L E N I N COLLECTED WORKS 16 A IN ACCORDANCE WITH A DECISION OF THE NINTH CONGRESS OF THE R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
) AND THE SECOND CONGRESS OF SOVIETS OF THE U. 
S. 
S. 
R. 
 B. 
 n. 
 l d H n H С О Ч И Н E Н И Я И з д a н u е ч е m в е p m o e ГОСУДАРСТВ ЕНН ОЕ ИЗ ДАТ ЕЛЬ СТВО ПОЛИТИЧЕ СКОЙ ЛИ ТЕРАТУ РЫ M О С К В А V. 
 I. 
 L E N I N cOLLEcTED WORKS VOLUME 16 September 1909 –December 1910 PROGRESS PUBLISHERS MOSCOW TRANSLATED THE RUSSIAN EDITED BY C L E M E N S D U T T First printing 1963 Second printing 1967 Third printing 1974 Fourth printing 1977 l 10102– 673 ÇÜà èÇõÄÉå. 
 014(01)–77 From Marx to Mao M L © Digital Reprints 2010 www. 
marx 2mao. 
com 13 15 23 24 29 29 33 3743 49 5559 62 65 76 77 78 79 82 85CONTENTS Preface ........................ 1909 THE LIQUIDATORS EXPOSED ............... ON THE OPEN LETTER OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE OF THE MOSCOW REGIONAL COMMITTEE ............. 
. 
 THE ELECTION IN ST. 
 PETERSBURG. 
 A Comment ....... 
 THE FACTION OF SUPPORTERS OF OTZOVISM AND GOD-BUILDING I...................... 
. 
 II...................... 
. 
 III ...................... 
. 
 IV...................... 
. 
 V...................... 
. 
 VI...................... 
. 
 VII ...................... 
. 
 ONCE MORE ON PARTYISM AND NON-PARTYISM ....... 
 A WORD TO THE BOLSHEVIKS OF ST. 
 PETERSBURG ...... NOTE TO THE ARTICLE “THE ST. 
 PETERSBURG ELECTION” ... DRAFT RESOLUTION ON THE CONSOLIDATION OF THE PARTYAND OF ITS UNITY................... 
 SPEECH AT THE MEETING OF THE INTERNATIONAL SOCIALIST BUREAU ON THE SPLIT IN THE DUTCH SOCIAL-DEMOCRATIC LA-BOUR PARTY. 
 From the Report in the “Bulletin ” of the I . 
S. 
B. 
. 
 . 
 THE TSAR AGAINST THE FINNISH PEOPLE .......... 
 TO PUPILS OF THE CAPRI SCHOOL ............ A SHAMEFUL FIASCO .................. SOME SOURCES OF THE PRESENT IDEOLOGICAL DISCORD ... METHODS OF THE LIQUIDATORS AND PARTY TASKS OF THE BOL-SHEVIKS ...................... 
. 
 GOLO S SOTSIAL-DEMOKRATA AND CHEREVANIN ....... 
 THE BOURGEOIS PRESS FABLE ABOUT THE EXPULSION OF GORKY IDEOLOGICAL DECAY AND DISUNITY AMONG RUSSIAN SOCIAL -DEMOCRATS ...................... 
 EXPLANATORY NOTE ON THE DRAFT OF THE MAIN GROUNDS OF THE BILL ON THE EIGHT-HOUR WORKING DAY ...... LETTER TO I. 
 I. 
 SKVORTSOV-STEPANOV .......... 
. 
 CONCERNING VEKHI ................... 
 I...................... 
. 
 II...................... 
. 
 THE LAST WORD OF RUSSIAN LIBERALISM ......... THE ELEVENTH SESSION OF THE INTERNATIONAL SOCIALISTBUREAU ........................ 1910 THE VPERYOD GROUP . 
 A Conspectus .......... 
. 
 TOWARDS UNITY ................... 
. 
 GOLOS (VOICE ) OF THE LIQUIDATORS AGAINST THE PARTY Reply to Golos Sotsial-Demokrata ............. 
 WHAT TO FIGHT FOR? .................. THE CAMPAIGN AGAINST FINLAND ............. 
 THEY ARE NERVOUS ABOUT THE ARMY .......... 
. 
 PARTY UNITY ABROAD .................. ONE OF THE OBSTACLES TO PARTY UNITY .......... 
 TO THE CENTRAL COMMITTEE OF THE R . 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 ...... NOTES OF A PUBLICIST .................. I. 
The “Platform” of the Adherents and Defenders of Otzovism ................... 
87 95 103 106 107 110 117 123 124 126 132 140 145 147 156 165 171 176185189191195 197 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR II. 
 The “Unity Crisis” in Our Party .......... 
 1. 
 Two Views on Unity ............. 
 2. 
 “The Fight on Two Fronts” and the Overcoming of Deviations .................. 3. 
 The Terms of Unity and Sectarian Diplomacy . 
. 
 4. 
 Paragraph I of the Resolution on the State of Affairs in the Party ............. 
 5. 
 The Significance of the December (1908) Resolu-tions and the Attitude of the Liquidators to Them 6. 
 The Group of Independent-Legalists ....... 
 7. 
 Pro-Party Menshevism and Its Evaluation .... 
. 
 8. 
 Conclusion. 
 The Platform of the Bolsheviks .... 
 THE JUBILEE NUMBER OF ZIHNA ............. 
 DRAFT RESOLUTION ON CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIES THE RUSSIAN SOCIAL-DEMOCRATIC DELEGATION AT THE COPENHA-GEN CONGRESS..................... LETTER TO THE INTERNATIONAL SOCIALIST BUREAU ON THEREPRESENTATION OF THE R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 ............ THE VPERYOD FACTION ................ 
. 
 THE QUESTION OF CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIES AT THE INTERNA-TIONAL SOCIALIST CONGRESS IN COPENHAGEN ....... 
. 
 HOW CERTAIN SOCIAL-DEMOCRATS INFORM THE INTERNA-TIONAL ABOUT THE STATE OF AFFAIRS IN THE R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
. 
 . 
 . 
 ANNOUNCEMENT ON THE PUBLICATION OF RABOCHAYA GAZETA THE LESSONS OF THE REVOLUTION ............ TWO WORLDS ..................... THE DEMONSTRATION ON THE DEATH OF MUROMTSEV . 
 A Comment ................... 
 IS THIS THE TURN OF THE TIDE? ............. 
 L. 
 N. 
 TOLSTOY ..................... TO THE COMRADES STUDYING AT THE SCHOOL IN BOLOGNA . 
. 
 L. 
 N. 
 TOLSTOY AND THE MODERN LABOUR MOVEMENT .... 
 AN OPEN LETTER TO ALL PRO -PARTY SOCIAL -DEMOCRATS ... DIFFERENCES IN THE EUROPEAN LABOUR MOVEMENT .... 
. 
 I........................208 209 215 219 226232 238 251 258 260 265 267 268 275 284 289 296 305 314 320 323 328330333347347 TOLSTOY AND THE PROLETARIAN STRUGGLE ......... THE BEGINNING OF DEMONSTRATIONS .......... 
. 
 WHAT IS HAPPENING IN THE COUNTRYSIDE? ......... IVAN VASILYEVICH BABUSHKIN An Obituary ....... 
. 
 TO THE CENTRAL COMMITTEE ............... HEROES OF “RESERVATION” ............... THE HISTORICAL MEANING OF THE INNER -PARTY STRUGGLE IN RUSSIA ........................ I...................... 
. 
 II...................... 
. 
 III ...................... 
. 
 IV...................... 
. 
 STRIKE STATISTICS IN RUSSIA ............. 
. 
 I...................... 
. 
 II...................... 
. 
 THE CAPITALIST SYSTEM OF MODERN AGRICULTURE .... 
. 
 First article ................... 
 I. 
 A General Picture of the Economic System of Mod-ern Agriculture ................ 
 II. 
 The Real Nature of the Majority of Modern Agricul-tural “Farms” (Proletarian “Farms”) ....... 
 III. 
 Peasant Farms Under Capitalism ......... IV. 
 Labour of Women and Children in Agriculture ... V. 
 Squandering of Labour in Small-Scale Production . 
. 
 VI. 
 The Capitalist Character of the Use of Machinery in Modern Agriculture ............. 
. 
 VII. 
 The Low Productivity of Labour in Small-Scale Production and Excessive Work ......... Notes ......................... 
 The Life and Work of V. 
 I. 
 Lenin . 
 Outstanding Dates .... 
353 355 359361 365 368 374 374 380 384 387 393 395 408 423 427 429 434 437 441 441 441 442 447 475 ILLUSTRATIONS Portrait of V. 
 I. 
 Lenin. 
 1910 ............... First page of Lenin’s manuscript “Announcement on the Publi-cation of Rabochaya Gazeta ”, October 1910 ......... First page of Rabochaya Gazeta No. 
 1, October 30 (November 12), 1910, with Lenin’s lending article “The Lessons of the Revolu-tion” ......................... 
 First page of the newspaper Zvezda No. 
 1, 1910 ....... 
 Diagram of the number of strikers per quarter, 1910 .... 
 First page of the manuscript of the article “The Capitalist System of Modern Agriculture”, 1910 .......... 
. 
14-15 287 297 345 400-401 425 PREFACE Volume 16 contains works written by V. 
 I. 
 Lenin in the period from September 1909 to December 1910. 
 The volume consists mainly of articles and documents devoted to the struggle for the Party and its revolutionary principles, against the two kinds of opportunism in the Party: the liquidators, the “direct opponents of the Party”,and the otzovists, the “hidden enemies of the Party”, as wellas against the conciliators, who served as a screen for bothkinds of opportunists. 
 The articles “The Liquidators Exposed”, “Methods of the Liquidators and Party Tasks of the Bolsheviks”, “Golos Sotsial-Demokrata and Cherevanin”, and “ Golos (Voice ) of the Liquidators Against the Party” are devoted to the struggle against liquidationism—the agency of theliberal bourgeoisie in the Party. 
 The articles “The Faction of Supporters of Otzovism and God-building”, “A Word to the Bolsheviks of St. 
 Peters-burg”, “A Shameful Fiasco” and “The Vperyod Faction”, are directed against otzovism and ultimatumism. 
 The work “Notes of a Publicist” gives an appraisal of the decisions of the plenary session of the C. 
C. 
 of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
in January 1910 and an account of the struggle at the ple-nary session against the liquidators, Trotskyists and con-ciliators. 
 The articles “The Eleventh Session of the International Socialist Bureau”, “The Question of Co-operative Societiesat the International Socialist Congress in Copenhagen”,“Two Worlds”, and “Differences in the European Labour Movement” are directed against opportunism in the Euro-pean labour movement, against the treacherous policy ofthe leaders of the Second International. 
 The articles “The Historical Meaning of the Inner-Party Struggle in Russia” and “Strike Statistics in Russia” are devoted to a study of the experience of the Revolution of 1905-07. 
 Included in this volume are eight documents published in the Collected Works for the first time: “To Pupils of the Capri School”, which reveals the anti-Party activityof the Capri school; “Ideological Decay and Disunity Among Russian Social-Democrats”; “The Vperyod Group”; “Announcement on the Publication of Rabochaya Gazeta ”; “An Open Letter to All Pro-Party Social-Democrats”with an exposition of the inner-Party situation after theJanuary plenum of the C. 
C. 
 of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 in 1910; andtwo statements to the Central Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Like the majority of the works in this volume, these docu-ments are devoted to the struggle for the Party, the struggleon two fronts. 
 Among the newly included articles is a large work of Lenin’s, “The Capitalist System of Modern Agriculture”,written at the end of 1910. 
 The manuscript of this work has not yet been found in its entirety. 
 The end of the article with the signature V. 
 Ilyin , as well as the end of Chapter I and the beginning of Chapter II, which were absent whenthe work was published in 1932, have now been found, andtherefore Chapters I, II and VII are now published in fullfor the first time. 
 THE LIQUIDATORS EXPOSED Our readers know, of course, that during the past year our Party has had to concern itself with the so-called liquidationist trend in Social-Democracy. 
 The liquidatorsare those most undaunted opportunists who have begun toadvocate the view that an illegal Social-Democratic Party is unnecessary in Russia today, that the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 is unnecessary. 
 Our readers are also aware that the Bolshevikswaged and carried through a struggle against this liqui-dationist trend, carried it through at least to such an extentthat at the All-Russian Party Conference in December 1908 1 liquidationism was condemned in the most decisive and irre-vocable manner against the votes of the Mensheviks and part 2 against liquidationism). 
 However, the official organ of the Menshevik faction, Golos Sotsial-Demokrata ,3 not only did not admit that it was liquidationist but, on the contrary, assumed an unusual-ly “proud and noble” pose and denied that it was in any way involved in liquidationism. 
 The facts convicted them. 
 ButGolos Sotsial-Demokrata grandly ignored the facts. 
 The recent issue, No. 
 9, of Plekhanov’s Dnevnik Sotsial-Demokra-ta,4 (August 1909) is extremely valuable because in it one of the leaders of Menshevism completely exposes liquidation-ism. 
 This is not the only significance of Dnevnik but it is on this aspect of the matter that we must dwell first of all. 
 No. 
 45 of Proletary5 published a letter from Mensheviks of Vyborg District (in St. 
 Petersburg) protesting against the Menshevik liquidators. 
 This letter is reprinted in Golos No. 
 14 (May 1909) and the editors remark: “The editorial board of Proletary pretends to have seen in the letter of the Vyborg comrades a step away from the newspaper Golos Sotsial-Demokrata .... 
”of the Bundists’ (the other part of the Bundists came out Plekhanov’s Dnevnik appears. 
 Its author shows the whole content of liquidationist ideas in the article published in Golos No. 
 15, without the slightest reservation on the part of the editors (and moreover in an article expressing entirelythe same views as those of the editors). 
 Plekhanov quotesin this connection the letter of the Vyborg comrades andsays: “This letter shows us how the broad workers’ organisa-tions are at times influenced by people who have deserted our Party on the pretext of ‘new’ work” ( Dnevnik , p. 
 10). 
 It is just this “pretext” that has always been put forward byGolos ! “Such influence,” Plekhanov continues, “is by no means a Social-Democratic influence; it is in spirit absolute-ly hostile to Social-Democracy” (p. 
 11). 
 And so, Plekhanov quotes the letter of the Vyborg com-rades against No. 
 15 of Golos Sotsial-Demokrata . 
 We ask the reader: in point of fact , who is it that is “pretending ”? Was Proletary “pretending” when it accused Golos of liquidation-ism, or was “ Golos ” pretending when it denied that it had any connection with liquidationism. 
 The literary dishonesty of the editorial board of Golos has been exposed, and exposed by Plekhanov, who until recently was one of its members. 
 But this is by no means all. 
In Golos No. 
 15 (June 1909), in an article signed F. 
 Dan , we find a statement that Pravda ’s 6 reputation for non-fac-tionalism protects it “from stupid and unscrupulous accusa-tions of liquidationism” (p. 
 12). 
 One could not put it more forcefully. 
 It would be difficult to show on one’s countenancea more lofty, nobler indignation at Golos being accused of liquidationism. 
 Plekhanov’s Dnevnik appears. 
 The author shows the whole content of liquidationist ideas in one of the articles of Golos No. 
 15 and declares to the Mensheviks who share those ideas: “Why are you offended at the charge of liqui-dationism when in fact you are very much guilty of thissin?” (p. 
 5). 
 “Comrade S. 
 7 [the author of the article in Golos No. 
 15 examined by Plekhanov] * not only can but must be *Interpolations in square brackets (within passages quoted by Lenin) have been introduced by Lenin, unless otherwise indicated. 
 —Ed. 
 accused of liquidationism, because the plan that he expounds and defends in his letter is in reality nothing but a plan for the liquidation of our Party” ( Dnevnik , p. 
 6). 
 In his article Comrade S. 
 plainly expresses his solidarity with “the Cau-casian delegation ”, i. 
e. 
, with the editorial board of “Golos ”, which had, as is known, two mandates out of three in thisdelegation. 
 Plekhanov continues: “One must make a choice here: either liquidationism or a fight against it. 
 There is no third way. 
 In saying so I havein mind, of course, comrades who are guided not by theirpersonal interests but by the interests of our common cause. 
For those who are guided by their personal interests, forthose who are thinking only of their revolutionary careers— and there is indeed such a career!—for them, of course, a third way does exist. 
 Big and little people of this calibre can,and even must at the present time, manoeuvre between theliquidationist and anti-liquidationist trends; under existingconditions they have to make the strongest possible excusesfor not giving a straight answer to the question whether it is necessary to combat liquidationism; they have to escape from giving such an answer by means of ‘allegories and emp-ty hypotheses’, for nobody knows yet which trend will getthe upper hand—the liquidationist or anti-liquidationist—and these sapient diplomatists want at any rate to share inthe celebration; they want at all costs to be on the side of the victors. 
 I repeat, for such people there is a third way. 
 But Comrade S. 
 will probably agree with me if I say thatthey are not genuine people, but only ‘toy manikins’. 
 8 They are not worth talking about; they are inborn opportunists;their motto is: ‘as you please’” ( Dnevnik , pp. 
 7-8). 
 This can be called: a gentle hint ... at a serious matter. 
 The fifth and last act, scene 1. 
 On the stage are the editors of Golos , all except one. 
 Editor So-and-so, addressing the public with an air of exceptional nobility: “the accusationsof liquidationism levelled at us are not only stupid butdeliberately dishonest . 
” Scene 2. 
 The same persons and “he”, the editor of Golos who has just safely resigned from the editorial board 9; he pretends not to notice any of the editors and says, address-ing contributor S. 
, who is at one with the editors: “Either liquidationism, or a fight against it. 
 There is a third way only for revolutionary careerists, who manoeuvre, who make excuses for not giving a straight answer, who wait to see who will get the upper hand. 
 Comrade S. 
 probably agrees with methat these are not genuine people but toy manikins. 
 Theyare not worth talking about: they are inborn opportunists;their motto is—’as you please’. 
” Time will show whether “Comrade S. 
”, the collective-Menshevik Comrade S. 
, really agrees with Plekhanov or whether he prefers to retain as his leaders certain toy mani-kins and inborn opportunists. 
 One thing we can safely sayalready: among Menshevik workers , if Plekhanov, Potresov (a “convinced liquidator” according to Plekhanov’s com-ment on p. 
 19 of Dnevnik ) and the toy manikins, whose motto is “as you please”, fully lay bare their views before them, you will certainly not find ten per cent who are in favour of Potresov and in favour of those who say “as you please”, taken together . 
 You can be sure of that. 
 Plekhanov’s statement is sufficient to make Menshevik workers turn in disgust from both Potresov and those who say “as you ple-ase”. 
 Our task is to see to it that the working-class Menshe-viks, especially those who are not readily influenced by prop-aganda coming from the Bolsheviks, become fully acquaint-ed with No. 
 9 of Plekhanov’s Dnevnik . 
 Our task is to see to it that the working-class Mensheviks now seriously set aboutclarifying the ideological basis of the divergencies between Plekhanov, on the one hand, and Potresov and those who say “as you please” on the other. 
 On this particularly important question, Plekhanov in Dnevnik No. 
 9 provides material that is also extremely valuable, but far, very far, from adequate. 
 “Hurrah for‘general delimitation’!” exclaims Plekhanov, greeting the fixing of boundaries between the Bolsheviks and the anarcho-syndicalists (as Plekhanov calls our otzovists, ultimatumistsand god-builders 10) and declaring that “we Mensheviks must demarcate ourselves from the liquidators” ( Dnevnik , p. 
 18). 
 Of course, we Bolsheviks, who have already fixed our general boundary , whole-heartedly associate ourselves with this demand for a general delimitation within the Menshevik faction. 
 We shall await with impatience this general delim-itation among the Mensheviks. 
 We shall see where the general boundary among them will lie. 
 We shall see whether it will be a really general boundary. 
 Plekhanov depicts the split within the Menshevik ranks over liquidationism as a split over an organisational ques-tion. 
 At the same time, however, he provides data whichshow that the matter is far from being confined to a questionof organisation. 
 So far Plekhanov has drawn two bounda-ries, neither of which as yet deserves to be called general. 
 The first boundary definitely divides Plekhanov from Potresov, the second divides him indefinitely from the“factional diplomatists”, the toy manikins and theinborn opportunists. 
 Concerning Potresov, Plekhanov saysthat already in the autumn of 1907 he “spoke like a convincedliquidator”. 
 But there is more to it than that. 
 Besides this verbal statement of Potresov’s on the organisational ques-tion, Plekhanov refers to the well-known collective workof the Mensheviks The Social Movement in Russia at the Beginning of the Twentieth Century , and says that he, Ple-khanov, resigned from the editorial board of this symposiumbecause Potresov’s article (even after corrections and re-draftings demanded by Plekhanov and carried out through the mediation of Dan and Martov) was unacceptable to him. 
“I became fully convinced that Potresov’s article could notbe corrected” (p. 
 20). 
 “I saw,” he writes in Dnevnik , “that the liquidationist ideas Potresov expressed in Mannheim werefirmly established in his mind and that he had completely lost the ability to look at social life, at its present and past, through the eyes of a revolutionary” (pp. 
 19-20). 
 “Potresovis no comrade of mine ... he and I do not go the same way”(p. 
 20). 
 The question here is not at all one of present-day organi-sational problems, which Potresov did not touch on, and could not touch on, in his article. 
 It is a question of the fundamental ideas of the Social-Democratic programme and tactics , which are being “liquidated” by the collective Men-shevik “work” issued under the collective Menshevik editor-ship of Martov , Maslov and Potresov . 
 In order to draw a really general boundary here it is not enough to break with Potresov and make a “gentle” hint at the “as you please” heroes. 
 For this it is necessary toreveal in detail precisely where, when, why and how “Potre-sov lost the ability to look at social life through the eyes of a revolutionary”. 
 Liquidationism, says Plekhanov, leads to the “slough of the most disgraceful opportunism” (p. 
 12). 
 “Among them (the liquidators) new wine is converted intoa very sour liquid suitable only for preparing petty-bour-geois vinegar” (p. 
 12). 
 Liquidationism “facilitates the pen-etration of petty-bourgeois tendencies in a proletarianenvironment” (p. 
 14). 
 “I have repeatedly tried to prove to influential Menshevik comrades that they are making a great mistake in displaying at times their readiness togo hand-in-hand with gentlemen who to a greater or lesserextent are redolent of opportunism” (p. 
 15). 
 “Liquidationismleads straight to the muddy slough of opportunism andpetty-bourgeois aspirations hostile to Social-Democracy” (p. 
 16). 
 Compare all these comments of Plekhanov’s with the recognition of Potresov as a convinced liquidator. 
 Itis quite clear that Potresov is described by Plekhanov (isnow recognised by Plekhanov, it would be more correct tosay) as a petty-bourgeois democrat-opportunist . 
 It is quite clear that insofar as Menshevism, represented by all the influential writers of the faction (except Plekhanov), par-ticipates in this Potresovism (in The Social Movement ), to that extent Menshevism is now acknowledged by Plekhanovto be a petty-bourgeois opportunist trend . 
 Insofar as Men-shevism, as a faction, gives its blessing to Potresov, andscreens him, Menshevism is now acknowledged by Plekhanov to be a petty-bourgeois opportunist faction . 
 The conclusion is clear: if Plekhanov remains alone, if he fails to gather around him the bulk, or at least a considerablesection, of the Mensheviks, if he fails to lay bare before allMenshevik workers the entire roots and manifestationsof this petty-bourgeois opportunism, then our estimate of Menshevism will prove to be confirmed by the Menshevik who is the most outstanding as regards theoryand who led the Mensheviks farthest in the tactics of1906-07. 
 Time will show whether the “revolutionary Menshevism” proclaimed by Plekhanov will be strong enough to wage a struggle against the whole circle of ideas that have given rise to Potresov and liquidationism. 
 In speaking of the general delimitation among the Bolshe-viks Plekhanov compares the Bolshevik Marxists, Social-Democrats, to Gogol’s Osip,11 who picked up all sorts of rubbish, every little bit of string (including empirio-criti-cism12 and god-building). 
 Now the Bolshevik Osip, says Plekhanov jokingly, has begun “to clear the space aroundhim”, to expel the anti-Marxists, to throw away the “string”and other rubbish. 
 Plekhanov’s joke touches not on a frivolous question but on a fundamental and very serious one for Russian Social-Democracy, namely, which trend within it has been most to the benefit of rubbish, “string”, i. 
e. 
, to the benefit ofbourgeois-democratic influences in the proletarian environ-ment. 
 All the “subtleties” of factional disputes, all the longvicissitudes of the struggle over various resolutions, slogans, etc. 
—all this “factionalism” (which is now so frequently being condemned by empty cries against “factionalism”that encourage unprincipledness most of all ) turns on this fundamental and very serious question for Russian Social-Democracy: which trend within it has been the most subser-vient to bourgeois-democratic influences (which are inevi-table to some extent at some time during the bourgeois revolution in Russia, just as they are inevitable in everycapitalist country). 
 Every trend in Social-Democracy inevi-tably receives the adherence of a greater or lesser number ofnot purely proletarian but semi-proletarian and semi-petty-bourgeois elements; the question is which trend is less subor-dinate to them, more rapidly rids itself of them, more successfully combats them. 
 This is the question of thesocialist, proletarian, Marxist Osip in relation to theliberal or anarchist, petty-bourgeois, anti-Marxist “bit ofstring”. 
 Bolshevik Marxism, says Plekhanov, is a “more or less narrow and crudely conceived Marxism”. 
 The Menshevik va-riety, apparently, is “more or less broad and subtle”. 
 Letus look at the results of the revolution, at the results of six years of the history of the Social-Democratic movement(1903-09), and what six years they were! The BolshevikOsips have already drawn a “general boundary” and “shown the door” to the Bolshevik petty-bourgeois “bit of string”, which is now whining that it has been “ousted” and “re-moved”. 
 The Menshevik Osip has proved to be a lone figure, who has resigned both from the official Menshevik editorial board and from the collective editorial board of the most important Menshevik work, a lone protester against “petty-bourgeois opportunism” and liquidationism, which reignboth in the one and the other editorial board. 
 The Menshevik Osip has proved to be tied up by the Menshevik “bit of string”. 
 He did not pick it up; it picked him up. 
 He has not overpowered it, it has overpowered him. 
 Tell us, reader, would you prefer to be in the position of the Bolshevik Osip or the Menshevik Osip? Tell us, doesthat Marxism in the history of the workers’ movement proveto be “narrow and crude” that is more firmly linked with theproletarian organisations and is more successfully coping with the petty-bourgeois “bit of string”? Proletary No. 
 47-48 , Published according to September 5 (18), 1909 the text in Proletary ON THE OPE N LETTER OF THE EXECUTIV E COMMITTEE OF THE MOSCO W REGIONA L COMMITTE E13 In connection with this resolution on the celebrated “school” we must remark that we do not make any accusa-tion against the workers who have eagerly seized the opportu-nity to go abroad to study. 
 These workers made “contact”both with us and with the Central Committee (in the letterjust received and the Executive Committee of the MoscowRegional Committee writes that one of the students has al-ready sent it a report as well) and we explained to them the significance of this so-called school. 
 Incidentally, here are a few quotations from the hectographed “Report” of thisschool which was sent to us. 
 “It has been decided to begin thecourses with the students (nine comrades) and lecturers (sixcomrades) already here. 
” Of these six lecturers the followingare well-known to the Party: Maximov, Lunacharsky, Lya-dov and Alexinsky. 
 Comrade Alexinsky (at the opening of the school) “pointed out”: “A certain place has been chosenas the venue of the school because many of the lecturers arethere. 
” Comrade Alexinsky is too modest: not “many” butall the lecturers of the new faction (some even say all the initiators, and organisers, and agitators, and functionaries) are “there”. 
 Finally: “Comrade Alexinsky opened the prac-tical course on the organisational question. 
” We ventureto hope that a detailed explanation during this “practical”course is being given of the hints in Maximov’s “Report”that the editorial board of Proletary is trying to get control over the property of the whole faction.... 
 Proletary No. 
 47-48 , Published according to September 5 (18), 1909 the text in Proletary THE ELECTIO N IN ST. 
 PETERSBURG14 A COMMENT The election in St. 
 Petersburg has been fixed for Septem-ber 21. 
 The conditions which the workers’ party has to con-tend with in this election are extraordinarily difficult. 
 But it is an event of the highest importance and all Social-Democrats must exert every effort in the forthcoming elec-tion campaign, which in some respects has already begun. 
 The election is taking place in an atmosphere of the most rabid reaction, with the counter-revolutionary fury of thetsarist government gang raging in full force. 
 All the more important then is it that this reaction should be opposed by the nomination put forward by the Social-DemocraticParty, the only party which even from the platform of theBlack-Hundred Third Duma has succeeded in raising itsvoice, declaring its unshakable socialist convictions, reit-erating the slogans of the glorious revolutionary struggle, and unfurling the republican banner in the face of the Octob-rist-Black-Hundred heroes of counter-revolution and the liberal (Cadet) 16 ideologists and defenders of counter-revo-lution. 
 The election is taking place in conditions which entirely preclude the participation of the broad mass of the working class: the workers are excluded from the voters’ lists, the ranks of the voters have been decimated by the triumphantaristocratic gang who carried out the coup d’état of June 3,1907. 
 17 All the more important is it that there should come out before this audience, least capable of sympathising ingeneral with the ideas of Social-Democracy, a party which combines the fight for socialism with the fight for a con-sistent and drastic democratic revolution in a bourgeoiscountry. 
 However restricted, however hampered the work15 of the Social-Democratic Party has been of late among the working masses, this work has been carried on without a break. 
 Hundreds of workers’ groups and circles are upholding the traditions of the Social-Democratic Party, continuingits cause, training new proletarian fighters. 
 Through theirdeputies, their agitators and their delegates, working-classSocial-Democrats will now come forward before the mass ofpetty-bourgeois voters and remind them of the aims of real democracy which have been forgotten by the bourgeois-democratic parties and groups. 
 The election is taking place in a situation where the Social-Democratic Party and all working-class organisations what-soever have been totally outlawed, where it is utterly impos-sible to hold meetings of workers, where the workers’ press is totally banned, where the “opposition” is (through police measures) entirely monopolised by the Cadet Party, whichhas prostituted itself by a series of unprecedented acts offlunkeyism in the Black Duma and has helped the autocracyto raise money in Europe to spend on prisons and gallows,which has helped to stage the comedy of a constitutional autocracy for the benefit of the European capitalists. 
 All the more important is it that this Cadet monopoly, fenced aroundby a forest of gallows, and “earned” by the unlimited grovel-ling of the liberals to tsarism, should be broken , broken at all costs, in full view of the masses who see the election,hear about the election, and who are following the chances of the candidates and the results of the election. 
 If the most important thing for the bourgeois politicians in all countries,from the Russian Cadets to the “free-thinkers” of Germanyor the bourgeois-democratic “radicals” in France, is to achievean immediate success, to gain a parliamentary seat, themost important thing for a socialist party is propaganda and agitation among the masses, the most important thing is to advocate the ideas of socialism and of a consistent, self-denying struggle for complete democracy. 
 And the successof this propaganda is very far from being measured solelyby the number of votes, hand-picked under the law of June 3,which was passed by the gentlemen of the nobility. 
 Look at our Cadet press: with what amazing effrontery it uses its monopoly, earned by the accommodatingness ofMilyukov and protected by Stolypin. 
 18 In its leading article 19 says: “No one has any doubts as to the outcome of the St. 
 Petersburg election.... 
 If the nomination of Kutler,20 who was one of the most authoritative deputies in the Second Duma, is fixed, the election victory will be even more imposing. 
” To be sure it will! What could be moreimposing” than a victory over the “Lefts” who have been“disqualified” by the Black-Hundred coup d’état? Whatcould be more imposing than a victory over socialism which has to propagate its old ideals in the illegal press and illegal labour organisations, a victory of “democrats” whose democ-racy fits in easily with the Stolypin Constitution? Who canthere be more “authoritative” in the eyes of the petty bour-geois, the philistine, in the eyes of the cowed citizen of Rus-sia, than ex-minister Mr. 
 Kutler? For the party of “peo-ple’s freedom” the prestige of a deputy in the Duma is meas-ured by his prestige in the eyes of Romanov, Stolypin and Co. 
 “We presume,” continues Rech majestically, “that on this occasion there will be no purposeless splitting of votes be-tween the progressive candidates as well. 
 That is the sense ofa statement made by V. 
 V. 
 Vodovozov, one of the represent-atives of the ‘Left bloc’. 
” This little tirade reflects the whole nature of our Cadets as a drop of water reflects the sun. 
 Splitting the votes is “to no purpose” (the Cadets no longer say it is dangerous in faceof the Black Hundreds, because the stupid liberal fable ofthe Black-Hundred danger has been convincingly refuted by the revolutionary Social-Democrats and by events), why “to no purpose”, gentlemen? Because our man will not get in , that is the first and last argument of the Cadets. 
 Indeed,this is an Octobrist argument, dear opponents of Octobrism; this is the argument of submission to the law of June 3, the very same loving submission and joyful obedience for which you reproach the Octobrists! Your essential nature is such that prior to an election, when you come before the voters,before the crowd, you accuse the Octobrists of being incapa-ble of carrying out a policy based on principle, of utteringopportunist phrases about “purposelessness”, but at elec-tions, before the authorities, before the tsar and Stolypin, you pursue the very same policy as the Octobrists. 
 Since it is“purposeless” to vote against the budget—we shall vote forthe budget. 
 Since it is “purposeless” to uphold the ideals ofof August 1 Rech the revolution and freedom—we shall vilify them, we shall publish Vekhi ,21 we shall throw mud at the revolution, we shall hire as many renegades as possible—Izgoyevs, Gali-ches, Struves and so forth—to demonstrate our renunciationof the revolution. 
 Since it is “purposeless” to fight againstthe autocracy receiving support from foreign capital—weshall help the autocracy to negotiate loans, we shall sendMilyukov as a footman on the step of the royal coach of Nicholas the Bloody. 
 But if the phrase about an ideological struggle at the elec-tions being “purposeless” is a true indication of the “ideolog-ical” nature of the Cadets, the next phrase is a model ofdownright election trickery. 
 Exercising the monopoly of“His Majesty’s Opposition”, 22 Rech slandered, firstly, the Social-Democrats, who have never anywhere declared against splitting votes (and who—this is very important— won over the Trudoviks to their leadership in the famous Left bloc, won them over by the firm determination to put up aSocial-Democratic candidate at all costs ), and, secondly, the Trudovik 23 Vodovozov. 
 Apart from the leading article, there is an item in the issue of August 1 imputing to Vodovozov a statement that theelectors have already declared for the Cadets, and that theTrudoviks must either vote for the Cadets or abstain. 
 Onlyin its issue of August 6 does the organ of the party of “peo-ple’s freedom” find an odd corner (underneath the “Country Life” column) for a letter from Mr. 
 Vodovozov, who protests that he “ never said ” the words ascribed to him. 
 Rech is not at all abashed by this and goes on to argue the point withVodovozov. 
 The deed is done, the reader has been deceived,the monopoly of the press permitted by the Stolypins hasbeen utilised and that is all that matters. 
 Finally in the issue of August 9 there is a couple of lines on the Social-Democrat-ic candidate Sokolov and on the fact that many Trudovikspropose to vote for him. 
 All that was reported in the leadingarticle of August 1 concerning the Lefts proves to have beena canard.... 
 The difficulties of the task confronting the Social-Demo-crats in St. 
 Petersburg will not dismay them but will make them redouble their efforts. 
 Not only all Party organisations,every workers’ circle, every group of Social-Democratic sympathisers in any section of the community—even if this group consists of two or three persons and is cut off from active political work, in the way that only Russian citizens can be cut off from politics in the epoch of the StolypinConstitution—everyone can and must take part in the Social-Democratic election campaign. 
 Some can draw up and dis-tribute the election manifestoes of the Social-Democrats;others can help to circulate the Duma speeches of the Social-Democrats; some can organise a canvass of the electors in order to propagate Social-Democratic ideas and explain theaims of the Social-Democrats in the election campaign;others will speak at meetings of voters or at private meet-ings; still others can cull a bouquet of extracts from Cadetliterature and Cadet speeches that will cure all honest demo-crats of any desire to vote for the Cadets; others ... but it is not for us in a newspaper published abroad to point out waysand means of agitation, ways and means will be found local-ly, in St. 
 Petersburg, a hundred times richer, livelier andmore varied. 
 The members of the Social-Democratic group inthe Duma can, by virtue of their position, render partic-ularly valuable services to the election campaign in St. 
 Petersburg; here the Social-Democratic deputies have aparticularly useful and particularly grateful part to play. 
No administrative prohibitions, no police traps, no confis-cations of Social-Democratic literature, no arrests of Social-Democratic agitators can prevent the workers’ party from doing its duty, namely, to make full use of the election cam-paign to spread among the masses the whole, undilutedprogramme of the socialist proletariat, the vanguard in theRussian democratic revolution. 
 P. 
 S. 
This article had been sent to press when we read in Rech of August 13 the following extremely important news item: “On August 13 the Trudoviks held their first meeting devoted to the Duma election.... 
 It was unanimouslydecided to support the candidature of the Social-DemocratSokolov, and it was resolved not to make this support depend on any political obligations . 
” Needless to say, the Social-Democrats could not accept support on any other conditions. 
 Proletary No. 
 47-48 , Published according to September 5 (18), 1909 the text in Proletary THE FACTION OF SUPPORTERS OF OTZOVISM AND GOD-BUILDING Comrades Maximov and Nikolayev have issued a special leaflet entitled “Report of the Members Removed from theEnlarged Editorial Board of Proletary to the Bolshevik Comrades. 
” Our victims of removal most bitterly complain to the public of the wrongs suffered by them at the hands ofthe editorial board and how it removed them. 
 To show the party of the working class what kind of people these bitterly complaining victims of removal are, let usfirst of all examine the principles embodied in their leaflet. 
 The reader knows, from Proletary No. 
 46 and the supple-ment to it, that the Conference of the enlarged editorialboard of Proletary adjudged Comrade Maximov to be one of the organisers of a new faction in our Party, a faction withwhich Bolshevism has nothing in common, and it disclaimed“all responsibility for the political actions of Comrade Maxi-mov”. 
 24 It is evident from the resolutions of the Conference that the fundamental issue of divergence with the new fac-tion that has broken away from the Bolsheviks (or rather,with Maximov and his friends) is, firstly, otzovism andultimatumism; secondly, god-building. 
 The attitude of theBolshevik group to both trends is set out in three detailed resolutions. 
 What now do the bitterly complaining victims of removal say in reply? I Let us begin with otzovism. 
 Our victims of removal sum up the parliamentary or Duma experience of the past years,justify the boycott of the Bulygin and Witte Dumas, as well as the participation in the Second Duma, and con-tinue: “At a time of acute and increasing reaction all this changes again. 
 The Party cannot then carry out a big and spectacular election cam-paign, nor obtain worth-while parliamentary representation. 
” The first phrase with an independent idea not copied from old Bolshevik publications at once reveals to us the abysmalpolitical thoughtlessness of the otzovists. 
 Just reflect for a moment, good souls, at a time of acute and increasing reac-tion is it possible for the Party to organise in a “big andspectacular” way the “training groups and schools” forboyeviks 24a that you speak about on the very same page, in the very same column of your literary production? Reflectfor a moment, good souls, can the Party obtain “worth-while representation” in such schools? If you could think, if you were at all capable of political judgement, O you unjustlyremoved ones, you would see what absolute nonsense youare talking. 
 Instead of thinking politically, you pin your faith to a “ spectacular ” signboard and so find yourselves in the role of Simple Simons of the Party. 
 You babble about “training schools” and “intensifying [!] propaganda in the armed forces” (ibid. 
) because, like all the political infants inthe camp of the otzovists and ultimatumists, you considersuch activities to be particularly “spectacular”, but you areincapable of thinking about the conditions for applyingthese forms of activity in practice (and not in words). 
 You have memorised fragments of Bolshevik phrases and slogans but your understanding of them is precisely nil. 
 “At a time of acute and increasing reaction” all work is difficult for the Party, but however great the difficulties, it is stillpossible to obtain worth-while parliamentary representation. 
 This is proved too, for instance, by the experience of the German Social-Democrats in a period of “acute and increas-ing reaction” as during the introduction of the Anti-Social-ist Law. 
 25 By denying this possibility Maximov and Co. 
 only reveal their class political ignorance. 
 To advocate “train-ing schools” and “ intensification of propaganda in the armed forces” “at a time of acute and increasing reaction” and at the same time to deny the possibility of the Party having worthwhile parliamentary representation is to utter obvious incongruities which deserve to be published in an anthology of logical absurdities for junior high-school boys. 
 Both train-ing schools and the intensification of propaganda in the armed forces presuppose an inevitable violation of the oldlaws, breaking through these laws, whereas parliamentaryactivity by no means necessarily, or at any rate much morerarely, presupposes a breach of the old laws by the new socialforces. 
 Now reflect, good souls, when is it easier to force a breach of the old laws: at a time of acute and increasing reac-tion or when the movement is on the upgrade? Reflect, Ounjustly removed ones, and be ashamed of the nonsense youutter in defending the otzovists, who are so dear to you. 
 Further. 
 Which activity presupposes a wider scope for the energy of the masses, greater influence of the masses on immediate political life—parliamentary activity within the laws framed by the old regime, or propaganda among thetroops, which at one stroke directly undermines this regime’smaterial force? Reflect, good souls, and you will see thatparliamentary activity takes second place in this respect. 
And what follows from this? It follows that the stronger the immediate movement of the masses, and the greater the scope of their energy, in other words: the more one can speak ofan “acute and increasing” revolutionary onslaught of thepeople and not of “acute and increasing reaction”, all the more possible, certain and successful will become both prop-aganda among the troops and militant actions that are really connected with the mass movement and are not merely the adventurism of unrestrained boyeviks . 
 That, O unjustly removed ones, was the reason why Bolshevism could sopowerfully develop both militant activities and propagandaamong the troops in the period of “acute and increasing”revolutionary upsurge; that was the reason why the Bol-sheviks could (beginning from 1907) dissociate, and by 1909 did completely dissociate their group from the boyevism that at a time of “acute and increasing reaction” degenerated , inevitably degenerated, into adventurism. 
 But with these heroes of ours, who have learned by heart fragments of Bolshevik phrases, it is the other way round. 
 The highest forms of struggle, which have never anywhere in the world succeeded without a direct onslaught of themasses, are put in the forefront and recommended as “feasi-ble” at a time of acute reaction, while the lower forms of struggle, which presuppose not so much a direct breach of the law by mass struggle as utilisation of the law for the purpose of propaganda and agitation, preparing the minds of the masses for struggle, are declared “unfeasible”!! The otzovists and their “removed” echoers have heard, and committed to memory, that the Bolsheviks regarddirect struggle of the masses, drawing into motion even the troops (i. 
e. 
, the most obdurate section of the population, the slowest to move and most protected against propaganda,etc. 
) and converting armed outbreaks into the real beginningof an uprising, as the highest form of the movement, andparliamentary activity without the direct action of themasses as the lowest form of the movement. 
 The otzovists and their echoers, such as Maximov, heard this and learned it by heart, but they did not understand it, and so disgracedthemselves. 
 The highest form—that means the most “spec-tacular”—thinks the otzovist and Comrade Maximov. 
 Well,then, I’ll raise a highly “spectacular” cry, that should pro-duce the most revolutionary result of all. 
 As for the meaning of it, that can be left to the devil! Now listen to some more of Maximov’s ideas (we continue the quotation from where we left off): “The mechanical force of reaction severs the connection of the already existing Party faction with the masses and makes it terriblydifficult for the Party to influence them, with the result that thisrepresentative body is unable to conduct sufficiently broad and deeporganisational and propaganda work in the interests of the Party. 
 If the Party itself is weakened there is not excluded even the danger of degeneration of the faction and its deviation from the main lineof Social-Democracy.... 
” In very truth, isn’t that supremely pretty? When it is a matter of the lower, legal forms of struggle they try to frighten us: “the mechanical force of reaction”, “unable toconduct sufficiently broad work”, “the danger of degenera-tion”. 
 But when it is a matter of the higher forms of the classstruggle, which force a breach in the old laws, the “mechan-ical force of reaction” disappears, there is no “inability” to conduct “sufficiently broad” work among the troops, and the “danger of degeneration” of training groups and schools,please observe, is altogether out of the question! There you have the best justification of the editorial board of Proletary , why it had to remove political leaders who spread such ideas among the masses. 
 Get this into your heads, O unjustly removed ones: when the conditions of acute and increasing reaction are reallypresent, when the mechanical force of this reaction reallysevers the connection with the masses, makes sufficientlybroad work difficult and weakens the Party, it is then that the specific task of the Party becomes to master the parlia-mentary weapon of struggle; and that, O unjustly removedones, is not because parliamentary struggle is higher thanany other forms of struggle; no, it is just because it is lower than them, lower, for example, than a struggle which drawsinto the mass movement even the armed forces, which gives rise to mass strikes, uprisings, etc. 
 Then why does mastery of the lowest form of struggle become the specific (i. 
e. 
, distin-guishing the present moment from other moments) task ofthe Party? Because the stronger the mechanical force of reac-tion and the weaker the connection with the masses, themore immediate becomes the task of preparing the minds of the masses (and not the task of direct action), the more immedi-ate becomes the task of utilising the methods of propaganda and agitation created by the old regime (and not a direct onslaught of the masses against this old regime). 
 II For any Marxist who has at all pondered over the philoso-phy of Marx and Engels, for any Social-Democrat who isat all acquainted with the history of the international social-ist movement, this conversion of one of the lowest forms ofstruggle into the specific weapon of struggle of a special historic moment contains nothing surprising. 
 The anarchists have absolutely never been able to understand this simplething. 
 Now our otzovists and their removed echoers aretrying to introduce anarchist modes of thought amongRussian Social-Democrats, crying out (like Maximov andCo. 
) that Proletary is dominated by the theory of “ parlia-mentarism at any price ”. 
 To show how stupid and un-Social-Democratic these out-cries of Maximov and Co. 
 are, we shall once more have to begin with the ABC. 
 Just reflect, O unjustly removed ones, what is the specific difference between the policy and tactics of the German Social-Democrats and those of the socialist workers’ parties in other countries? The utilisation of par-liamentarism; the conversion of bourgeois Junker (approx-imate Russian equivalent: Octobrist-Black-Hundred) par-liamentarism into an instrument for the socialist educationand organisation of the mass of the workers. 
 Does this mean that parliamentarism is the highest form of struggle of the socialist proletariat? Anarchists the world over think it doesmean that. 
 Does it mean that the German Social-Democratsstand for parliamentarism at any price? Anarchists theworld over think it does mean that, and hence there is noenemy more hateful to them than German Social-Democracy, there is no target they love to aim at more than the German Social-Democrats. 
 And in Russia, when our Socialist-Revo-lutionaries begin to flirt with the anarchists and advertisetheir own “revolutionary militancy” they never fail-to dragin real or imaginary errors of the German Social-Democrats,and draw conclusions from them to the detriment of Social-Democracy. 
 Now let us go further. 
 In what lies the fallacy of the an-archists’ argument? It lies in the fact that, owing to theirradically incorrect ideas of the course of social development,they are unable to take into account those peculiarities ofthe concrete political (and economic) situation in different countries which determine the specific significance of one or another means of struggle for a given period of time . 
 In point of fact the German Social-Democrats, far from stand-ing for parliamentarism at any price, not only do not subor-dinate everything to parliamentarism, but, on the contrary,in the international army of the proletariat they best of all have developed such extra-parliamentary means of struggle as the socialist press, the trade unions, the systematic useof popular assemblies, the socialist education of youth, andso on and so forth. 
 What is the point then? The point is that a combination of a number of historic conditions has made parliamentarism a specific weapon of struggle for Germany over a given period , not the chief one, not the highest, not of prime and essentialimportance in comparison with other forms, but merely specific, the most characteristic in comparison with other countries. 
 Hence, the ability to use parliamentarism has proved to be a symptom (not a condition but a symptom) of exemplary organisation of the entire socialist movement, in all its branches, which we have enumerated above. 
 Let us turn from Germany to Russia. 
 Anyone who pre-sumed to draw an exact parallel between the conditions inthese two countries would be guilty of a number of gross er-rors. 
 But try to put the question as a Marxist is bound to do: what is the specific peculiarity of the policy and tactics ofthe Russian Social-Democrats at the present time? We mustpreserve and strengthen the illegal Party—just as before therevolution. 
 We must steadily prepare the masses for a newrevolutionary crisis—as in the years 1897-1903. 
 We must strengthen to the utmost the Party’s ties with the masses, develop and utilise all kinds of workers’ organisations forthe furtherance of the socialist cause, as has always been thepractice of all Social-Democratic parties. 
 The specific pecu-liarity of the moment is, namely, that the old autocracy ismaking an attempt (an unsuccessful attempt) to solve new historic problems with the help of the Octobrist-Black-Hun-dred Duma. 
 Hence, the specific tactical task of the Social-Democrats is to use this Duma for their own purposes, for spreading the ideas of revolution and socialism. 
 The point isnot that this specific task is particularly lofty, that it opensgrand vistas, or that it equals or even approaches in impor-tance the tasks which faced the proletariat in, say, the period of 1905-06. 
 No. 
 The point is that it is a special feature of thetactics of the present moment, marking its distinction fromthe period that is past or from that which is yet to come (forthis coming period will certainly bring us specific tasks, more complex, more lofty, more interesting than that of utilising the Third Duma). 
 We cannot be equal to the present situa-tion, we cannot solve the whole assemblage of problems withwhich it confronts the Social-Democratic Party, unless wesolve this specific problem of the moment, unless we convertthe Black-Hundred-Octobrist Duma into an instrument for Social-Democratic propaganda. 
 The otzovist windbags, taking their cue from the Bol-sheviks, talk, for instance, of taking account of the experi-ence of the revolution. 
 But they do not understand what they are talking about. 
 They do not understand that taking ac-count of the experience of the revolution includes defending the ideals and aims and methods of the revolution from inside the Duma . 
 If we do not know how to defend these ideals, aims and methods from inside the Duma, through our work-ing-class Party members who might enter and those who havealready entered this Duma, it means that we are unable tomake the first step towards politically taking account of the experience of the revolution (for what we are concerned with here is of course not a theoretical summing up of ex-perience in books and researches). 
 Our task is by no meansended by this first step. 
 Incomparably more important thanthe first step will be the second and third steps, i. 
e. 
, theconversion of the experience already gained by the masses into ideological stock-in-trade for new historic action. 
 But if these otzovist windbags themselves speak of an “inter-revolutionary” period they should have understood (if theywere able to think and reason things out in a Social-Demo-cratic way) that “inter-revolutionary” signifies preciselythat elementary , preliminary tasks come on the order of the day. 
 “Inter-revolutionary” denotes an unsettled, indefinite situation when the old regime has become convinced thatit is impossible to rule with the old instruments alone andtries to use a new instrument within the general framework of the old institutions. 
 This is an internally contradictory,futile attempt, in which the autocracy is once more going towards inevitable failure, is once more leading us to a repetition of the glorious period and glorious battles of 1905. 
But it is going not in the same way as in 1897-1903, it is leading the people to revolution not in the same way a s before 1905. 
 It is this “not in the same way” that we mustbe able to understand; we must be able to modify our tactics, supplementing all the basic, general, primary and cardinal tasks of revolutionary Social-Democracy by one more task,not very ambitious, but a specific task of the present newperiod: the task of utilising the Black-Hundred Duma ina revolutionary Social-Democratic way. 
 Like any new task it seems more difficult than the others, because it requires of people not a simple repetition of slo-gans learned by heart (beyond which Maximov and the otzo-vists are mentally bankrupt), but a certain amount of initia-tive, flexibility of mind, resourcefulness and independent work on a novel historical task. 
 But in actual fact this task can appear particularly difficult only to people who are incapable of independent thought and independent effort:actually this task, like every specific task of a given moment,is easier than others because its solvability is determinedentirely by the conditions of the given moment. 
 In a periodof “acute and increasing reaction” to solve the problem of organising “training schools and groups” in a really serious way, i. 
e. 
, one that really connects them with the massmovement, that really subordinates them to it, is quite im-possible , for it is a task set stupidly by people who have copied the formulation of it from a good pamphlet, which was based on the conditions of a different period. 
 But to solve the problem of subordinating the speeches, actions and policy of the Social-Democrats in the Third Duma tothe mass party and the interests of the masses is possible . 
 It is not easy, compared with the “easy” matter of repeatingthings learned by heart, but it can be done . 
 However we exert all the forces of the Party now, we cannot solve the problem of a Social-Democratic (and not anarchist) organisation of “training schools” at the present “inter-revolutionary” mo-ment, for the solution of this problem requires altogetherdifferent historical conditions. 
 On the contrary, by exertingall our forces we shall solve (and we are already beginning to solve ) the problem of utilising the Third Duma in a revo-lutionary Social-Democratic way. 
 And we shall do so, O you otzovists and ultimatumists wronged by removal and theharshness of God, not in order to put parliamentarism onsome high pedestal, not to proclaim “parliamentarism atany price”, but in order, after the solution of the “inter-revolutionary” problem, corresponding to the present “inter-revolutionary” period, to proceed to the solution of loftier revolutionary problems, which will correspond to the higher,i. 
e. 
, more revolutionary period of tomorrow. 
 III These stupid outcries of Maximov and Co. 
 about the Bolsheviks’ standing for “parliamentarism at any price”,sound particularly queer in view of the actual history of otzovism. 
 What is queer is that the shout about exaggerated parliamentarism should come from the very people who have developed and are developing a special trend exclusively over the question of their attitude to parliamentarism!What do you call yourselves, dear Maximov and Co. 
? Youcall yourselves “otzovists”, “ultimatumists”, “boycottists”. 
Maximov to this day is so proud of being a boycottist of theThird Duma that he can’t get over it, and his rare Party utterances are invariably accompanied by the signature: “Reporter on behalf of the boycottists at the July Conferenceof 1907. 
” 26 One writer in olden times used to sign himself: “Substantive state councillor and cavalier. 
” Maximov signshimself: “Reporter on behalf of the boycottists”—he, too,is a cavalier, you see! In the political situation of June 1907, when Maximov advocated the boycott, the mistake was still quite a smallone. 
 But when Maximov comes out in July 1909 with a mani-festo of sorts and persists in admiring his “boycottism”in regard to the Third Duma, it is downright stupidity. 
Boycottism, otzovism and ultimatumism—all these expres-sions in themselves imply the formation of a trend over the question of the attitude to parliamentarism andexclusively over this question. 
 To make a separate stand on this question, to persist (two years after the Party hassettled it in principle!) in this separate stand, is a sign ofunparalleled narrow-mindedness. 
 It is just those who behave in this way, i. 
e. 
, the “boycottists” (of 1909) and the otzovists and the ultimatumists, who prove thereby that they do not think like Social-Democrats, that they are putting parlia-mentarism on a special pedestal, that exactly like the anar-chists they make a trend out of isolated formulas: boycott that Duma, recall your men from that Duma, present an ultimatum to that group in the Duma. 
 To act like that is to be a caricature of a Bolshevik. 
 Among Bolsheviks thetrend is determined by their common attitude to the Russian revolution and the Bolsheviks have emphatically declareda thousand times (as it were to forewarn political infants)that to identify Bolshevism with boycottism or boyevism is a stupid distortion and vulgarisation of the views of revo-lutionary Social-Democracy. 
 Our view that Social-Demo-cratic participation in the Third Duma is obligatory, for instance, follows inevitably from our attitude to the present moment, to the attempts of the autocracy to take a step forward along the path of creating a bourgeois monarchy, to the significance of the Duma as an organisation of counter-revolutionary classes in a representative institution on anational scale. 
 Just as the anarchists display an invertedparliamentary cretinism when they separate the question of parliament from the whole question of bourgeois society in general and try to create a trend from outcries against bourgeois parliamentarism (although criticism of bourgeoisparliamentarism is in principle on the same level as criti-cism of the bourgeois press, bourgeois syndicalism and soforth), so our otzovists, ultimatumists and boycottists, inexactly the same way, display inverted Menshevism when they form a separate trend on the question of the attitude to the Duma, on the question of methods of combating devia-tions on the part of the Social-Democratic group in the Duma(and not the deviations of bourgeois literati, who come intothe Social-Democratic movement incidentally, and so on). 
 The climax of this inverted parliamentary cretinism is reached in the famous argument of the leader of the Moscow otzovists whom Maximov is shielding: the recall of the Dumagroup should serve to emphasise that the revolution is not dead and buried! And Maximov with pure and unruffledbrow does not hesitate to declare publicly: “the otzovistshave never (of course, never !) expressed anti-parliamentary sentiments at all. 
” This shielding of the otzovists by Maximov and Co. 
 is one of the most characteristic features of the new factionand we must dwell on it in all the more detail because theunenlightened public is all too often taken in by our bitterlycomplaining removed ones. 
 It consists firstly in the fact that Maximov and Co. 
 are forever beating their breasts and protesting: we are not otzovists, we do not share the opinionsof the otzovists at all! Secondly, Maximov and Co. 
 accusethe Bolsheviks of exaggerating the fight against the otzo-vists. 
 It is an exact repetition of the story of the attitude of the Rabocheye Dyelo -ists (in the years 1897-1901) to the adherents of Rabochaya Mysl . 
 “We are not Economists,” 27 cried the Rabocheye Dyelo -ists, beating their breasts, “we do not share the views of Rabochaya Mysl , we are carrying on a controversy with them (in just the same way as Maxi-mov carried on a ‘controversy’ with the otzovists!), it is only those wicked Iskrists who have brought a false charge against us, slandered us, ‘exaggerated’ Economism, etc. 
, etc. 
” Thusamong the supporters of Rabochaya Mysl —frank and honest Economists—there were not a few people who had genuinelygone astray, who had the courage of their convictions,whom it was impossible not to respect—while the Rabocheye Dyelo clique abroad specialised in definite intrigues, in covering up their tracks, in playing hide-and-seek and deceiv-ing the public. 
 The consistent and declared otzovists (likeVsev, 28 and Stan,29 who are well known in Party circles) stand in exactly the same relation to Maximov’s cliqueabroad. 
 We are not otzovists, cry the members of this clique. 
 But make any of them say a few words about the contemporarypolitical situation and the tasks of the Party and you willhear in full all the otzovist arguments, slightly watereddown (as we have seen in the case of Maximov) by Jesuiticalreservations, additions, suppressions, mitigations, confu-sions, etc. 
 Your Jesuitry, O unjustly removed ones, cannot acquit you of the charge of otzovist stupidity, but aggra-vates your guilt tenfold, for an ideological confusion that isconcealed is a hundred times more corrupting to the prole-tariat, a hundred times more harmful to the Party. 
 * We are not otzovists, cry Maximov and Co. 
 Yet after June 1908, when he resigned from the small editorial board of Proletary , Maximov formed an official opposition inside the collegium, demanded and obtained freedom of discussionfor this opposition, demanded and obtained special repre-sentation for the opposition in the organisation’s chiefexecutive bodies responsible for the circulation of the newspaper. 
 It goes without saying that ever since that time, *A little example which, by the way, serves to illustrate Maxi-mov’s assertion that only Proletary is spreading tales about the ul-timatumists out of spite. 
 In the autumn of 1908 Alexinsky appearedat the congress of the Polish Social-Democrats and there proposedan ultimatumist resolution. 
 This was before “Proletary ” embarked on a determined campaign against the new faction. 
 And what hap-pened? The Polish Social-Democrats ridiculed Alexinsky and his resolution, telling him: “You are nothing more than a cowardly otzo-vist. 
” i. 
e. 
, for over a year all the otzovists have been in the ranks of this opposition, have jointly organised an agency in Russia, have jointly adapted the school abroad (of which more below) for the purposes of an agency, and so on and soforth. 
 We are not otzovists—cry Maximov and Co. 
 Yet at the All-Russian Party Conference in December 1908, when themore honest otzovists of this opposition came out before the whole Party as a separate group, as a specific ideological trend, and, as such, received the right to put forward theirspokesman (the Conference had decided that only separateideological trends or separate organisations—time beingshort—could be represented by a separate spokesman), thespokesman from the otzovist faction—by sheer accident! sheer accident!—was Comrade Maximov .... 
 This deception of the Party by harbouring otzovism is systematically pursued by Maximov’s group abroad. 
 InMay 1908 otzovism suffered defeat in open battle: it wasoutvoted by 18 to 14 at the general city conference in Moscow(in July 1907, in this district almost all the Social-Demo-crats without exception were boycottists but, unlike Maxi-mov, by June 1908 they had the sense to understand that itwould be unpardonable stupidity to insist on “boycotting”the Third Duma). 
 After this, Comrade Maximov organ-ised abroad an official opposition to Proletary and began a controversy in the columns of the Bolshevik periodical, something which had never been practised before. 
 Finally, in the autumn of 1908 when the whole St. 
 Petersburg organ-isation divided into otzovists and non-zovists (the termcoined by the workers) during the election of delegates to theAll-Russian Conference, when discussions were held in all districts and subdistricts of St. 
 Petersburg, not on the plat-form of Bolsheviks versus Mensheviks but on that of otzo-vists versus non-zovists, the otzovists hid their platform from the eyes of the public . 
 It was not communicated to Proletary . 
 It was not released for the press. 
 It was not communicated to the Party at the All-Russian Conference of December1908. 
 Only after the Conference , on the insistent demand of the editorial board, was it communicated to us and we print-ed it in Proletary No. 
 44. 
 (“Resolution of the St. 
 Petersburg Otzovists”. 
) A well-known otzovist leader in Moscow Region “edit-ed” an article by an otzovist worker, which was published in Rabocheye Znamya30 No. 
 5, but we have still not received this leader’s own platform. 
 We know perfectly well that inthe spring of 1909 when the regional conference of the Cen-tral Industrial Region was in preparation the otzovist lead-er’s platform was being read and passed from hand to hand. 
We know from the reports of Bolsheviks that there were incomparably more gems of un-Social-Democratic thought in this platform than in the St. 
 Petersburg platform. 
 But we were never supplied with the text of the platform , probably for reasons just as accidental, purely accidental, as thosewhich caused Maximov to address the conference as thespokesman of the otzovist faction. 
 The question of utilising legal opportunities, too, Maxi-mov and Co. 
 covered up by a “smooth” phrase: “It is takenfor granted. 
” It would be interesting to know if “it is takenfor granted” now also by the practical leaders of the Maxi-mov faction, Comrade Lyadov and Stanislav , who only three months ago caused a resolution to be passed in the Regional Bureau of the Central Industrial Region, which was then in their hands (the same Regional Bureau which endorsed thefamous “school”; the membership of this Bureau has changedsince), against Social-Democratic participation in the congress of factory doctors . 
31 As we know this was the first congress at which the revolutionary Social-Democrats were in the majority. 
 Yet all the prominent otzovists and ultimatumists campaigned against participation in this congress, declaringthat it would be “treason to the cause of the proletariat” totake part in it. 
 And Maximov covers up his tracks—“it istaken for granted”. 
 We may “take it for granted” that thefranker otzovists and ultimatumists are openly disrupting practical work in Russia, while Maximov and Co. 
 who are hankering for the laurels of Krichevsky and Martynov, 32 obscure the point at issue: there are no differences of opinion,no one is opposed to the idea of utilising legal opportu-nities. 
 The restoration of the Party bodies abroad, the foreign groups for the organisation of connections, etc. 
, leads inev-itably to a repetition of the old abuses which must be com-bated most relentlessly. 
 It is a complete repetition of the history of the Economists, who in Russia carried on a cam-paign against political action while they sheltered them-selves abroad behind Rabocheye Dyelo . 
 It is a complete repetition of the history of the bourgeois-democratic “Credo”(Credo—a symbol of faith), which was advocated in Russiaby Prokopovich and Co. 
 and was made public in the revo-lutionary Social-Democratic press against the will of the authors . 
 Nothing could have a more demoralising influence on the Party than this game of hide-and-seek, this exploita-tion of the onerous conditions of illegal work to hold thingsback from Party publicity, this Jesuitry of Maximov andCo. 
, who, while operating wholly and in every respect hand in glove with the otzovists, in print beat their breasts anddeclare that all this business of otzovism is a deliberate exaggeration on the part of Proletary . 
 We are not pettifoggers, we are not formalists, but revo-lutionaries. 
 What matters to us is not the verbal distinctionswhich might be drawn between otzovism, ultimatumism,and “boycottism” (of the Third Duma), but the actualcontent of Social-Democratic propaganda and agitation. 
 And if views which have nothing in common with Bolshevism nor with Social-Democracy in general are being propagatedin illegal Russian circles under the mask of Bolshevism,those persons who are hindering a full exposure of theseviews and a full explanation of their falsity before the wholeParty are acting as enemies of the proletariat. 
 IV These people have also disclosed themselves on the ques-tion of god-building. 
 The enlarged editorial board of Proletary adopted and published two resolutions on this question: one on the principle involved, the other with special refer-ence to Maximov’s protest. 
 The question arises, what does thissame Maximov say now in his “Report”? He writes his“Report” in order to cover up his tracks exactly in the styleof the diplomat who said that language was given to man so as to hide his thoughts. 
 33 We are told that “wrong informa-tion” is being spread about the “so-called god-building”trend of Maximov’s clique, and that is all. 
 “Wrong information” do you say? Oh no, my dear fellow, it is just because you know perfectly well that the “infor-mation” in Proletary on god-building is absolutely correct that you have been covering up the tracks. 
 You know per-fectly well that this “information”, as is stated in the pub-lished resolution, refers primarily to the literary productionsemanating from your literary clique. 
 These literary produc-tions are very exactly specified in our resolution; one thing alone being omitted, which could not be added in the reso-lution, namely, that for about a year and a half the strongestresentment against the “god-building” of your confrères hasbeen expressed in leading Bolshevik circles, and it is on thesegrounds (besides those stated above) that the new factionof caricature Bolsheviks has been poisoning for us, by means of evasions, artifices, pin-pricks, objections and quibbles, every opportunity of working. 
 One of the most notable ofthese quibbles is particularly well known to Maximov be-cause it was a protest in writing lodged in due form with the editors of Proletary against the publication of an article en-titled “Our Ways Part” ( Proletary No. 
 42). 
 Perhaps this too is “wrong information”, O unjustly removed ones? Per-haps this too was only a “so-called protest”? No, let me tell you that the policy of covering up tracks does not always succeed and you will never succeed withit in our Party. 
 It is no use playing hide-and-seek and byputting on airs trying to make a secret of something which everybody knows who takes an interest in Russian literature and Russian Social-Democracy. 
 There is a literary cliquewho, with the help of several bourgeois publishers, areflooding our legal literature with systematic propaganda ofgod-building. 
 Maximov too belongs to this clique. 
 Thispropaganda has become systematic precisely in the past eighteen months, when the Russian bourgeoisie for its coun-ter-revolutionary purposes felt a need to revive religion,increase the demand for religion, invent religion, inoculatethe people with religion or strengthen the hold of religionon them in new forms. 
 Hence the preaching of god-buildinghas acquired a social, political character. 
 Just as the bour-geois press in the period of the revolution fondled and petted the most zealous of the Mensheviks for their pro-Cadetism,so in the period of counter-revolution the bourgeois press is fondling and petting the god-builders in the ranks—it is no joke!—in the ranks of the Marxists and even in the ranks of the “also-Bolsheviks”. 
 And when the official organ of Bol-shevism stated in an editorial that Bolshevism had nothing in common with such propaganda (this statement was issued in the press after endless persuasion in letters and personalconversations had failed to stop this disgraceful propaganda),Comrade Maximov lodged a formal, written protest with the editorial board of Proletary . 
 He, Maximov, had been elected by the London Congress, 34 hence his “acquired right” was being violated by those who dared to officially repudiatethe disgraceful doctrine of god-building. 
 “Why, is our fac-tion in bondage to the god-building literati?” This was theremark that Comrade Marat 35 let slip during a stormy scene in the editorial office—yes, yes, the very same Comrade Marat who is so modest, so well-meaning, so peaceable andso good-hearted that he cannot properly decide to this veryday whether to go with the Bolsheviks or the godly otzovists. 
 Or is this perhaps also a piece of “wrong information”, O unjustly removed Maximov? There is no clique of god-building literati, you never defended them, you never pro-tested against the article “Our Ways Part”? eh? Of “wrong information” on the god-building trend Com-rade Maximov speaks in his “Report” concerning the school abroad which is being held by the new faction. 
 Comrade Maximov is so emphatic about this being “the first [Maxi-mov’s italics] Party school to be held abroad” and is so bent on misleading the public on this question, that we shallhave to speak of the notorious “school” in greater detail. 
 Comrade Maximov bitterly complains: “Not a single attempt, not only to lend support to the school but even to take control over it, was made by the editorial board (of Pro-letary ); while spreading false information about the school derived from unknown sources, the editorial board did not address a single enquiry to the organisers of the school to verify this information. 
 Such was the attitude of the editorial board to the whole affair. 
” So. 
 So. 
 “Not a single attempt even to take control over the school. 
”... In this phrase Maximov’s Jesuitry goes so far that it exposes itself. 
 Remember, reader, Yerogin’s hostel in the period of the First Duma. 
 A retired rural superintendent (or some bureau-cratic knight of the same nature) Yerogin opened a hostel in St. 
 Petersburg for peasant deputies coming in from the country, his desire being to lend support to the “plans of the government”. 
 The inexperienced peasants on arrivingin the capital were intercepted by Yerogin’s agents anddirected to Yerogin’s hostel, where, of course, they founda school in which the heretical doctrines of the “Lefts” were refuted, in which the Trudoviks, etc. 
, were covered with obloquy, and in which the new-fledged Duma members were schooled in “true Russian” statecraft. 
 Fortunately,since the State Duma was held in St. 
 Petersburg it was in St. 
Petersburg that Yerogin had to organise his hostel, and asSt. 
 Petersburg is a centre with a fair breadth and freedom ofideological and political life Yerogin’s deputies, of course, very soon began to desert Yerogin’s hostel and transfer to the camp of the Trudoviks or the independent deputies. 
Thus Yerogin’s little intrigue resulted only in disgrace,both for himself and the government. 
 Now imagine, reader, that a Yerogin hostel like this is organised, not in some foreign St. 
 Petersburg, but in some foreign equivalent of Tsarevokokshaisk. 
 36 If you grant this hypothesis, you will have to agree that the otzovist-god-building Yerogins have used their knowledge of Europeto prove themselves more cunning than the true-blue RussianYerogin. 
 People calling themselves Bolsheviks set up anexchequer of their own—independent of what, as far as we know, is the one and only general Bolshevik exchequer, out of which comes the cost of publishing and circulatingProletary —organised an agency of their own, shipped some of “their” agitators to Tsarevokokshaisk, sent out there someworkers belonging to the Social-Democratic Party and pro-claimed this (hidden away from the Party in Tsarevokok-shaisk) Yerogin hostel the “ first Party” (party, because it is hidden from the Party) “school abroad”. 
 We hasten to make the reservation—since the removed Comrade Maximov has so vigorously raised the questionwhether his removal was regular or irregular (of this, later)—that there is nothing at all “irregular” in the actions of the otzovist-god-building Yerogins. 
 Nothing whatsoever. 
 Every-thing there is quite regular. 
 It is quite regular for kindredspirits in a party to form a group together. 
 It is quite regular for these kindred spirits to collect a fund and start some joint enterprise of propaganda and agitation. 
 It is quite regular that in this instance they should wish to choose as the form of their enterprise, say, not a newspaper, buta “school”. 
 It is quite regular that they should consider it anofficial Party affair, so long as it is organised by members ofthe Party and so long as there is a Party organisation, nomatter which, assuming political and ideological respon-sibility for the enterprise. 
 Everything is quite regular here and everything would be quite all right if ... if there wereno Jesuitry, no hypocrisy, no deception of your own Party. 
 Is it not a deception of the Party if you publicly emphasise that the school is a Party affair, i. 
e. 
, if you restrict yourselfto the question of its formal legitimacy and do not give the names of the initiators and organisers of the school, i. 
e. 
, you keep silent about the ideological and political trendof the school as the undertaking of a new faction in our Party? There have been two “documents” about this schoolin the possession of the editors of Proletary (for over a year now relations between the editorial board and Maximov have been carried on entirely through the medium of “documents” and diplomatic notes). 
 The first document bore no signature,nobody’s signature at all. 
 It was merely an abstract state-ment of the virtue of education and the educational valueof institutions called schools. 
 The second document wassigned by figure-heads. 
 Now, coming out in print before the public with praise of the “first Party school abroad” Com-rade Maximov, as before, keeps silent about the factional character of the school. 
 This policy of Jesuitry is harmful to the Party. 
 We shall expose this “policy”. 
 The initiators and organisers of theschool are in actual fact Comrades “Er” 37 (thus we will name the leader the Moscow otzovists well known to all Party members, who delivered lectures on the school,organised a circle of pupils and was appointed to theroster of lecturers by several workers’ circles), Maximov,Lunacharsky, Lyadov, Alexinsky and so on and so forth . 
 We do not know and we are not interested in knowing what particular part was played by one or other of the above-mentioned comrades, what places they occupy in the variousofficial institutions of the school, in its “Council”, “execu-tive commission”, collegium of lecturers, etc. 
 We do not know which “non-factional” comrades might supplement this clique in one or another particular case. 
 All this is quite unimportant. 
 What we assert is that the actual ideological and political trend of this school, as a new factional centre,is determined precisely by the names enumerated and that by concealing this from the Party Maximov is conducting apolicy of Jesuitry. 
 What is bad is not that a new factional centre has come into being in the Party—we by no means belong to the class of people who are not averse to makinga little political capital out of cheap and fashionable outcriesagainst factionalism—on the contrary, it is a good thingthat a distinctive shade of opinion, once it exists, shouldbe able to have its special expression in the Party. 
 What is bad is the deception of the Party and the workers who— naturally—sympathise with the idea of any school , as they do with any educational undertaking. 
 Is it not hypocrisy when Comrade Maximov complains to the public that the editorial board of Proletary had not “even” (“ even !”) the desire “to take control over the school”? Only think: in June 1908 Comrade Maximov left the small editorial board of Proletary ; since that time internal strife has gone on almost continuously in a thousand different forms in the Bolshevik group; Alexinsky abroad, “Er” andCo. 
 abroad and in Russia, repeat after Maximov all thearrant nonsense of the otzovists and god-builders against Proletary in a thousand different tones. 
 Maximov lodges written and formal protests against the article “Our WaysPart”; everybody who knows anything of Party affairs if onlyby hearsay speaks of a coming inevitable split in the ranksof the Bolsheviks (it suffices to point out that the Menshevik Dan at the All-Russian Conference of December 1908 de-clared for all to hear, at an official gathering: “Who does not know that the Bolsheviks are now accusing Lenin of betray-ing Bolshevism”!)—yet Comrade Maximov, playing the roleof an innocent, absolutely innocent, child, asks the hon-ourable public, why is it that the editorial board of Proletary did not “even” want to take control over a Party school in god-building Tsarevokokshaisk? “Control” over the school! Supporters of Proletary in the capacity of “ inspectors ”, sitting in at the lectures of Maximov, Lunacharsky, Ale-xinsky and Co. 
!! Come now, why do you play this unbecom-ing, this disgraceful farce? For what purpose? Why throw dust in the eyes of the public by circulating meaningless “programmes” and “reports” of the “school” instead of ad-mitting frankly and openly who are the ideological leadersand inspirers of the new factional centre! For what purpose?—we shall answer this question pres-ently, but first let us finish with the question of the school: There is room for Tsarevokokshaisk in St. 
 Petersburg and it can be transferred (most of it, anyway) to St. 
 Petersburg,but St. 
 Petersburg can neither be accommodated in nortransferred to Tsarevokokshaisk. 
 The more energetic andindependent of the students at the new Party school willmanage to find their way from the narrow new faction to the broad Party, from the “science” of the otzovists and god-builders to the science of Social-Democracy in generaland Bolshevism in particular. 
 As for those who prefer tolimit themselves to a Yerogin education, nothing can bedone with them. 
 The editorial board of Proletary is prepared to give and will give every possible assistance to all workers, whatever their views, if they want to migrate (or travel) from the foreign Tsarevokokshaisk to the foreign St. 
 Peters-burg and acquaint themselves with Bolshevik views. 
The hypocritical policy of the organisers and initiatorsof the “ first Party school abroad”, however, we shall expose before the whole Party. 
 V What is the purpose of all this hypocrisy of Maximov’s, we asked, and deferred our reply until we had finished talk-ing about the school. 
 But, strictly speaking, the question to be cleared up here is not “for what purpose”, but “why?”It would be wrong to think that all the members of thenew faction are conducting a hypocritical policy delibe-rately for a definite purpose. 
 No. 
 The fact is that in the verysituation of this faction, in the conditions in which it has appeared and is active, there are causes (which many otzo-vists and god-builders are not conscious of) that give rise toa hypocritical policy. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR There is an old saying to the effect that hypocrisy is the tribute that vice pays to virtue. 
 But this saying refers to the sphere of personal ethics. 
 As applied to ideological and political trends it must be said that hypocrisy is the screenadopted by groups that are internally not homogeneous,that are made up of assorted elements, accidentally throwntogether, who feel that they are too weak for open, straight-forward action. 
 The composition of the new faction is the determining factor that made it adopt this screen. 
 The general staffof the faction of godly otzovists consists of unrecognisedphilosophers, ridiculed god-builders, otzovists convicted ofanarchistic nonsense and reckless revolutionary phrase-mongering, muddled ultimatumists and, lastly, those boye-viks (fortunately few in the Bolshevik faction) who consid-ered it below their dignity to come down from the outwardlyshowy and “spectacular” to obscure, modest revolutionarySocial-Democratic work corresponding to the conditions andtasks of the “inter-revolutionary” period, and on whomMaximov bestows honours by his “spectacular” phrases about training schools and groups ... in 1909. 
 The only thing that holds these diverse elements so strongly together at thepresent moment is—a burning hatred to Proletary , a hatred it has quite properly incurred, because not a single attempt by these elements to obtain self-expression in Proletary , or even indirect recognition or the slightest defence and con-donation, has ever failed to encounter the most strenuous opposition . 
 “Abandon hope for ever”—that was what Proletary told these elements in every issue, at every meeting of the edi-torial board, in every declaration on every Party questionof the day. 
 And when (due to the objective conditions of the devel-opment of our revolution and the counter-revolution in ourcountry) it came about that god-building and the theoreticalfoundations of Marxism became the questions of the day inthe literary sphere, and the utilisation of the Third Dumaand of the Third Duma platform by the Social-Democratic Party in the sphere of political work, these elements rallied together and the natural and inevitable explosion tookplace. 
 Like any explosion it was instantaneous, not in the sense that there had been previously no signs of such tendencies, or isolated manifestations of them, but in the sense that the political fusion of diverse tendencies, including some veryremote from politics, took place almost in a flash. 
 Hencethe general public, as always, is inclined to be satisfiedprimarily with a philistine explanation of the new split, one imputing it to the bad qualities of one or another of the lead-ers, the influence of life abroad, parochialism and so on and so forth. 
 There is no doubt that the location abroad, which,due to objective conditions, became the inevitable base ofoperations of all the central revolutionary organisations,has left its imprint on the form of the split. 
 There is no doubt that its form was also affected by the idiosyncrasies of the literary circle one wing of which came into the Social-Demo-cratic movement. 
 What we call a philistine explanation isnot one that takes note of these circumstances, which canexplain nothing but the form, the occasions and the “exter-nal history” of the split, but one that is based on refusal orincapacity to understand the ideological and political foun-dations, causes and roots of the divergence. 
 The new faction’s failure to understand these foundations is also the reason why it has resorted to the old method ofcamouflage, covering up tracks, denying the inseparable connection with otzovism, etc. 
 The failure to understandthese foundations causes the new faction to speculate on a philistine explanation of the split and on philistine sympathy . 
 What indeed is it but speculation on philistine sympathy to weep publicly about being “ousted” and “removed” asMaximov and Co. 
 are doing now? Bestow the charity ofyour sympathy, for Christ’s sake, on the ousted, the un-justly removed ones.... 
 That this is a method counting with infallible certainty on philistine sympathy is proved by the curious fact that even Comrade Plekhanov, the enemy of all god-building, all “new” philosophy, all otzovismand ultimatumism, etc. 
, even Comrade Plekhanov bestowed his mite of sympathy for Christ’s sake, taking advantageof Maximov’s whining, and over and over again called the Bolsheviks “stiff-necked” in this connection (see Ple-khanov’s Dnevnik Sotsial-Demokrata , August 1909). 
 If Maximov has even managed to extract a mite of sympathy from Plekhanov, you can imagine, reader, what tears of sympathy for Maximov will be shed by the philistine elements inside and on the fringe of the Social-Demo-cratic movement over the “ousting” and “removal” ofthe virtuous, well-meaning and modest otzovists andgod-builders. 
 The question of this “ousting” and “removal” is treated by Comrade Maximov both from its formal aspect and with regard to the essence of the matter. 
 Let us examine this treatment. 
 From the formal point of view the removal of Maximov was “irregular”, say the removed ones, and “we do not recog-nise this removal”, for Maximov was “elected by the Bol-shevik congress, i. 
e. 
, the Bolshevik section of the Party Congress”. 
 Reading Maximov and Nikolayev’s leaflet, the public sees a grave accusation (“irregular removal”) withoutbeing given either an exact formulation of it or materialfrom which to judge the matter. 
 But that is the invariablemethod of a certain side during splits abroad: to obscurethe divergence of principle, to draw a veil over it, to keep silent about the ideological dissensions, to conceal their ideological friends, and to make as much noise as possibleabout organisational conflicts, which the public is not ina position to analyse exactly and has not the right to sort outin detail. 
 That was how the Rabocheye Dyelo -ists behaved in 1899, with their outcry that there was no Economism in any shape or form, but that Plekhanov had stolen the press. 
 That was how the Mensheviks behaved in 1903 withtheir outcry that they had made no turn whatsoever toRabocheye Dyelo -ism but that Lenin had “ousted” or “re-moved” Potresov, Axelrod and Zasulich, etc. 
 That is the be-haviour of people who are speculating on elements abroad who are fond of rows and sensations. 
 There is no otzovism, nor any god-building, but there is the “irregular removal” of Ma-ximov “by the majority of the editorial board”, who want to“leave at their full disposal ” “the property of the whole fac-tion”—come into the shop, gentlemen, we will tell you some-thing most spicy about this business.... 
 An old device, Comrades Maximov and Nikolayev! And the politicians who resort to it are bound to break their necks. 
 Our “victims of removal” talk of “irregularity” because in their opinion the editorial board of Proletary has no right to decide the question of the fate of the Bolshevik faction and of the split in its ranks. 
 Very well, gentlemen. 
If the editorial board of Proletary and the 15 Bolshevik members and candidate members of the Central Committeeelected at the London Congress have not the right to repre-sent the Bolshevik faction you have every opportunity to make a public declaration to that effect and conduct a cam-paign for the overthrow of these undesirable representativesor for new elections to replace them. 
 But you have indeed conducted such a campaign and only after you had met with a certain number of reverses did you prefer to complain andwhine. 
 If you raised the question of a congress or conference of Bolsheviks, Comrades Maximov and Nikolayev, then why did you not tell the public that several months ago Comrade “Er” submitted a draft resolution to the MoscowCommittee calling for a vote of no confidence in Proletary and the holding of a Bolshevik conference to elect a newideological centre for the Bolsheviks? Why did you keep silent about this, O wrongly removed ones? Why did you keep silent about the fact that “Er’s” reso-lution was rejected by every vote except his own? Why did you keep silent about the fact that in the autumn of 1908 in the whole St. 
 Petersburg organisation from top to bottom a struggle was going on over the platforms of the two trends of Bolshevism, the otzovistsand the opponents of otzovism, and that the otzovists weredefeated? Maximov and Nikolayev want to whine to the public be-cause they have been repeatedly defeated in Russia. 
 Both “Er” and the St. 
 Petersburg otzovists had the right to wage a struggle against Bolshevism, in the highest down to thelowest organisations, without waiting for any conferenceand without making public their platforms before the whole Party. 
 But had not the Proletary editorial board, which declared open war on otzovism from June 1908, the right after a year of strife, a year of controversy, a year of friction, con-flict, etc. 
, after it had invited three regional delegates from Russia and consulted several Russian members of the en-larged editorial board, who had not taken part in a single con-flict abroad, had it not the right to declare what was a matter of fact , to declare that Maximov had split away from the board , to declare that Bolshevism has nothing in common with otzovism, ultimatumism and god-building? Stop this hypocrisy, gentlemen! You fought on what you thought was your strongest ground and you suffered defeat. 
 You went preaching otzovism to the masses in spite of a decision of the official centre of the Bolsheviks and withoutwaiting for a special conference. 
 And now you start whiningand complaining because you found yourselves in a ludi-crously small minority on the enlarged editorial board, at theconference held with the participation of regional dele-gates! Here again we have a device of Russians abroad exactly after the manner of Rabocheye Dyelo : playing at “democ-racy” when the conditions for complete democracy are absent,speculating on the inflammation of all kinds of discontent“abroad” and at the same time transmitting from abroad (through the “school”) your otzovist and god-building prop-aganda—starting a split among the Bolsheviks, and after-wards moaning about a split—forming a private faction(under cover of a “school”) and shedding crocodile tears overthe “splitting” policy of Proletary . 
 No, this squabble has gone on long enough! A faction is a free union of kindred minds within a party and after over a year of strife both in Russia and abroad we had a perfectright, we had the duty, to make a definite decision. 
 Andwe have done so. 
 You have a perfect right to oppose it, toput forward your platform and try to win a majority for it. 
If you do not do so, if instead of forming an open alliance with the otzovists and putting forward a common platform you persist in playing hide-and-seek and speculating on acheap “democracy” abroad, you will get nothing in returnbut the contempt you deserve. 
 You are playing a double game. 
 On the one hand, you declare that for a whole year Proletary has been “wholly” pursuing a non-Bolshevik policy (and your supporters in Russia have tried more than once to gain acceptance for these views in resolutions of the St. 
 Petersburg Committee and the Moscow Committee). 
 On the other hand, you bewail the split and refuse to recognise the “removal”. 
 On the one hand, you are in fact hand in glove with the otzovists and god-builders, on the other you repudiate them and pose aspeacemakers who want to make peace between the Bolsheviksand the otzovists and god-builders. 
 “Abandon hope for ever!” You can try to win a majority. 
 You can gain what victories you like among immature Bol-shevik members. 
 We shall not agree to any reconciliation. 
 Form your faction, or rather: go on forming it, since youhave already begun, but do not try to deceive the Party,do not try to deceive the Bolsheviks. 
 All the conferencesand congresses in the world are powerless now to reconcilethe Bolsheviks with the otzovists, the ultimatumists and the god-builders. 
 We have said and we repeat it once again: every Bolshevik Social-Democrat and every class-consciousworker must make his fixed and final choice. 
 VI Concealing their ideological kin, afraid to declare their real platform, the new faction is trying to fill up the gapsin its ideological stock-in-trade by borrowing words from the vocabulary of old splits. 
 The “new Proletary ”, the “new Proletary line”, shout Maximov and Nikolayev imitating the fight against the new Iskra in the old days. 
 It is a trick that might beguile certain political infants. 
But you are not even capable of repeating old words, gentlemen. 
 The “point” of the slogan “against the newIskra ” was that when the Mensheviks took over Iskra they themselves had to start a new line of policy, whereas the Congress (the Second Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 in 1903) had endorsed the line of the old Iskra . 
 The “point” was that the Mensheviks (through the mouth of Trotsky in 1903-04) had to declare: the old Iskra and the new are poles apart. 
 And to this day Potresov and Co. 
 are trying to remove fromthemselves the “traces” of the period when they were guided by the old Iskra . 
 Proletary is now in its 47th issue. 
 The first came out exactly three years ago, in August 1906. 
 In this first issue of Proletary , dated August 21, 1906, we find an editorial article “The Boycott” and it states in black and white: “ The time has now come when the revolutionary Social-Democrats must cease to be boycottists . 
”* Since that time there has not been a single issue of Proletary containing even one line of print in favour of “boycottism” (after 1906), otzovism and ultimatumism, without a refutation of this caricature of Bolshevism . 
 And now the caricature Bolsheviks are getting on stilts and trying to compare themselves with those who first fought the three-year campaign of the old Iskra and secured the endorsement of its line by the Second PartyCongress and then exposed, the volte-face of the new Iskra ! Comrade Maximov now signs himself “Former editor of the popular workers’ newspaper Vperyod ”, wanting to remind the reader that it was said “geese saved Rome”. 
 “Your rela-tion to the policy of Vperyod ,” 38 we tell Maximov in reply to this reminder, was exactly the same as Potresov’s rela-tion to the old Iskra . 
 Potresov was its editor, but he did not lead the old Iskra , the old Iskra led him. 
 As soon as he sought to change the policy the supporters of the old Iskra turned their backs on him. 
 And now even Potresov himself is making frantic efforts to blot out the “sin of his youth”, hisparticipation in the editorship of the old Iskra . 
 Maximov did not lead Vperyod , but Vperyod led him. 
 Proof: the policy of boycotting the Third Duma, in supportof which Vperyod did not and could not say a single word . 
 Maximov acted very wisely and well when he allowed him-self to be led by Vperyod . 
 Now he has begun to think up (or, what comes to the same thing, to help the otzovists to thinkup) a line of policy that is inevitably leading him into the morass, just like Potresov. 
 Remember this, Comrade Maximov: the basis one should take for comparison is the integrity of an ideological and political trend, not “words” and “slogans”, which somepeople learn by heart without understanding their meaning. 
 Bolshevism ran the old Iskra for three years, from 1900 to 1903, and emerged as an integral trend for the struggle withMenshevism. 
 The Mensheviks persisted for a long time in their new alliance with the anti-Iskrists and the support-*See present edition, Vol. 
 11, p. 
 145. 
— Ed. 
 ers of Rabocheye Dyelo until finally they surrendered Pot-resov (and only Potresov?) to Prokopovich. 
 The Bolsheviks ran the “old” Proletary (1906-09) in a spirit of resolute opposition to “boycottism”, etc. 
, and emerged as an integraltrend for the struggle against those who are now thinking up“otzovism”, “ultimatumism”, “god-building”, etc. 
 TheMensheviks wanted to reform the old Iskra in the spirit of Martynov and the Economists, and they broke their necks in the attempt. 
 You want to reform the old Proletary i n the spirit of “Er”, the otzovists and the god-builders—andyou will break your necks too. 
 But what about the “turn towards Plekhanov”, says Maxi-mov triumphantly? What about the formation of a “newCentrist faction”? And our “also-Bolshevik” describes as “diplomacy” a “denial” that “the realisation of the idea of a ‘centrist group’ is being contemplated!” These cries which Maximov is uttering against “diplom-acy” and “uniting with Plekhanov” are simply laughable. 
Here, too, the caricature Bolsheviks are true to themselves:they have firmly learned by heart that Plekhanov pursued an ultra-opportunist policy in 1906-07. 
 And they think that if they repeat it rather frequently, without bothering toanalyse the changes that are taking place, this will denotethe maximum degree of “revolutionary spirit”. 
 The fact of the matter is that starting from the London Congress the “diplomats” of Proletary always openly pursued and succeeded in carrying out a pro-Party policy against the grotesque exaggerations of factionalism, a policy ofdefending Marxism against anti-Marxist criticism. 
 Thereare two reasons for Maximov’s present outcries: on the onehand, ever since the London Congress there have always beenindividual Bolsheviks (Alexinsky is an example) alleging that a policy of “conciliation”, a “Polish-Lettish” policy, etc. 
, has been substituted for a policy of Bolshevism. 
 Thesestupid allegations, which were merely evidence of bigotedthinking, were seldom taken seriously by the Bolsheviks. 
On the other hand, the literary clique to which Maximovbelongs and which has never at any time had more than one foot in the Social-Democratic movement, has for a long time regarded Plekhanov as the chief enemy of their god-buildingand suchlike tendencies. 
 In the eyes of this clique nothing is more terrible than Plekhanov. 
 Nothing is more destruc-tive to their hope of inculcating their ideas into the workers’ party than “uniting with Plekhanov”. 
 And now these two elements: bigoted factionalism with its incomprehension of the tasks of the Bolshevik factionin forming the Party, and the god-builders of the literarycircles and apologists of god-building, have come togetheron the “platform”: against “union with Plekhanov”, against the “conciliatory”, “Polish-Lettish” policy of Proletary , etc. 
 Plekhanov’s Dnevnik No. 
 9, which is now out, makes it unnecessary for us to explain to the reader in special detailwhat a caricature this “platform” of the caricature Bol-sheviks is. 
 Plekhanov exposed the liquidationism of Golos Sotsial-Demokrata , the diplomacy of its editors and declared that his “way parted” with Potresov, who had ceased to be a revolutionary. 
 It is clear now to every Social-Democratthat working-class Mensheviks will go with Plekhanov against Potresov. 
 It should be clear to everyone that the split amongthe Mensheviks vindicates the policy of the Bolsheviks. 
It is clear to everyone that Plekhanov’s declaration of the pro-Party line of policy against the splitting tactics of the liquidators is a tremendous victory for Bolshevism, which now holds the predominant position in the Party. 
 Bolshevism has won this tremendous victory because it pursued its pro-Party policy in spite of the outcries of the immature “Lefts” and god-building literati. 
 Only such peo-ple as these can be afraid of a rapprochement with the Plekhanov who exposes and expels the Potresovs from theworkers’ party. 
 Only in the stagnant bog of the god-builders’circle or of the heroes of phrases learned by heart is there anychance of success for a “platform”: “Against union withPlekhanov”, that is to say , against rapprochement with the pro-Party Mensheviks for the struggle against liquidationism, against rapprochement with the orthodox Marxists (whichis disadvantageous to the clique of literary Yerogins),against the winning of further Party support for revolutionarySocial-Democratic policy and tactics. 
 We Bolsheviks can point to great achievements in winning such support. 
 Rosa Luxemburg and Karl Kautsky—Social-Democrats who often write for Russians and to that extentare in our Party—have been won over to our point of view, although at the beginning of the split (1903) their sympa-thies were entirely with the Mensheviks. 
 They were won over because the Bolsheviks made no concessions to “criti-cism” of Marxism, because the Bolsheviks upheld, not theletter of their own , definitely their own factional theory, but the general spirit and meaning of revolutionary Social-Democratic tactics. 
 We shall continue to advance alongthis path, we shall wage an even more relentless war against pedantic stupidity and reckless phrase-mongering with phrases learned by heart, against the theoretical revisionismof the god-building circle of literati. 
 Two liquidationist trends have now quite clearly mate-rialised among the Russian Social-Democrats: Potresov’sand Maximov’s. 
 Potresov is necessarily afraid of the Social-Democratic Party because henceforth there is no hope of his line being adopted by it. 
 Maximov is necessarily afraid of the Social-Democratic Party because there is now no hopeof his line being adopted by it. 
 Both the one and the other will support and shield by fair means or by foul the esca-pades of the separate literary circles with their peculiar forms of revision of Marxism: Both the one and the other will clutch, as the last shadow of hope, at the preservation of the circlespirit against the Party spirit, for Potresov can still winoccasional victories in a select company of bigoted Men-sheviks, Maximov can still gain an occasional laurel wreathfrom circles of especially bigoted Bolsheviks, but neither the one nor the other will ever obtain a firm footing whether among Marxists or in a really Social-Democratic workers’party. 
 They represent two opposite, but mutually comple-mentary, equally limited, petty-bourgeois trends in theSocial-Democratic movement. 
 VII We have shown what the general staff of the new faction is like. 
 Where can its army be recruited from? From thebourgeois-democratic elements who attached themselves to the workers’ party during the revolution. 
 The proletariat everywhere is constantly being recruited from the pettybourgeoisie, is everywhere constantly connected with it through thousands of transitional stages, boundaries and gradations. 
 When a workers’ party grows very quickly (as ours did in 1905-06) its penetration by a mass of elements imbued with a petty-bourgeois spirit is inevitable. 
 Andthere is nothing bad about that. 
 The historic task of the pro-letariat is to assimilate, re-school, re-educate all the ele-ments of the old society that the latter bequeaths it in theshape of offshoots of the petty bourgeoisie. 
 But the prole-tariat must re-educate these newcomers and influence them, not be influenced by them. 
 Of the “Social-Democrats of thedays of freedom”, who first became Social-Democrats inthe days of enthusiasm and celebration, the days of clarionslogans, the days of proletarian victories which turned theheads of even purely bourgeois intellectuals, very many began to study in earnest , to study Marxism and to learn persistent proletarian work—they will always remain Social-Democrats and Marxists. 
 Others did not succeed in gaining,or were incapable of gaining, anything from the proletarianparty but a few texts and “striking” slogans learned by heart,a few phrases about “boycottism”, “ boyevism ”, and so forth. 
 When such elements thought to foist their “theories”, their world outlook, i. 
e. 
, their short-sighted views, on the work-ers’ party, a split with them became inevitable. 
 The fate of the boycottists of the Third Duma is an obvious example that admirably shows the difference between thetwo elements. 
 The majority of the Bolsheviks, sincerely carried away by the desire for a direct and immediate fight against theheroes of June 3, were inclined to boycott the Third Duma,but were very soon able to cope with the new situation. 
 Theydid not go repeating words learned by heart but attentivelystudied the new historical conditions, pondered over the question why events had gone that way and not otherwise, worked with their heads, not merely with their tongues,carried out serious and persistent proletarian work, and theyvery quickly realised the utter stupidity, the utter paltrinessof otzovism. 
 Others clutched at words, began to concoct“their own line” from half-digested phrases, to shout about “boycottism, otzovism, ultimatumism”, to substitute these cries for the proletarian revolutionary work which the givenhistorical conditions dictated, and to collect a new faction from all sorts of immature elements in the ranks of Bolshe-vism. 
 Good riddance to you, my friends? We have done every-thing we could to teach you Marxism and Social-Demo-cratic work. 
 Now we declare the most ruthless and irrecon-cilable war on the liquidators, both of the Right and of theLeft, who are corrupting the workers’ party by theoreticalrevisionism and petty-bourgeois methods of policy andtactics. 
 Supplement to Proletary Published according to No. 
 47-48 , the Supplement to Proletary September 11 (24), 1909 ONCE MORE ON PARTYISM AND NON-PARTYISM The question of Party and non-Party, necessary and “un-necessary”, candidatures is undoubtedly one of the mostimportant—if not the most important—in the present Dumaelection. 
 First of all and above all, the electors and thebroad masses who are watching the election must realise why the election is necessary, what is the task that faces a Duma deputy, what the tactics of a St. 
 Petersburg deputy in the Third Duma should be. 
 But a really full and accurateidea of all this is possible only if the whole election campaignis of a Party character. 
 For those who desire in the election to uphold the inter-ests of the really broad and broadest masses the first and foremost task is to develop the political consciousness ofthe masses. 
 The more this consciousness is developed, andin inseparable connection with its development, the moreclearly defined is the grouping of the masses according tothe real interests of the various classes of the population. 
 All non-partyism, even under exceptionally favourable con-ditions, invariably indicates that clarity and maturity arelacking in the political consciousness of the candidate, thegroups or parties supporting him and the mass of people whotake part in his election. 
 In the case of all the parties devoid of proper organisation and a clear-cut and principled programme, whose aim in the election is to cater for the interests of particular small groupsof the propertied classes, the development of the politicalconsciousness of the masses is always thrust into the back-ground, while a clear class grouping of the masses is practi-cally always regarded as undesirable and dangerous. 
 For those who have no desire to come to the defence of the bour-geois parties clarity of political consciousness and of class alignment comes before everything. 
 This, of course, does not exclude temporary joint actions by different parties in certain special cases, but it does absolutely exclude all non-partyism and all weakening or obscuring of party char-acter. 
 But for the very reason that we uphold the party princi-ple, in the interests of the broad masses, for the sake of freeingthem from any kind of bourgeois influence, for the sake of the fullest clarity of class alignments, we must exert to the maximum our strength and vigilance to see that the Partyprinciple is observed not in words merely , but in fact . 
 The non-party candidate Kuzmin-Karavayev, who has already been labelled an “unnecessary candidate”, lays downthat, strictly speaking, there are no party candidates at the elections in St. 
 Petersburg. 
 This opinion is so false that it is not worth pausing to refute it. 
 It is impossible to doubtthat Kutler and N. 
 D. 
 Sokolov are party candidates. 
 Kuzmin-Karavayev is led astray partly by the fact that neither ofthe parties which have nominated them are existing quiteopenly as such. 
 But if this makes it difficult to run the elections on a party basis it does not do away with the neces-sity of it. 
 To give in to such difficulties, to fold ones arms in face of them, is absolutely identical with acceding toMr. 
 Stolypin’s desire to hear confirmation of his “consti-tutionalism” from the lips of the “opposition” (the so-calledopposition). 
 For the masses who are taking part in the St. 
 Petersburg election it is particularly important now to find out which parties have given up in face of these difficulties and which of them have preserved in their entirety both their programmeand their slogans; which have tried to “adapt themselves”to the reactionary regime by curtailing and restricting their Duma activity, their press and their organisation to the framework of this regime and which of them have adaptedthemselves to it by changing certain forms of activity, butnot by any means by clipping their slogans in the Duma, orby strait-jacketing their press, organisation, etc. 
 Such acomprehensive inquiry, based on the history of the parties, based on the facts of their activity inside and outside the Duma, should be the main content of the election campaign. 
The masses should, in this new and, for democrats, more difficult situation, re-acquaint themselves with the parties which claim the title of democratic. 
 The masses should familiarise themselves again and again with the features that distinguish the bourgeois democrats from the demo-crats who have nominated N. 
 D. 
 Sokolov on this occasion,the differences in their general outlook, ultimate aims,their attitude to the task of the great international movementfor emancipation, their ability to uphold the ideals and meth-ods of the movement for emancipation in Russia. 
 The masses must come out of this election campaign more party-con-scious, more clearly aware of the interests, aims, slogans,points of view and methods of action of the different classes—that is the permanent result which the political trend repre-sented by N. 
 D. 
 Sokolov values above everything and which it will be able to achieve by the most strenuous, unwa-vering, persistent and comprehensive work. 
 Novy Dyen No. 
 9, Published according to September 14 (27), 1909 the text in Novy Dyen Signed: Vl. 
 Ilyin A WORD TO THE BOLSHEVIKS OF ST. 
 PETERSBURG By the time this issue of Proletary reaches Russia the elec-tion campaign in St. 
 Petersburg will be over. 
 Hence itis quite in place now to discuss with the St. 
 Petersburg Bol-sheviks—and all the Russian Social-Democrats—the struggle with the ultimatumists, which almost came to the point of a total split in St. 
 Petersburg during the election and whichis of tremendous significance for the whole Social-DemocraticLabour Party in Russia. 
 First of all the four stages of this struggle have to be clearly established, after which we shall dwell on the significance of the struggle and on certain differences of opinion between ourselves and a section of the Bolsheviks in St. 
 Petersburg. 
These four stages are as follows: 1) At the Conference of theenlarged editorial board of Proletary held abroad the atti-tude of the Bolsheviks to otzovism and ultimatumism wasdefinitely stated, and the fact of Comrade Maximov’s split-ting off was also noted ( Proletary No. 
 46 and its Supple-ment *). 
 2) In a special leaflet likewise printed and circulated abroad, entitled “Report of the Members Removed from theEnlarged Editorial Board of Proletary to the Bolshevik Comrades”, Comrades Maximov and Nikolayev (condition-ally and partially supported by Comrades Marat and Domov) set out their views on the policy of Proletary as a “Menshevik” policy, etc. 
, and defended their ultimatumism. 
 An analysisof this leaflet was given in a special supplement to Proletary No. 
 47-48. 
 ** 3) At the very beginning of the election cam-paign in St. 
 Petersburg the Executive Committee of the St. 
Petersburg Committee of our Party adopted an ultimatumist *See present edition, Vol. 
 15, pp. 
 425-33, 442-60. 
— Ed. 
 **See pp. 
 29-61 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 resolution on the election. 
 The text of this resolution is given elsewhere in this issue. 
 4) The adoption of this resolution raised a regular storm in Bolshevik Party circles in St. 
 Petersburg. 
 The storm raged, if you will permit the expres-sion, from above and from below. 
 “From above”—the indig-nation and protests of the representatives of the CentralCommittee and members of the enlarged editorial boardof Proletary . 
 “From below”—the calling of a non-official inter-district meeting of Social-Democratic workers and functionaries in St. 
 Petersburg. 
 The meeting adopted aresolution (see text in this issue) of solidarity with the edi-torial board of Proletary , but sharply censured the “splitting actions” of both this editorial board and of the otzovist-ultimatumists. 
 Then a new meeting of the St. 
 Petersburg Committee and Executive Committee was held and the ulti-matumist resolution was rescinded . 
 A new resolution was adopted in harmony with the policy of Proletary . 
 The text of this resolution is quoted in full in the Current Eventscolumn of the present issue. 
 Such, in the main, is the picture of events. 
 The signif-icance of the notorious “ultimatumism” in our Party has now been completely demonstrated in practice and all RussianSocial-Democrats should ponder carefully over the questionsin dispute. 
 Further, the censure which a section of our com-rades in St. 
 Petersburg passed on our “splitting” policy givesus a welcome opportunity to explain ourselves definitively to every Bolshevik on this important question as well. 
 It is better to “explain ourselves” fully now than to arousenew friction and “misunderstandings” at every step in ourpractical work. 
 First of all let us establish what exactly was the stand-point we adopted on the question of a split immediately after the Conference of the enlarged editorial board of Proletary . 
 The “Communication” on this Conference (Supple-ment to Proletary No. 
 46 *) states from the outset that ulti-matumism, as the trend proposing that an ultimatum shouldbe presented to the Social-Democratic group in the Duma,is vacillating between otzovism and Bolshevism. 
 One of our ultimatumists abroad—says the “Communication”— *See present edition, Vol. 
 15, pp. 
 425-33. 
— Ed. 
 “admitted that there had been a great improvement lately in the work of the Social-Democratic group in the Duma, and that he did not intend to present an ultimatum to it now, immediately”. 
 “It is of course possible,” the “Communication” contin-ues, “to get along with ultimatumists like this within one and the same wing of the Party.... 
 In the case of such Bolshevik ultimatumists a split is out of the question. 
” It would be ridiculous even to speak of such a thing. 
 Further on, on the second page of the “Communication” we read: “It would be a profound mistake for any local functionary to un-derstand the resolutions of the Conference as an instruction to expelotzovist-minded workers, let alone bring about an immediate splitin organisations where there are otzovist elements. 
 We warn localfunctionaries in all seriousness against such actions. 
” It would be impossible to express oneself more clearly, one would think. 
 The splitting off of Comrade Maximov,who refuses to submit to the resolutions of the Conference, is inevitable. 
 As for the vacillating, indefinite otzovist-ultimatumist elements, far from declaring a split with them we emphatically warned against it. 
 Now look at the second stage of the struggle. 
 Comrade Maximov and Co. 
 publish a leaflet abroad, in which on theone hand we are accused of a split, while on the other handthe policy of the new Proletary (which is supposed to have betrayed the old Proletary , the old Bolshevism) is declared Menshevist, “Duma-ist” and so forth. 
 Is it not absurd tocomplain of a split in the faction, i. 
e. 
, in a union of kindred minds within a party , if you yourselves admit that there is no unanimity? Defending their ultimatumism ComradeMaximov and Co. 
 wrote in their leaflet that “the Party cannot then [i. 
e. 
, in the conditions of acute and increasing reaction characteristic of the present time] carry out a big and spec-tacular election campaign, nor obtain worth-while parli-amentary representation”—that the “question of the actualusefulness of taking part in a pseudo-parliamentary insti-tution then becomes doubtful and disputable”—that “in essence” Proletary was “going over to the Menshevik point of view of parliamentarism at any price”. 
 These phrasesare accompanied by an evasive defence of otzovism (“the otzovists have never [!!!] expressed anti-parliamentary sentiments at all”) and an evasive repudiation of otzovism (we are not otzovists; the Party must not liquidate the So-cial-Democratic group in the Duma now; “the Party must” ...“decide whether in the last analysis the whole undertaking—participation in the Third Duma—has not been disadvan-tageous to it”, as though the Party had not decided this question already!). 
 This evasiveness of Maximov and Co. 
 has deceived and still deceives many people. 
 They say: “Well, what harm canthe Party or even the faction suffer from people who do not atall refuse to carry out the Party’s decisions but only cau-tiously defend their own somewhat different point of viewon tactics?” Such a reaction to the propaganda of Maximov and Co. 
 is very widespread among the unthinking public who givecredence to words without taking into account the concrete political significance of evasive, guarded, diplomatic phrases in the circumstances of the present Party situation. 
 Now they have received an excellent lesson. 
 Maximov and Co. 
’s leaflet is dated July 3 (16), 1909. 
 In August the Executive Committee of the St. 
 Petersburg Committee passed the following resolution by three ulti-matumist votes to two on the prospective election campaignin St. 
 Petersburg (which is now over). 
 “On the question of the election the Executive Committee, without attaching special importance to the State Duma and our group there, but being guided by the general Party decision, resolves to take partin the election, not investing all the available forces, but merely put-ting forward its own candidates to gather the Social-Democratic votesand organising an election committee subordinated to the ExecutiveCommittee of the St. 
 Petersburg Committee through its representa-tive. 
” Let readers compare this resolution with Maximov’s foreign leaflet. 
 A comparison of these two documents isthe best and surest way of opening the eyes of the public tothe true character of Maximov’s group abroad. 
 This resolu-tion, just like Maximov’s leaflet, professes submission to the Party but, again just like Maximov, in principle defends ultimatumism. 
 We do not at all mean to say that the St. 
Petersburg ultimatumists have been guided directly by Maximov’s leaflet—we have no data on this subject. 
 And it is not important. 
 We assert that the ideological affinity of the political stand here is indubitable. 
 We assert that this is a particularly clear example of the application of “cau-tious”, “diplomatic”, tactical, evasive—call it what youwill—ultimatumism in practice , an application that, to any person who is close to Party work, is familiar from a hundred analogous cases which are less “striking”, are not authenti-cated by official documents and concern matters that a So-cial-Democrat cannot tell to the public for reasons of secrecy,etc. 
 Of course, the St. 
 Petersburg resolution is less skilfulas regards literary technique than Maximov’s leaflet. 
 But inpractice the views of Maximov will always (or in 999 casesout of a thousand) be applied in the local organisations not by Maximov himself but by his less “skilful” supporters. 
 What concerns the Party is not who is more “skilful” in coveringup tracks, but what is the actual content of Party work, what is the actual trend imparted to it by particular leaders. 
 And we ask any impartial person: is it possible for the supporters of Proletary and the authors of such resolutions to work in one faction, i. 
e. 
, in one union of Party members with kindred opinions? Is it possible to speak seriously of putting into effect the Party decision to utilise the Dumaand the Duma tribune when such resolutions are passed bythe governing bodies of the local committees? That the resolution of the Executive Committee did in effect put a spoke in the wheel of the election campaign that had just begun, that this resolution did in effect disrupt the election campaign, was immediately understood byeveryone (except the authors of it and the ultimatumists whowere enraptured by Maximov’s “art” in covering up thetracks). 
 We have already related how the Bolsheviks in St. 
 Petersburg reacted to this resolution and we shall say more farther on. 
 As for ourselves, we immediately wrote an articleentitled “The Otzovist-Ultimatumist Strike-breakers” 39— strike-breakers because the ultimatumists, by the positionthey took, were obviously betraying the Social-Democratic election campaign to the Cadets —in which we showed what a downright disgrace it was for Social-Democrats to pass such a resolution and invited the Executive Committeewhich passed this resolution to immediately withdraw from Proletary the heading “Organ of the St. 
 Petersburg Commit-tee” if this Executive Committee claimed to voice the viewsof the St. 
 Petersburg Social-Democrats: we do not want tobe hypocritical—said this article—we have never been and never will be the organ of such ... also-Bolsheviks. 
 The article was already set up and even in page proof when we received a letter from St. 
 Petersburg informingus that the notorious resolution had been rescinded . 
 We had to postpone publication (as a result No. 
 47-48 came out a few days later than it should have). 
 Now, fortunately, wehave to speak of the ultimatumists’ resolution not in connec-tion with an election campaign in process but in an account of something that is past ... and it would be well if it were“buried in oblivion”. 
 Here is the text of the resolution passed by the St. 
 Peters-burg Bolsheviks at a non-official meeting called after theadoption of the notorious resolution: “This non-official inter-district meeting of Social-Democratic workers and functionaries, having discussed the resolutions of the enlarged editorial board of Proletary , expresses complete solidarity with the political line of the resolutions: ‘The Tasks of the Bolsheviksin the Party’, ‘The Attitude to Duma Activities, etc. 
’ and ‘On Ulti-matumism and Otzovism’. 
 “At the same time the meeting strongly disagrees with the methods of struggle against the ultimatumist comrades pursued by the edito-rial board in the said resolutions, considering such methods an ob-stacle to the solution of the basic tasks outlined by the editorial boardof Proletary —the rebuilding of the Party. 
 “The meeting protests no less strongly against the splitting actions of our ultimatumist and otzovist comrades. 
” After this resolution was adopted the St. 
 Petersburg Committee held a new meeting which rescinded the ulti-matumist resolution and adopted a new one (see CurrentEvents). 
 This new resolution concludes: “Considering it highly important and essential to utilise the forthcoming election campaign, the St. 
 Petersburg Committee resolvesto take an active part in it. 
” Before we go on to reply to the comrades who do not agree with what they call our splitting policy we shall quote somepassages from a letter sent by one of these comrades: ...“But if the participants in the meeting (the non-official inter-district meeting), two-thirds of them workers, were unanimous in their estimate of the present period and of our tactical moves resulting from it, they were no less unanimous in their disapproval of the meth-ods of struggle which the editorial board of Proletary proposed against our tactical opponents—the ultimatumists. 
 They did not agreewith the resolutions of Proletary that it is necessary to make a faction-al break with these comrades, but considered that such a break would be a step endangering the existence of the Party.... 
 I am sure that Icorrectly express the opinion and sentiment of the meeting if I say:we shall not allow a split . 
 Comrades! You people abroad have conjur-ed up for yourselves a dreadful demon of ultimatumism that in real-ity does not exist over here. 
 A chance combination in the St. 
 Peters-burg Committee and the Executive Committee produced an ultima-tumist majority, the result of which was the adoption of a silly, il-literate resolution which dealt these ultimatumists such a moral blowthat they can scarcely recover-from it.... 
 At the meeting of the St. 
 Pe-tersburg Committee which adopted this resolution there were norepresentatives from three districts, and it has now come to light that the representative of the fourth district was not entitled to vote. 
 So there were in effect no representatives from four districts and theone vote which gave the majority to the ultimatumists, is “accountedfor”. 
 So It turns out that even with the St. 
 Petersburg Committeemeeting under strength the ultimatumists did not have a majority.... 
 Asregards the resolution of the St. 
 Petersburg Committee on the elec-tion, the meeting resolved to get it reconsidered and there is no doubt that at the very next meeting of the St. 
 Petersburg Committee, whereit now appears that we shall be in the majority, a different resolutionwill be adopted. 
 The ultimatumists themselves are ashamed of their re-solution and agree to have It reconsidered. 
 They all agree, the proposerhimself not excepted, it seems, that it is altogether stupid, but—and I emphasise this—there is nothing criminal in it. 
 The ultimatumist comrades who voted for it voiced their disagreement with the authorof the resolution who was really following the advice of the saying thatone should behave so as ‘to acquire capital without incurring blame’. 
” Thus our supporter charges us with spending our time abroad conjuring up a vision of a dreadful demon of ultimatum-ism, and with impeding (or undermining) the cause of rebuild-ing the Party by our splitting attacks on the ultimatumists. 
 The best reply to this “charge” is the history of what took place in St. 
 Petersburg. 
 That is why we have told it in suchdetail. 
 The facts speak for themselves. 
 We considered that Comrade Maximov had broken with our faction because he refused to submit to the resolutions of the enlarged editorial board and organised under the guiseof the notorious “school” the ideological and organisationalcentre of a new organisation abroad. 
 For this we are beingcensured by some of our supporters who in St. 
 Petersburghad to use the most drastic measures (a special non-official resolution already adopted!) to rescind an “ altogether stu-pid” resolution that reproduced the views of Maximov!! No, comrades, when you accuse us of splitting and of “conjuring-up demons” you only prove over and over againthat it was imperatively necessary to recognise that Maxi-mov had broken with our faction, you only prove that weshould have hopelessly disgraced Bolshevism and done ir-reparable damage to the Party cause if we had not dissociated ourselves from Maximov on the eve of the election in St. 
 Petersburg. 
 Your deeds , comrades who accuse us of a split, contradict your words . 
 You “differ only” with our methods of combating the ulti-matumists. 
 We do not differ at all with your methods of combating the ultimatumists, we whole-heartedly and en-tirely approve of both your methods and the victory you won by them—but we are most profoundly convinced at the sametime that your methods are nothing more than the practical application of “our” methods to a certain Party milieu. 
 In what do our “bad” methods consist? In the fact that we called for a dissociation from Maximov and Co. 
? In what do your good methods consist? In the fact that you condemned as “altogether stupid” a resolution wholly advo-cating Maximov’s views, called a special meeting, raised acampaign against this resolution, with the result that theauthors themselves became ashamed of it, that it was re-scinded and another resolution passed in its stead, not ulti-matumist but Bolshevist. 
 Your “campaign”, comrades, does not cut across our cam-paign but is a continuation of it. 
 “But we do not admit that anyone has broken away,” you will say. 
 Very well. 
 If you want to “refute” our, bad method,try to do abroad what you have done in St. 
 Petersburg. 
 Try to secure that Maximov and his supporters (if only at the site of the celebrated Yerogin “school”) admit that theideological content of Maximov’s leaflet (“Report to the Bol-shevik Comrades”) is “altogether stupid”, to secure that Maxi-mov and his clique become “ashamed” of this leaflet, thatthe notorious “school” issue a leaflet with a diametrically opposite ideological content. 
 * If you could secure this you *Here, incidentally, is an illustration how Maximov and the no-torious “school” cover their tracks. 
 The school issued a printed leaflet, would really refute our methods of struggle and we should gladly admit that “your” methods were better. 
 In St. 
 Petersburg there was vital, urgent, general Party business in hand: the election. 
 In St. 
 Petersburg the Social-Democratic proletariat immediately called the ultimatumists to order i n such a tone that they obeyed at once: the Party spirit prevailed, the proximity of the proletarian massesexerted a favourable influence; it at once became clear to all that the ultimatumist resolution made work impossible. 
 The ultimatumists were immediately presented with anultimatum , and the St. 
 Petersburg ultimatumists ( to their honour be it said ) replied to this ultimatum of the Bolsheviks by submitting to the Party, by submitting to the Bolsheviks,and not by waging a struggle against the Bolsheviks (at least, not at the election; whether they will refrain from a struggle after the election remains to be seen). 
 Maximov and Co. 
 are ultimatumists not only in sentiment. 
 They are trying to make ultimatumism a whole politicalline. 
 They are building a complete system of ultimatum-ist policy (we say nothing of their friendship with the god-builders, for which the St. 
 Petersburg ultimatumists are probably not to blame), they are creating a new trend onthis basis, they have begun to wage systematic war against dated August 26, 1909, containing the programme of the school, a letter from Kautsky (who very mildly advises that philosophicaldifferences should “not be brought to the fore”, and declares that he“does not consider justified the sharp criticism of the Social-Demo-cratic group in the Duma”, not to speak of “ultimatumism”!), a let-ter of Lenin’s (see present edition, Vol. 
 15, pp. 
 468-69— Ed. 
) and a resolution passed by the school Council. 
 This droll Council declaresthat “factional strife has absolutely no relation to its (the school’s)aims and objects, which strictly coincide with the general aims andobjects of the Party”. 
 We read the signatories to the leaflet. 
 Lecturers: Maximov, Gorky, Lyadov, Lunacharsky, Mikhail, Alexinsky. 
 Only think: a school with such a roster of lecturers “has absolutely no re-lation” to “factional strife”. 
 Listen, my dear comrades: ... invent,but don’t stretch it too far!—We shall be told that the school has“invited” other lecturers too. 
 In the first place, it did so, knowingthat these others would practically never be able to come. 
 In the se-cond place, it sent out invitations, but.... 
 “But the school could not offer them (the other lecturers) travelling expenses and maintenanceduring the period of the lectures. 
” (Leaflet of August 26, 1909). 
 Nicethat, is it not? We are absolutely not factionalists, but we “cannotoffer” travelling expenses to anyone but our “own” people.... 
 Bolshevism. 
 Of course these inspirers of the otzovists, too, will suffer (and are already suffering) defeat, but to rid our faction and Party more rapidly of the disease of otzovism-ultimatumism, more drastic methods are required and themore decisively we combat the overt and covert otzoviststhe sooner we shall be able to rid the Party of this disease. 
 “An accidental majority” of the ultimatumists—say our friends in St. 
 Petersburg. 
 You are profoundly mistaken, comrades. 
 What you see at present among you is a small particle of the general phenomenon and you call it “acciden-tal” because you do not see its connection with the whole. 
Recall the facts. 
 In the spring of 1908 otzovism raises itshead in the Central Region and collects 14 votes (outof 32) at the Moscow City Conference. 
 In the summer and autumn of 1908 the otzovist campaign in Moscow: Rabo-cheye Znamya opens a discussion and refutes otzovism. 
 In August 1908 Proletary too takes up the controversy. 
 The autumn of 1908: the otzovists form a separate “trend” atthe Party’s All-Russian Conference. 
 The spring of 1909: theotzovists’ campaign in Moscow (see Proletary No. 
 47-48, “Conference of the Moscow Area Organisation”). 
 The summer of 1909: the ultimatumist resolution of the Executive Com-mittee of the St. 
 Petersburg Committee. 
 In the face of these facts to speak of the ultimatumist majority as “accidental” is sheer naïveté. 
 In some localitiesvery marked variations in the make-up of our organisations are inevitable, while reaction is so strong and the member-ship of the Social-Democratic organisations is so weak, asis the case now. 
 Today the Bolsheviks declare “accidental”an ultimatumist majority in X. 
 Tomorrow the ultima-tumists declare “accidental” a Bolshevik majority in Y. 
There are hosts of people ready to squabble on this score— but we are not among them. 
 It must be understood that these squabbles and wrangles are a product of a deep-seated ideolog-ical divergence. 
 Only if we understand this can we helpthe Social-Democrats to replace fruitless and degradingsquabbles (over “accidental” majorities, organisational con-flicts, money matters, contacts, etc. 
) by an explanation of the ideological causes of the divergence . 
 We know perfectly well that in many towns the struggle between the ultimatum-ists and the Bolsheviks has spread to the most diverse branches of work, and has sown discord and disorder also in activities in legal unions, associations, congresses and assemblies. 
 We have letters from the “field of battle” about this discord and disorder—unfortunately, the requirementsof secrecy allow us to publish only a tenth, if not a hundredth,part of what we have received on this subject . 
 We declare most categorically that the fight against the ultimatumistsin St. 
 Petersburg election was no accident , but was one of the innumerable symptoms of a general disease. 
 Hence we repeat over and over again to all our Bolshevik comrades, to all workers who cherish the cause of revolu-tionary Social-Democracy: there is nothing more erroneousand harmful than attempts to conceal this disease. 
 We mustlay bare for all to see the causes, the nature and the sig-nificance of our difference with the supporters of otzovism, ultimatumism and god-building. 
 The Bolshevik faction,i. 
e. 
, the union of like-minded Bolsheviks, who want tolead the Party along the line set by Proletary and known to all, must be clearly separated, demarcated from the newfaction which today leads its supporters inevitably to “acci-dental” anarchist phrases in the platforms of the Moscow and St. 
 Petersburg otzovists, tomorrow to an “accidental”caricature of Bolshevism in Maximov’s leaflet, and the dayafter that to an accidentally “stupid” resolution in St. 
Petersburg. 
 We must understand this disease and energeti-cally co-operate to cure it. 
 Where it can be treated by the St. 
 Petersburg method, i. 
e. 
, by an immediate and successful appeal to the Social-Democratic consciousness of the advancedworkers, such treatment is the best of all, there no one has ever preached splitting off and demarcation at all costs. 
 But wherever, due to various conditions, centres and circlesare being formed on anything like a permanent basis for the propagation of the ideas of the new faction, demarcation is essential. 
 There demarcation from the new faction i s an earnest of practical unity of work in the ranks of the Party , for in St. 
 Petersburg the Party practical workers themselves have just admitted that such work is impossibleunder the banner of ultimatumism. 
 Proletary No. 
 49, Published according to October 3 (16), 1909 the text in Proletary NOT E TO THE ARTICLE “THE ST. 
 PETERSBURG ELECTIO N”40 Only the Bolsheviks have protested against the exaggera-tion of this Bolshevik idea. 
 When the newspaper Novy Dyen41 struck a false note by demarcation inadequate in principle from the Trudoviks and Popular Socialists, three Bolshevik writers made an attempt to correct this oblit-eration of differences in programme and to put agitationin the newspaper and at election meetings on more consistentclass , socialist lines. 
 This attempt failed, as far as we know, through no fault of the Bolsheviks . 
 Equally unsuccessful was the attempt of a certain Bolshevik to protest against Jor-dansky’s arguments in Novy Dyen concerning Social-Demo-cratic views on law and order. 
 Jordansky, like many oppor-tunists, vulgarised Engels’s well-known statement about the“rosy cheeks” that the Social-Democratic movement hadacquired on the basis of “legality”. 
 Engels himself strongly protested against a loose interpretation of his idea (see his letters in Neue Zeit ), which applied to a definite period of development in Germany (with universal suffrage, etc. 
). 
 42 Jordansky thinks it is in place to speak of such a thing underthe “legality” of June 3. 
 Proletary No. 
 49, Published according to October 3 (16), 1909 the text in Proletary DRAF T RESOLUTIO N ON THE CONSOLIDATION OF THE PART Y AND OF ITS UNIT Y43 The editorial board of the Central Organ44 recognises that the consolidation of our Party and of its unity may at the present time be achieved only by the rapprochement , which has already begun, between definite factions that are strong and influential in the practical workers’ move-ment, and not by moralising whining for their abolition. 
Moreover, this rapprochement must take place and develop on the basis of revolutionary Social-Democratic tactics and an organisational policy aiming at a determined struggle against liquidationism both of the “Left” and of the “Right”, especially against the latter, since “Left” liquidationism,being already routed, is a lesser danger. 
 Written October 21 (November 3), 1909 First published in 1929 Published according to in the second and third the manuscript editions of Lenin’s Collected Works , Vol. 
 XIV SPEEC H AT THE MEETING OF THE INTERNATIONA L SOCIALIS T BUREAU ON THE SPLIT IN THE DUTC H SOCIAL-DEMOCRATI C LABOUR PART Y45 OCTOBER 25 (NOVEMBER 7), 1909 Both Singer and Adler proceeded from a number of facts which I want to mention once again here. 
 First, the split is a fact that has to be taken into account. 
 Secondly, ac-cording to Adler himself, the Social-Democratic Party isa socialist Party. 
 Thirdly, it has the incontestable right to participate in international congresses. 
 The S. 
D. 
P. 
 it-self does not even demand to be allowed to participate inthe decisions of the Bureau; it could be granted an advisoryvote in the Bureau, as was done in the case of a number ofRussian parties. 
 Fourthly, Comrade Adler has found that thevotes at international congresses should be divided between the two parties in the Dutch section of the Copenhagen Con-gress, while the S. 
D. 
P. 
 is to be granted the right of appealto the Congress. 
 Unanimity should be achieved on these fouritems at this session. 
 I want to add that Comrade RolandHolst mentioned by Troelstra had come out for the accept-ance of the S. 
D. 
P. 
 Published on November 13, 1909 Published according to in Supplement No. 
 4 to the the text of the supplement newspaper Leipziger Volkszeitung Translated from the No. 
 24 German THE TSAR AGAINST THE FINNISH PEOPLE The Black-Hundred bandits of the Winter Palace46 and the Octobrist tricksters of the Third Duma have begun anew campaign against Finland. 
 To do away with the consti-tution that protects the rights of the Finns against the tyr-anny of the Russian autocrats, to put Finland on a par with the rest of Russia deprived of rights by the exceptionallaws—such is the purpose of this crusade which has beeninaugurated by the tsar’s ukase deciding the question ofmilitary service over the head of the Finnish Diet and by theappointment of new senators from Russian officialdom. 
 It would be a waste of time to dwell on the arguments with which these bandits and tricksters are trying to prove thelegality and justice of the demands which are presented toFinland under the threat of a million bayonets. 
 The essenceof the matter is not in these arguments but in the aim thatis being pursued. 
 In the person of free and democratic Fin-land the tsarist government and its associates want to efface the last trace of the popular gains of 1905. 
 Hence the cause of the whole Russian people is at stake in these days when theCossack regiments and artillery batteries are hastily occupy-ing the urban centres of Finland. 
 The Russian revolution, supported by the Finns, com-pelled the tsar to relax the stranglehold which he had kept on the Finnish people for a number of years. 
 The tsar, whowanted to extend his despotic power over Finland, to whoseconstitution his ancestors and he himself had taken the oath,was compelled to sanction not only the expulsion of Bobri-kov’s 47 executioners from Finnish soil and the repeal of his own unlawful ukases, but also the introduction of uni-versal and equal suffrage in Finland. 
 After crushing the Rus-sian revolution the tsar is harking back to the past, but with the difference that he now feels behind him not only the sup-port of the old guard, his hired spies and plunderers of the public purse, but also the support of the moneyed gang, headed by the Krupenskys and Guchkovs, which is operatingjointly in the Third Duma in the name of the Russian people. 
 The bandits’ venture has everything in its favour. 
 The revolutionary movement in Russia has been terribly enfee-bled and the beast on the throne need have no concern on its account to distract him from his coveted prey. 
 The West-European bourgeoisie, which had once petitioned the tsarto leave Finland in peace, will not lift a finger to halt thebandits. 
 Only just recently it has been given assurances that the tsar’s intentions are honest and “constitutional” by thevery people who, at that time, exhorted Europe to condemn the tsar’s policy in Finland. 
 Calling themselves “represent-atives of the Russian intelligentsia” and “representativesof the Russian people”, the Cadet leaders have solemnly as-sured the European bourgeoisie that they, and the Russianpeople with them, are at one with the tsar . 
 The Russian liberals have done everything to ensure that Europe remains as indifferent to the new attacks of the two-headed ravager on Finland as it was to his excursions against free Persia. 
 Free Persia has rebuffed tsarism by her own efforts. 
 The Finnish people—and the Finnish proletariat in the lead—are preparing a strong rebuff to the successes of Bobrikov. 
 The Finnish proletariat is aware that it will have to fight in extremely difficult conditions. 
 It knows that the West-European bourgeoisie who are flirting with the autocracywill not interfere; that the moneyed section of Russian so-ciety, partly bribed by Stolypin’s policy, partly corruptedby the lies of the Cadets, will not lend Finland the moralsupport which she enjoyed prior to 1905; that the insolence of the Russian Government has grown beyond measure since it managed to strike a blow at the revolutionary army inRussia proper. 
 But the Finnish proletariat also knows that the outcome of a political struggle is not decided by a single engagement,that it sometimes entails long years of stubborn effort and the winner in the long run is the side which has the force of historical development behind it. 
 The freedom of Finlandwill triumph because without it the freedom of Russia is inconceivable, while without the triumph of freedom in Russia the economic development of the latter is inconceivable. 
 The Finnish proletariat also knows from glorious experi-ence how to wage a long, stubborn revolutionary strugglefor freedom, designed to wear down, disorganise and dis-credit the vile enemy until circumstances permit the deliv-ery of a decisive blow. 
 At the same time the proletariat of Finland knows that from the outset of its new struggle it will have on its side the socialist proletariat of all Russia, ready, however oner-ous the conditions of the contemporary moment, to do theirduty, their whole duty . 
 The Social-Democratic group in the Diet has sent a depu-tation to the Social-Democratic group in the Third Duma in order jointly to discuss a plan of action against the coer-cionists. 
 From the lofty tribune of the Duma our deputieswill raise their voice, as they did last year, to brand thetsarist government and unmask its hypocritical allies inthe Duma. 
 Let then all the Social-Democratic organisationsand all workers exert every effort so that the voice of our deputies in the Taurida Palace 48 is not a cry in the wil-derness, so that the enemies of Russian and Finnish libertysee that the whole Russian proletariat is one with the Fin-nish people. 
 The duty of the comrades in each locality is touse every opportunity that presents itself to make manifestthe attitude of the proletariat of Russia to the Finnish ques-tion. 
 Beginning with appeals to the Russian and Finnish Social-Democratic groups, and proceeding to more activeforms of protests, the Party will find ways enough to breakthe disgraceful conspiracy of silence in which the Russiancounter-revolution is rending the body of the Finnish people. 
 The struggle in Finland is a struggle for the freedom of all Russia. 
 Whatever bitter moments the new struggle will cost the heroic Finnish proletariat, it will bind with newties of solidarity the working class of Finland and Russia,preparing them for the moment when they will be strongenough to finish what they began in the October days of1905 and what they tried to continue in the glorious days of Kronstadt and Sveaborg. 
 Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 9, Published according to October 31 (November 13), 1909 the text in Sotsial-Demokrat TO PUPIL S OF THE CAPR I SCHOO L49 Dear comrades, we have received both your letters about the incipient split in the “school”. 
 These are the first com-radely letters of kindred thinkers to reach us from Capri and they have made all of us very happy. 
 We most heartilywelcome the clear demarcation in the school. 
 It required time, of course, to lay bare the true character of the school as a new centre of the new faction. 
 We didnot doubt for a moment that sooner or later the most class-conscious Social-Democratic workers would find their bear-ings in this situation and select the right path. 
 We learnfrom Moscow that letters have been received there from out-and-out “Bogdanovist” pupils of the school who are cam-paigning openly for the Capri centre and very greatly help-ing all Social-Democratic workers to understand the true significance of the Capri school. 
 Now to come to the matter in hand. 
 You must, comrades, thoroughly think over the new situation that has arisen sothat we can discuss it together and take the right steps,choosing the right time for them. 
 You understand, of course,that a split in the school is now inevitable: you yourselves write that you cannot feel at home in such a school. 
 You, of course, are not counting on united action with theout-and-out “Bogdanovists”. 
 And once matters have reachedsuch a pitch that a split in the school is inevitable , it is necessary to understand clearly the significance of thissplit, to have a clear idea of the struggle ensuing from the split, and how the Bogdanovists will try to “ disarm ” all of you (i. 
e. 
, to deprive you of the possibility of making your influence felt and of telling the truth about the school), to compromise all of you (the nickname “agent of the Bol-shevik Centre” bandied about, as you say, by Alexinsky is only a beginning; it is only the bud, the fruit is still to come ), etc. 
, etc. 
 You must think this over thoroughly and act firmly, resolutely and intelligently, as in a battle; you yourselveswrite that a “battle” is going on in the school over the plat-form. 
 This is the beginning of battles against you wher-ever the Bogdanovists have penetrated. 
 You should begin by making an accurate count of your numbers. 
 How many resolute opponents of the “Bogdano-vist” platform are there? Can this number be increased ornot? If yes, then how and in what period of time? If not,then what is the behaviour of the “neutrals”? You must think over what your behaviour should be during an inevitable split in the school in order as far as possibleto win over these neutrals to your side or at worst to prevent them falling wholly into the hands of the Bogdano-vists. 
 Further, how do you intend to arrange your exit from the school? As a simple departure or as a withdrawal owing to the struggle over platforms? Of course, if the struggle amongyou has developed as rapidly as one might judge from yourfirst two letters, the split has perhaps already happened,i. 
e. 
, perhaps the Bogdanovists have already ousted you,quite simply ousted you, and in that case there is nothing to be said. 
 If this has not yet happened—think carefully over how you will arrange your departure. 
 You must givea reply to all the Russian organisations. 
 You must refuteprecisely and clearly, by giving the facts, all the thousandsof attacks which will now be heaped on you by the “Bogda-novists”. 
 You must be prepared to defend your views on the school and on the “platform” of the Bogdanovists. 
 If the question of your departure arises you must see that you are given the means for travelling to Russia. 
 That isthe school’s obligation, just as prior to the split among theBolsheviks it was the obligation of the Bolshevik Centre topay the expenses of travelling to Russia (after the Decem-ber Party Conference of 1908) for Lyadov, Vsevolod and Stanislav. 
 They demanded their expenses from us at thattime and received them. 
 We shall, of course, help you as regards passports and a meeting with us (in Paris or in some small town, where it would be more secret and save you time, as well as being cheaper). 
 We will discuss where to meet as a separate ques-tion and make a choice later on. 
 Our finances are not bril-liant and we can only give you modest assistance. 
 I am writing all this to clarify matters and to exchange opinions with you. 
 When we have received more detailed replies from you and cleared up all the questions by our correspondence we shall convene the executive committeeof the enlarged editorial board of Proletary and then settle the amount of assistance, the time and place of our meet-ing, and so forth. 
 Please answer in detail. 
 Can you give us your direct address? With greetings, The Secretary of “Proletary ” Written October 1909 First published in 1933 Published according to in Lenin Miscellany XXV the manuscript A SHAMEFUL FIASCO The reader will remember the short but instructive his-tory of the “Party” school in X. 
—. 
 Here it is. 
 After a year’sinternal strife the Bolshevik faction categorically disso-ciated itself from the “new” trends—otzovism, ultimatum-ism and god-building. 
 The Bolshevik Conference passed a special resolution declaring the school in X. 
—to be the centre of a new faction consisting of the supporters of these trends. 
 * The leaders abroad of the new faction built on these three monster bases split off from the Bolsheviks organisa-tionally. 
 Being endowed with unusual political courage andunshakable belief in their creed, the heroes of the new fac-tion did not venture to come out with visor up in their own newspaper, etc. 
 They chose instead the simple expedientof deceiving the Party and our faction: they formed a school abroad which they called a “Party” school and carefullyconcealed its true ideological complexion. 
 After a numberof efforts they managed to collect some thirteen workers in this mock-Party school and a group consisting of Maximov, Alexinsky, Lyadov and Lunacharsky set to work “teaching”them. 
 Throughout, this clique not only concealed the factthat the “school” was the centre of a new faction but stren-uously insisted that the “school” was not connected withany faction but was a general Party undertaking. 
 Maximov, Alexinsky, Lyadov and Co. 
 in the role of “non-factional” comrades! ** *See present edition, Vol. 
 15, pp. 
 450-51. 
— Ed. 
 **Incidentally let Comrade Trotsky read the workers’ letters inserted elsewhere in this issue and decide whether it is not time hekept his promise to go and teach in the “school” at X. 
—(if one of the reports of the “school” is correct in saying that such a promise was given). 
 Perhaps this is the opportune moment to come on the “fieldof battle” holding an olive branch of peace and a cruse of “non-fac-tional” unction. 
 And, now, finally, the last stage. 
 Of the workers who came abroad to study at this mock-Party school, about half of them are in revolt against the “bad shepherds” Elsewhere we print two letters from pupils of the notorious “school”and several reports from Moscow which completely exposeMaximov, Alexinsky, Lyadov and Co. 
 for the adventurersthey are. 
 The contents speak for themselves. 
 It is all goodstuff: the “regular battle”, the “fiercest controversies every day” and the picture of schoolmaster Alexinsky putting his tongue out at the worker students, etc. 
 In the weightyreports of the school all these things will probably be trans-muted into “practical studies” of questions of agitationand propaganda, a course “on social philosophies”, etc. 
But alas, no one will take this pitiful, shameful farce seri-ously now! For two months the leaders of the new faction have been trying to persuade the workers of the superiority of otzo-vism and god-building over revolutionary Marxism. 
 Then,losing patience, they began to force the otzovist-ultimatum-ist “platform” down their throats. 
 And the more enlight-ened and independent of the workers protested of course. 
 We do not want to serve as a screen for the new ideologicalcentre of the otzovists and god-builders; there is no controlover the school either “from below” or “from above”, say theworker comrades in their letters. 
 And this is the surest guar-antee that the policy of hide-and-seek and demagogic “democratism” is doomed to bankruptcy in the eyes of the pro-Party workers. 
 “The local organisations themselves will govern the school in X. 
—,” the workers were told by Ma-ximov and Co. 
 Now this game has been exposed by the sameworkers who used to have faith in this clique. 
 In conclusion—one request, godly otzovist gentlemen. 
 When you in your divinely hallowed Tsarevokokshaisk finish—as we hope you will—drawing up your platform,don’t hide it from us on the precedent of your action on aprevious occasion. 
 In any case we shall get hold of it soon-er or later and publish it in the Party press. 
 So it wouldbe better for you not to disgrace yourselves once again. 
 A separate reprint from Published according to Proletary No. 
 50, the text of the separate November 28 (December 11), 1909 reprint SOME SOURCES OF THE PRESENT IDEOLOGICAL DISCORD In the present issue of Proletary we print one of the nu-merous letters we have received pointing out the tremendous ideological discord among the Social-Democrats. 
 Special attention is merited by the ideas on the subject of the “Ger-man line” (i. 
e. 
, the prospect of Germany’s developmentafter 1848 being duplicated in our own country). 
 In orderto trace the sources of the mistaken opinions current inthis very important question, for without its clarification the workers’ party cannot devise correct tactics, we shall take the Mensheviks and Golos Sotsial-Demokrata on the one hand and Comrade Trotsky’s Polish article on theother. 
 I The tactics of the Bolsheviks in the Revolution of 1905-07 were based on the principle that the complete victoryof this revolution was possible only as a dictatorship ofthe proletariat and the peasantry. 
 What are the economic grounds for this view? Beginning with Two Tactics (1905) * and continuing with numerous articles in newspapers and miscellanies of 1906 and 1907 we have consistently giventhe following grounds: the bourgeois development of Rus-sia is now a foregone conclusion but it is possible in twoforms—the so-called “Prussian” form (the retention of themonarchy and landlordism, the creation of a strong, i. 
e. 
, bourgeois, peasantry on the given historical basis, etc. 
) *See present edition, Vol. 
 9, pp. 
 15-140. 
— Ed. 
 and the so-called “American” form (a bourgeois republic, the abolition of landlordism, the creation of a farmer class, i. 
e. 
, of a free bourgeois peasantry, by means of a marked change of the given historical situation). 
 The proletariatmust fight for the second path as offering the greatest de-gree of freedom and speed of development of the productiveforces of capitalist Russia, and victory in this struggle ispossible only with a revolutionary alliance between the proletariat and the peasantry. 
 This is the view embodied in the resolution of the Lon-don Congress on the Narodnik or Trudovik parties and onthe attitude of the Social-Democrats towards them. 
 TheMensheviks, as we know, are hostile to this resolution, par-ticularly as regards the special question which we are ana-lysing here. 
 But how shaky the economic basis of their case is can be seen from the following words of a most influentialMenshevik authority on the agrarian question in Russia,Comrade Maslov. 
 In the second volume of his Agrarian Question , published in 1908 (the preface is dated December 15, 1907), Maslov wrote: “ As long as [Maslov’s italics] purely capitalistic relations have not developed in the coun-tryside, as long as subsistence rent [Maslov wrongly uses this unfortunate expression instead of the term: feudalbondage rent] persists, a solution of the agrarian questionmost advantageous for democracy will still be possible. 
The past history of the world shows two types of capitalist development: the type prevailing in Western Europe (not counting Switzerland and some odd corners of other Euro-pean states), which is the result of a compromise betweenthe nobility and the bourgeoisie, and the type of agrarianrelations which have been established in Switzerland, theUnited States of America, and the British and other colo-nies. 
 The data which we cite on the status of the agrarian question in Russia does not give us sufficient grounds to say for certain which type of agrarian relations will becomeestablished in our country, while our ‘scientific conscience’does not allow us to draw subjective and arbitrary conclu-sions...” (p. 
 457). 
 That is true. 
 And it is a full recognition of the economic basis of Bolshevik tactics. 
 It is not a matter of “revolution-ary intoxication” (as the Vekhists and the Cherevanins /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR think) but of objective , economic conditions, which would allow the possibility of an “American” line of capitalist de-velopment in Russia. 
 In his history of the peasant move-ment in 1905-07 Maslov had to recognise our main prem-ises. 
 The agrarian “programme of the Cadets”, he writes inthe same place, “is the most utopian as there is no broadsocial class interested in the question being solved in theway they desire, either the interests of the landowners will prevail with impending political concessions [Maslov means to say: with inevitable concessions to the landown-ing bourgeoisie] or the interests of democracy” (p. 
 456). 
 And that too is true. 
 Hence it follows that the tactics of proletarian support for the Cadets in the revolution was“utopian”. 
 Hence it follows that the forces of “democracy”, i. 
e. 
, of the democratic revolution, are the forces of the proletar-iat and peasantry. 
 Hence it follows that there are two roadsof bourgeois development: one is that of the “landowners, making concessions to the bourgeoisie”, the other is thatalong which the workers and peasants want to lead and canlead this development (cf. 
 Maslov, p. 
 446: “If all the landed estates were ceded gratis to the peasantry for their use, even then ... the process of the capitalisation of peasant farmingwould take place, but less painfully...”). 
 We see that when Maslov argues as a Marxist he argues in a Bolshevik way. 
 But the following is an instance where,in attacking the Bolsheviks, he argues just like a liberal. 
 This instance, needless to say, is to be found in the liqui-dationist book: The Social Movement in Russia at the Be-ginning of the Twentieth Century which is being published under the editorship of Martov, Maslov and Potresov; in thesection “Summing up” (Vol. 
 I) we find an article by Mas-lov: “The Development of the National Economy and Its Influence on the Class Struggle in the Nineteenth Century”. 
 In this article, on page 661, we read: “... some Social-Democrats have begun to regard the bourgeoisie as a hopelessly reactionary class and a negligible quantity. 
 Not only has the strength and importance of the bourgeoisie been underestimated but the historic role of this class has been viewed out of historicalperspective: the participation of the middle and petty bourgeoisiein the revolutionary movement and the sympathy towards it by thebig bourgeoisie in the first stage of the movement have been ignored,while it is taken as a foregone conclusion that in the future, too, the bourgeoisie will play a reactionary role, and so on” (that’s just as he has it: “and so on”!). 
 “Hence was deduced the inevitability of thedictatorship of the proletariat and the peasantry, which would con-tradict the whole trend of economic development. 
” This tirade is wholly Vekhist. 
 This “Marxism” is all of the Brentano, Sombart or Struve variety. 
50 The standpoint of its author is the standpoint of a liberal as distinct froma bourgeois democrat. 
 For a liberal is a liberal preciselybecause he does not visualise, his mind does not accept, any other course of bourgeois development than the one al-ready in process, i. 
e. 
, the one led by the landowners, whomake “concessions” to the bourgeoisie. 
 A democrat is ademocrat precisely because he sees another way and fightsfor it, the way led by the “people”, i. 
e. 
, the petty bourgeoi-sie, the peasantry and the proletariat, but he does not see that this way too is bourgeois. 
 In the “Summing up” of this liquidationist book Maslov forgot all about the two lines of bourgeois development, about the strength of the bour-geoisie of the American type (in its Russian equivalent:a bourgeoisie that grows out of the peasantry, on a soil swept clean of landlordism by revolutionary means), about the weakness of the bourgeoisie of the Prussian type (en-slaved by “landowners”); he forgot that the Bolsheviks havenever spoken of the “inevitability” of “dictatorship”, but ofits necessity for the victory of the American path; he for-got that the Bolsheviks deduced “dictatorship” not from theweakness of the bourgeoisie, but from the objective , econom-ic conditions making possible two lines of development of the bourgeoisie. 
 In its theoretical aspect the tirade quotedis a sheer mass of confusion (which Maslov himself repudi-ates in the second volume of the Agrarian Question ); in its practical political aspect it is liberalism, an ideologicaldefence of extreme liquidationism. 
 Now see how an unsound position on the main economic question leads to unsound political conclusions. 
 Here isa quotation from Martov’s article “Whither Next?” ( Golos Sotsial-Demokrata No. 
 13): “In contemporary Russia no one can say definitely just now whether in a new politicalcrisis favourable objective conditions will be created for a radical democratic revolution; we can only indicate the specific conditions under which a revolution of this kind will become inevitable. 
 Until history decides this question of the future as it was decided for Germany in 1871, the So-cial-Democrats must not relinquish the aim of meeting the inevitable political crisis with their own revolutionary so-lution of the political, agrarian and national problem (ademocratic republic, the confiscation of landed estates, andthe full right of self-determination). 
 But they must go for-ward to meet the crisis which will settle once and for all the question of the ‘German’ or ‘French’ consummation of the revolution, not stand and wait for the advent of the crisis. 
” True. 
 Splendid words paraphrasing the resolution of the Party Conference of December 1908. 
 This formulation is infull accord with Maslov’s words in the second volume o f the Agrarian Question and the tactics of the Bolsheviks. 
 There is a decided difference between this formulation andthe standpoint expressed in the famous exclamation thatthe “Bolsheviks at the Conference of December 1908 decidedto push in where they had had one licking already. 
” 51 We can “go forward with our revolutionary solution of the agrarian question” only together with the revolutionary sections of the bourgeois democracy, i. 
e. 
, only with the peas-antry, not with the liberals, who are satisfied with “con-cessions from the landowners”. 
 To go forward to confiscationtogether with the peasantry—there is nothing but a ver-bal difference between this formulation and the principle: to go forward to a dictatorship of the proletariat and the peasantry. 
 But Martov, who came so close to the standpointof our Party in Golos No. 
 13, does not hold to this position consistently but constantly deviates towards Potresov andCherevanin, not only in the liquidationist book The Social Movement but in the same issue, No. 
 13. 
 In the same arti-cle, for instance, he defines the task of the moment as the “struggle for a legal labour movement, including one for winning the legalisation of our own existence [of the So-cial-Democratic Party!”. 
 To say that means making a con-cession to the liquidators: we want to strengthen theSocial-Democratic Party, utilising all legal possibilities and all opportunities of open action; the liquidators want to squeeze the Party into the framework of a legal and open(under Stolypin) existence. 
 We are fighting for the revolu-tionary overthrow of the Stolypin autocracy, utilising for this struggle every case of open action, widening the prole-tarian basis of the movement for this purpose. 
 The liquida-tors are fighting for the open existence of the labour move-ment ... under Stolypin. 
 Martov’s statement that it is ourduty to fight for a republic and the confiscation of the landis so formulated that it precludes liquidationism; his state-ment about fighting for the open existence of the Party is so formulated that it does not preclude liquidationism. 
 Here in the political field is the same inconsistency as Mas-lov’s in the economic field. 
 * This inconsistency soars to Himalayan heights in Marty-nov’s article on the agrarian question (No. 
 10-11). 
 Marty-nov tries to carry on a biting controversy against Proletary but, owing to his inability to formulate the question, he flounders helplessly and clumsily. 
 For Proletary , you see, the result is as Tkachov has it: “Now, a little bit later, ornever!” 52 This is the “result” also for Maslov and Martov, dear Comrade Martynov; it should be the result for anyMarxist, since it is a question not of a socialist revolution (as in the case of Tkachov) but of one of the two methods of consummating the bourgeois revolution. 
 Just think, Comrade Martynov: can Marxists undertake in general to support theconfiscation of large landed estates or are they obliged to doso only “until” (whether “now, a little bit later” or for quitea long time yet is more than you or I can say) the bourgeois system is definitely “established?” Another example. 
 The law of November 9, 1906 53 “threw the countryside into a great tumult, a state of veritable internecine war, some-times running to knife-play”, says Martynov rightly. 
 And hisconclusion: “in the near future to expect any unanimousand impressive revolutionary action of the peasantry, a peas-ant uprising, is quite impossible in view of this internecine war. 
” It is ludicrous of you, dear Comrade Martynov, tocounterpose an uprising, i. 
e. 
, civil war, to “internecinewar”. 
 Furthermore, the question of the near future does notenter here since it is not a question of practical directivesbut of the line of the whole agrarian development. 
 Another *We took as an example only one instance of the political incon-sistency of Martov, who in the same article, No. 
 13, speaks of the com-ing crisis as a “constitutional” crisis, and so on. 
 example. 
 “The exodus from the village communes is proceed-ing at a forced pace. 
” True. 
 What is your conclusion?... “It is obvious that the break-up by the landlords will be suc-cessfully completed and that in the course of a few years,precisely in those extensive areas of Russia where quite re-cently the agrarian movement was taking the most acuteforms, the village commune will be destroyed and with itthe chief cradle of Trudovik ideology will disappear. 
 Thus one of Proletary ’s two prospects, the ‘bright’ one, is elimi-nated. 
” It is not a question of the village commune, dear Com-rade Martynov, for the Peasant Union in 1905 and the Tru-doviks in 1906-07 demanded that the land be transferrednot to the village communes but to individuals or free as-sociations. 
 The village commune is being destroyed both b y the landlords’ breaking up of the old system of land tenureunder the supervision of Stolypin and its breaking up by the peasants, i. 
e. 
, confiscation for the creation of a new orderon the land. 
 Proletary ’s “bright” prospect is not connected with the village commune or with Trudovism as such, but with the possibility of an “American” development, the creation of free farmers. 
 So by saying that the bright pros-pect is eliminated, and at the same time declaring that “theslogan of expropriating the big landowners will not go bythe board” Comrade Martynov is making an unholy muddle. 
If the “Prussian” type is established this slogan will go by the board and the Marxists will say: we have done every-thing in our power to bring about a more painless develop-ment of capitalism, now we must fight for the destruction ofcapitalism itself. 
 If, on the other hand, this slogan does notgo by the board it will mean that the objective conditions are at hand for switching the “train” on to the American “line”. 
 In that case the Marxists, if they do not wish to become Struve-ists, will know how to see, behind the reactionary“socialist” phraseology of the petty bourgeois, expressingthe latter’s subjective views, the objectively real struggleof the masses for better conditions of capitalist development. 
 Let us sum up. 
 Disputes over tactics are vain if they are not based on a clear analysis of economic possibilities. 
 The question of Russia’s agrarian evolution taking a Prus-sian or American form has been raised by the struggle of 1905-07, which proved its reality. 
 Stolypin is taking anoth-er step further along the Prussian path—it would be a lu-dicrous fear of the bitter truth not to recognise this. 
 We must go through a peculiar historical stage in the condi-tions created by this new step. 
 But it would be criminal aswell as ludicrous not to recognise the fact that Stolypin hasso far only complicated and aggravated the old state of af-fairs without creating anything new. 
 Stolypin is “putting his stake on the powerful” and asks for “20 years of peace and tranquillity” for the “reformation” (read: spoliation) of Rus-sia by the landlords. 
 The proletariat must put its stakeon democracy, without exaggerating the latter’s strengthand without limiting itself to merely “pinning hopes” on it,but steadily developing the work of propaganda, agitation and organisation, mobilising all the democratic forces—the peasants above all and before all—calling upon them toally themselves with the leading class, to achieve the “dic-tatorship of the proletariat and the peasantry” for the pur-pose of a full democratic victory and the creation of thebest conditions for the quickest and freest development of capitalism. 
 Failure to fulfil this democratic duty on the part of the proletariat will inevitably lead to vacillations andobjectively play into the hands of the counter-revolutionary liberals outside the labour movement and the liquidatorswithin it. 
 Proletary No. 
 50, November 28 Published according to (December 11), 1909 the text in Proletary METHODS OF THE LIQUIDATORS AND PARTY TASKS OF THE BOLSHEVIKS The crisis affecting our Party at the present time is due, as we have said more than once, to the instability of the petty-bourgeois elements who joined the working-class movement during the revolution and who have now gone over to theliquidationism of the Mensheviks on one flank and to ot-zovism and ultimatumism on the other. 
 Hence a fight ontwo flanks is an essential task for defending correct revolu-tionary Social-Democratic tactics and building the Party. 
 And this fight is being waged steadfastly by the Bolshevik faction, which is thereby rallying and uniting all reallyParty, really Marxist, Social-Democratic elements. 
 In order to wage the fight for the Party successfully— for the Party emphatically condemned liquidationism at the December Conference in 1908 and equally emphatically dissociated itself from otzovism and ultimatumism at the same Conference—one must have a clear idea of the situa-tion in which this struggle within the Social-Democraticmovement has to be carried on. 
 Golos Sotsial-Demokrata No. 
 16-17 and the new semi-newspaper of the otzovistsand ultimatumists (the 8-page leaflet of Comrades Maximov and Lunacharsky: “To All Comrades”) merit attention pri-marily because they clearly depict this situation. 
 Both Go-los and Maximov and Co. 
 shield the liquidators. 
 The iden-tity of the methods used by the liquidators of the Right andof the Left is strikingly obvious and demonstrates the equalshakiness of the two positions. 
 Liquidationism is “a deliberately vague, maliciously indefinite catchword”, asserts a leading article in Golos . 
 Maximov asserts that Proletary magnifies and inflates practical differences of opinion with the ultimatumists until they become differences in principle. 
 Poor Golos ! So far it has been able to lay the blame for all “malicious inven-tion” on the Bolsheviks, i. 
e. 
, on its “factional opponents”. 
Now it is Plekhanov and the Bund that have to be chargedwith malicious invention (see No. 
 3 of Otkliki Bunda o n liquidationism in the Bund). 
 Is it Plekhanov and the Bund-ists or is it Golos who “maliciously” prevaricates; which is more likely to be true? We are not liquidators, Golos assures us, we merely in-terpret membership of the Party differently; in Stockholm we adopted Clause 1 of the Rules in the Bolshevik way , but there is no harm in that; now, after Plekhanov’s chargeof liquidationism against us, we shall bring out Clause 1 and interpret all our notorious liquidationism as being merely a desire to extend the concept of the Party. 
 The Party,you see, is not merely the sum of the Party organisations (aswe ourselves conceded to the Bolsheviks in Stockholm ), but also all those who work outside the Party organisations un-der the control and leadership of the Party! What a magnificent subterfuge, what a brilliant inven-tion: there is no liquidationism—merely the old disputesover Clause 1! The only unfortunate thing, dear Golos-ists, is that you thereby confirm Plekhanov’s charge, for in fact, as every Party Social-Democrat and every worker So-cial-Democrat will understand at once, you have dragged out all the old rubbish about Clause 1 precisely in defence of liquidationism ( =replacement of the Party organisation by an “amorphous” legal organisation: see the resolutionof the December 1908 Conference). 
 In fact , what you do is to open the door to the liquidators, however much youassure us in words that your “desire” is to open the door for the Social-Democratic workers. 
 Exactly like Maximov, who assures us that he is not a defender of otzovism, that he only (only!) regards the ques-tion of participation in the Duma as “very, very disputa-ble”. 
 Clause 1 is disputable, participation in the Duma isdisputable—what has this to do with “malicious” inven-tions about otzovism and liquidationism? We are not liquidators, Golos assures us, we only find that Plekhanov “successfully avoided the question of what is to be done if the structure of the Party unit hinders noth-ing more nor less than its rebuilding”. 
 In actual fact Ple-khanov did not avoid this question but answered it frankly and directly: he replied to the Bolsheviks’ removal of theotzovists and ultimatumists by a call to observe the Partyprinciple and by condemning splitting and liquidationism. 
The Party unit is a type of illegal Party organisation inwhich as a rule the Bolsheviks predominate and the rebuild-ing of which (for participation in the Duma, in legal as-sociations, etc. 
) the otzovists have hindered . 
 The pro-Party Mensheviks cannot reply to the Bolsheviks’ removal ofthe otzovists in any other way than that of Plekhanov. 
Golos, however, prevaricates and in fact supports the liq-uidators, repeating in an illegal publication abroad the liberals ’ slander about the conspiratorial character of the Bolsheviks’ organisations, about the Bolsheviks’ unwilling-ness to form broad workers’ organisations, to take part incongresses, and so forth (for, by taking part in the new “op-portunities”, the Party units were thereby reconstructedfor such participation and learned reconstruction in prac-tice). 
 To say that the “ structure ” of the Party unit hinders its reconstruction means in fact to advocate a split, to justi-fy the splitting actions of the liquidators against the Party, which consists of the sum of the units built precisely inthe present way. 
 We are not liquidators, not legalists, we merely assert in a “Party” (according to its signboard!) “illegal” (but ap-proved by Mme Kuskova) publication that the structure ofthe Party unit (and of the sum of the units, the Party) hin-ders the rebuilding of the Party. 
 We are not otzovists, not wreckers of the work of the Social-Democrats in the Duma,we only assert (in 1909) that the question of participation in the Duma is “very disputable” and that “Duma-ism” overshadows everything for our Party. 
 Which of these twotypes of liquidator does more harm to the Party? Plekhanov resigned from The Social Movement , declar-ing that Potresov had ceased to be a revolutionary. 
 Potre-sov writes a letter to Martov: why have I been insulted. 
 I don’t know. 
 Martov replies: I too don’t know. 
 The two editors make an “investigation” ( Golos ’s expression!) of the causes of Plekhanov’s dissatisfaction. 
 The two editors write to the third editor, Maslov, but it turns out that Maslov, too, does not know why Plekhanov resigned. 
 They had worked for years with Plekhanov, they had tried to correct Potresov’s article in accordance with Plekhanov ’s directive and, when an accusation was made against them in printand openly, they suddenly find themselves unable to un-derstand what Plekhanov is accusing Potresov of and theymake an “investigation” of it! Prior to this unfortunate oc-currence they were such skilled, such experienced literati— now they have become children who “don’t know” whatkind of spirit of repudiation of the revolution emanatesfrom Cherevanin’s articles, from Potresov, from the wholeof The Social Movement . 
 Roland-Holst noticed this spirit in Cherevanin—obviously, also out of malice! But Chereva-nin, while continuing together with Potresov to write in the same spirit, inserted somewhere a reservation ... where is there any liquidationism here? The Cadets =Vekhists with reservations. 
 Cherevanin, Potresov and The Social Move-ment=repudiation of the revolution with reservations. 
 Yes, yes, what a deliberately vague, maliciously indefinite catchword “liquidationism” is! But the catchword “god-building” is just as deliberate-ly vague and maliciously indefinite, cry Maximov and Lu-nacharsky. 
 Cherevanin can be shielded by writing a reser-vation ; in what way is Lunacharsky worse than Cherevanin and Potresov? And Lunacharsky together with Maximov concoct a reservation . 
 “Why do I reject this terminology?”— such is the heading of the main paragraph in Lunacharsky’sarticle. 
 Let us change inconvenient terms, we will not speakeither of religion or of god-building ... one can speak rath-er of “culture” ... just try afterwards to make out what weare offering you in the shape of a now, genuinely new and genuinely socialist, “culture”. 
 The Party is so importu-nate, so intolerant (Lunacharsky’s paragraph: On “Intoler-ance”)—well, let us change the terminology, they are notfighting against ideas, you see, but against “terminology”.... 
 And so, dear Golosists, are you not intending in No. 
 18-19 to announce your rejection of terminology ... for instance, as regards liquidationism? And so, editors of The Social Movement , are you not intending in Volumes III-X to explain that “you have been misunderstood”, that you have not called in question any “idea of hegemony”, that you do not approve the slightest spirit of liquidationism ... not the least bit!? On the eve of the Duma elections (in September 1909) the St. 
 Petersburg otzovists and ultimatumists, who havelong been spoiling all the work of the St. 
 Petersburg Commit-tee, secured the passage of a resolution actually disrupt-ing the elections. 
 The workers raised a revolt in the name of the Party and forced the Left liquidators to rescind this stupid resolution. 
 Maximov now prevaricates: the resolu-tion, he says, was “extremely mistaken” but the comrades“themselves rejected it”. 
 “It is quite clear,” writes Maxi-mov, “this mistake had nothing to do with ultimatumismas such. 
” What is clear, Comrade Maximov, is not this, but your shielding of Left liquidationism, which is ruinous for the Party. 
 The Mensheviks of Vyborg District in St. 
 Peters-burg came out against liquidationism (also, presumably,solely out of malice?). 
 Golos at first approved them (after Proletary ). 
 Now the Menshevik liquidator G-g 54 comes forward in Golos No. 
 16-17, and—can you imagine?—he swears like a trooper at the Vyborg comrades, using the most abusive language. 
 In the Menshevik organ he abuses theMensheviks as being Bolsheviks ! The editors of Golos become modest, very modest, innocent, very innocent, and washtheir hands of the matter in the Maximov fashion: “Weshall not take upon ourselves the responsibility” (p. 
 2, col-umn 2 of the Supplement to No. 
 16-17), “it is a question of fact”.... 
 ... Well, what wicked slanderers they are who invented the “legend” (Martov’s expression in Vorwärts 55) that Go-los shields liquidationism, helps liquidationism! Is it not a slander to say that someone assists the liquidators if in an illegal organ he ridicules the Duma work of the Cen-tral Committee, insinuating that this work has developed“after the majority of the Central Committee began to liveabroad” (ibid. 
)—taking advantage of the fact that it is impossible to refute these insinuations, i. 
e. 
, to tell the truth about the Duma work of the illegal Central Committee.... 
 Maximov asserts that the question of the possibility of Party leadership of the Duma group is a very, very dis-putable one (after two years’ experience). 
 Golos asserts that this leadership by the Party amounts to empty words (“af-ter the majority of the members of the Central Committee began to live abroad”). 
 And both Maximov and the Golos-ists beat their breasts and declare that only slanderersset afloat rumours about anti -Party activity by the Right and Left liquidators. 
 Both Maximov and the Golosists explain the whole strug-gle with liquidationism as due to “ousting” inclinations on the part of persons or groups. 
 This is the word that Maxi-mov uses. 
 Golos indignantly describes Plekhanov’s call for the general delimitation as “surgery”, the method of “hair-cutting, shaving and blood-letting”, the methods of “So-bakevich-Lenin”, the methods of the “dare-devil” P. 
 56 (P. 
=a Plekhanov-Menshevik, who was not afraid to tell the truth openly about the liquidationism of the Cherevanins, Larins and Potresovs). 
 Proletary uses diplomatic language, flirts with Plekhanov (Maximov), Proletary fawns on Ple-khanov ( Golos : “Proletary ’s feuilletonist”, who is “obliging” in relation to Plekhanov). 
 You see: the Maximovites and theGolosists explain the new splits and the new alignments in exactly the same way. 
 Let us leave such explanations to the toy manikins and get down to business. 
 Liquidationism is a deep-seated social phenomenon, in-dissolubly connected with the counter-revolutionary moodof the liberal bourgeoisie, with disintegration and break-up in the democratic petty bourgeoisie. 
 The liberals and pet-ty-bourgeois democrats are trying in thousands of ways todemoralise the revolutionary Social-Democratic Party, toundermine and overthrow it, to clear the way for legal work-ers’ associations in which they might achieve success. 
 Andin a time like this the liquidators are ideologically and or-ganisationally fighting against the most important remain-der of the revolution of yesterday, against the most impor-tant bulwark of the revolution of tomorrow. 
 The Golos-ists (from whom the Party asks no more than an honest,straight fight, without reservations, against the liquidators ) by their prevaricating are doing the liquidators a service . 
 Menshevism is put in a difficulty by the history of counter-revolution: it must either fight liquidationism or becomeits accomplice. 
 Menshevism inside-out, i. 
e. 
, otzovism and ultimatumism, also leads in fact to strengthening liquida-tionism: to continue to “dispute” about Duma and legal activity, to try to preserve the old organisation, not adapt-ing it to the new historical period, to the changed condi-tions, means in fact a policy of revolutionary inaction and destruction of the illegal organisation. 
 The Bolsheviks are faced with the task of a fight on two flanks—a “central” task (the essence of which has not been understood by Maximov, who sees here only insincerity and diplomacy). 
 It is impossible to preserve and strengthenthe illegal Social-Democratic organisation without recon-structing it systematically, undeviatingly, step by step,for coping successfully with the present difficult period, for persistent work through the “strongpoints” of legal pos-sibilities of every kind. 
 Objective conditions have dictated this task to the Party. 
 Who will solve it? The same objective conditions have dic-tated a rapprochement of pro-Party members of all factions and sections of the Party, above all a rapprochement be-tween the Bolsheviks and the pro-Party Mensheviks, and with the Mensheviks of the type of the Vyborg comrades in St. 
 Petersburg and the Plekhanovites abroad. 
 The Bol-sheviks for their part have openly proclaimed the need forthis rapprochement, and for it we issue a call to all Men-sheviks capable of openly combating liquidationism, of openly supporting Plekhanov, and, of course, to all Men-shevik workers above all. 
 The rapprochement will occur rapidly and extensively if an agreement with the Plekhano-vites is possible: an agreement on the basis of the strugglefor the Party and the Party principle against liquidation-ism, without any ideological compromises, without anyglossing over of tactical and other differences of opinion within the limits of the Party line. 
 Let all Bolsheviks, and especially working-class Bolsheviks in the localities, doeverything to achieve such agreements. 
 If the Plekhanovites prove too weak or unorganised, or do not want to reach an agreement, then we shall advancetowards the same goal by a longer route, but in any case we shall advance towards it and we shall reach it. 
 Then the Bolshevik faction remains the sole builder of the Party,at once and immediately, in the sphere of practical work (for Plekhanov’s help is only literary). 
 We shall exert eve-ry effort to promote this building, we shall be merciless to the contemptible subterfuges and prevarications of the Go-losists and Maximovites; at every step in practical Partywork we shall expose and brand before the proletariat theanti-Party nature of both of them. 
 The working class has left the imprint of its proletarian, revolutionary Social-Democratic tactics on the entire bour-geois revolution in Russia. 
 No efforts of the liberals, liquidators and accomplices of liquidationism can do awaywith this fact. 
 And the advanced workers will build, andbuild to completion, the revolutionary Social-DemocraticParty together with those who want to help them in thismatter, against those who do not want to help them, or are incapable of doing so. 
 Proletary No. 
 50, Published according to November 28 (December 11), 1909 the text in Proletary GOLO S SOTSIA L-DEMOKRATA AND CHEREVANI N57 Comrade Cherevanin is the prototype and model of the confirmed liquidator among the Mensheviks. 
 He has made this perfectly clear in his well-known book The Proletariat , etc. 
 Liquidationism is so strongly pronounced in this book that the well-known Dutch woman writer and Marxist, Ro-land-Holst, the author of the preface to the German trans-lation, could not refrain from expressing her protest againstthe distortion of Marxism and its replacement by revision-ism. 
 At that time the editorial board of Golos Sotsial-De-mokrata printed a repudiation of Cherevanin in Vorwärts , declaring that leading Mensheviks do not agree with him. 
Proletary pointed out the hypocrisy of such a repudiation, since it was not reprinted in Golos and was not accompanied by a systematic explanation of Cherevanin’s “mistakes”in the Russian press. 
 * Is not this exactly how bourgeois ministers behave, beginning with Stolypin and ending withBriand: by making reservations, corrections, by repudiat-ing and over-zealous kindred-spirit and over-ardent support-er, and by continuing the old line under this cover? Golos No. 
 16-17 publishes a letter from Cherevanin to the editors with its comment. 
 Proletary is accused of “slander” because we allegedly “concealed” from the publicthat Cherevanin himself “corrected the mistake” in hisbook: The Contemporary Situation and the Possible Future (Moscow, 1908). 
 We shall show our readers once again what are the methods of the Golosists, and what it means when they accuse Pro-letary of “slandering” them as liquidators. 
 *See present edition, Vol. 
 15, pp. 
 452-60. 
— Ed. 
 We shall limit ourselves to a few quotations from Chere-vanin’s above-mentioned new book. 
 Page 173: “In general I do not retract anything of the analysis which I gave in my book: The Proletariat in the Revolution . 
 The proletariat and the Social-Democrats have unquestionably made a num-ber of mistakes which were bound to impede the victory of therevolution, even if this victory had been possible [Cherevanin’s italics]. 
 But now the question must be asked whether this victory was really possible and whether the mistakes of the proletariat and the Social-Democratic Party were the onlycauses of the defeat of the revolution. 
 The question itselfsuggests the answer. 
 The defeat of the revolution is so pro-found and the reign of the reaction, for the next few years atleast, is so secure that it would be quite impossible to refer the causes of this to any mistakes of the proletariat. 
 Here, evidently, it is a question not of mistakes but of deeper causes. 
” There, according to Golos , you have Cherevanin’s “cor-rection of the mistake”! Cherevanin does not retract his“analysis”, but deepens it, adding quite a number of new gems (such as the statistical definition of the “forces of rev-olution” as one quarter of the total population, 21. 
5%-28%; we shall discuss this gem another time!) . 
 To thethesis that the revolutionary proletariat made mistakes,Cherevanin adds: the revolution did not have the “ possi-ble” support (p. 
 197, Cherevanin’s italics) of over one quar-ter of the population—and the Golosists call this a “cor-rection” and loudly accuse Proletary of slander. 
 Page 176: “Let us imagine that the Mensheviks had all along adhered consistently to their Menshevik principlesand had not fallen under the influence of the revolutionaryintoxication of the Bolsheviks, by taking part in the Novem-ber strike in St. 
 Petersburg, the forcible introduction of the 8-hour day and the boycott of the First Duma. 
” (Conclu-sion: the tactics of the proletariat would have improved,but defeat would have followed just the same. 
) Page 138: “Perhaps the revolutionary and oppositional [listen to this!] parties in the stormy year of 1905 went toofar in their expectations of a radical break-up of the agrar-ian and political relations. 
” That should be enough, it seems? Liquidationism and renegacy repeated and aggravated, Golos Sotsial-Demokrata calls a correction. 
 Tomorrow a German translation of The Contemporary Situation will come out—the Golosists will publish a new repudiation for the Germans —Cherevanin will publish a new “reservation”—the liquidationist preach-ing will be intensified— Golos will wax nobly indig-nant at being slanderously accused of liquidationism. 
 Anold story, but ever new. 
 Maslov, Martov and Potresov simply cannot understand, not for the life of them, what was the “spirit” in the writings of Potresov that—at long last!—caused even Plekhanov, aMarxist who had gone to such lengths in manoeuvringround the Cadets, to flare up. 
 So you don’t understand, mydear Golosists? And after these quotations from Chereva-nin’s “corrected” book you still don’t understand? How convenient it is sometimes to be dense! Proletary No. 
 50, November 28 Published according to (December 11), 1909 the text in Proletary THE BOURGEOIS PRESS FABLE ABOUT THE EXPULSION OF GORKY For several days now the bourgeois newspapers of France (L’Eclair , Le Radical ), Germany ( Berliner Tageblatt ) and Russia ( Utro Rossii , Rech , Russkoye Slovo , Novoye Vremya ) have been smacking their lips over a most sensational pieceof news: the expulsion of Gorky from the Social-Demo-cratic Party. 
 Vorwärts has already published a refutation of this nonsensical report. 
 The editorial board of Proletary has also sent a denial to several newspapers, but the bour-geois press ignores it and continues to boost the libel. 
 It is easy to see how it originated: some penny-a-liner over-heard a whisper of the dissensions about otzovism and god-building (a question which has been discussed openly foralmost a year in the Party in general and in Proletary i n particular), made an unholy mess in weaving together his fragments of information and “earned a pretty penny” out of imaginary “interviews”, etc. 
 The aim of this slanderous campaign is no less clear. 
 The bourgeois parties would like Gorky to leave the Social-Dem-ocratic Party. 
 The bourgeois newspapers are sparing noeffort to fan the dissensions in the Social-Democratic Party and to give a distorted picture of them. 
 Their labour is in vain. 
 Comrade Gorky by his great works of art has bound himself too closely to the workers’movement in Russia and throughout the world to replywith anything but contempt. 
 Proletary No. 
 50, Published according to November 28 (December 11), 1909 the text in Proletary IDEOLOGICA L DECA Y AND DISUNITY AMON G RUSSIAN SOCIA L-DEMOCRATS58 The fight against otzovism and liquidationism, which has naturally occupied the first place among the tasks of the really Marxist and Social-Democratic elements of ourParty, should not, however, hide from us the more profoundevil which has in essence given rise to both otzovism andliquidationism and which, according to all the evidence,will give rise to a number of further new tactical absurdi-ties. 
 This evil is the ideological decay and disunity which has wholly taken possession of liberalism and is finding itsway into our Party from all sides. 
 The following is one of the numerous illustrations of this disunity. 
 A comrade who had long worked in the Party,an old Iskrist and old Bolshevik, was prevented by im-prisonment and exile from taking part in the movement for a very long time, almost from the beginning of 1906. 
 Herecently returned to work, became acquainted with otzovism-ultimatumism, and rejected it with dissatisfaction and in-dignation as a scandalous corruption of revolutionary So-cial-Democratic tactics. 
 Having learned of the state of work in Odessa and St. 
 Petersburg, this comrade came, inter alia , to the following conclusion or “provisional result” from his observations: “...It seems to me that the hardest time has passed and it remains to liquidate the remnants ofthe period of break-up and disintegration. 
” But there arenot a few of these remnants. 
 “In all the St. 
 Petersburg work,” we read in the same let-ter, “one feels the absence of a single guiding centre, in-discipline, lack of order, the absence of connection betweenthe separate parts, the absence of unity and plan in the work. 
 Each one works on his own account. 
 Otzovist tendencies are strong in the illegal organisation, they infect even anti-otzovists” ... (obviously, this refers to those Bolsheviks who, despite Proletary ’s repeated and emphatic insistence, have not broken with the otzovists, do not wage a relentless waragainst them, make attempts at conciliation, uselessly de-laying the inevitable denouement without obtaining in factany renunciation of their stupid tactics by the otzovist-ultimatumists).... 
 “On this basis there is developing a char-acteristic phenomenon which has been quite independentlyshown in Odessa as well, viz. 
, revolutionary inaction. 
 Wher-ever the spirit of otzovism prevails, it is strikingly evidentthat the illegal organisations are doing nothing. 
 One or twopropagandist circles, a struggle against legal opportunities— that is the total activity. 
 It is mostly of a disorganising na-ture, as you can see from the extensive data I sent you fromOdessa” ... (used in the article:... *). 
 “As regards legal possi-bilities, their utilisation lacks a consistent Social-Democrat-ic line. 
 In the darkness of the reaction, the opportunistsin the Social-Democratic movement have raised their heads and ‘brazen it out’, knowing that it is not dangerous now to go against the fundamental principles of Social-Democ-racy. 
 One encounters here such a thoroughgoing revision ofrevolutionary Social-Democracy, of its programme and tac-tics, that in comparison with it Bernstein’s 59 revisionism seems child’s play. 
 The R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 does not understand Marx, it has made an incorrect analysis of the tendencies of Russian economic development; there was never any feudalsystem in Russia, there was a feudalistic-trading system;there were not and are not any contradictions between theinterests of the bourgeoisie and those of the landed nobility,nor is there an alliance between them, for these two classes invented by Russian Social-Democracy constitute a single bourgeois class (this is a distinctive feature of Russia) andthe autocracy is the organisation of this class. 
 The weaknessof the Russian bourgeoisie, on which was based (??—theinterrogation marks are those of the author) the slogan ofthe ‘dictatorship of the proletariat and peasantry’ is imagi-*In the manuscript a place is left blank here for the title of the article. 
— Ed. 
 nary, and this slogan was and remains utopian. 
 It should be discarded, together with the democratic republic, for the Russian train has gone on to the German lines. 
 ”...60 It is clear that we have here an instantaneous photograph of one of the rivulets of that broad torrent of ideological confusion which gives rise to otzovism and liquidationism,sometimes fantastically mixing up and even blending to-gether the premises of extreme Right and extreme “Left” idiotism. 
 The first half of these premises (the absence of contradiction between the bourgeoisie and feudalistic land-ownership, etc. 
) is so illogical and absurd that it is dif-ficult even to take it seriously. 
 It is not worth cry... *. 
 Written at the end of November (beginning of December), 1909 First published in 1933 Published according to in Lenin Miscellany XXV the manuscript *The manuscript here breaks off. 
— Ed. 
 EXPLANATORY NOTE ON THE DRAFT OF THE MAIN GROUNDS OF THE BILL ON THE EIGHT-HOUR WORKING DAY II* In the present, second part of the explanatory note we in-tend to dwell on the question of the type of the Social-Demo-cratic Bill on the Eight-Hour Working Day for the ThirdDuma and on the grounds explaining the basic features o f the Bill. 
 The original draft in the possession of the Duma Social-Democratic group and given to our subcommittee could betaken as a basis, but it has required a number of alterations. 
 The main aim of the Bills introduced by the Social-Demo-crats in the Third Duma must lie in propaganda and agita-tion for the Social-Democratic programme and tactics. 
 Any hopes of the “reformism” of the Third Duma would not only be ludicrous, but would threaten completely to distort thecharacter of Social-Democratic revolutionary tactics andconvert it into the tactics of opportunist, liberal social-reformism. 
 Needless to say, such a distortion of Social-Democratic Duma tactics would directly and emphatically contradict the universally binding decisions of our Party, viz. 
: the resolutions of the London Congress of theR. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 and the resolutions, confirmed by the Central *The first part of the first chapter of the explanatory note should include a popular account, written in as propagandist a manner aspossible, of the reasons in favour of the eight-hour working day, fromthe point of view of the productivity of labour, the health and cul-tural interests of the proletariat, and the interests in general of its struggle for emancipation. 
 Committee, of the All-Russian Party Conferences of No-vember 1907 and December 1908. 
 For Bills introduced by the Social-Democratic group in the Duma to fulfil their purpose, the following conditionsare necessary. 
 (1) Bills must set out in the clearest and most definite form the individual demands of the Social-Democrats in-cluded in the minimum programme of our Party or neces-sarily following from this programme; (2) Bills must never be burdened with an abundance of legal subtleties; they must give the main grounds for the pro-posed laws, but not elaborately worded texts of laws withall details; (3) Bills should not excessively isolate various spheres of social reform and democratic changes, as might appear essential from a narrowly legal, administrative or “purelyparliamentary” standpoint. 
 On the contrary, pursuing theaim of Social-Democratic propaganda and agitation, Billsshould give the working class the most definite idea pos-sible of the necessary connection between factory (and social in general) reforms and the democratic political changes without which all “reforms” of the Stolypin autocracy areinevitably destined to undergo a “Zubatovist” 61 distortion and be reduced to a dead letter. 
 As a matter of course thisindication of the connection between economic reforms andpolitics must be achieved not by including in all Bills the demands of consistent democracy in their entirety, but by bringing to the fore the democratic and specially proletar-ian-democratic institutions corresponding to each individ-ual reform, and the impossibility of realising such institu-tions without radical political changes must be emphasisedin the explanatory note to the Bill; (4) in view of the extreme difficulty under present con-ditions of legal Social-Democratic propaganda and agitationamong the masses, Bills must be so composed that the Billtaken separately and the explanatory note to it taken sepa-rately can achieve their aim on reaching the masses (whether by being reprinted in non-Social-Democratic newspapers, or by the distribution of separate leaflets with the text of the Bill, etc. 
), i. 
e. 
, can be read by rank-and-file unen-lightened workers to the advantage of the development of their class-consciousness. 
 With this end in view the Bills in their entire structure must be imbued with a spirit of proletarian distrust of the employers and of the state as an organ serving the employers: in other words, the spirit ofthe class struggle must permeate the whole structure of theBill and ensue from the sum of its separate propositions; finally (5) under conditions in Russia today, i. 
e. 
, in the ab-sence of a Social-Democratic press and Social-Democratic meetings, Bills must give a sufficiently concrete idea of the changes demanded by the Social-Democrats and not limitthemselves to a mere proclamation of principle. 
 The ordin-ary unenlightened worker should find his interest arousedby the Social-Democratic Bill, he should be inspired by itsconcrete picture of change so that later he passes from this individual picture to the Social-Democratic world outlook as a whole. 
 Proceeding from these basic premises, it has to be admit-ted that the type of Bill chosen by the author of the origi-nal draft of the Bill on the Eight-Hour Working Day is more in accordance with Russian conditions than, for example, those Bills on a shorter working day which were introduced by the French and German Social-Democrats in their parlia-ments. 
 For example, the Bill on the Eight-Hour WorkingDay moved by Jules Guesde in the French Chamber of Dep-uties on May 22, 1894, contains two articles: the first for-bids working longer than eight hours per day and six days per week, the second permits work in several shifts provided that the number of working hours per week does not exceed48. 
 * The German Social-Democratic Bill of 1890 contains 14 lines, proposing a 10-hour working day immediately,a nine-hour working day from January 1, 1894, and an eight-hour day from January 1, 1898. 
 In the session of 1900-02 the German Social-Democrats put forward a still shorter proposal for limiting the working day immediately to tenhours, and subsequently. 
 ** *Jules Guesde, Le Problème et la solution ; les huit heures à la chambre , Lille. 
 ( The Problem and Its Solution ; the Eight-Hour Day in Parliament —Ed. 
) **M. 
 Schippel, Sozial-Demokratisches Reichstagshandbuch (Social-Democratic Handbook to the Reichstag —Ed. 
) Berlin, 1902, pp. 
 882 and 886. 
 In any case, of course, such Bills are ten times more ration-al from the Social-Democratic point of view than attempts to “adapt” oneself to what is practicable for reactionary or bourgeois governments. 
 But whereas in France and Germany,where there is freedom of press and assembly, it suffices todraft a Bill with only a proclamation of principle , in our case in Russia at the present time it is necessary to addconcrete propaganda material in the Bill itself . 
 Hence we regard as more expedient the type adopted by the author of the original draft, but a number of correctionsneed to be made in this draft, for in some cases the authorcommits what is in our opinion an extremely important andextremely dangerous mistake, viz. 
, he lowers the demandsof our minimum programme without any need for it (e. 
g. 
, by fixing the weekly rest period at 36 hours instead of 42, or by saying nothing about the need to have the consent ofthe workers’ organisations for permitting night work). 
 Ina few cases the author, as it were, tries to adapt his Bill tothe requirement of “practicability” by proposing, for exam-ple, that the minister should decide requests for exceptions (with the matter being raised in the legislative body) and by making no mention of the role of the workers’ trade un-ion organisations in implementing the law on the eight-hourday. 
 The Bill proposed by our subcommittee introduces into the original draft a number of corrections in the above-men-tioned direction. 
 In particular, we shall dwell on the grounds for the following alterations of the original draft. 
 On the question of what enterprises should come under the Bill, the sphere of its application should be extendedto include all branches of industry, trade and transport, andall kinds of institutions (including those of the state: the post office, etc. 
) as well as home work. 
 In the explanatory note put forward in the Duma the Social-Democrats mustespecially emphasise the need for such an extension and forputting an end to all boundaries and divisions (in this mat-ter) between the factory, trading, office, transport and othersections of the proletariat. 
 The question may arise of agriculture, in view of the de-mand in our minimum programme for an eight-hour workingday “for all wage-workers”. 
 We think, however, that it is hardly expedient at the present time for the Russian Social-Democrats to take the initiative in proposing an eight-hour working day in agriculture. 
 It would be better to make the proviso in the explanatory note that the Party reserves theright to introduce a further Bill in regard to both agricultureand domestic service, etc. 
 Further, in all, cases where the Bill deals with the permis-sibility of exceptions to the law, we have inserted a demand for the consent of the workers’ trade union to each exception. 
 This is essential in order to show the workers clearly that itis impossible to achieve an actual reduction of the workingday without independent action on the part of the workers’organisations. 
 Next, we must deal with the question of the gradual introduction of the eight-hour working day. 
 The author of the original draft does not say a word about this, limitinghimself to the simple demand for the eight-hour day as inJules Guesde’s Bill. 
 Our draft, on the other hand, followsthe model of Parvus * and the draft of the German Social-Dem-ocratic group in the Reichstag, establishing a gradual in-troduction of the eight-hour working day (immediately, i. 
e. 
. 
 within three months of the law coming into force, a ten-hourday, and a reduction by one hour annually). 
 Of course, thedifference between the two drafts is not such an essentialone. 
 But in view of the very great technical backwardnessof Russian industry, the extremely weak organisation of the Russian proletariat and the huge mass of the working class population (handicraftsmen, etc. 
) that has not yet par-ticipated in any big campaign for a reduction of the workingday—in view of all these conditions it will be more expe-dient here and now , in the Bill itself , to answer the inevitable objection that a sharp change is impossible, that with such a change the workers’ wages will be reduced, etc. 
 ** Laying *Parvus, Die Handelskrisis und die Gewerkschaften . 
 Nebst An-hang, Gesetzentwurf über den achtstundigen Normalarbeitstag. 
 Mün-chen: 1901 (Parvus, The Trade Crisis and the Trade Unions . 
 With ap-pendix: Bill on the Eight-Hour Normal Working Day, Munich, 1901. 
 **On the question of the gradual introduction of the eight-hour working day Parvus says, in our opinion quite rightly, that this fea-ture of his Bill arises “not from the desire to come to an understandingwith the employers but from the desire to come to an understandingwith the workers. 
 We should follow the tactics of the trade unions: down a gradual introduction of the eight-hour working day (the Germans protracted its introduction to eight years; Parvus to four years; we are proposing two years) provides an immediate reply to this objection: work in excess of tenhours per day is certainly irrational economically and im-permissible on health and cultural grounds. 
 The annual term,however, for reducing the working day by one hour fullysuffices for the technically backward enterprises to come into line and introduce changes, and for the workers to go over to the new system without an appreciable difference in labourproductivity. 
 The introduction of the eight-hour working day should be made gradual not in order to “adapt” the Bill to the meas-ure of the capitalists or government (there can be no ques-tion of this, and if such ideas were to arise-we should, of course, prefer to exclude any mention of gradualness), but inorder to show everyone quite clearly the technical, culturaland economic practicability of the Social-Democratic pro-gramme in even one of the most backward countries. 
 A serious objection to making the introduction of the eight-hour working day a gradual one in the Russian Social-Democratic Bill would be that this would disavow, even ifindirectly, the revolutionary Soviets of Workers’ Deputiesof 1905, which called for immediate realisation of the eight-hour working day. 
 We regard this as a serious objection,for the slightest disavowal of the Soviets of Workers’ Depu-ties in this respect would be direct renegacy, or at any rate support of the renegades and counter-revolutionary liberals,who have made themselves notorious by such a disavowal. 
 We think therefore that in any case , whether gradualness will be incorporated in the Bill of the Social-DemocraticDuma group or not, in any case it is altogether essential that both the explanatory note submitted to the Duma and the Duma speech of the Social-Democratic representative,should quite definitely express a view which absolutely ex-cludes the slightest disavowal of the actions of the Soviets ofWorkers’ Deputies and absolutely includes our recognition of them as correct in principle, wholly legitimate and necessary. 
 they carry out the reduction of the working day extremely gradually for they are well aware that this is the easiest way to counteract areduction of wages ”. 
 (Parvus’s italics, ibid. 
, pp. 
 62-63). 
 “The Social-Democrats,” so, approximately, the statement of the Social-Democratic representatives or their explanato-ry note should read, “do not in any case renounce the imme-diate introduction of the eight-hour working day; on the contrary, in certain historical conditions, when the struggle becomes acute, when the energy and initiative of the massmovement are at a high level, when the clash between the oldsociety and the new assumes sharp forms, when for the suc-cess of the working class struggle against medievalism, for instance, it is essential not to stop at anything—in short, in conditions resembling those of November 1905—the Social-Democrats regard the immediate introduction of the eight-hour working day as not only legitimate but even essential . 
 By inserting in its Bill at the present time a gradual introduc-tion of the eight-hour working day, the Social-Democrats merely desire to show thereby the entire possibility of puttinginto effect the demands of the programme of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
even under the worst historical conditions, even during theslowest tempo of economic, social and cultural development. 
” Let us repeat: we consider such a declaration on the part of the Social-Democrats in the Duma and in their explana-tory note to the Bill on the eight-hour working day as abso-lutely and under all circumstances essential, whereas the question of introducing a gradual establishment of theeight-hour working day in the Bill itself is relatively lessimportant. 
 The remaining changes made by us in the original draft of the Bill concern particular details and do not requirespecial comment. 
 Written in the autumn of 1909 First published in 1924 Published according to in the magazine Proletarskaya the manuscript Revolutsia , No. 
 4 (27) LETTER TO I. 
 I. 
 SKVORTSOV-STEPANOV December 16, 1909 Dear Colleague, I have received your answer and take up my pen to con-tinue our discussion. 
 You want to shift the question more to the theoretical (not tactical) ground. 
 I agree. 
 I shall only remind you thatyour point of departure was a tactical one: certainly yourejected the “classical presentation” of the basic tacticalproposition. 
 You indicated this tactical solution (without drawing the final tactical conclusions from it) in connection with the rejection of the “American possibility”. 
 Therefore,I do not regard as correct the account of our differences ofopinion that you give in the following words: “You [i. 
e. 
, I]emphasise the existence of a movement of the peasantry . 
 I recognise the existence of a movement of the peasantry that is becoming proletarianised . 
” But this is not the point of difference. 
 Of course I do not deny that the peasantry isbecoming proletarianised. 
 The point of difference is whetherthe bourgeois agrarian system has taken root in Russia tosuch an extent as to make a sharp transition from the “Prus-sian” development of agrarian capitalism to the “Amer-ican” development of agrarian capitalism objectively impos-sible. 
 If it has, the “classical” presentation of the basicquestion of tactics falls to the ground. 
 If not—it is preserved. 
 Well, I maintain that it must be preserved. 
 I do not deny the possibility of the “Prussian” path; I recognise that aMarxist must not “vouch” for either of these ways, nor must he bind himself down to one of them only ; I recognise that Stolypin’s policy 62 is another step along the “Prussian” path and that at a certain stage along that path a dialectical change may set in which would abolish all hopes and pros-pects for an “American” path. 
 But I assert that at the present time this change has certainly not yet come and that, there-fore, it is absolutely inadmissible for a Marxist, absolutelywrong theoretically, to renounce the “classical” presentationof the question. 
 That is where we differ. 
 Theoretically these differences reduce themselves, if I am not mistaken, to two chief points: 1) I must destroy your “ally”, V. 
 Ilyin, 63 in order to justify my position. 
 In other words, this position contradicts the results of the Marxistanalysis of the pre-revolutionary economics of Russia. 
2) The “classical” presentation may and must be comparedwith the agrarian opportunism of the revisionists (Davidand Co. 
), for there is no substantial, radical difference in principle between the presentation of the question of the workers’ attitude towards the “muzhik” in Russia and inGermany. 
 I consider both these propositions to be radically wrong. 
Ad * 1) (In order not to touch on “tactics” I shall set aside Martynov’s attack on Ilyin64 and take up only your presen-tation of the theoretical question. 
) What did Ilyin argue and prove? In the first place, that the development of agrarian relations in Russia is proceedingon capitalist lines both in landlord and in peasant economy, both outside and within the “village commune”. 
 In the sec-ond place, that this development has already irrevocably determined that there will be no other path than the capital-ist path, no other grouping of classes than the capitalist grouping. 
 This was the subject of the dispute with the Narodniks. 
 This had to be proved. 
 It was proved. 
 It remains proved. 
 Atthe present time another , further question is raised (and was raised by the movement of 1905-07), which presupposes the solution of the problem that was solved by Ilyin (and, ofcourse, not by him alone), but which presupposes not only this, but something bigger, more complex, something new. 
Apart from the problem that was finally and correctly solved in 1883-85, in 1895-99, the history of Russia in the twentieth century has confronted us with a further problem, *With regard to. 
— Ed. 
 and theoretically there is nothing more erroneous than to recede from it, dismiss it, or wave it aside by a reference to what has previously been solved. 
 That would mean reducing problems of, so to say, a second, i. 
e. 
, higher, order to prob-lems of a lower, first order. 
 We cannot halt at a general solution of the problem of capitalism when new events (and events that are of world-historic importance such as those of1905-07) have raised a more concrete problem, of a more detailed nature, the problem of the struggle between the two paths or methods of capitalist agrarian development. 
 When we were fighting against the Narodniks to prove thatthis path was inevitably and irrevocably a capitalist one,we were quite right and we could not but concentrate all our strength, all our attention on the question: capitalism or “people’s production”. 
 This was natural, inevitable and le-gitimate. 
 Now, however, this question has been settled both in theory and in reality (for the petty-bourgeois characterof the Trudoviks en masse has been proved by recent Rus-sian history), and another, higher question has taken itsplace: capitalism of type α or capitalism of type β. 
 And, in my humble opinion, Ilyin was right when, in the preface to the second edition of his book, he pointed out that it fol-lows from the book that two types of capitalist, agrarian development are possible, and that the historical strugglebetween these types has not yet come to an end. 
 * The special feature of Russian opportunism in Marxism, i. 
e. 
, of Menshevism in our time, is that it is associated with a doctrinaire simplification, vulgarisation and distortionof the letter of Marxism, and a betrayal of its spirit (suchwas the case with both Rabocheye Dyelo -ism and Struve-ism). 
 While fighting Narodism as a wrong doctrine of so-cialism , the Mensheviks, in a doctrinaire fashion, overlooked the historically real and progressive historical content o f Narodism as a theory of the mass petty-bourgeois struggle of democratic capitalism against liberal-landlord capitalism, of“American” capitalism against “Prussian” capitalism. 
 Hencetheir monstrous, idiotic, renegade idea (which has alsothoroughly permeated The Social Movement ) that the peas-ant movement is reactionary, that a Cadet is more progressive *See present edition, Vol. 
 3, pp. 
 31-34. 
— Ed. 
 than a Trudovik, that the “dictatorship of the proletariat and the peasantry” ( =the classical presentation) contradicts “the entire course of economic development” (p. 
 661 of the Menshevik Social Movement ). 
 “Contradicts the entire course of economic development”—is this not reactionary? I maintain that the struggle against this monstrous dis-tortion of Marxism was the basis of the “classical presenta-tion” and a correct basis, although unfortunately, owing to the natural conditions of the time, this struggle was very zealously conducted as regards tactics, and not zealouslyenough as regards theory. 
 By the way, “unfortunately” isnot the right word here and should be struck out! This agrarian question is now the national question of bourgeois development in Russia, and in order not to fall into the error of a mistaken (mechanical) application of the German model, which in many respects is correct and in allrespects very valuable, to our conditions, we must clearly un-derstand that the national question of the fully establishedbourgeois development of Germany was unification, etc. 
,and not the agrarian question; whereas the national question of the final consolidation of bourgeois development in Rus-sia is precisely the agrarian (and even narrower: the peasant) question. 
 Such is the purely theoretical basis of the difference i n application of Marxism in Germany in 1848-68 (approxi-mately) and in Russia in 1905?? How can I prove that in our country the agrarian question, and not some other, has assumed national significance for bourgeois development? I do not even know that it requiresproof. 
 I think it is indisputable. 
 But this is precisely thetheoretical basis and all the partial questions must turn on this . 
 If this is disputed, I shall briefly point out (briefly for the time being) that it is precisely the course of events, the facts and the history of 1905-07 that have proved the importance I have indicated of the agrarian (peasant, andof course petty-bourgeois peasant, but not village-communepeasant) question in Russia. 
 The same thing is being provednow by the law of June 3, 1907, and by the composition and activity of the Third Duma, and—a detail—by November 20, 1909, 65 and (what is especially important) by the gov-ernment’s agrarian policy. 
 If we agree that the recent history of Russia, the history of 1905-09, has proved the fundamental, prime, national sig-nificance (national in the above sense) of the agrarian ques-tion in establishing a definite type of bourgeois evolution inRussia, then we can proceed further; otherwise we cannot. 
 By 1905 the bourgeois development of Russia had already matured sufficiently to require the immediate break-up ofthe antiquated superstructure—the antiquated medieval system of land tenure (you understand, of course, why, of the entire superstructure, I take here land tenure alone). 
 We are now living in the period of this break-up, which various classes of bourgeois Russia are trying to complete, to consum-mate in their own way: the peasants ( $the workers) by means of nationalisation (I am very glad you agree with me on the absolute absurdity of municipalisation: I have already quoted passages from Theorien über den Mehrwert * in favour of nationalisation in one of my works printed in part in Pol-ish)**; the landlords ( $the old bourgeoisie, the Girondist bourgeoisie) by the method of November 9, 1906, etc. 
 Landnationalisation = the break-up of the old system of land tenure by the peasants is the economic basis of the Americanpath. 
 The law of November 9, 1906=the break-up of the old system of land tenure in the interests of the landlords, is theeconomic basis of the Prussian path. 
 Our epoch, 1905-??,is the epoch of the revolutionary and counter-revolutionarystruggle between these paths, just as 1848-71 in Germany was a period of the revolutionary and counter-revolutionary strug-gle between two paths of unification ( =of the solution of the national problem of bourgeois development in Germany), the path through the Great-German Republic and the path through the Prussian monarchy. 
 It was only in 1871 that the second path was finally (that is where my “completely” comes in) victorious . 
 It was then that Liebknecht gave up the boycott of parliament. 
 It was then that the dispute betweenthe Lassalleans and the Eisenachers died down . 
 It was then too that the question of a general democratic revolution in Germany died down —and Naumann, David and Co. 
 start-ed in the nineties (twenty years later !) to revive the corpse. 
 *Theories of Surplus Value. 
—Ed. 
 **See present edition, Vol. 
 15, pp. 
 158-81. 
— Ed. 
 In our country the struggle is still going on. 
 Neither of the agrarian paths has won so far. 
 In our country, in every crisis of our epoch (1905-09-??), a “ general democratic” movement of the “muzhik” will arise , is bound to arise, and to ignore it would be a fundamental mistake which, in prac-tice, would lead to Menshevism, although in theory the dis-pute may be placed on a different plane. 
 It is not I who “re-duce” the dispute to “Menshevism”, it is the history of our epoch that reduces to Menshevism the ignoring by the pro-letariat of the national task of the bourgeois developmentof Russia, for this is precisely the essence of Menshevism. 
 Nebenbei. 
 * Have you read, in Cherevanin ’s The Contem-porary Situation , about the opportunism of the “classical presentation” of the question by the Bolsheviks? Read it! Ad 2) I have really said almost all there is to be said about this. 
 In Germany the support by the workers of the desire of the “muzhik” to get for himself (i. 
e. 
, for the muzhik) theland of the big landlords—the Junkers—is reactionary. 
Isn’t that so? Is it not true? In Russia in 1905-09-?? the de-nial of that support is reactionary. 
 Hic Rhodus hic salta . 
 ** Here it is a question of either renouncing the entire agrar-ian programme and going over ... almost to Cadetism ...or of recognising the difference in principle between the presentation of the question in Germany and that in Russia,in principle—not in the sense that the epoch is non-capitalistin our country, but in the sense that these are two altogether different epochs of capitalism, differing in principle: the epoch preceding the final consolidation of the national path of capitalism, and the epoch succeeding such consolidation. 
 I conclude for the time being. 
 I shall try to send you news-paper cuttings on the subject of our discussion. 
 Write whenyou can spare time. 
 Warm greetings. 
 Yours, Starik . 
 *** First published in 1924 Published according to in the magazine Proletarskaya the manuscript Revolutsia , No. 
 5 *By the way. 
— Ed. 
 **Here is Rhodes, leap here!— Ed. 
 *** The Old Man. 
— Ed. 
 CONCERNIN G VEKH I66 The well-known symposium Vekhi , compiled from contri-butions by the most influential Constitutional-Democratic publicists, which has run through several editions in a shorttime and has been rapturously received by the whole reac-tionary press, is a real sign of the times. 
 However much the Cadet newspapers do to “rectify” particular passages inVekhi that are excessively nauseating, however much it isrepudiated by some Cadets who are quite powerless to in-fluence the policy of the Constitutional-Democratic Partyas a whole or are aiming to deceive the masses as to the true significance of this policy, it is an unquestionable fact that “Vekhi ” has expressed the unmistakable essence of modern Cadetism . 
 The party of the Cadets is the party of Vekhi . 
 Prizing above everything the development of the politi-cal and class-consciousness of the masses, working-classdemocrats should welcome Vekhi as a magnificent exposure of the essence of the political trend of the Cadets by their ideo-logical leaders. 
 The gentlemen who have written Vekhi ar e: Berdayev, Bulgakov, Herschensohn, Kistyakovsky, Struve,Frank and Izgoyev. 
 The very names of these well-knowndeputies, well-known renegades and well-known Cadets, areeloquent enough. 
 The authors of Vekhi speak as real ideolog-ical leaders of a whole social trend. 
 They give us in concise outline a complete encyclopaedia on questions of philosophy, religion, politics, publicist literature, and appraisals of thewhole liberation movement and the whole history of Russiandemocracy. 
 By giving Vekhi the subtitle “A Collection of Articles on the Russian Intelligentsia” the authors under-state the actual subject-matter of their publication, for, withthem, the “intelligentsia” in fact appears as the spiritualleader, inspirer and mouthpiece of the whole Russian de-mocracy and the whole Russian liberation movement. 
 Vekhi is a most significant landmark on the road of Rus-sian Cadetism and Russian liberalism in general towards a complete break with the Russian liberation movement, with all its main aims and fundamental traditions. 
 I This encyclopaedia of liberal renegacy embraces three main subjects: 1) the struggle against the ideological principlesof the whole world outlook of Russian (and international)democracy; 2) repudiation and vilification of the liberationmovement of recent years; 3) an open proclamation of its “flunkey” sentiments (and a corresponding “flunkey” policy) in relation to the Octobrist bourgeoisie, the old regime andthe entire old Russia in general. 
 The authors of Vekhi start from the philosophical bases of the “intellectualist” world outlook. 
 The book is permeatedthrough and through with bitter opposition to materialism, which is qualified as nothing but dogmatism, metaphysics, “the most elementary and lowest form of philosophising”(p. 
 4—references are to the first edition of Vekhi ). 
 Positivism is condemned because “for us” (i. 
e. 
, the Russian “intelligent-sia” that Vekhi annihilates) it was “identified with material-ist metaphysics” or was interpreted “exclusively in the spir-it of materialism” (15), while “no mystic, no believer, can deny scientific positivism in science” (11). 
 Don’t laugh!“Hostility to idealist and religious mystical tendencies”(6)—such is the charge with which Vekhi attacks the “intel-ligentsia”. 
 “Yurkevich, at any rate, was a real philosopherin comparison with Chernyshevsky” (4). 
 Holding this point of view, Vekhi very naturally thunders incessantly against the atheism of the “intelligentsia” andstrives with might and main to re-establish the religiousworld outlook in its entirety. 
 Having demolished Cherny-shevsky as a philosopher it is quite natural that Vekhi demol-ishes Belinsky as a publicist. 
 Belinsky, Dobrolyubov and Chernyshevsky were the leaders of the “intellectuals” (134, 56, 32, 17 and elsewhere). 
 Chaadayev, Vladimir Solovyov,Dostoyevsky were “not intellectuals at all”. 
 The former were the leaders of a trend against which Vekhi is fighting to the death. 
 The latter “tirelessly maintained” the very same things that Vekhi stands for today, but “they were unheeded, the intelligentsia passed them by”, declares the preface to Vekhi . 
 The reader can already see from this that it is not the “intelligentsia” that Vekhi is attacking. 
 This is only an ar-tificial and misleading manner of expression. 
 The attackis being pursued all along the line against democracy, against the democratic world outlook. 
 And since it is inconvenient for the ideological leaders of a party that advertises itself as“constitutional” and “democratic” to call things by theirtrue names, they have borrowed their terminology from theMoskovskiye Vedomosti . 
 67 They are not renouncing democra-cy (what a scandalous libel!) but only “intellectualism”. 
 Belinsky’s letter to Gogol, declares Vekhi , is a “lurid and classical expression of intellectualist sentiment” (56). 
 “Thehistory of our publicist literature, after Belinsky, in thesense of an understanding of life, is a sheer nightmare” (82). 
 Well, well. 
 The serf peasants’ hostility to serfdom is ob-viously an “intellectualist” sentiment. 
 The history of the protest and struggle of the broadest masses of the population from 1861 to 1905 against the survivals of feudalism through-out the whole system of Russian life is evidently a “sheernightmare”. 
 Or, perhaps, in the opinion of our wise and edu-cated authors, Belinsky’s sentiments in the letter to Gogoldid not depend on the feelings of the serf peasants? The his-tory of our publicist literature did not depend on the indig-nation of the popular masses against the survivals of feudaloppression? Moskovskiye Vedomosti has always tried to prove that Russian democracy, beginning with Belinsky at least, in noway expresses the interests of the broadest masses of the population in the struggle for the elementary rights of the people, violated by feudal institutions, but expresses only“intellectualist sentiments”. 
 Vekhi has the same programme as Moskovskiye Vedomosti both in philosophy and in publicist matters. 
 In philosophy,however, the liberal renegades decided to tell the whole truth, to reveal all their programme (war on materialism and the materialist interpretation of positivism, restorationof mysticism and the mystical world outlook), whereas on publicist subjects they prevaricate and hedge and Jesuitise. 
 They have broken with the most fundamental ideas of democ-racy, the most elementary democratic tendencies, but pre-tend that they are breaking only with “intellectualism”. 
 Theliberal bourgeoisie has decisively turned away from defenceof popular rights to defence of institutions hostile to the peo-ple. 
 But the liberal politicians want to retain the title of“democrats”. 
 The same trick that was performed with Belinsky’s letter to Gogol and the history of Russian publicist literature isbeing applied to the history of the recent movement. 
 II As a matter of fact Vekhi attacks only the intelligentsia that was a voice of the democratic movement and onlyfor that which showed it to be a real participant in thismovement. 
 Vekhi furiously attacks the intelligentsia pre-cisely because this “little underground sect came out into the broad light of day, gained a multitude of disciples and for a time became ideologically influential and even actuallypowerful” (176). 
 The liberals sympathised with the “intelli-gentsia” and sometimes supported it secretly as long as i t remained merely a little underground sect, until it gained a multitude of disciples and became actually powerful; that is to say, the liberals sympathised with democracy as long as it did not set in motion the real masses, for, as long asthe masses were not drawn in, it only served the self-seekingaims of liberalism, it only helped the upper section of theliberal bourgeoisie to climb a little nearer to power. 
 The lib-eral turned his back on democracy when it drew in the masses, who began to realise their own aims and uphold their own interests. 
 Under the cover of outcries against the demo-cratic “intelligentsia” the war of the Cadets is in fact being waged against the democratic movement of the masses . 
 One of the innumerable and obvious revelations of this in Vekhi is its declaration that the great social movement of the end of the eighteenth century in France was “an example of a sufficiently prolonged intellectualist revolution, displayingall its spiritual potentialities” (57). 
 Good, is it not? The French movement of the end of the eighteenth century, please note, was not an example of the democratic movement of the masses in its profoundest and broadest form, but an example of “intellectualist” revolu-tion! Since democratic aims have never anywhere in theworld been achieved without a movement of a homogeneoustype it is perfectly obvious that the ideological leaders ofliberalism are breaking with democracy. 
 The feature of the Russian intelligentsia that Vekhi in-veighs against is the necessary accompaniment and expression of any democratic movement. 
 “The admixture of the polit-ical radicalism of intellectualist ideas to the social radical-ism of popular instincts * was achieved with amazing rapid-ity” (141)—and this was “not simply a political mistake, not simply an error of tactics. 
 The mistake here was a moral one. 
” Where there are no martyred popular masses, there canbe no democratic movement. 
 And what distinguishes a demo-cratic movement from a mere “riot” is that it proceeds underthe banner of certain radical political ideas. 
 Democraticmovements and democratic ideas are not only politically er-roneous, are not only out of place tactically but are morally sinful—such in essence is the real opinion of Vekhi , which does not differ one iota from the real opinions of Pobedonos-tsev. 
 68 Pobedonostsev only said more honestly and candidly what Struve, Izgoyev, Frank and Co. 
 are saying. 
 When Vekhi proceeds to define more precisely the sub-stance of the hateful “intellectualist” ideas, it naturally speaks about “Left” ideas in general and Narodnik and Marx-ist ideas in particular. 
 The Narodniks are accused of “spuri-ous love for the peasantry” and the Marxists “for the proletar-iat” (9). 
 Both are blasted to smithereens for “idolisation ofthe people” (59, 59-60). 
 To the odious “intellectual” “god is the people, the sole aim is the happiness of the majority” (159). 
 “The stormy oratory of the atheistic Left bloc” (29)—thisis what impressed itself most on the memory of the CadetBulgakov in the Second Duma and particularly aroused hisindignation. 
 And there is not the slightest doubt that Bulga-kov has expressed here, somewhat more conspicuously than *“Of the martyred popular masses” is the phrase used on the same page, two lines down. 
 others, the general Cadet psychology, he has voiced the cherished thoughts of the whole Cadet Party. 
 That for a liberal the distinction between Narodism and Marxism is obliterated is not accidental, but inevitable. 
 Itis not the “trick” of the writer (who is perfectly aware of thedistinction) but a logical expression of the present natureof liberalism. 
 At the present time what the liberal bourgeoi-sie in Russia dreads and abominates is not so much the so-cialist movement of the working class in Russia as the demo-cratic movement both of the workers and the peasants, i. 
e. 
,it dreads and abominates what Narodism and Marxism havein common, their defence of democracy by appealing to themasses. 
 It is characteristic of the present period that liberal-ism in Russia has decisively turned against democracy; quite naturally it is not concerned either with the distinc-tions within democracy or with the further aims, vistasand prospects which will be unfolded when democracy isachieved. 
 Vekhi simply teems with catchwords like “idolisation of the people”. 
 This is not surprising, for the liberal bourgeoi-sie, which has become frightened of the people, has no alter-native but to shout about the democrats’ “idolisation of thepeople”. 
 The retreat cannot but be covered by an extra loudroll of the drums. 
 In point of fact, it is impossible to denyoutright that it was in the shape of the workers’ and peas-ants’ deputies that the first two Dumas expressed the real interests, demands and views of the mass of the workers and peasants. 
 Yet it was just these “intellectualist” * dep-uties who infected the Cadets with their abysmal hatred of the “Lefts ” because of the exposure of the Cadets’ everlast-ing retreats from democracy. 
 In point of fact, it is impossibleto deny outright the justice of the “four-point electoral system” demand 69; yet no political leader who is at all honest has the slightest doubt that in contemporary Russiaelections on the “four-point” system, really democratic elec-*Vekhi ’s distortion of the ordinary meaning of the word “intel-lectual” is really laughable. 
 We have only to look through the listof deputies in the first two Dumas to see at once the overwhelmingmajority of peasants among the Trudoviks, the predominance of work-ers among the Social-Democrats and the concentration of the mass of the bourgeois intelligentsia among the Cadets. 
 tions, would give an overwhelming majority to the Trudovik deputies together with the deputies of the workers’ party. 
 Nothing remains for the back-sliding liberal bourgeoisie but to conceal its break with democracy by means of catch-words from the vocabulary of Moskovskiye Vedomosti and Novoye Vremya 70; the whole symposium Vekhi positively teems with them. 
 Vekhi is a veritable torrent of reactionary mud poured on the head of democracy. 
 Of course the publicists of Novoye Vremya —Rozanov, Menshikov and A. 
 Stolypin—have has-tened to salute Vekhi with their kisses. 
 Of course, Anthony, Bishop of Volhynia,71 is enraptured with this publication of the leaders of liberalism. 
 “When the intellectual,” says Vekhi , “reflected upon his duty to the people, he never arrived at the thought that the idea of personal responsibility expressed in the principle ofduty must be applied not only to him, the intellectual, but tothe people as well” (139). 
 The democrat reflected on the ex-tension of the rights and liberty of the people, clothing thisthought in words about the “duty” of the upper classes to the people. 
 The democrat could never and will never arrive at the thought that in a country prior to reform or in a coun-try with a June 3 constitution there could be any question of“responsibility” of the people to the ruling classes. 
 To arriveat this thought the democrat, or so-called democrat, must becompletely converted into a counter-revolutionary liberal. 
 “Egoism, self-assertion is a great power,” we read in Vekhi , “this is what makes the Western bourgeoisie a mighty un-conscious instrument of God’s will on earth” (95). 
 This isnothing more than a paraphrase flavoured with incense ofthe celebrated “Enrichissez vous!—enrich yourselves!”—or of our Russian motto: “We put our stake on the strong!” 72 When the bourgeoisie were helping the people to fight forfreedom they declared this struggle to be a divine cause. 
When they became frightened of the people and turned tosupporting all kinds of medievalism against the people, theydeclared as a divine cause “egoism”, self-enrichment, a chau-vinistic foreign policy, etc. 
 Such was the case all over Eu-rope. 
 It is being repeated in Russia. 
 “The revolution should virtually and formally have culmi-nated with the edict of October 17” (136). 
 This is the alpha and omega of Octobrism, i. 
e. 
, of the programme of the coun-ter-revolutionary bourgeoisie. 
 The Octobrists have always said this and acted openly in accordance with it. 
 The Cadets acted surreptitiously in the same way (beginning from Octo-ber 17), but at the same time wanted to keep up the pretenceof being democrats. 
 If the cause of democracy is to be success-ful, a complete, clear and open demarcation between thedemocrats and the renegades is the most effective and neces-sary thing. 
 Vekhi must be utilised for this necessary act. 
 “We must have the courage to confess at last,” writes the ren-egade Izgoyev, “that in our State Dumas the vast majorityof the deputies, with the exception of three or four dozen Ca-dets and Octobrists, have not displayed knowledge requiredfor the government and reformation of Russia” (208). 
 Well, of course, how could clod-hopping Trudovik deputies or some sort of working men undertake such a task? It needs a major-ity of Cadets and Octobrists and that needs a Third Duma.... 
 And so that the people and their idolators should realise their “responsibility” to the bosses in the Third Duma andThird Duma Russia the people must be taught—with the assistance of Anthony, Bishop of Volhynia—“repentance” (Vekhi , 26), “humility” (49), opposition to “the pride of the intellectual” (52), “obedience” (55), “the plain, coarse foodof old Moses’ Ten Commandments” (51), struggle against“the legion of devils who have entered the gigantic body ofRussia” (68). 
 If the peasants elect Trudoviks and the work-ers elect Social-Democrats, this of course is just such devils’ work, for by their true nature the people, as Katkov andPobedonostsev discovered long ago, entertain “hatred forthe intelligentsia” (87; read: for democracy). 
 Therefore, Vekhi teaches us, Russian citizens must “bless this government which alone with its bayonets and prisons still protects us [“the intellectuals”] from popular fury” (88). 
 This tirade is good because it is frank; it is useful because it reveals the truth about the real essence of the policy ofthe whole Constitutional-Democratic Party throughout theperiod 1905-09. 
 This tirade is good because it reveals con-cisely and vividly the whole spirit of Vekhi . 
 And Vekhi i s good because it discloses the whole spirit of the real policy of the Russian liberals and of the Russian Cadets includedamong them. 
 That is why the Cadet polemic with Vekhi and the Cadet renunciation of Vekhi are nothing but hypoc-risy, sheer idle talk, for in reality the Cadets collectively, as a party, as a social force, have pursued and are pursuing the policy of Vekhi and no other . 
 The calls to take part in the elections to the Bulygin Duma in August and September1905, the betrayal of the cause of democracy at the end of thesame year, their persistent fear of the people and the popu-lar movement and systematic opposition to the deputies of the workers and peasants in the first two Dumas, the voting for the budget, the speeches of Karaulov on religion and Be-rezovsky on the agrarian question in the Third Duma, thevisit to London—these are only a few of the innumerablelandmarks of just that policy which has been ideologically proclaimed in Vekhi . 
 Russian democracy cannot make a single step forward un-til it understands the essence of this policy and the classroots of it. 
 Novy Dyen No. 
 15, Published according to December 13, 1909 the text in Novy Dyen Signed: V. 
 Ilyin THE LAST WORD OF RUSSIAN LIBERALISM The Russian Social-Democrats drew the main lessons of the revolution in the London resolution on the non-proletar-ian parties. 
 73 In this resolution the Social-Democratic pro-letariat made a clear and precise appraisal of the class rela-tions in the revolution, defined the social basis of all the ma-jor parties and the general tasks of the workers’ movementin the fight for democracy. 
 The resolution of the DecemberParty Conference of 1908 was a further development of thesefundamental views of Social-Democracy. 
 Now, a year after this Conference, two and a half years after the London Congress, it is extremely instructive to seethe views on the present position and the tasks of democracythat are being reached by the most influential representativesof Russian liberalism. 
 The recent “conference” of leadingmembers of the Cadet Party is particularly interesting in this respect. 
 The “conference” endorsed the report of the leader of the party, Mr. 
 Milyukov, who has now had it printedin Rech under the heading: “The Political Parties in the Country and in the Duma”. 
 This report is an extremelyimportant political document. 
 In it we have what is hence-forth the official platform of the Cadet Party. 
 Furthermore, we have here an answer to questions which the Social-Democratic Party raised and settled long ago—an answersupplied by one of the shrewdest diplomats and politiciansin the liberal camp, and at the same time one of the mostadept historians, who has learned a thing or two from his-torical materialism, by which he was unmistakably influ-enced ... when he was a historian. 
 The historian Milyukov tries to put the question on a thor-oughly scientific, i. 
e. 
, materialist basis. 
 To obtain “firm strongpoints” for party tactics there must be “a uniform conception of what is taking place in the country”. 
 And to understand this one must see how the chief political parties or “political trends” are striving to “find support” in “broadcircles of the population”. 
 The method is excellent. 
 Its application immediately re-veals to us the transformation of the adept historian intoa commonplace liberal sycophant: the Cadets, you see, and everything to the right of them, constitute the “three chief political trends”, while everything to the “left” of the Cadetsis a “political paroxysm”. 
 Thank you for your candour, Mr. 
Liberal! But we’ll see nevertheless what you have to say asa historian? Three chief trends: the first is “demagogic mon-archism”. 
 Its “purpose” is to “defend the old social founda-tions of life”, a “combination of unlimited autocracy [the liberal, the Constitutional-Democrat unconsciously goes overto the standpoint of the Octobrist who upholds limited autoc-racy] with the peasantry on the basis of those patriarchalrelations in which the nobility is the natural intermediarybetween the one and the other”.... 
 Translated from the lan-guage of liberalism into plain ordinary Russian this means the domination of the feudal (“patriarchal”) landlords andBlack-Hundred tsarism. 
 Mr. 
 Milyukov rightly remarks thatthis tsarism is becoming “demagogic”, that it is “abandon-ing the old artificial non-partyism or above-partyism and isintervening actively in the process of the organisation of par-ties in the country”. 
 It is this, incidentally, that constitutes the step towards the conversion of the autocracy into a bour-geois monarchy which is dealt with in the resolution of theDecember Conference of the Social-Democrats in 1908. 
 Thisis the new development which constitutes the spectfic pecu-liarity of the present moment and which was taken into ac-count by our Party in formulating the present tactical aims. 
 Although he correctly notes certain features of the process,Mr. 
 Milyukov, firstly, has not fully thought out the econom-ic roots of it and, secondly, he is afraid to draw the logi-cal conclusion about the reasons for the strength of the feu-dal landlords. 
 This strength is expressed in the fact that in European Russia, according to the official statistics of 1905, ten million poor peasants have 75 million dessiatines of land,while 30,000 big landlords (including the crown lands, i. 
e. 
, those of Nicholas Romanov and his family) own 70 million dessiatines. 
 Can Russia be delivered from “patriarchal” rela-tions without the total abolition of these feudal latifundia of the upper thirty thousands, what do you think, Mr. 
 His-torian? The second trend is “bourgeois constitutionalism”. 
 Thus Mr. 
 Milyukov names, the Octobrists. 
 “For the big bourgeoi-sie,” he writes, “this trend, perhaps, is too conservative be-cause of its close ties with the bureaucracy and the nobility. 
” They are united by “a negative aim: joint defence against themore radical social or political trends”. 
 “The bourgeois con-stitutionalists of June 3 and November 9”, seeking strong-points for themselves, are trying “to assimilate at least theupper section of the mass of the peasantry [the strong and virile ones, as Mr. 
 Stolypin calls the]. 
 But for the time being this sort of social basis lies entirely in the future. 
”“That is why this trend has perhaps the weakest prospectsof finding a social basis”!! It is a favourite tendency in our country—unfortunately even among would-be Social-Democrats—to attack “revolu-tionary illusions”. 
 But could anything be more naïve than this liberal illusion that the social basis of the counter-revo-lutionary bourgeoisie (“joint defence”) and the landlords is“weak”, that they can be defeated by other means than amost vigorous and ruthless revolutionary offensive of themasses, an uprising of the masses? The serious historian again gives way to the commonplace liberal. 
 The third trend is the Cadets. 
 Mr. 
 Milyukov calls it “dem-ocratic constitutionalism” and explains that “the essenceof this position consists in a combination of a radical po-litical and radical social programme”. 
 The historian is quiteeclipsed by the diplomatist and politician. 
 In actual fact the entire policy of the Cadets runs counter to the radicalism of the masses. 
 In words—especially at a “conference” wherethere are Cadets from the provinces who are somewhatmore closely aware of the sentiments of the masses—weare radicals, we are concerned for democracy and the masses. 
 Mr. 
 Milyukov (particularly under the influence of the “conference”, we may be sure) makes no mistakes about the masses. 
 He recognises as an indisputable fact that the“growth of political consciousness in recent years has been tremendous”, that “the causes of mass discontent have not disappeared: it is possible that they have even increased in number and that their effect has grown stronger in propor-tion to the growth of political consciousness”. 
 But, althoughthe historian has to admit this, the liberal gets the upperhand just the same: ...”among the masses, unfortunately, itturned out [during the revolution] that only a bolder secretdemagogy was effective, one which flattered the traditional opinions and customary expectations of the masses. 
 This demagogy united in a purely artificial manner the intelligi-ble and legitimate mass slogan of ‘land’ with the unintelligi-ble and misinterpreted slogan of ‘liberty’. 
 Under these cir-cumstances even the grasping by people’s minds of the natu-ral connection between the two slogans was only a source of new misunderstandings and gave rise to the same illusions,” and so on and so forth, right down to the “principle”: neitherrevolution nor reaction, but “a legal constitutional struggle”. 
The question of returning to the “old tactics of 1905” “mustbe answered with a categorical and emphatic negative”. 
 As the reader sees, all the good intentions of the historian Milyukov to find strongpoints for party tactics among broad circles of the population came to nothing as soon as it was aquestion of the peasantry and the proletariat. 
 Mr. 
 Milyukovgives the latter up as a bad job, admitting that “democraticconstitutionalism has a wider, better organised and morepolitically conscious social basis among the urban democracy than any other political party can show, with the exception of the Social-Democratic Party , which is relying on the work-ing class . 
” But Mr. 
 Milyukov does not lose hope of the peasantry. 
 “In spite of the existence of such obstacles” as“demagogy”, etc. 
, he writes, “the possibility is not excludedof democratic constitutionalism acting parallel [Milyukov’s italics] to the direct expressions of the desires of the pop-ular masses. 
” Parallel activity!—there you have the new catchword for old liberal tactics. 
 Parallel lines never meet. 
 The bourgeoisintellectuals have understood that their liberalism willnever meet the masses, i. 
e. 
, will not become their voice and leader in Russia—“never”, because of the growth of political consciousness after 1905. 
 But the liberals of the Cadet typecontinue to count on the masses as a stepping stone to success, /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR to domination. 
 Translated into simple and clear language, to proceed “parallel” means to exploit the masses politically, trapping them with democratic words and betraying them in practice. 
 “To support them [the Octobrists] systematicallyin constitutional questions”, these words in Mr. 
 Milyukov’sreport express the essence of the policy of the Cadets. 
 In prac-tice the Cadets are accomplices of Octobrism, they are awing of bourgeois constitutionalism. 
 Struve and the other Vekhists admit this in candid, blunt and straightforward terms, and demand that the Cadets should stop “ogling theleft and fawning on the revolutionaries who despise them”(the words of the well-known renegade Mr. 
 Izgoyev in Mos-kovsky Yezhenedelnik , 74 1909, No. 
 46, page 10). 
 Milyukov and Co. 
 are dissatisfied only with the bluntness and straight-forwardness of the Vekhists only because the Vekhists are spoiling their diplomacy, are making it hard for themto lead the backward elements of the masses by the nose. 
Milyukov is the practical politician, Struve—the liberaldoctrinaire, but their peaceful coexistence in the sameparty is no accident, but a necessity, because by the very nature of the case the bourgeois intellectual vacillates be-tween placing hopes in the masses (who can help to pullthe chestnuts out of the fire) and placing hopes in the Octob-rist bourgeoisie. 
 “The fact that it is impossible for the present regime to permit free intercourse between the democratic elements who are politically enlightened and the democratic masses prevents the realisation of the main promises contained inthe Manifesto of October 17,” writes Mr. 
 Milyukov. 
 Here,inadvertently, he has spoken a deeper truth than he intended. 
Firstly, if it is true that it is impossible for the present regime to permit intercourse between the masses and the democrats (and that is unquestionably true) then revolution-ary tactics are necessary, not a “constitutional” struggle; the people need to be led to the overthrow of this regime, not its reformation. 
 Secondly, October-December 1905 and theFirst Duma and the Second Duma all proved that “it is impossible to permit free intercourse” between the “demo-cratic masses” and the Social-Democrats or even the Narod-niks of all shades not only “for the present regime” but alsofor the Russian liberals , the Russian Cadets . 
 The Cadets were unable to lead the democracy not only of the workers but also of the peasants during the period of civil liberties in October-December 1905, and even during the time of the Du-mas watched over by the Goremykins and Stolypins the de-mocracy was not reconciled to the leadership of the Cadets. 
 The political significance of the Cadet “conference” at the end of 1909 and of Mr. 
 Milyukov’s report lies in the fact thatthe educated representatives of liberalism, being most bitter enemies of revolutionary Social-Democracy, have given signal confirmation of the correctness of its estimate of themoment and of its tactics. 
 Everything of value and truth-ful in the report merely pads out and repeats over and overagain our own basic thesis that the chief mark of distinctionof the present moment is the step taken by the autocracy along the path towards transformation into a bourgeois monarchy. 
 This is what distinguishes it from yesterday andtomorrow. 
 This is the basis of the tactics peculiar to theSocial-Democrats; tactics which require the application of the principles of revolutionary Marxism to alteredconditions, and not simply the repetition of some slogans or other. 
 The liberals have recognised that the big bourgeoisie are counter-revolutionary, they have recognised that the massesare becoming more politically conscious and discontented. 
Then why don’t they resolutely enter the service of the bigbourgeoisie if they repudiate the revolution, 1905, and the “demagogy” of “land and liberty”, if they recognise that Octobrism is too conservative for the big bourgeoisie? Becausethe “conference” of provincials made it crystal clear tothem that the new Stolypin, bourgeois policy of the autocra-cy is a failure . 
 The new social basis for the monarchy “ still lies wholly in the future ”—there you have the liberals’ most valuable admission. 
 Well-ordered bourgeois constitu-tionalism with a monarchy at the head is a very fine thing,but it is not forthcoming , it will not come without a new movement of the masses —such is the summing up of the Cadet “conference”. 
 We hate the movement of the masses, we hatethe “demagogy” of “land and liberty”, we hate “political paroxysms” but we are realistic politicians, we must reckon with facts, we must shape our policy to run parallel with the movement of the masses, since it is inevitable. 
 “The possibil-ity is not excluded” that we can successfully contend for the leadership of the rural and urban masses (except the workers): let us try by talking about our “radicalism” to secure a niche in the people’s movement just as our talk of beingHis Majesty’s Opposition secured us a niche in London. 
 Inadvertently the Cadet conference has signally confirmed the tactics of our Party. 
 We must survive this new histor-ical period when the autocracy is trying to save itself in a new way and is plainly heading for bankruptcy again o n this new path. 
 We must survive this period, systematically,persistently, patiently working to build up a broader andstronger organisation of the more politically conscious massesof the socialist proletariat and the democratic peasantry. 
We must utilise all conditions and opportunities for Party activity at a time when both the Black-Hundred Duma and the monarchy are obliged to take the path of partyism. 
 Wemust use this time as a period for training fresh masses ofthe people, on a new basis, under new conditions, to wagea more vigorous revolutionary struggle for our old demands. 
The revolution and the counter-revolution have shown that the monarchy is quite incompatible with democracy, rule by the people, freedom of the people—we must carry out amongthe masses propaganda for the abolition of the monarchy, forrepublicanism, as the condition without which the people cannot be victorious, we must make the slogan of “downwith the monarchy” as popular a “household word” as the slogan of “down with the autocracy” became as a result of the long years of persistent work by the Social-Democratsin 1895-1904. 
 The revolution and the counter-revolutionhave shown in practice the full power and significance of thelandlord class—we must sow among the masses of the peas-antry propaganda for the complete abolition of this class, the complete destruction of landlordism. 
 The revolution and counter-revolution have shown in actual fact the true natureof the liberals and bourgeois intelligentsia—we must ensurethat the masses of the peasantry clearly understand that theleadership of the liberals will ruin their cause, that withoutindependent revolutionary mass struggle whatever the Cadet “reforms”, they will inevitably remain in bondage to the landlord. 
 The revolution and counter-revolution have shownus the alliance of autocracy and the bourgeoisie, the alliance of the Russian and international bourgeoisie—we must educate, rally and organise in three times greater numbers than in 1905 the masses of the proletariat, which alone, led by an independent Social-Democratic Party and marchinghand in hand with the proletariat of the advanced countries,is capable of winning freedom for Russia. 
 Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 10, Published according December 24, 1909 to the manuscript (January 6, 1910 ) THE ELEVENTH SESSION OF THE INTERNATIONAL SOCIALIST BUREAU On November 7, New Style, the eleventh session of the International Socialist Bureau was held in Brussels. 
 It was preceded, as usual in recent years, by a conference of social-ist journalists of different countries. 
 The conference discussedcertain practical questions concerning the establishmentof more regular contact between the socialist daily news-papers of different lands. 
 As for the session of the International Socialist Bureau, apart from minor current affairs, there were two big items on the agenda: firstly, the International Socialist Congressto be held in Copenhagen in 1910, secondly, the split in theDutch party. 
 On the first item, first of all the date of the Congress was fixed: August 2-September 3, New Style. 
 As regards the place of the Congress the question was raised whether the Russian socialists could travel to Copenhagen without hind-rance. 
 Knudsen, the representative of the Danish socialists,replied that, according to their information and all thatthey knew concerning the intentions of the Danish Govern-ment, the police would not interfere with the Russian del-egates to the Congress. 
 If it was found on the eve of the Congress that the opposite was the case the InternationalSocialist Bureau would undoubtedly take steps to hold theCongress elsewhere. 
 The agenda adopted for the Copenhagen Congress was the following: 1) the co-operative movement; 2) international organisation of assistance to big strikes; 3) unemployment; 4) disarmament and the arbitration of international conflicts;5) the results of labour legislation in different countries and the question of organising it internationally, particularly the question of the eight-hour day; 6) the improvement of contact between the national parties and the International Socialist Bureau; 7) the abolition of capital punishment. 
 It was originally intended to include the agrarian ques-tion. 
 Vaillant and Molkenbuhr objected on the grounds that itwould be difficult to discuss such a question at an interna-tional congress without first submitting it to more de-tailed consideration at congresses of the national parties. 
 A desire was expressed that the congresses of national partiesshould discuss this question specially, so that it could bein shape for the international congress of 1913. 
 After adopting resolutions of sympathy with the Swedish workers who have organised one of the biggest general strikes of the recent period, and the workers of Spain who have been fighting heroically against the military adventure of theirgovernment, as well as resolutions of protest against theatrocities and murders committed by tsarism in Russia andby the governments of Spain, Rumania and Mexico, the In-ternational Socialist Bureau passed to the next main item on its agenda, the question of the split in Holland. 
 The opportunists and Marxists of the Socialist Party in Holland have long been in conflict. 
 On the agrarian questionthe opportunists stood for the point in the programme thatcalls for the allotment of land to agricultural labourers. 
 TheMarxists vigorously opposed this point (which was defend-ed by the leader of the opportunists, Troelstra) and secured its removal in 1905. 
 After this the opportunists, attuningtheir policy to the religious section of the Dutch workers,went to the length of defending state subsidies for religiousinstruction in the schools. 
 The Marxists put up a strenuousopposition. 
 The opportunists, with Troelstra at their head, counterposed the parliamentary Social-Democratic group to the Party and acted contrary to the decisions of the CentralCommittee. 
 The opportunists pursued a policy of rapproche-ment with the liberals and of committing the socialiststo their support (“justifying” this, of course, by the aim ofobtaining social reforms, which the liberals promised and ... failed to carry out). 
 The opportunists set about revising the old, Marxist programme of the Dutch Social-DemocraticParty and, inter alia , put forward for this revision such theses as renouncing the “downfall theory” (a well-known idea of Bernstein’s) or desiring that recognition of the pro-gramme should oblige party members to recognise the politi-cal and economic “ but not the philosophical views of Marx ”. 
 The Marxists’ opposition to such a policy became more andmore acute. 
 Finding themselves ousted from the CentralOrgan of the party, the Marxists (among them the well-known woman writer Roland-Holst, furthermore Gorter, Pannekoek and others) started a newspaper of their own, Tribune . 
 Troelstra unscrupulously persecuted this newspaper, accusing the Marxists of wanting to “oust” him personally,stirring up the petty-bourgeois-minded section of the Dutchworkers against the “trouble-makers”, the polemicists, thedisturbers of the peace—the Marxists. 
 The upshot was that an extraordinary congress of the party in Davant (February 13-14, 1909), which gave the majority to Troelstra’s sup-porters, decided to close down “Tribune ” and have in its place “a supplement” to the opportunist Central Organ of theparty! Naturally, the editors of Tribune did not agree to this (with the exception of Roland-Holst, who, unfortuna-tely adopted a hopelessly conciliatory position) and were expelled from the party . 
 The result was a split. 
 The old, opportunist party, led by Troelstra and van Kol (“famous” since his opportunistutterances on the colonial question in Stuttgart), kept thetitle of “Social-Democratic Labour Party” (S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
). 
 The new, Marxist party—much smaller in numbers—took the title of “Social-Democratic Party” (S. 
D. 
P. 
). 
 The Executive Committee of the International Socialist Bureau tried to assume the role of mediator for the resto-ration of unity in Holland but made a very bad job of it. 
It took a formal point of view and, obviously sympathising with the opportunists, blamed the Marxists for the split. 
 Accordingly, their request for the admission of the newparty into the International was rejected by the ExecutiveCommittee of the International Socialist Bureau. 
 The question of admitting the Dutch Marxists into the International came before a meeting of the International Socialist Bureau itself on November 7, 1909. 
 Everybody wanted to avoid discussion of the real point at issue and todo no more than suggest procedure, i. 
e. 
, refer the case to be dealt with in one way or another, to indicate a method of settling the conflict although, of course, the majority of the members of the Bureau must have been well aware of the real substance of this matter, the real substance of the strug-gle between the two trends in Holland. 
 Finally two resolutions were moved, revealing two trends. 
 Singer in support of the Marxists, Adler against. 
 Singer’sread as follows: “The International Socialist Bureau resolves: the Party which has been formed in Holland under the name of the newS. 
D. 
 Party [there is a mistake in the title: it should be “S. 
D. 
Party”], should be admitted to International Socialist Con-gresses as it satisfies the conditions specified in the Rulesof the International. 
 Whether it should have a delegate on the Bureau and how many votes it should have at the Congress is a question for the Copenhagen Congress to decideif the Dutch comrades themselves do not reach a settlementof the dispute. 
” We see from this text that Singer did not go beyond the formal aspect, leaving the final settlement of the question to the Dutch section of the international congress, but at the same time clearly emphasising that the Marxist party inHolland should be recognised by the International. 
 Adlerdid not venture to say the opposite, he did not venture todeclare outright that he did not consider the Dutch Marx-ists to be members of the International, that he shared the attitude of the Executive Committee which flatly rejected the Marxists’ application. 
 Adler moved that “The requestof the S. 
D. 
P. 
 be referred to the Dutch section. 
 If no agree-ment is reached within this section an appeal can be madeto the Bureau. 
” The formal attitude is the same as Singer’s,but it is clear from the text that the sympathies of this reso-lution are on the side of the opportunists, for it says nothing about recognising the Marxists as members of the Interna-tional. 
 And the voting of the resolutions made it instantlymanifest that the spirit of both one and the other had been perfectly grasped by the members of the Bureau. 
 Singerreceived 11 votes: from France 2 votes, Germany 2, Eng-land 1 (S. 
D. 
), Argentina 2, Bulgaria 1, Russia 1 (S. 
D. 
), Poland 1 (S. 
D. 
), America 1 (the Socialist Labour Party). 
Adler received 16 votes: from England 1 (“Independent” Labour Party), Denmark 2, Belgium 2, Austria 2, Hunga-ry 2, Poland 1 (Polish Socialist Party), Russia 1 (S. 
R. 
), America 1 (Socialist Party), Holland 2 (van Kol and Troel-stra!), Sweden 2. 
 The organ of the German revolutionary Social-Democrats, Leipziger Volkszeitung (No. 
 259), rightly called this resolu-tion of the International Socialist Bureau a regrettable one. 
“At Copenhagen the proletarian International must recon-sider this decision”, it concluded with full justification. 
 Another newspaper of the same trend, the Bremer Bürger-zeitung of November 11, 1909, wrote: “Comrade Adler speaks as the advocate of international opportunism in allits glory. 
” His resolution was passed “thanks to the supportof the opportunist olla podrida” (Sammelsurium). 
 To these just words we Russian Social-Democrats can only add that our Socialist-Revolutionaries, of course, madehaste to take their place in the opportunist throng togetherwith the P. 
S. 
P. 
 The session of the International Socialist Bureau was followed on November 8, 1909 in Brussels by the fourthsession of the inter-parliamentary socialist commission, i. 
e. 
,of the members of the socialist parliamentary groups ofdifferent countries. 
 The groups were but sparsely representedin general (the Russian Social-Democratic group in the Duma was not represented at all). 
 The delegates interchanged reports on question of workers’ old-age insurance, thestate of legislation in different countries, and Bills drawnup by labour deputies. 
 The best report was one made by Mol-kenbuhr based on his article published in the Neue Zeit . 
 Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 10, Published according to December 24, 1909 the text in Sotsial-(January 6, 1910 ) Demokrat THE VPERYO D GROU P75 A CONSPECTUS After a series of lectures to the comrades of the Vperyod group and after a final conversation with them on Party tasks and the position of the Vperyod group in the Party, I find it necessary to set out in written form my attitude to the questions in dispute in order to avoid misunderstandingsand misinterpretations. 
 I consider that the platform of the Vperyod group is permeated through and through by views which are incompatible with Party decisions (the resolutions of the December Conference in 1908) and are contrary to thosedecisions. 
 The Vperyod platform takes a wrong view of the present period, for this view leaves out of account the economicand political changes in Russia which are finding expression in the autocracy’s new step along the path to conversion into a bourgeois monarchy. 
 Hence in actual fact otzovist tactical conclusions follow from the view adopted by theVperyod platform. 
 Consequently, the Vperyod platform is wholly permeated by views that deny the absolute necessity of the Social-Dem-ocratic Party’s participation in the Third Duma and the absolute necessity of building a new type of illegal Partyorganisation surrounded by a network of legal organisationsand necessarily utilising every legal opportunity. 
 By putting forward in its platform the task of elaborating a so-called “proletarian philosophy”, “proletarian culture”, etc. 
, the Vperyod group in fact comes to the defence of the group of literati who are putting forward anti-Marxist views in this field. 
 By declaring otzovism “a legitimate shade of opinion”, the platform of the Vperyod group shields and defends ot-zovism, which is doing great harm to the Party. 
 In view of all this, the personal declarations of the major-ity of comrades of the Vperyod group that they will carry on a sincere correspondence with the Central Organ, thatthey will fight against the otzovists in a principled and com-radely way, that they will co-operate sincerely in utilis-ing legal opportunities, that they will combat all attempts to disrupt the legal workers’ organisations and enterprises—these declarations do not inspire confidence and make onefear that the Vperyod group will wage a struggle against the Party line in local work and in the work of preparing fora conference. 
 My attitude to the local functionaries of the Vperyod group will depend on their activities in Russia and howthey put their declarations into effect. 
 Lenin Written at the end of December 1909 (the first half of January 1910 ) First published in 1933 Published according to in Lenin Miscellany XXV the manuscript TOWARDS UNITY Exactly a year ago, in February 1909, in Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 2, we characterised the work of the Party Con-ference of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 as putting the Party “on the right path” after “a year of disintegration, a year of ideolog-ical and political disunity, a year of Party driftage” (ar-ticle: “On the Road”). 
 * We pointed out that the severe crisis affecting our Party was undoubtedly not only organ-isational but also ideological and political. 
 We saw theguarantee of a successful struggle of the Party organisa-tion against the disintegrating influences of the counter-revolutionary period primarily in the fact that the tactical decisions of the conference correctly solved the fundamentaltask: the full confirmation by the workers’ party of its revo-lutionary aims derived from the recent period of storm andstress, and of its revolutionary Social-Democratic tacticsconfirmed by the experience of the immediate mass struggle, and at the same time the taking into account of the vast economic and political changes occurring before our eyes,the attempts of the autocracy to adapt itself to the bourgeoisconditions of the era, to organise itself as a bourgeois mon-archy and to safeguard the interests of tsarism and the Black-Hundred landlords by means of an open alliance, extensively and systematically carried out, with the bourgeois top sec-tions in the countryside and with the bosses of commercial andindustrial capitalism. 
 We outlined the Party’s organisation-al task associated with the new historical period—the taskof the utilisation of all possible legal institutions by theillegal party, including the Social-Democratic group in the Duma, so as to create strongpoints for revolutionary Social-*See present edition, Vol. 
 15, pp. 
 345-55. 
— Ed. 
 Democratic activity among the masses. 
 Pointing out the resemblance between this organisational task and that solved by our German comrades at the time of the Anti-Social-ist Law, we spoke about an “unfortunate deviation from per-sistent proletarian work” in the shape of rejecting Social-Democratic activity in the Duma or refraining from frankand open criticism of the policy of our Duma group, in the shape of rejecting or belittling the illegal Social-Democratic Party, of attempts to replace it by an amorphous legal organ-isation, to curtail our revolutionary slogans, and so forth. 
 By taking this backward glance we can more correctlyappraise the significance of the recently held plenary sessionof the Central Committee of our Party. 
 76 The text of the most important resolutions adopted by the plenary session will be found elsewhere in this issue. 
 Their significance is that they are a big step towards actual unity of the Party,towards the union of all Party forces, towards unanimous recognition of those basic propositions on the tactics of theParty and its organisation that decide the path of Social-Democracy in our difficult period. 
 This path was correctly indicated a year ago and it is now being taken by the whole Party, all factions of which have become convinced of its correctness. 
 The past year was a year of new factional divi-sions, of new factional struggle, a year in which the dangerof a break-down of the Party was accentuated. 
 But the con-ditions of work in the localities, the difficult position of the Social-Democratic organisation, the urgent tasks of the economic and political struggle of the proletariat, impelledall the factions to unite the Social-Democratic forces. 
 Themore powerful, insolent and rampant the counter-revolutionbecame, the more widely foul renegacy and repudiation ofthe revolution spread among the liberal and petty-bourgeois democratic strata, the more powerfully were all Social-Democrats drawn towards the Party . 
 It is highly character-istic that in the second half of 1909, under the influence ofthis whole combination of circumstances, such widely di-vergent members of our Party as the Menshevik ComradePlekhanov, on the one hand, and the Vperyod group (a group-of Bolsheviks who had departed from orthodox Bolshevism), on the other, pronounced in favour of the Party principle. 
In August 1909 the former came out vigorously against a split and the policy of splitting the Party under the slogan: “The struggle for influence in the Party. 
” The latter group put forward a platform which, it is true, at the beginning speaks of a “struggle for restoring the unity of Bolshevism”but at the end emphatically condemns factionalism, “a par-ty within the Party”, “the isolation and exclusiveness offactions”, and vigorously demands their “merging” in theParty, their “fusion”, and the conversion of the factional centres into centres that are “in actual fact only ideological and literary” (pp. 
 18 and 19 of the pamphlet: The Present Situation and the Tasks of the Party ). 
 The path clearly indicated by the majority of the Party has now been accepted unanimously—not in every detail,of course, but in the main —by all the factions. 
 A year of acute factional struggle has led to a decisive step being taken in favour of abolishing all factions and every kind of factionalism, in favour of the unity of the Party. 
 It wasdecided to unite all forces for the urgent tasks of the eco-nomic and political struggle of the proletariat; the closingdown of the factional organ of the Bolsheviks was an-nounced; a decision was adopted unanimously on the need to close down Golos Sotsial-Demokrata , i. 
e. 
, the factional organ of the Mensheviks. 
 A number of resolutions were passedunanimously, among which we should specially mentionhere as the most important that on the state of affairs inthe Party and that on the convocation of the next Party Conference. 
 The first of these two resolutions merits partic-ularly detailed examination as being, so to speak, theplatform for uniting the factions. 
 It begins with the words: “In furtherance of the basic propositions of the resolutions of the 1908 Party Confer-ence.... 
” We have cited above these basic propositions of the three chief resolutions of this Conference of December 1908: on the appraisal of the present moment and the politicaltasks of the proletariat, on the organisational policy of theParty and on its attitude to the Social-Democratic groupin the Duma. 
 There cannot be the slightest doubt that thereis no unanimity in the Party in regard to every detail, each item of these resolutions, that the Party press must open its doors widely for their criticism and revision in accordancewith the dictates of experience and the lessons of the increasingly complex economic and political struggle, that this work of criticism, application and improvement must henceforth be regarded by all factions, or more correctly all trends , in the Party as a matter of their own self-determina-tion, as a matter of elucidating their own policy. 
 But thework of criticism and correction of the Party line must notprevent unity in Party activity , which cannot cease for a single moment, which cannot waver, which must be guided in everything by the basic propositions of the above-men-tioned resolutions. 
 In furtherance of these propositions, the first point of the decision of the Central Committee recalls the “basicprinciples” of Social-Democratic tactics, which, in accordancewith the method of the whole of international Social-Democracy, cannot be calculated especially in a period such as we are passing through—“merely for the given con-crete circumstances of the immediate future”, but must takeinto account various paths and all possible situations, boththe possibility of a “rapid break-up” and the possibilityof a “relatively unchanging situation”. 
 For the first time the possibility arises for the proletariat to apply this method in a planned and consistent fashion. 
 At one and the sametime, in one and the same action of the proletariat, in oneand the same network of organisational units, our Party’stactics must “prepare the proletariat for a new open revolu-tionary struggle” (without this we should lose the right to belong to revolutionary Social-Democracy, we should not be carrying out our fundamental task, bequeathed to us bythe period of 1905 and dictated by every feature of the con-temporary economic and political situation) and “afford theproletariat the possibility of utilising for itself all the contra-dictions of the unstable regime of counter-revolution” (with-out this our revolutionary character would become a mere phrase, the repetition of revolutionary words instead of the application of the sum-total of the revolutionary experience, knowledge and lessons of international Social-Democracyto each practical activity, to the utilisation of each contra-diction and vacillation of tsarism, its allies and all bour-geois parties). 
 The second point of the resolution characterises the change which the workers’ movement in Russia is undergoing. 
 Let us unite and go to the aid of the new generation of So-cial-Democratic workers, so that they can solve their his-torical task, renew the Party organisation, and work out new forms of struggle, while in no way renouncing the“tasks of the revolution and its methods” but, on the contra-ry, upholding them and preparing a wider and firmer basisfor a more victorious application of these methods in thecoming new revolution. 
 The third point of the resolution describes the conditions which have evoked among politically conscious workerseverywhere an “urge towards concentration of pro-PartySocial-Democratic forces, towards the strengthening of Par-ty unity”. 
 The chief of these conditions is the strong coun-ter-revolutionary current. 
 The enemy is uniting and attack-ing. 
 The old enemies—tsarism, the tyranny and violence of officialdom, the oppression and shameless outrages ofthe feudal landlords—are being joined by a new enemy:the bourgeoisie, which is becoming increasingly united inconscious enmity to the proletariat, an enmity reinforcedby its own experience. 
 The revolutionaries are being harassed, tortured and exterminated as never before. 
 Efforts are being made to vilify and defame the revolution, to eraseit from the memory of the people. 
 But in no country has theworking class ever yet allowed its enemies to take from itthe chief attainment of every revolution at all worthy ofthis name, viz. 
, the experience of mass struggle, the con-viction of millions of working and exploited people that this struggle is essential for any serious improvement of theirposition. 
 And through all its trials the working class of Rus-sia will preserve the readiness for revolutionary struggle,the mass heroism, by which it conquered in 1905 and whichwill enable it to be victorious more than once in the future. 
 It is not merely the oppression of counter-revolution and the raging of counter-revolutionary sentiments thatunite us. 
 We are being united too by each step taken inmodest, daily practical work. 
 The work of the Social-Demo-crats in the Duma makes steady progress, becoming free fromthe mistakes that were inevitable at the outset, overcoming scepticism and indifference, forging the weapon of revolu-tionary propaganda and agitation of organised class struggle,so valued by all Social-Democrats. 
 And every legal congress in which workers participate, every legal institution into which proletarians penetrate and introduce their class-consciousness, the open defence of labour interests and democratic demands, conduces to the union of forces and thedevelopment of the movement as a whole. 
 No persecutionby the government, no devices resorted to by its Black-Hundred and bourgeois allies, can put an end to the mani-festations of the proletarian struggle in the most varied and sometimes unexpected forms, for capitalism itself at each step of its development teaches and unites itsgrave-diggers, multiplying their ranks and intensifyingtheir wrath. 
 The divided character of the Social-Democratic groups and the “parochialism” in their work, from which our move-ment has suffered so much during the last one-and-a-half to two years, acts in the same direction (the urge towardspartyism). 
 It has become impossible to raise the level ofpractical work without concentrating our forces, withoutcreating a guiding centre. 
 The Central Committee adopteda number of decisions on the organisation and functioning of this centre, on enlarging it by the addition of prac-tical workers, on uniting its work more closely with that inthe localities, etc. 
 The theoretical interests that inevitablycome to the fore during a period of stagnation likewise re-quire to be united for the defence of socialism in general andof Marxism, as the only scientific socialism, especially in view of the bourgeois counter-revolution, which is mobilis-ing all its forces to combat the ideas of revolutionary So-cial-Democracy. 
 Finally, the last point of the resolution speaks of the ideo-logical and political aims of the Social-Democratic move-ment. 
 The acute development occurring within the Social-Democratic movement in 1908-09 has led to these problems being raised until now in an extraordinarily sharp form andsettled by a most intense factional struggle. 
 This was noaccident, but an inevitable phenomenon in the circumstancesof the crisis and break-down of the Party organisations. 
But it was inevitable, and the unanimous adoption of the resolution we have examined has clearly demonstrated the general effort to go forward, to pass from fighting for dis-puted basic propositions to acknowledging them to be indis-putable and to intensified co-operative work on the basis of this acknowledgement. 
 The resolution notes that two kinds of deviations from the correct path are inevitably engendered by the presenthistorical situation and by bourgeois influence on the prole-tariat. 
 The characteristic features of one of these deviationsare essentially the following: “Rejection of the illegal So-cial-Democratic Party, belittling of its role and significance, attempts to curtail the programmatic and tactical tasks and slogans of revolutionary Social-Democracy, etc. 
” The con-nection between these errors within the Social-Democraticmovement and the counter-revolutionary bourgeois currentoutside it is obvious. 
 Nothing is so hateful to the bourgeoi-sie and tsarism as the illegal Social-Democratic Party, which proves by its work its loyalty to the behests of the revolu-tion, its unswerving readiness to wage a relentless struggleagainst the foundations of Stolypin’s “legality”. 
 Nothing isso hateful to the bourgeoisie and the servitors of tsarism asthe revolutionary aims and slogans of Social-Democracy. 
 Itis our imperative task to defend both the one and the other and it is the combination of illegal and legal work that espe-cially demands from us that we combat every “belittling ofthe role and significance” of the illegal Party. 
 It is just theneed to defend the Party position on minor matters, in moremodest measures, in particular instances, in the legalframework, that especially requires us to see to it that these aims and slogans are not curtailed , that the changed form of the struggle does not destroy its content, does not makeit less irreconcilable, does not distort the historical perspec-tive and historical aim of the proletariat, viz. 
, through aseries of bourgeois revolutions that achieve a democraticrepublic to lead all working and exploited people, the whole mass of the people, to the proletarian revolution which overthrows capitalism itself. 
 On the other hand—and here we proceed to characterise the other deviation—it is impossible to carry out in prac-tice daily revolutionary Social-Democratic work withoutlearning how to change its forms, adapting them to the spe-cific character of each new historical period. 
 “Rejection of So-cial-Democratic work in the Duma and of utilising legalopportunities, a failure to understand the importance of both of them” is just the kind of deviation which makes it impossible in practice to pursue a class Social-Democratic policy. 
 The new stage of the historical development of Russia confronts us with new tasks. 
 This does not mean that the oldtasks have already been solved, that it is permissible to aban-don them; it means that it is necessary to take account ofthese new tasks, to find new forms of struggle, to work outthe tactics and organisation appropriate to them. 
 Once agreement has begun to be established in the Party on these basic questions, an agreement on the need to over-come both of the above-mentioned deviations, chiefly by extending and deepening Social-Democratic work—thechief requirement (for correctly determining the “ideologicaland political tasks of the Social-Democratic movement”) has been achieved. 
 We must now systematically put this achievement into effect, ensure a full and clear understand-ing of these tasks by all Party circles, by all local Partyworkers, carry to its logical conclusion the explanationof the danger of both deviations in all fields of activity, and put the work on such a footing as to make impossible any vacillation to one side or the other. 
 Practical steps in implementing the decisions adopted and the needs of the eco-nomic and political struggle itself will then themselves showwhat remains to be done here and how to do it. 
 Among these needs is one that forms part of the ordinary course of Party life (when this “ordinary course” exists). 
 We are referring to a Party conference, which would bring to-gether from all parts of Russia representatives of pro-PartySocial-Democratic organisations and groups actually en-gaged in local work . 
 This task may be a modest one but the present break-down has made it terribly difficult. 
 The reso-lution of the Central Committee takes into account the new difficulties (the election of regional delegates by individual local Party units and not by regional conferences, if thelatter cannot be convened) and the new tasks (the participa-tion with a consultative voice of Party functionaries fromthe legal movement). 
 The objective conditions require that the basis of the Par-ty’s organisation should consist of illegal workers’ units that are modest as regards size and present forms of work. 
Much more initiative and independent activity than pre-viously, however, is required of them in order to learn to carry out revolutionary Social-Democratic work systemati-cally, undeviatingly and in a planned way in the present difficult situation, and the more so because in very manycases they cannot expect assistance from old, experiencedcomrades. 
 And these primary units cannot solve the tasksof constant influence on the masses and interaction with themasses without establishing, firstly, firm connections with one another and, secondly, without strongpoints in the form of all possible kinds of legal institutions. 
 Hence the neces-sity for a conference of delegates of these illegal primaryunits—first of all, immediately and at all costs. 
 Hence theneed to draw in pro-Party Social-Democrats from the legal movement, representatives “of Social-Democratic groups in the legal movement that are ready to establish a firm organisational connection with the local Party centres”. 
 Who among our legal Social-Democrats is really pro-Party, indeeds and not merely in words, who among them has reallyunderstood the new conditions of work outlined above andhow to combine with them the old aims of revolutionary Social-Democracy, who is sincerely prepared to work for the fulfilment of these aims, which groups are really pre-pared to establish a firm organisational connection with theParty—this is something that can only be ascertained inthe localities, in the actual course of daily illegal work. 
 Let us hope that all Social-Democratic forces will unite for this work, that Party functionaries at the centre and in the localities will set about preparing the conference withthe utmost vigour, that this conference will help definitivelyto reinforce our Party unity and vigorously promote thecreation of a broader, more stable and more flexible pro-letarian basis for the future revolutionary battles. 
 Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 11, Published according to February 13 (26), 1910 the text in Sotsial-Demokrat GOLOS (VOIC E) OF THE LIQUIDATORS AGAINST THE PART Y77 REPLY TO GOLOS SOTSIAL-DEMOKRATA Golos Sotsial-Demokrata No. 
 19-20 and the manifesto of Comrades Axelrod, Dan, Martov and Martynov, published separately under the heading “Letter to the Comrades”, areso much in the nature of a bomb intended to disrupt theParty immediately after the unity plenum that we are forcedto come forward with an immediate, although brief andincomplete, warning, and to address a caution to all Social-Democrats. 
 We shall begin with the fact that Golos Sotsial-Demo-krata directs its fire at us, at the editorial board of the Cen-tral Organ. 
 It accuses us, through the mouth of Comrade Martov, of relegating his article to Diskussionny Listok . 
 78 “My article does not discuss the decisions of the plenum at all,” writes Comrade Martov and he lays stress on this; the same thing is repeated word for word in the “Letter to theComrades”. 
 Anyone who cares to read Comrade Martov’s article head-ed “On the Right Path”, will see that it directly discusses the decisions of the plenum, directly opposes the decisions on the composition of the Central Organ, and gives a detailedjustification of the theory of the equality of trends, of the“neutralisation ” of trends. 
 The glaring untruth uttered by Comrade Martov and the whole editorial board of Golos i n alleging that this controversial article “does not discuss”the decisions of the plenum looks like a downright mockery of Party decisions. 
 If anyone is unclear about the difference between dis-cussing the decisions of the plenum and conscientiously implementing the line of the plenum in the Central Organ itself, we invite such people, and particularly the Menshe-viks , to reflect on Comrade Plekhanov’s instructive article in the current issue of the Central Organ and on the no lessinstructive No. 
 11 of Dnevnik Sotsial-Demokrata by the same author. 
 A Menshevik who does not want to flout the Partydecision and Party unity cannot deny that in Dnevnik Com-rade Plekhanov discusses the decisions of the plenum, where-as in the article “In Defence of Underground Activity” he defends the Party line . 
 How can one fail to understand this difference unless one is pursuing the malicious aim ofdisrupting the decisions of the plenum? But it is not enough that Comrade Martov and the whole editorial board of Golos utter a glaring untruth in alleging that the article “On the Right Path” does not discuss the de-cisions of the plenum. 
 The article contains something farworse. 
 It is based entirely on the theory of equality of the illegal Party, i. 
e. 
, the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, on the one hand, andof the legalists , who have broken away from the Party, yet want to be called Social-Democrats, on the other. 
 The article is based entirely on the theory of a split between these “two parts ” of the working-class vanguard, these “ two parts of Social-Democracy ”, which should unite on the same princi-ples of “equality and neutralisation” on which all parts of awhole that have split up always unite! Shortage of space prevents us from adding to the quota-tions confirming this description of Martov’s views. 
 This will be done in a series of other articles, if it is at all nec-essary, for scarcely anyone will dare to deny that Martovputs forward the “theory of equality”. 
 Yet this new theory is in direct opposition to the decisions of the plenum; more than that, it is a downright mockery of them. 
 The meaning of these decisions, which is clear to all who are conscientiously fulfilling the decisions of theplenum, is that what has to be done away with is the splitbetween the pro-Party Mensheviks and the pro-Party Bolshe-viks, the split between these ancient factions , and by no means the “split” between all the legalists in general and our illegal R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 The legalists who have broken away from the Party are not at all to be regarded as a “part ofSocial-Democracy” similar to the Party or on a par with the Party. 
 On the contrary, they are being called back to the Part y on the definitely expressed conditio n that they break with liquidationism (i. 
e. 
, legalism at all costs) and come over to the Party standpoint, to the “Party way of life”. 
 The Central Committee’s letter on the conference, this official commentary on the resolutions of the plenum, one which is absolutely binding on the Party, says with the utmost clarity that it is the illegal organisation s* that must judge whether the legalists are in actual fact pro-Part y, i. 
e. 
, it specifically rejects the “theory of equality”! By a specific decision of the plenum this letter of the Central Committee was drawn up by a special committee consisting of Comrades Grigory ,79 Innokent y80 and Martov. 
 The letter was endorsed unanimously by the whole of this committee. 
 Now Comrade Martov, as if inspired by some evil spirit, performs a volte-face , writes an article wholly imbued with a directly opposite theory, and in addition complains, as if in mockery of the Party, when this articleis declared controversial! It is quite obvious that this theory of equality, which is expressed in all the other articles of Golos still more sharply and crudely than in the case of Martov, leads in fact to the Party being subordinated to the liquidators , for the legalist who sets himself against the illegal Party, considering him-self on a par with it, is nothing but a liquidator. 
 The “equal-ity” between an illegal Social-Democrat who is persecuted by the police and a legalist who is safeguarded by his legal-ity and his divorce from the Party is in fact the “equality”between the worker and the capitalist. 
 All this is so apparent, Golos ’s contemptuous treatment of the decision of the plenum and of the explanation of thisdecision in the Central Committee’s letter is so obvious, that Martov’s article can only be called one that points *See No. 
 11 of the Central Organ, pp. 
 11-12: “Only the local or-ganisations can ensure that this additional representation is extended solely to real (the “Letter’s” italics) pro-Party elements; our local workers will judge not only by the words of these leaders of the legalmovement, but also by their deeds , and will exert every effort so that only those are drawn in who in essence are even now part of our Party,who wish to join our Party organisation in order really to work in it, to strengthen it, to subordinate themselves to it and serve it”, etc. 
 out the “ true path ” ... to the victory of the liquidators over the Party. 
 The pro-Party Mensheviks have already seen this danger. 
 The proof is No. 
 11 of Dnevnik Sotsial-Demokrata , in which the Menshevik Plekhanov, who had only read the plenumresolutions and had not yet seen the Central Committee’s“Letter”, expressly points out that in the case of an “inatten-tive attitude” to the text of the resolution on the legalists, who are “ready to establish a firm organisational connection with the local Party centres”, “ the ‘liquidators ’ may find here a convenient loophole for themselves ” (p. 
 20). 
 Is it not evident that Plekhanov has an excellent knowl-edge of his Golosists? He has pointed out the very sameloophole of the liquidators that Golos Sotsial-Demokrata No. 
 19-20 has been “working on” with all its might, in almost all its articles, from the first line to the last. 
 Arewe not entitled to call it the “voice” of the liquidators ? The lengths to which the Golosists go in their defence of liquidationism can be seen from the following passage inthe “Letter to the Comrades”: ... “The Central Organ ... has to win the confidence both of the viable elements of the old underground organisations ... [the underground Partyorganisations display full confidence in both the CentralCommittee and the Central Organ; it is ridiculous to speakof “winning” here] ... and of the new legal organisationswhich are now the chief centre [there you have it!] of Social-Democratic work. 
” Thus the legalists who have broken away from the Party are the chief centre . 
 It is not they who have to win the confidence of the Party, to become pro-Party inreality, to join the Party, to return to the Party principle,but the Party in the shape of the Central Organ which hasto “win their confidence ”—evidently by that hidden defence of liquidationism, that preparation of loopholes for liqui-dationism, which we see in Golos !! The whole of Comrade F. 
 Dan’s article “The Fight for Legality” is imbued with the spirit of liquidationism, goingas far as downright reformism. 
 By saying that “the fightfor legality” is “one of the principal revolutionary tasks”, that it is the “banner”, etc. 
, Comrade Dan defends not the Social-Democratic but the Cadet point of view. 
 ComradeDan proclaims “illegal solidarity as an essential weapon in the fight for legality”. 
 This is in the Cadet spirit. 
 For the Cadets the Party is illegal, but their illegality is merely “an essential weapon in the fight for legality”. 
 For the Social-Democrats legal solidarity is at the present time one of the essential weapons of the illegal Party . 
 ... “Only in the light of this [the fight for legality], in its name, is it possible at the present time for the prole-tariat to wage a struggle which sets itself ... the aim ... of overthrowing the autocracy.... 
” This argument again must be turned inside-out for it to become a Social-Democratic argument. 
 Only in the light of the struggle to overthrow the autocracy, only in its name,is Social-Democratic work in legal organisations really pos-sible. 
 Only in the name of the struggle for the uncurtailed revolutionary demands of the proletariat, only in the light of the programme and tactics of revolutionary Marxism, isit possible for Social-Democrats to make really successfuluse of all legal opportunities, is it possible and necessaryto defend these opportunities with the utmost determina-tion, and to convert them into strongpoints for our Party work. 
 But this too is not all. 
 The Golosists act in direct contra-diction to the decisions of the plenum when they come for-ward in their letter and in their newspaper with agitationfor the continuance of “Golos ” in spite of the decisions of the Central Committee. 
 We are not going to examine here the ludicrous and miserable sophistry by which they seek to justify the breach of a Party decision. 
 We prefer to confineourselves—at least in the present short article—to a referenceto the voice of pro-Party Menshevism , to No. 
 11 of Dnevnik . 
 Comrade Plekhanov foresaw also this loophole of the liqui-dators, saying frankly, simply and clearly something that no loyal Social-Democrat can doubt. 
 “The agitation against the closing down of Golos ,” he writes on p. 
 18, is “an agita-tion against the abolition of the faction, i. 
e. 
, for reducing to naught the chief possible result of the Central Committee’s plenary meeting. 
” What does Golos Sotsial-Demokrata represent for the Mensheviks of the trend concerned? It is their actual factional—and moreover irresponsible—centre. 
 Precisely so. 
 To reduce unity to naught —that is what the concern of Golos No. 
 19-20 and of the manifesto of the four editors of Golos against the decisions of the plenum amounts to. 
 After the unity plenum they came out with a much more open and much more impudent defence of liquidationism than prior to it. 
 When their manifesto tells the Menshe-viks that the letter of the C. 
C. 
 Bureau Abroad to thegroups, 81 which calls for the creation of real unity, was adopted against the votes of the Menshevik and Bundistmembers of the Bureau Abroad , everyone realises that we are confronted with a poorly disguised call for non-compli-ance with this letter and for disruption of unity abroad. 
 Let the pro-Party Mensheviks who condemn the Golosistspass from condemnation to action if they want at all costs to uphold Party unity. 
 This unity depends now on the pro-Party Mensheviks, on their readiness and ability to wage an open figh t both against the foreign and the Russian “actual centre” of the Golosist liquidators. 
 This Russian centre, the Russian M. 
C. 
 (Menshevik centre) comes out plainly in Golos No. 
 19-20 with an “Open Letter” in which Plekhanov is declared “a liquidator of the ideasof Menshevism”. 
 The Mensheviks’ withdrawal from the Par-ty is explained—it would be more correct to say, is justified —by the “universally known phenomenon of the necrosis ofthe Party units”!! Those who withdraw—the manifesto ofthe M. 
C. 
 tells us—are “falsely called liquidators” (p. 
 24of Golos ). 
 We ask any Social-Democrats who are at all capable of impartiality, we ask particularly working-class Social-Demo-crats, irrespective of trends, whether the appearance of sucha manifesto of the M. 
C. 
 on the morrow of the plenum doesnot reduce to naught the efforts for unity. 
 We consider it our duty to inform the whole Party of the names of those who signed this famous document, which, we are sure, will have the ill-fame attaching to the name of Herostratus: 1) Avgustovsky, 2) Anton, 3) Vadim, 4) V. 
 Pet-rova, 5) Georgy, 6) Georg, 7) Yevg. 
 Ha-az, 8) Kramolnikov,9) D. 
 Koltsov, 10) Nat. 
 Mikhailova, 11) Roman , 12) Romul, 13) Solomonov, 14) Cherevanin (of course!), 15) Yuri , 16) Y. 
 P-y. 
 82 “These signatories,” says the editorial board of Golos “are old Party workers, well-known to the editorial board;some of them have held responsible posts in the Party. 
” These names, we reply, will be nailed to the pillory by all class-conscious Social-Democratic workers when they read Golos S. 
 D. 
 No. 
 19-20, when they learn the decisions of the plenum, when they become aware of the followingfact: The Russian Bureau of the C. 
C. 
 has recently sent an official letter to the C. 
C. 
B. 
A. 
 (the executive organ abroadof the Central Committee). 
 This letter states in so many words: ... “We made a proposal to Comrades Mikhail , 83 Roman and Yuri [we stressed these names above] that they should set to work , but we received a reply from them saying that not only do they consider the decisions of the plenum harmfulbut they find the very existence of the C. 
C. 
 harmful. 
 On these grounds, they refuse even to appear at any meeting for co-optation ” *.... 
 (Let us make it clear for our own part: the chiefs of the Menshevik centre not only themselves refuse to support theC. 
C. 
, but they refuse to appear for co-opting other Menshe-viks, for co-opting Menshevik workers, being very well aware that the refusal to appear for the co-optation will hold up the work of the C. 
C. 
, will hold up its formation , and will compel the C. 
C. 
 to postpone , perhaps for months, the very commencement of its work as a C. 
C. 
) *We shall cite in addition all the passages of the letters (of the Russian Bureau of the C. 
C. 
 and of one of the C. 
C. 
 members operatingin Russia 84) relating to the convocation of the C. 
C. 
 in Russia: ... “We request Comrades Martov and the Menshevik members of the C. 
C. 
 to communicate to us immediately the names and addresses of the comrades whom they propose to co-opt (the St. 
 PetersburgMensheviks have refused to do this)”.... 
 “It is impossible for the timebeing to convene the Russian collegium: practically no one hasagreed to be co-opted, at present only one Bolshevik has agreed,and that conditionally. 
 The Mensheviks (Mikhail , Roman and Yuri ) have categorically refused , considering the work of the Central Commit-tee harmful . 
 The resolutions of the plenum , in the opinion of Mikhail and others , are also harmful . 
 The interference of the C. 
C. 
 in the spon-taneous process of the grouping of Social-Democratic forces in legalorganisations that is now taking place is , in their words , like plucking the fruit from the mother ’s womb after two months ’ pregnancy . 
 We ask you immediately to indicate to us other comrades to whom we may address a proposal that they should be co-opted. 
 It is also de-sirable to publish the attitude of the comrades to this behaviour ofMikhail and the others . 
” Thus the same people who declare in print, with the assistance and approval of Axelrod, Dan, Martov and Martynov, that Plekhanov “falsely calls them ‘liquidators’” are directly disrupting the very existence of the C. 
C. 
 andare proclaiming its existence harmful. 
 The same people who are exclaiming in the illegal press (through Golos ) and in the legal press (through the liberals) about “the universally known phenomenon of the necrosis of the Party units”, are themselves disrupting attempts t o put in order, restore and set going these Party units and evensuch a Party unit as the Central Committee. 
 Let all Social-Democrats be aware now who the manifesto of Comrades Axelrod, Dan, Martov and Martynov is allud-ing to when it speaks of “leaders of the legal movement who have now occupied the advanced posts of the militant proletariat”. 
 Let all Social-Democrats be aware now who itis that the editorial board of Golos is addressing when it writes: “We should like the comrades [of the type of Mikhail,Roman and Yuri] to appreciate the breach which has beenmade in the official dogma that has actually condemned the Party organisation to inevitable decay, and to attempt to occupy the positions that have been opened to them [Mikha-il, Roman, Yuri and the like] owing to this breach. 
” We address ourselves to all organisations, to all groups of our Party, and we ask them: do they intend to toleratethis flouting of Social-Democracy? Is it permissible now to remain passive spectators of what is taking place, or is it obligatory for them to undertake a resolute fight against the trend that is undermining the very existence of the Party? We ask all Russian Social-Democrats: can they now still remain in doubt as to the practical, real political signifi-cance of the “theory of equality” of trends, of the equality of the legalists and the illegal Party, of the theory of the fight for legality”, etc. 
, etc. 
? These theories, these arguments, these loopholes, are the verbal shield behind which are concealed such enemies of Social-Democracy as those like Mikhail, Roman and Yuri, such political accomplices of them as the sixteen Herostrat-ean Mensheviks, such ideological leaders as the literati who conduct the “Voice of the Liquidators ”. 
 And so, No. 
 19-20 of Golos Sotsial-Demokrata and the splitting manifesto of the four editors of Golos , “To the Comrades”, is direct agitation: for a factional organ against unity , against unity abroad , in defence of flagrant liquidationism , in defence of the downright opponents of the very existence of the C. 
C. 
 Against the Party! The conspiracy against the Party is revealed. 
 Let all to whom the existence of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 is dear come to theaid of the Party! Written on March 11 (24), 1910 . 
 Published between March 12-16 Published according to the (25-29 ) as a separate print from text in Sotsial-Demokrat , the newspaper Sotsial-Demokrat checked with the text of the No. 
 12 separate reprint WHAT TO FIGHT FOR? The recent utterances of the Octobrists, the predomi-nating party in the Duma, in connection with the speechesmade by Right-wing Cadets there and elsewhere, are undoubt-edly highly symptomatic. 
 “We are isolated in the country and in the Duma,” complained the head of the party of counter-revolutionary capitalists, Mr. 
 Guchkov. 
 And theVekhist Mr. 
 Bulgakov echoes him, as it were, in Mos-kovsky Yezhenedelnik : ... “both the reaction and the revolu-tion deny ‘inviolability of the person’; on the contrary theyaffirm ‘violability’ of the person with all their heart and soul—there is complete identity between Markov the Second, with his persecution of non-Russian races and his pogrommorality, and the Social-Democrat Gegechkori, who appealsto a ‘second great Russian revolution’ in the name of invio-lability of the person” (No. 
 8, February 20, 1910, page 25). 
 “We are waiting,” said Mr. 
 Guchkov in the Duma, ad-dressing the tsarist government, signifying by these words that the bourgeoisie, which has surrendered body and soulto the counter-revolution, cannot as yet regard their interestsas assured or see anything really firm and stable in the senseof the creation of the famous “renovated” order. 
 And the Vekhist Bulgakov echoes him: “... I reflect with undiminishing pain on the old, bitter and anguishing thought: yes, it’s the same thing [i. 
e. 
, the reaction and therevolution are the same thing, namely—] ... the same Maxi-malism effected by force.... 
 Of late some people are already beginning again to sigh for a new revolution , as though now, after what we have experienced, anything could be expected from it but the final collapse of Russia” (p. 
 32). 
 The Duma leader of the largest bourgeois party and a Right-wing Cadet publicist who is popular in liberal “society” ( Vekhi is being issued in a fifth edition)—both of them complain, lament and assert that they are isolated . 
 They are ideologically isolated among the Maximalists of the reaction and the “Maximalists” of the revolution, amongthe heroes of the Black Hundred and the “sighers for a newrevolution” (the liberals?)— “isolated in the Duma and inthe country”. 
 This isolation of the “centre”, the isolation of the bour-geoisie who want to change the old regime but do not want to fight it, who want to “renovate” tsarism but fear itsoverthrow, is no new phenomenon in the history of the Rus-sian revolution. 
 In 1905 when the mass revolutionary move-ment was growing by leaps and bounds, dealing tsarismblow after blow, the Cadets and the Octobrists alike felt “isolated”. 
 The Cadets (the Osvobozhdeniye people of that time) began to back out already after August 6, 1905, whenthey declared against boycotting the Bulygin Duma. 
 TheOctobrists finally “backed out” after October 17. 
 In 1906-07the Cadets were “isolated” in both Dumas, powerless to usetheir majority, shuttling helplessly between tsarism and revolution, between the Black-Hundred landlords and the onslaught of the proletariat and the peasantry. 
 In spite oftheir majority in both Dumas the Cadets were isolated allthe time, they were caught in a cleft stick between Trepov 85 and the real revolutionary movement and made an inglo-rious exit without a single victory to their credit. 
 In 1908-09 the Octobrists were in the majority in the Third Duma, worked hand in glove with the government, supported itmost loyally—and now they have to admit that in realitynot they but the Black Hundreds were in command, and thatthe Octobrist bourgeoisie is isolated . 
 Such is the summing-up of the historical role of the bour-geoisie in the Russian bourgeois revolution. 
 The experience of those most eventful five years (1905-09), which most ofall brought about an open development of the mass struggle,of the class struggle in Russia, proved by facts that both sections of our bourgeoisie, the Cadet wing and the Octo-brist wing alike, were actually neutralised by the struggle between revolution and counter-revolution, and were power-less, helpless, pitiful, tossed hither and thither between thehostile camps. 
 By its continual betrayals of the revolution the bourgeoi-sie has richly deserved the unceremonious kicks, indigni-ties, and contemptuous spurning which have so long been its portion from Black-Hundred tsarism, from the Black-Hun-dred clique of the tsar and the landlords. 
 And it is not, ofcourse, any special moral qualities that have occasionedthese betrayals on the part of the bourgeoisie and broughtthis historic retribution upon it but the contradictory eco-nomic position of the capitalist class in our revolution. 
 This class feared revolution more than it feared reaction,the victory of the people more than the preservation oftsarism, the confiscation of the landed estates more thanthe preservation of the power of the feudal landlords. 
 Thebourgeoisie was not one of those categories that had nothing to lose in the great revolutionary battle. 
 Only the proletariat was such a category in our bourgeois revolution, and afterit the millions of ruined peasantry. 
 The Russian revolution confirmed the conclusion which Engels drew from the history of the great bourgeois revolu-tions of the West, namely: In order to secure even those con-quests of the bourgeoisie that were ripe for gathering at the time, the revolution had to be carried considerably fur-ther . 
 86 And the proletariat of Russia has led, is leading and will lead our revolution forward, impelling events further than the point at which the capitalists and liberals wouldlike to halt them. 
 In the banquet campaign of 1904 the liberals tried in every way to restrain the Social-Democrats, fearing their impet-uous intervention. 
 But the workers were not to be deterredby the spectre of a frightened liberal and led the movementforward, to the 9th of January, to the wave of continuousstakes that swept the whole of Russia. 
 The bourgeois liberals, including the Osvobozhdeniye peo-ple who were “illegal” at that time, called on the proletariatto take part in the Bulygin Duma. 
 But the proletariat wasnot to be deterred by the spectre of a frightened liberal andled the movement forward, to the great October strike, thefirst victory of the people. 
 The bourgeoisie split after October 17. 
 The Octobrists definitely sided with the counter-revolution. 
 The Cadetscut themselves adrift from the people and ran pell-mell to Witte’s antechamber. 
 The proletariat marched onward. 
 Placing itself at the head of the people it mobilised the masses for independent historic action in such millions that a few weeks of real freedom once and for all drew an in-delible line between the old Russia and the new. 
 The prole-tariat raised the movement to the highest possible form ofstruggle—the armed uprising in December 1905. 
 It suffereddefeat in this struggle but was not routed. 
 Its uprising was crushed but it succeeded in uniting in battle all the revo-lutionary forces of the people, it did not allow itself to bedemoralised by retreat but showed the masses—for the firsttime in the recent history of Russia—that the strugglecould and must be fought to the finish. 
 The proletariat wasrepulsed but it did not relinquish the great banner of revolu-tion and at a time when the Cadet majority in the First and Second Dumas were repudiating the revolution, trying toextinguish it and assuring the Trepovs and Stolypins thatthey were ready and able to extinguish it, the proletariatraised the banner on high and continued to call to action,educating, uniting, and organising forces for the struggle. 
 Soviets of Workers’ Deputies in all the big industrial cen-tres, a number of economic gains wrested from capital, So-viets of Soldiers’ Deputies in the army, peasant committees inGuria and other places; finally, transient “republics” in sev-eral cities in Russia—all this was the beginning of the con-quest of political power by the proletariat relying on the revolutionary petty bourgeoisie, particularly the peasantry. 
 The December movement of 1905 was a great movement because it converted for the first time “a pitiful nation, anation of slaves” (as N. 
 G. 
 Chernyshevsky said at the begin-ning of the sixties 87) into a nation capable under proletar-ian leadership of carrying the fight against the loathsome autocracy to a conclusion and drawing the masses into this struggle. 
 It was a great movement because the proletariatgave a practical demonstration of the possibility of the con-quest of power by the democratic masses, the possibility ofa republic in Russia, showed “ how it is done ”, showed in practice how the masses set about accomplishing this task. 
 The December struggle of the proletariat left the people a legacy that can serve as an ideological and political beaconfor the work of several generations. 
 And the darker the clouds of rabid reaction, the greater the atrocities of the counter-revolutionary tsarist Black Hundreds, the more frequent the spectacle of even the Octo-brists shaking their heads, declaring that “they are waiting”for reforms and losing patience, the more frequently theliberals and the democrats “sigh for a new revolution”, themore abject the utterances of the Vekhists (“we must con-sciously not want a revolution”; Bulgakov, ibid. 
, page 32)— the more vigorously must the workers’ party remind the people what to fight for . 
 We have already said time and again that the aims set by the year 1905, the objectives which the movement ofthat time came near to attaining, must be fought for now byother methods in view of the altered conditions, in view of the different situation at the present historical moment. 
 The attempts of the autocracy to remould itself on thepattern of a bourgeois monarchy, its long parleys with thelandlords and the bourgeoisie in the Third Duma, thenew bourgeois agrarian policy, etc. 
—all these things haveled Russia into a unique phase of development, have con-fronted the working class with the lengthy tasks of prepar-ing a new proletarian army—and a new revolutionaryarmy—tasks of training and organising the forces, of uti-lising the Duma tribune and all opportunities for semi-legal activity. 
 We must prove able to carry out our tactical line and build our organisation in such a way as to take into account the altered situation without lessening our objectives, without curtailing them or diminishing the ideological and politicalcontent of even the most modest, inconspicuous and, atfirst sight, petty work. 
 It would be just such a lessening ofour objectives and weakening of the ideological and political content of the struggle if, for instance, we were to put before the Social-Democratic Party the slogan of fighting for alegal labour movement. 
 Taken by itself this is not a Social-Democratic but a Cadet slogan, for only the liberals dream of the possibility of alegal labour movement without a new revolution (and, while they dream of it, preach false doctrines to the people). 
 Only the liberals are limiting their objectives through asubsidiary aim, expecting—like the liberals of Western Europe—to reconcile the proletariat with a “reformed”, cleansed, “improved” bourgeois society. 
 Far from fearing such an outcome the Social-Democratic proletariat, on the contrary, is confident that any reformworth the name, any enlargement of its scope of activity,the base of its organisation and the freedom of its movementwill increase its strength tenfold and enhance the revolu-tionary mass character of its struggle. 
 But in order to bring about a real enlargement of the scope of its movement, to bring about a partial improvement, the slogans we putto the proletarian masses must not be curtailed, must notbe attenuated. 
 Partial improvements can be (and alwayshave been in history) merely a by-product of revolutionaryclass struggle. 
 Only if we set before the mass of the workers the objectives, in all their breadth and magnitude, which our generation inherits from 1905 will we be in a positionactually to widen the base of the movement, to draw into itgreat masses and inspire them with that spirit of selflessrevolutionary struggle that has always brought the oppressedclasses to victory over their enemies. 
 Not to neglect a single opportunity, however slight, for open activity, for open action, for widening the base of themovement, continually enlisting new sections of the prole-tariat, using every weak point in the capitalist position forlaunching an attack and winning some improvement indaily life—and at the same time permeating all these activ-ities with the spirit of revolutionary struggle, explaining at every step and turn in the movement the full substance of the objectives which we approached but did not attain in1905—such must be the policy and tactics of the RussianSocial-Democratic Labour Party. 
 Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 12, Published according to March 23 (April 5), 1910 the text in Sotsial-Demokrat THE CAMPAIGN AGAINST FINLAND On March 17, 1910 Stolypin introduced a Bill to the State Duma “On the Procedure of Promulgating Laws andGeneral State Ordinances Concerning Finland”. 
 This officialbureaucratic heading conceals a most brazen campaign of the autocracy against the freedom and independence of Finland. 
 Stolypin’s Bill is concerned with placing under the juris-diction of the State Duma, the Council of State and NicholasII all those Finnish affairs which “relate not merely to theinternal affairs of this territory”. 
 The Finnish Diet is only allowed to tender its “conclusions” on these affairs, and these conclusions are not binding upon anyone whatsoever: inits relation to the empire the Finnish Diet is to be reducedto the status of a Bulygin Duma. 
 What is meant here by “laws and ordinances which relatenot merely to the internal affairs” of Finland? Without citing the whole list, which takes up 17 clauses in Stoly-pin’s Bill, we may mention that it includes the customsrelations between Finland and other parts of the empire,deletions from the Finnish criminal code, the railways, themonetary system in Finland, rules on public meetings, the-press laws in Finland and other things. 
 To put all such questions under the jurisdiction of the arch-reactionary Octobrist Duma! The utter destruction of Finland’s freedom —that is what is being undertaken by the autocracy, which is counting on the support of the represent-atives of the landed proprietors and the top section of themerchants, who are united by the constitution of the Third of June. 
 The plan is foolproof, of course, as far as it concerns only those whose position is legal under this “constitution”: fifty extreme Rights, a hundred nationalists and “Right Octo-brists”, a hundred and twenty-five Octobrists—such is the black-hand gang which has already mustered in the Duma and has been suitably prepared by the long continued in-citements of the government press to ensure the adoption ofany measure of violence against Finland. 
 The old nationalism of the autocracy, which suppressed all “non-Russian races”, has now been reinforced, firstly by the hatred of all the counter-revolutionary elements towards a people which managed to utilise the brief victory of theproletariat of Russia in October to create under the verynose of the Black-Hundred tsar one of the most democraticconstitutions in the world, and to create free conditions forthe organisation of the working masses of Finland, the staunch supporters of Social-Democracy. 
 Finland took advantage of the Russian revolution to secure a few years of freedomand peaceful development. 
 The counter-revolution in Russiais making haste to utilise the complete lull “at home” totake away as much as possible of Finland’s gains. 
 History, as it were, is demonstrating by the example of Finland that the famous “peaceful” progress, so idolised by all philistines, is just one of those brief, unstable, ephemer-al exceptions which conclusively prove the rule. 
 And thisrule is that only the revolutionary movement of the massesand of the proletariat at their head, only a victorious revolu-tion, can make lasting changes in the life of peoples and seri-ously undermine medieval rule and semi-Asiatic forms of capitalism. 
 Finland could only breathe freely when the working class of Russia rose in a gigantic mass and gave a shock tothe Russian autocracy. 
 And it is only by joining the revolu-tionary struggle of the masses in Russia that the Finnish worker can now seek the way to deliverance from the on-slaught of the Black-Hundred bashi-bazouks. 
 The bourgeoisie of Finland has shown its counter-revolu-tionary qualities even in this peaceful country, whichaccomplished a revolution at the expense of the October days in Russia, which upheld liberty under the wing of the Decem-ber struggle and the two oppositional Dumas in Russia. 
 Bourgeois Finland persecuted the Red Guard of the Finnishworkers and accused them of revolutionism; it did every-thing in its power to prevent the full freedom of the socialist organisations in Finland, it thought to escape violence at the hands of tsarism by compliance (such as the surrender of political offenders in 1907); it accused the socialists of itsown country of having been corrupted by the Russian social-ists, infected with their revolutionary spirit. 
 In Finland now the bourgeoisie too can see the fruits of the policy of concessions, compliance and “flunkeyism”, the policy of directly or indirectly betraying the socialists. 
 Apart from the struggle of the masses, schooled in a social-ist way and organised by socialists, the Finnish people willfind no escape from their plight: apart from proletarianrevolution there is no way of repulsing Nicholas II. 
 Another thing that reinforces the old nationalism as the policy of our autocracy is the growing class-consciousness and consciously counter-revolutionary attitude of our Rus-sian bourgeoisie. 
 Chauvinism has grown among them withtheir growing hatred of the proletariat as an internationalforce. 
 Their chauvinism has grown stronger parallel withthe growth and intensification of the rivalry of international capital. 
 Chauvinism appeared as a thirst for revenge engen-dered by the losing of the war with Japan and the powerless-ness of the bourgeoisie against the privileged landlords. 
Chauvinism has found support in the appetites of the trueRussian industrialists and merchants who are glad to “con-quer” Finland after failing to grab a slice of the pie in the Balkans. 
 Therefore, the representative assembly of the land-lords and big bourgeoisie gives tsarism true allies for set-tling with free Finland. 
 But if the basis of counter-revolutionary “operations” over the free border province has become wider, so has thebasis for repelling these operations. 
 If instead of the bureauc-racy alone and a handful of magnates we have the landed nobility and the wealthiest merchants organised in theThird Duma on the side of the enemies of Finland, we haveon the side of her friends those millions of common peoplewho created the movement of 1905, who produced the revolu-tionary wing in both the First Duma and the Second. 
 And however profound the political lull at the present moment these masses of people are alive and are growing in spite ofeverything. 
 So too is growing a new avenger of the new defeat of the Russian revolution, for the defeat of Finland’s free-dom is a defeat of the Russian revolution. 
 Our Russian liberal bourgeoisie is also being exposed now—over and over again—in all its pusillanimity andspinelessness. 
 The Cadets, of course, are against the perse-cution of Finland. 
 They will certainly not vote with theOctobrists. 
 But was it not they who did most of all to under-mine the sympathy of the “public” for that direct revolu-tionary struggle, those “tactics” of October and December which alone made possible the birth of Finland’s freedom?— enabled it to hold out for more than four years now? Was itnot the Cadets who rallied the Russian bourgeois intelligent-sia to repudiate this struggle and these tactics? Was it notthe Cadets who did their utmost to rouse nationalist feelings and sentiments throughout Russian educated “so-ciety”? How right the Social-Democratic resolution (of December 1908) was in saying that the Cadets by their nationalistagitation were in fact rendering a service to tsarism and no one else 88 The “opposition” which the Cadets wanted to show the autocracy over Russia’s diplomatic reverses in the Balkans proved—as was only to be expected—a miserable,unprincipled, lackey-like opposition, which flattered the Black Hundreds, whetted the appetites of the Black Hun-dreds, and reproved the Black-Hundred tsar because he, the Black-Hundred tsar, was not strong enough. 
 So now, most “humane” gentlemen of the Cadet Party, reap what you have sown. 
 You have convinced tsarism thatit is weak in its stand for “national” interests; now tsarismis showing you its strength in nationalist persecution of a non-Russian race. 
 Your nationalism, neo-Slavism, etc. 
, hada selfish bourgeois essence of a narrow class nature wrapped in high-sounding liberal phrases. 
 The phrases have remained phrases, while the essence has furthered the misanthropic policy of the autocracy. 
 Thus it has always been, and always will be, with liberal phrases. 
 They merely screen the narrow egotism and brutal violence of the bourgeoisie; they are only artificial flowers festooning the peoples’ chains; they only stupefy the minds of the people, preventing them from recognising their real enemy. 
 But each act of tsarist policy, each month of the existence of the Third Duma is more and more mercilessly destroying the liberal illusions, more and more exposing the impotence and rottenness of liberalism, scattering ever wider and moreabundantly the seeds of a new revolution of the proletariat A time will come—the Russian proletariat will rise for the freedom of Finland, for a democratic republic in Russia. 
 Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 13, Published according to April 26 (May 9), 1910 the text in Sotsial-Demokrat THEY ARE NERVOUS ABOUT THE ARMY The debate in the Duma on the interpellation of the So-cial-Democrats and Trudoviks concerning the tsarist govern-ment’s violation of Article 96 of the fundamental laws isnot over yet. 
 But it has already given such a picture of the state of affairs and the papers have made such a noise about Stolypin’s notorious “declaration of March 31” that it willbe quite in place to dwell upon this instructive episode inthe history of the June 3 regime. 
 Our group in the Duma was quite right in interpellating the government about its violation of Article 96 of the fundamental laws and in speaking to such an extent as if “in defence” of law, “in defence of justice”, “in defence ofJune 3 legality”, and so on and so forth. 
 We say “to such anextent” because here the Social-Democrats unquestionablyundertook a complicated task requiring able handling ; they were undoubtedly wielding a double-edged weapon which with the slightest mistake or even awkward usage might wound the bearer. 
 To speak without metaphors, it mightimperceptibly lead the Social-Democrats astray from thepolicy of class struggle to the policy of liberalism. 
 The Social-Democrats would have made such a mistake if they had spoken purely and simply of “defending” these fundamental laws, without explaining the special character of this “defence”. 
 They would have made an even greatermistake had they turned the defence of the fundamentallaws or legality in general into some sort of slogan such as“fight for legality”—that would have been in the style ofthe Cadets. 
 Fortunately, our comrades in the Duma did neither the one nor the other. 
 The first speaker on the interpellation,Gegechkori, opened expressly with an explanation of the spe- /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR cial character of the Social-Democratic defence of the funda-mental laws. 
 Gegechkori began most aptly with the denun-ciatory speech of Count Bobrinsky at the Congress of the United Nobility, who with a more than broad hint at theSocial-Democrats clamoured for the “removal of these trouble-makers from the precincts of the State Duma”. 
 “I declare,”replied Gegechkori, “that in spite of the denunciation, inspite of violence and threats, the group sitting within these walls will not swerve one jot from its declared aims and objects of defending the interests of the working class. 
” Bobrinsky called upon the government to eject from the Duma those who are systematically agitating against June 3legality. 
 Gegechkori opened with a declaration that neitherviolence nor threats can make the Social-Democrats give up their activities. 
 Gegechkori laid special stress on the following point: “We, of course, are concerned less than anybody else withupholding the prestige of the Third State Duma, if it hassuch a thing ...” “it was we, opponents in principle of theexisting political order, who protested whenever the forces of reaction sought to curtail the rights of the popular repre-sentative assembly in their own interest ...” “when openencroachments are being made on the fundamental laws, we,the opponents in principle of these fundamental laws, areobliged to take them under our protection”. 
 And at the con-clusion of his speech, dissociating himself from those who make a fetish of legality, Gegechkori said: “If we make this interpellation, if we enter into digressions or into the fieldof juridical interpretations it is only for the purpose of ex-posing once again the hypocrisy of the government” (p. 
 1988of the verbatim report).... 
 Gegechkori voiced the consistently democratic, republi-can views of the socialists when he said: “our laws will correspond to the interests and requirements of the massof the population only when they are dictated by the direct will of the people ”, and the “ clamour from the right ” noted in this part of the verbatim report emphasised that theshaft had gone home. 
 Another Social-Democratic speaker, Comrade Pokrovsky, spoke even more clearly and definitely in his speech, refer-ring to the political significance of the interpellation: “Let them (the Octobrists) do this directly and openly. 
 Let them frankly accept the slogan of the Rights; ‘Down with the right of the popular representative assembly, long live the minis-terial antechamber!’ There is no doubt that the majorityis working to bring about a time in Russia when constitu-tional illusions will completely vanish, leaving a black realityfrom which the Russian people will draw the appropriateconclusions” (quoted from the report in Rech , April 1). 
 This treatment of the whole question based on exposing the hypocrisy of the government and the Octobrists and ondestroying constitutional illusions is the only correct So-cial-Democratic way of presenting the interpellation onthe violation of Article 96 of the fundamental laws in theThird Duma. 
 In connection with the proceedings in the Duma this is the aspect that must be brought to the fore in our Party agitation, at labour meetings, in our study circlesand groups, and, finally, in private conversations withworkers who do not belong to any organisation. 
 We mustexplain the role of the workers’ party, which is exposing a bourgeois Black-Hundred fraud inside the bourgeois Black-Hundred Duma itself. 
 Inasmuch as it was not possible in such a Duma to treat the question with complete clarity or to state in full detail the revolutionary Social-Democraticpoint of view, it is our duty to amplify what our comradessaid from the tribune of the Taurida Palace and popularisetheir speeches, so that the masses can understand and appre-ciate them. 
 What is the gist of the history of the violation of Article 96? This article occurs in Chapter Nine “on laws” and speci-fies the exceptions from the general rule, cases when theordinances and instructions of the military and navaldepartments are submitted directly to the tsar without passing through the State Duma and the Council of State. 
 89 New expenditure requires grants approved by the State Duma, that is the purport of this article. 
 A year ago the estimates of the naval general staff were being discussed in the State Duma. 
 A heated dispute aroseas to whether the confirmation of these estimates was subject to the jurisdiction of the State Duma or not. 
 The Rights (the Black Hundred) said no, maintaining that the Duma had no right to interfere, that it could not dare en-croach upon the prerogatives of the “imperial leader” of the armed forces, i. 
e. 
, the tsar, who alone , independent of any Duma , had the right to endorse the army and navy est-imates. 
 The Octobrists, Cadets and Lefts maintained that this was the prerogative of the Duma. 
 Consequently, it was aquestion of the Black Hundreds headed by Nicholas II want-ing to interpret restrictively the rights of the Duma, want-ing to curtail the prerogatives of the Duma which had al-ready been curtailed to an incredible extent. 
 The Black-Hundred landlords and, at their head, the richest andblackest reactionary landlord, Nicholas Romanov, made aparticular minor question into a question of principle, aquestion of the prerogatives of the tsar, the prerogatives of the autocracy, accusing the bourgeoisie (and even the Octo-brist bourgeoisie) of trying to curtail the prerogatives ofthe tsar, to limit his power, “to separate the leader of thearmy from the army”, and so on. 
 Whether the power of the tsar should be interpreted as absolutely unlimited autocracy, quite in the old way, or as power with a most modest limitation —such was the point of the dispute. 
 And this dispute swelled a year ago almostto the dimensions of a “political crisis”, i. 
e. 
, threats to kickout Stolypin whom the Black Hundreds accused of “con-stitutionalism”, threats to dissolve the Duma of the Octo-brists, whom the Black Hundreds called “Young Turks”. 
 90 Both the Duma and the Council of State approved the estimates of the naval general staff, i. 
e. 
, they regarded thequestion as coming under their jurisdiction . 
 Everyone waited to see whether Nicholas II would endorse the decision ofthe Duma and the Council of State. 
 On April 27, 1909,Nicholas II issued a rescript to Stolypin refusing to endorse the estimates and charging the ministers to draw up “regu-lations” on the application of Article 96. 
 In other words, the tsar for the hundredth time openly and definitely took the side of the Black Hundreds and re-sisted the slightest attempts to limit his power. 
 His instruc-tion to the ministers to draw up new regulations was a bare-faced order to violate the law , to interpret it in such a way that nothing would be left of it, to “interpret” it inthe style of the notorious Russian senatorial “interpreta-tions”. 
 Of course it was specified that the regulations should remain “within the limits of the fundamental laws”, but these words were the most obvious hypocrisy. 
 The minis-ters drew up such “regulations”—and Nicholas II approvedthem (they are called the regulations of August 24, 1909,from the date of their confirmation)—that the law was cir-cumvented! By the interpretation of the “regulations” enorsed without the Duma, Article 96 of the fundamental laws was reduced to nullity! By these regulations the esti-mates of the army and navy were taken out of the jurisdiction of the Duma. 
 The result was a splendid exposure of the flimsiness of the Russian “constitution”, the brazenness of the BlackHundreds, the partiality of the tsar towards the Black Hundreds, the flouting of the fundamental laws by the autocracy. 
 Of course, the illustration of this theme providedby the coup of June 3, 1907, was a hundred times more con-spicuous, complete, intelligible and obvious to the broadmasses of the people. 
 Of course, if our Social-Democratsin the Duma were unable to make an interpellation on the violation of the fundamental laws by the Act of June 3 this was only because the bourgeois democrats includingthe Trudoviks did not provide enough signatures to make upthe thirty names necessary for an interpellation—it onlygoes to show how limited is the specifically Duma formof propaganda and agitation. 
 But the fact that it was impossible to make an interpellation on the Act of June 3 did not prevent the Social-Democrats in their speechesfrom constantly characterising this Act as a coup d’état. 
And, as a matter of course, even on a comparatively minorissue the Social-Democrats could not and should not leaveunexposed the manner in which the autocracy was flouting the fundamental laws and the rights of the popular repre-sentative assembly. 
 The comparative unimportance, pettiness and insignifi-cance of a question like the estimates of the naval generalstaff, on the other hand, very sharply emphasised the hyper-sensitiveness of our counter-revolutionaries, their nervous-ness about the army . 
 In his second speech on March 26, Mr. 
 Shubinskoi, the Octobrist spokesman in the Duma, made amost definite turn towards the Black Hundreds, revealing that it was just their nervousness about the army that made the counter-revolutionaries so extremely sensitive about permitting the slightest interference of representative bodies in the approval of the military and naval estimates. 
“... The name of the Imperial Leader of the Russian Army istruly a great name” ... cried the bourgeois lackey of Nicholasthe Bloody. 
 “... Whatever assertions you [the members ofthe State Duma] make here, whatever you say about there being a desire to deprive someone of rights, you will not deprive the army of its Imperial Leader. 
” And in his “declaration” of March 31, in which he did his best to confuse his reply with quite empty, meaninglessand patently false speeches about “appeasement” and allegedabatement of repressions, Stolypin came out nevertheless quite definitely on the side of the Black Hundreds against the prerogatives of the Duma. 
 If the Octobrists proved tobe in agreement with Stolypin, this is nothing new. 
 Butif Rech of Milyukov and Co. 
 calls Stolypin’s reply “if any-thing, conciliatory as regards the prerogatives of the Duma”(No. 
 89, April 1—editorial after the leading article) we have before us just one more example of how low the Cadet Party has fallen. 
 “The history of recent years shows,”said Stolypin, “that the blight of revolution could not un-dermine our army.... 
” Could not undermine—this is a mis-statement of facts, for the generally known events of thesoldiers’ and sailors’ mutinies in 1905-06, the generally known opinions expressed by the reactionary press at that time, show that the revolution was undermining and, conse-quently, could undermine the army. 
 It did not completely undermine the army, that is true. 
 But if at the height ofthe counter-revolution of 1910, several years after the lastoutbreak of “unrest” among the troops, Stolypin says (in the same declaration) that he was “ possessed by an alarming thought when he listened to several of the previous speakers ”, that this “alarming thought” consisted in an “ uneasy impres-sion of some sort of discord among different state elementsin their attitude to our armed forces”, this gives Stolypinaway completely and the whole Black-Hundred gang at Nicholas II’s Court together with him! It proves that the tsar and his gang not only continue to be nervous but arestill in downright trepidation about the army . 
 This proves that the counter-revolution is still holding fast to the stand-point of civil war, the standpoint that the suppression of the popular indignation by military means is an immediate and urgent need. 
 Just consider the following phrases ofStolypin’s: “History ... teaches that an army falls into disorder when it ceases to be united in submission to a single sacred will. 
Insert into this principle the poison of doubt, instil in the army even only fragments of the idea that its organisation depends on collective will and its power will no longer rest on an immutable force—supreme power. 
” And inanother passage: “I know, many wanted ... to excite disputes ruinous to our army , concerning prerogatives ” (namely, the prerogatives of the Duma, the prerogatives of “collective will”). 
 Just as murderers are haunted by the ghosts of their victims, so do the heroes of the counter-revolution recollectthe “ruinous” influence of “collective will” on the army. 
Stolypin, as a true servant of the Black Hundreds, sees inevery Octobrist a “Young Turk” working for the “ disorgan-isation of the army ” by making it subordinate to collective will, by permitting “fragments of the idea” about suchsubordination! The executioners and assassins of the June 3 monarchy must be suffering from hallucinations, they must have goneclean out of their minds if they take the Octobrists for Young Turks. 
 But these delirious fancies, these extrava-gancies of the mind are a political malady engendered by afeeling of the insecurity of their position and by acutenervousness about the army. 
 If these gentry, the Stolypins,Romanovs and Co. 
 were able to view with the slightest de-gree of composure the question of the relation of “collective will” to the army they would see at once that if the tsar had tacitly approved the decisions of the Duma and the Councilof State on the naval estimates this would have been tentimes less noticeable to the army than Duma debates on the question of the prerogatives of the Duma , the question of the possible “ disorganisation of the army ”. 
 But it is character-istic of our counter-revolution that it gives itself away by its fears. 
 It is no more able to consider the question of the disorganisation of the army calmly than a murderer can listen calmly to talk about the participants and circum-stances of the murder he has committed. 
 The principles involved in the comparatively small and unimportant question of the naval estimates have beenbrought out by the Black Hundreds, by Nicholas II, and byMr. 
 Stolypin, so that it only remains for us to express oursatisfaction at their clumsiness due to their fears. 
 It onlyremains for us to take Comrade Pokrovsky’s excellent state-ments about the ending of “constitutional illusions”, about the need for the people themselves to draw the conclusionsfrom the undoubtedly “black reality” and compare themwith the admirably outspoken views in Moskovskiye Vedo-mosti concerning the “declaration of March 31”. 
 In the leading article of April 3 this newspaper declares: “The matter itself, as we already explained last year, is very sim-ple. 
 His Imperial Majesty did not confirm the estimates when passedthrough legislative channels, but established them by an act of sup-reme government for which even the existing law (apart from thenatural rights of the supreme authority) grants clear powers”.... 
 So. 
 So. 
 The “natural right” of the Russian monarchy to violate the fundamental laws. 
 That is the whole point. 
 “... The Duma opposition, however, had the impertinence to make this the occasion for an interpellation which questioned the actions of the supreme authority. 
” Exactly! Moskovskiye Vedomosti makes properly explicit what the Social-Democrats in the Duma could not. 
 Thepoint of the interpellation was to pronounce the actions ofthe tsar (and of Stolypin, the minister under him) a viola-tion of the fundamental laws. 
 Further, Moskovskiye Vedomosti attacks the “revolutiona-ry opposition” and the “revolutionary press” for their theoryof conquest of popular rights by means of a revolution and denies that there could be any “promises” whatsoever inthe “declaration of March 31”. 
 “The very talk about ‘promises’ is ludicrous and shows to what extent the revolution has befogged the minds even of persons notofficially belonging to the revolutionary camp. 
 What ‘promises’ canthe cabinet give?” “... The cabinet will carry out its lawful duties,true to the readership of the supreme authority.... 
 And we can only hope that this declaration will be understood more profoundly by the Duma in all its implications and thereby help to cure the honourablemembers from the chronic infection of revolutionary ‘directives’. 
” Precisely so: more profoundly to understand the declara-tion (and attitude) of the government and through it to“cure” the constitutional illusions —it is in this that lies the political lesson of the Social-Democratic interpellation on the violation of Article 96. 
 Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 13, Published according to April 26 (May 9), 1910 the text in Sotsial-Demokrat PARTY UNITY ABROAD A base of operations abroad is necessary and inevitable for a party which is working in conditions like ours. 
 Every-one who reflects on the position of the Party will admit thisis so. 
 However pessimistic the comrades in Russia feel about “abroad” it will be far from disserviceable to them to know what is going on here, particularly after the recent plenarysession. 
 Has unity been achieved abroad? No. 
 And for a very simple reason: one of the sides—the Golosists—showsabsolutely no desire to respond to the unanimous appeal of the Central Committee to put an end to the split abroad. 
 The factional Golos , contrary to the unanimous decision of the Central Committee, did not close down, although at theplenum one of its editors, Comrade Martov, officially declared(see the minutes of the plenum) that he would try to getit stopped temporarily at any rate. 
 * Before the Central Committee Bureau Abroad had time to take any steps towards unity the four editors of Golos (two of them members of the editorial board of the Central Organ!!) issueda manifesto with a thinly veiled injunction not to aim atunity. 
 The foreign C. 
B. 
G. 
A. 
 (“Central Bureau of GroupsAbroad”, which was elected in Basle one-and-a-half years ago at a factional Congress of Mensheviks) did the same. 
 *Here is the text of the statement: “Comrade Martov declares that although he cannot speak offici-ally for the editorial board of Golos Sotsial-Demokrata , he can say for himself personally that there will be no obstacles in the editorial board of “ Golos Sotsial-Demokrata ” to stopping “ Golos ” temporarily after the next issue (for a couple of months or even longer) as an ex-periment pending the results of the work of the new editorial boardof the Central Organ. 
” This C. 
B. 
G. 
A. 
 now does not even represent all the Menshe-viks but only their Golosist section. 
 But with the support of Golos it is strong enough to disrupt unity. 
 All the Central Committee Bureau Abroad can do now is to appealto the groups themselves, the pro-Party elements and aboveall the workers. 
 But—for reasons which are discussed be-low—this is not being done, or is being done very unsatis-factorily. 
 As before, the Central Committee abroad can count so far only on the support of the Bolshevik groups. 
 Lately, however, they are being reinforced by the pro-PartyMensheviks, the enemies of liquidationism (for the mostpart they are on the side of Comrade Plekhanov’s Dnevnik ). 
 The ideological differentiation of the Mensheviks abroad has, of course, considerable significance as a symptom, as a reflection of what is taking place—perhaps less obviously— in Russia as well. 
 The pro-Party Mensheviks have alreadypassed a number of resolutions in this connection. 
 Here area few excerpts from them. 
 The anti-Golosist Mensheviks inParis (there are about 20 of them) write: “...in No. 
 19-20of this organ ( Golos ) a new course is undoubtedly indicated, incidentally, in Comrade Dan’s article ‘The Fight for Legality’, which seeks to replace Social-Democratic slogansby a specific slogan, ambiguous to say the least, which isthe very twin of the slogan of the ‘Economic’ period: the fight for rights ”, ... “liquidationism, which the editorial board of Golos has repudiated until now, has found frank expression in the last issue of this newspaper”. 
 The pro-Party Mensheviks in Geneva (14 persons) find that “thecessation of the factional Golos Sotsial-Demokrata is an essential condition for strengthening Party unity”. 
 The group of pro-Party Mensheviks in Nice is of the opin-ion (unanimously) that “in No. 
 19-20 of this organ ( Golos ), liquidationism has already been frankly expressed in a number of articles. 
 The group finds that such a policy on thepart of Golos Sotsial-Demokrata is harmful and refuses to give it any support whatsoever. 
 The group is indignant atthe behaviour of Mikhail, Roman and Yuri, who have provedunworthy of the confidence of the last Party Congress and have carried liquidationist tendencies to their ghastly conclusion as regards practical manifestations”. 
 The groupof pro-Party Mensheviks in San Remo “unanimously refuse any support whatsoever for the said publication ( Golos ) because they do not subscribe to its liquidationist tendencies. 
 The group cannot restrain their indignation evoked by the conduct of Mikhail, Roman and Yuri”. 
 The pro-PartyMensheviks in Liége write in their resolution: “The letterfrom Stiva Novich and F. 
 Dan’s article ‘The Fight for Le-gality’ (in Golos No. 
 19-20) make quite definite the anti-Party trend of this organ.... 
 Golos Sotsial-Demokrata is a centre around which the liquidationist tendencies are group-ing. 
” The same point of view is taken by a considerablesection of the Menshevik group in Zurich and the majorityof the group in Berne. 
 There are supporters of the pro-PartyMensheviks in other cities too. 
 Only by uniting these Menshevik pro-Party elements with the Bolsheviks and the non-factional Party members who are opposed to liquidationism could the CentralCommittee Bureau Abroad achieve results and help thework in Russia. 
 And this is exactly what the Bolsheviksabroad are exhorting all comrades to do (see the resolution ofthe second Paris group). 
 91 A struggle against the Golosists who are disrupting unity and against the otzovist-ultimatum-ists who walked out of the editorial board of Diskussionny Listok and the general Party committee of the school and who are also undermining Party unity is inevitable if allthe real pro-Party elements are to be brought solidly togeth-er. 
 So far this has been left to the private initiative of the pro-Party elements, for the C. 
C. 
 Bureau Abroad has so far proved incapable of adopting the proper position. 
 Accordingto the new Rules, three of the five members of the Bureau Ab-road are appointed by “nationals”; thus it is not the Central Committee of the Party that determines the personnel of themajority of the C. 
C. 
 Bureau Abroad, and this produces some unexpected and surprising results. 
 For instance, at a recent session of the C. 
C. 
 Bureau Abroad a majority was formedagainst the line of the Central Committee. 
 A new majority consisting of one Golosist and two alleged, “non-factional”nationals refused to endorse the “modus” of uniting the groups(in the spirit of the decisions of the plenum, i. 
e. 
, with the de-mand that all funds be turned over to the Central Committee and not to the factional organs) which was worked out directly after the plenum of the Central Committee. 
 It turned down the proposal (of a Bolshevik and a Polish Social-Democrat) in a letter to each of the groups that the slogan should be put forward: all funds to be given to the general Party bodies and not to the factional newspapers (i. 
e. 
, Golos Sotsial-Demokrata ). 
 This decision evoked a sharp protest from two members of the C. 
C. 
 Bureau Abroad (a Bolshevikand a Polish Social-Democrat), who have sent their protestto the Central Committee. 
 Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 13, Published according to April 26 (May 9), 1910 the text in Sotsial-Demokrat ONE OF THE OBSTACLES TO PARTY UNITY While the pro-Party Mensheviks in quite a number of groups abroad are rallying together and coming out moreand more strongly against the patently liquidationist trend ofGolos Sotsial-Demokrata , the Vienna Pravda is still acting evasively. 
 In No. 
 12 we find an article entitled “To Unity— Despite All Obstacles”. 
 In this article one cannot but approve the first, even if very timid and very incomplete, attemptto carry out the resolution of the C. 
C. 
 about explaining the danger of liquidationism. 
 On the other hand, the wholeof the first part of the article is an illustration how muchfurther from defending partyism certain alleged non-fac-tional Social-Democrats are than the pro-Party Mensheviks. 
 Here Pravda tells a downright untruth, asserting that the editorial board of the Central Organ in the articleentitled “ Golos (Voice ) of the Liquidators Against the Party” * declared the “whole agreement” to have been “disrupted”. 
 Anyone who has read No. 
 12 of the Central Organ will see that we did not say anything of the sort. 
 The agreement with the Mensheviks was on condition that they recognised partyism and sincerely, consistently renounced liquidation-ism. 
 Golos Sotsial-Demokrata and a group of its followers in Russia disrupted this agreement: some, like Mikhail, Roman, Yuri, etc. 
 in Russia, by declaring openly that the agreement itself was harmful (“the resolutions of the Central Committee are harmful”; the very existence of theCentral Committee is harmful; there is no need to liquidatethe Party, it has been liquidated already), others, like Golos , by defending the utterances of the former. 
 The pro-PartyMensheviks, headed by Plekhanov, rebelled against the Golosists for their violation of the agreement. 
 If Pravda *See pp. 
 156-64 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 nevertheless wants as before, while speaking of the Menshe-viks “in general”, to have in mind only the Golosists to the exclusion of the Plekhanovites and the pro-Party Mensheviks, we shall always expose such a mode of action everywhere. 
 Pravda declares that it “cannot and does not want to enter into a discussion” of the conflicts after the plenum, firstly,because “it is not in possession of the factual data requiredfor a correct judgement”. 
 To this we reply: if Pravda abroad has not yet found suffi-cient “data” in the conduct of the Golosist liquidators itnever will. 
 In order to see the truth one must not fear to facethe truth. 
 “... Secondly—and this is the most important—because organisational conflicts require organisational and not literary intervention. 
 “ This principle is correct. 
 But the pro-Party Mensheviks “intervened”, as any Party member should, in the appraisalof an ideological and not an organisational conflict. 
 Pravda does the opposite. 
 It invokes a principle but does not followit in practice. 
 Actually, Pravda devoted the first paragraph of its article to “interfering” in an organisational conflict. 
 And that is not all. 
 In its version of the organisational conflict Pravda brings grist to the mill of the liquidators by calling our article “harsh in the extreme” but without qualifying the anti-Party behaviour of the Golosists; it tells an untruth by describing as a factional conflict the struggle between the Party ’s Central Organ and the anti-Party section of the Mensheviks (namely, the Golosists); it tells a half -truth by passing over in silence the splitting manifesto of the four editors of Golos Sotsial-Demokrata , and so forth. 
 A workers’ newspaper should either have kept off the subject of the “organisational” conflict or have given a full account of it, telling the whole truth. 
 One of the serious obstacles to Party unity lies in the attempts to screen the anti-partyism of Golos . 
 Keeping si-lent about its liquidationism or adopting a frivolous attitudeto it only aggravates the danger of liquidationism. 
 Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 13, Published according to April 26 (May 9), 1910 the text in Sotsial-Demokrat TO THE CENTRAL COMMITTEE OF THE R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Dear Comrades, We consider it our duty to inform you that it is our deep and firm conviction that the state of affairs in the editorialboard of the Central Organ has become absolutely intol-erable and that it is quite impossible for us to carry out the Party line unless the board’s composition is changed. 
 Only the first two meetings of the editorial board since the plenum afforded us any hope of the possibility of jointwork with Comrades Martov and Dan. 
 Comrade Martov’sagreement with the Central Committee’s letter on the Confer-ence (see No. 
 11 of the Central Organ. 
 Martov signed this letter) certainly testified to his endeavour loyally to carry out the decisions of the plenum. 
 A different tone was earliest ofall adopted by Comrade Dan, who declared the leading ar-ticle of the Central Organ No. 
 11 * harmful and in our presence accused Martov of opportunism like that of the Central Organ . 
 It has already become clear to us from this that the out-and-out Golosists consider Martov an “opportunist”in the sense of being ready to comply with the decisions ofthe Party, and the whole question reduces itself to whetherMartov will surrender to their attack. 
 Martov’s article “On the Right Path” has shown that the answer is yes. 
 His refusal to insert it in Diskussionny Listok (although it obviously discusses the Central Commit-tee’s decision on the composition of the Central Organ)is evidence of the outbreak of hostilities. 
 On the questionof the relation of illegal organisations and those active inthem to legal ones, Martov in this article has obviously gone over from the Central Committee (the letter on the Conference *See pp. 
 147-55 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 which Martov signed) to Dan. 
 “The theory of equal-ity” of illegalists and legalists denotes a departure from the Central Committee ’s letter, a turn on the part of Marto v, for the contradiction between this “theory” and the Central Committee’s letter is evident to anyone who does not want to close his eyes to it. 
 When, after the rejection of his article (he refused its publication as a comment, and in Diskussionny Listok as well), Martov announced in the editorial board of the Central Organ the outbreak of hostilities by him, his position and that of Dan became quite clear to us. 
 It was definitely made clear to the Party by: l) the behav-iour of Mikhail, Roman and Yuri; 2) the manifesto of the sixteen Russian Mensheviks; 3) Golo s No. 
 19-20; and 4) the splitting manifesto of the four editors of Golo s. 
 To this has now been added 5) the openly liquidationist state-ment of Potresov in Nasha Zary a”92 No. 
 2, where he writes along with Martov and others, and 6) the statement of the editors of Golos Sotsial-Demokrat a against Plekhanov (“A Necessary Supplement to Dnevni k”93), where, side by side with the same Potresov, Martynov, Martov and Axelrod treat the Central Organ of the Party and pro-Party Menshe-vism en canaille . 
 In our leaflet “ Golos (Voice ) of the Liquidators Against the Party” and in No. 
 12 of the Central Organ we gave anappraisal of the first four statements. 
 * In No. 
 13 of the Cen-tral Organ, which will be out next week, Plekhanov giveshis appraisal of Potresov’s article in Nasha Zarya . 
 As shown already by the four resolutions of the Men-shevik groups and parts of the Menshevik groups abroad (Paris, Nice, San Remo, Geneva **), the pro-Party Mensheviks are beginning to unite and come out against Golos Sotsial-Demokrata , which has definitely gone over to the liquidators. 
 The pro-Party Mensheviks openly oppose Golos and the Russian liquidators openly admit Golos ’s turn to liquida-tionism after the plenum. 
 The result is that the situation in the Party has altered considerably from that obtaining at the time of the plenum *See pp. 
 156-64 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 **See pp. 
 185-88 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 and hence absolutely requires changes in the composition of the Central Organ. 
 The plenum wanted to give the possi-bility of returning to the Party and working loyally in the Party to all Golosists, all Social-Democrats, all legal partic-ipants in the workers’ movement desiring to come over to the pro-Party position. 
 It was counting not on a split betweenthe two sections of Menshevism but on a general passage ofboth sections to the pro-Party position. 
 The blame rests with the Russian centre of the legalists (Potresov, Mikhail and Co. 
) and with Golos Sotsial-Demo-krata that things turned out otherwise. 
 Their split with the pro-Party Mensheviks became a fact. 
 Around the Central Organ and Diskussionny Listok we united a number of pro-Party Mensheviks (Plekhanov, Rappoport, Avdeyev), with whom we were fully able to arrange Party work devoid of any kind of factionalism, despite all our differences ofopinion. 
 Steps are being taken abroad to unite the Bolshe-vik groups and the pro-Party Mensheviks. 
 The Golos groups, on the other hand, have definitely taken a course against union. 
 Consequently, it is not for accidental or personal reasons that an absolutely impossible situation has been createdwithin the editorial board of the Central Organ. 
 If a stateof continual squabbling, from which there is no way out,prevails on our editorial board, if we three are definitelypowerless to overcome the hostile attitude of the two other editors, if all work in the Central Organ is held up, it is the inevitable result of the false position . 
 In accordance with the plenum decisions, rapprochement with the pro-Party Mensheviks is essential, but in our Central Organ the anti-Party Mensheviks wage a relentless struggle against the pro-Party Mensheviks who are outside the Central Organ and helping it! We are fully confident that the comrades in the Central Committee will realise the absolute impossibility of thissituation and will not demand that we exemplify it byrecounting the innumerable conflicts and rows in the edi-torial board. 
 These conflicts, accusations and frictions, the total disruption of the work, are simply the result of the changed political situation, which is inevitably bound to lead to the disintegration of the Central Organ if the step dictated by the whole spirit of the plenum decisions is not taken, viz. 
, the replacement of the anti-Party, liquidation-ist, Golosist Mensheviks by pro-Party Mensheviks, whose entry into the Party and its leading bodies we are obliged to assist. 
 In the Central Committee Bureau Abroad the pro-Party Mensheviks have already announced their desire tohave their representatives, i. 
e. 
, supporters of pro-Party Menshevism, on the editorial board of the Central Organ (and in the Central Committee Bureau Abroad). 
 We for our part declare that we are definitely not in a position to conduct the Party Organ in collaboration with the Golosists, for it is impossible to carry out work exclu-sively by means of a mechanical majority over people with whom we have no common Party ground. 
 We hope that the Central Committee will take the nec-essary organisational steps to change the composition of theeditorial board of the Central Organ and to set up a pro-Party collegium that is capable of functioning. 
 Written on or about May 2, 1910 Mailed from Paris to Russia First published in 1933 Published according to in Lenin Miscellany XXV the manuscript Signed: Members of the Editorial Board of the Central Organ Lenin and others NOTES OF A PUBLICIST Published March 6 (19) Published according to and May 25 (June 7) 1910 the text in in Diskussionny Listok Diskussionny Listok Nos. 
 1 and 2 Signed: N. 
 Lenin NOTES OF A PUBLICIST Published March 6 (19) Published according to and May 25 (June 7) 1910 the text in in Diskussionny Listok Diskussionny Listok Nos. 
 1 and 2 Signed: N. 
 Lenin I THE “PLATFORM” OF THE ADHERENTS AND DEFENDERS OF OTZOVISM A pamphlet published by the Vperyod group recently appeared in Paris under the title The Present Situation and the Tasks of the Party. 
 A Platform Drawn Up by aGroup of Bolsheviks . 
 This is the very same group of Bolshe-viks about whom, in the spring of last year, the enlargededitorial board of Proletary declared that they had formed a new faction. 
 Now this group, “consisting of fifteen Party members—seven workers and eight intellectuals” (as the group itself states), comes forward with an attempt to givea complete, systematic and positive exposition of its ownspecial “platform”. 
 The text of this platform bears cleartraces of careful, painstaking collective work in an effortto smooth out all rough spots, to remove sharp edges and to stress not so much those points on which the group is at variance with the Party as those on which it is in agree-ment with the Party. 
 All the more valuable to us, therefore,is the new platform, as the official presentation of the viewsof the trend concerned. 
 This group of Bolsheviks first gives its own “interpretation of the present historical situation of our country” (§ I, pp. 
 3-13), then it gives its own “interpretation of Bolshevism”(§ II, pp. 
 13-17). 
 And it interprets both the one and theother badly. 
 Take the first question. 
 The view held by the Bolsheviks (and by the Party) is set out in the resolution of the Decem-ber Conference of 1908 on the present situation. 
 Do the au-thors of the new platform share the views expressed in thatresolution? If they do, why do they not say so plainly? If they do, why was it necessary to draw up a separate platform, to give an exposition of their own particular “interpretation” of the situation? If they do not share these views, then again why not state clearly in what particularrespect the new group is opposed to the views held by theParty? But the whole point is that the new group itself is rather hazy about the significance of that resolution. 
 Unconsciously (or subconsciously) the new group inclines towards the views of the otzovists, which are incompatible with that resolution. 
 In its pamphlet the new group does not give apopular exposition of all the propositions contained inthat resolution, but only of a part of them, without under-standing the other part (perhaps even without noticing its importance). 
 The principal factors which gave rise to the Revolution of 1905 continue to operate—states the resolu-tion. 
 A new revolutionary crisis is maturing (clause “f”). 
The goal of the struggle is still the overthrow of tsarismand the achievement of a republic; the proletariat mustplay the “leading” role in the struggle and must strive for the “conquest of political power” (clauses “e” and “1”). 
 The state of the world market and of world politics makes the“international situation more and more revolutionary”(clause “g”). 
 These are the propositions that are explained in a popular manner in the new platform and to that ex-tent it goes hand in hand with the Bolsheviks and with the Party, to that extent it expresses correct views and performs useful work. 
 But the trouble is that we have to lay stress on this “ to that extent ”. 
 The trouble is that the new group does not understand the other propositions of this resolution, does not grasp their connection with the rest, and in particular it does not perceive their connection with that irreconcilable attitude to otzovism which is characteristic of the Bol-sheviks and which is not characteristic of this group. 
 Revolution has again become inevitable. 
 The revolution must again strive for and achieve the overthrow of tsarism—say the authors of the new platform. 
 Quite right. 
 But that is not all that a present-day revolutionary Social-Demo-crat must know and bear in mind. 
 He must be able to com-prehend that this revolution is coming to us in a new way and that we must march towards it in a new way (in a differ-ent way from the previous one; not merely in the way we did before; not merely with those weapons and means of struggle we used before); that the autocracy itself is notthe same as it was before. 
 It is just this point that the advo-cates of otzovism refuse to see. 
 They persistently want toremain one-sided and thereby , in spite of themselves, con-sciously or unconsciously, they are rendering a service to the opportunists and liquidators; by their one-sidedness in one direction they are supporting one-sidedness in anotherdirection. 
 The autocracy has entered a new historical period. 
 It is taking a step towards its transformation into a bourgeoismonarchy. 
 The Third Duma represents an alliance with definite classes. 
 The Third Duma is not an accidental, but a necessary institution in the system of this new monarchy. 
Nor is the autocracy’s new agrarian policy accidental;it is a necessary link in the policy of the new tsarism,necessary to the bourgeoisie and necessary because of its bour-geois character. 
 We are confronted by a specific historical period with specific conditions for the birth of a new revo-lution. 
 It will be impossible to master these specific con-ditions and prepare ourselves for this new revolution if weoperate only in the old way, if we do not learn to utilisethe Duma tribune itself, etc. 
 It is this last point that the otzovists cannot grasp. 
 And the defenders of otzovism, who declare it to be a “legitimate shade of opinion” (p. 
 28 of the pamphlet under review),cannot even now grasp the connection this point has with the whole cycle of ideas , with the recognition of the specific character of the present moment and with the effort totake it into account in their tactics! They repeat that we are passing through an “inter-revolutionary period” (p. 
 29), that the present situation is “transitional between two wavesof the democratic revolution” (p. 
 32); but they cannot un-derstand what it is that is specific in this “ transition ”. 
 How-ever, unless we do understand this transition it will be impossible to survive it with advantage to the revolution, it will be impossible to prepare for the revolution, to go over to the second wave! For the preparation for the new revolution cannot be restricted to repeating that it is inevitable; the preparation must consist in devising forms of propaganda, agitation and organisation that will take account of the specific character of this transitional situation . 
 Here is an instance of how people talk about the transi-tional situation without understanding what this transition actually is. 
 “That there is no real constitution in Russiaand that the Duma is only a phantom of it, devoid of power and importance, is not only well known to the mass of the population by dint of experience, it is now becoming obvi-ous to the whole world” (p. 
 11). 
 Compare this with theestimate of the Third Duma given in the December reso-lution: “The alliance of tsarism with the Black-Hundredlandlords and the top commercial and industrial bourgeoisie has been openly recognised and solidified by the coup d’état of June 3 and the establishment of the Third Duma. 
” Is it really not “obvious to the whole world” that the authors of the platform did not, after all, understand theresolution, in spite of the fact that for a whole year it waschewed over and over again in the Party press in a thou-sand ways? And they failed to understand it, of course, not because they are dull-witted, but because of the influ-ence over them of otzovism and the otzovist ideology. 
 Our Third Duma is a Black-Hundred-Octobrist Duma. 
 To assert that the Octobrists and the Black Hundreds haveno “power and importance” in Russia (as the authors of the platform do in effect) is absurd. 
 The absence of a “real con-stitution” and the fact that the autocracy retains full powerdo not in the least preclude the peculiar historical situationin which this government is forced to organise a counter-revolutionary alliance of certain classes on a national scale,in openly functioning institutions of national importance, and in which certain classes are organising themselves from below into counter-revolutionary blocs which are stretchingout their hand to tsarism. 
 If the “alliance” between tsarismand these classes (an alliance which strives to preservepower and revenues for the feudal landlords) is a specificform of class rule and of the rule of the tsar and his gang during the present transitional period, a form created by the bourgeois evolution of the country amidst the conditionsof the defeat of the “first wave of the revolution”—then there can be no question of utilising the transition period without utilising the Duma tribune. 
 The peculiar tactics of using the very tribune from which the counter-revolution-aries speak for the purpose of preparing the revolution thus becomes a duty dictated by the specific character of the entire historical situation. 
 If, however, the Duma is merely the “phantom” of a constitution “devoid of powerand importance”, then there is really no new stage in the development of bourgeois Russia, of the bourgeois monarchy, or in the development of the form of rule of the upperclasses, etc. 
; and in that case the otzovists are, of course,correct in principle ! Do not imagine that the passage we quoted from the platform was a slip of the pen. 
 In a special chapter, “On the State Duma” (pp. 
 25-28), we read at the very begin-ning: “All the State Dumas have hitherto been institutionsdevoid of real power and authority, and did not expressthe real relation of social forces in the country. 
 The govern-ment convened them under the pressure of the popularmovement in order, on the one hand, to turn the indignation of the masses from the path of direct struggle into peace-ful electoral channels, and, on the other hand, in order tocome to terms in these Dumas with those social groupswhich could support the government in its struggle againstthe revolution. 
” This is a sheer tangle of confused ideas orfragments of ideas. 
 If the government convened the Dumas in order to come to terms with the counter-revolutionary classes, it follows at once that the First and Second Dumashad no “power and authority” (to help the revolution), where-as the Third Duma possessed and possesses power and authority (to help the counter-revolution). 
 The revolution-aries could have (and in certain circumstances should have) refrained from participating in an institution which was powerless to help the revolution. 
 This is indisputable. 
By bracketing together such institutions of the revolution-ary period with the Duma of the “inter-revolutionary pe-riod”, which has power to help the counter-revolution, theauthors of the platform commit a monstrous error. 
 They apply correct Bolshevik arguments to those very cases to which they are really inapplicable! This is indeed to makea caricature of Bolshevism. 
 In summing up their “interpretation” of Bolshevism, the authors of the platform have even put in a special clause “d” (p. 
 16), in which this “caricature” of revolutionariness has found, we might say, its classical expression. 
 Here isthis clause in full: “d) Prior to the consummation of the revolution, no semi-legal or legal methods and means of struggle of the working class, includingalso participation in the State Duma, can have any independent ordecisive importance, but only serve as a means of gathering and pre-paring the forces for the direct, revolutionary, open mass struggle. 
” This implies that after the “consummation of the revolu-tion” legal methods of struggle, “including” parliamen-tarism, can have independent and decisive importance! That is wrong. 
 They cannot even then. 
 The platform of the Vperyod group contains nonsense. 
 Furthermore, it follows that “prior to the consummation of the revolution” all means of struggle except the legal and semi-legal, i. 
e. 
, all illegal means of struggle, can have independent and decisive importance! That is wrong. 
 There are certain illegal methods of strug-gle, which, even after the “consummation of the revolution” (for example, illegal propaganda circles) and “prior to theconsummation of the revolution” (for example, the seizureof money from the enemy, or the forcible liberation of ar-rested persons, or killing spies, etc. 
), “ cannot have any independent or decisive importance, but only serve”, etc. 
, as in the text of the “ platform ”. 
 To proceed. 
 What is the “consummation of the revolution” referred to here? Obviously, not the consummation of the socialist revolution, for then there will be no struggle ofthe working class, since there will be no classes at all. 
 Obvi-ously then, the reference is to the consummation of the bourgeois-democratic revolution. 
 Now let us see what the authors of the platform “meant” by the consummation of the bourgeois-democratic revolution. 
 Generally speaking, this term may be taken to mean two things. 
 If used in its broad sense, it means the fulfilmentof the objective historical tasks of the bourgeois revolution, its “consummation”, i. 
e. 
, the removal of the very soil ca-pable of engendering a bourgeois revolution, the consumma-tion of the entire cycle of bourgeois revolutions. 
 In this sense, for example, the bourgeois-democratic revolution in France was consummated only in 1871 (though begun in 1789). 
 But if the term is used in its narrow sense, it means a particular revolution, one of the bourgeois revolutions,one of the “waves”, if you like, that batters the old regimebut does not destroy it altogether, does not remove the basisthat may engender subsequent bourgeois revolutions. 
 Inthis sense the revolution of 1848 in Germany was “consummat-ed” in 1850 or the fifties, but it did not in the least thereby remove the soil for the revolutionary revival in the sixties. 
The revolution of 1789 in France was “consummated”, letus say, in 1794, without, however, thereby removing thesoil for the revolutions of 1830 and 1848. 
 No matter how the words of the platform, “prior to the consummation of the revolution”, are interpreted, whether in the wider or narrower sense, there is no meaning in themin either case. 
 Needless to say, it would be altogether absurdto attempt now to determine the tactics of revolutionarySocial-Democracy up to the consummation of the whole period of possible bourgeois revolutions in Russia. 
 As for the revolutionary “wave” of 1905-07, i. 
e. 
, the first bour-geois revolution in Russia, the platform itself is forced toadmit that “it [the autocracy] has beaten back the firstwave of the revolution” (p. 
 12), that we are passing throughan “inter-revolutionary” period, a period “between twowaves of a democratic revolution”. 
 Now what is the source of this endless and hopeless mud-dle in the “platform”? It lies in the fact that the platformdissociates itself from otzovism diplomatically withoutabandoning the ideology of otzovism, without correctingits fundamental error and without even noticing it. 
 Itlies in the fact that the Vperyodists regard otzovism as a “legitimate shade of opinion”, i. 
e. 
, they regard the otzo-vist shade of a caricature of Bolshevism as a law, a model, an unexcelled model. 
 Anyone who has set foot on this slop-ing path is bound to slide into a bog of hopeless confusion;he repeats phrases and slogans without being capable of pondering over the conditions of their application and the limits of their importance. 
 Why, for example, did the Bolsheviks in 1906-07 so often oppose the opportunists with the slogan, “the revolution is not over”? Because the objective conditions were such that the consummation of the revolution in the narrow sense of the word was out of the question. 
 Take, for instance, the period of the Second Duma—the most revolutionaryparliament in the world and probably the most reactionary,autocratic government. 
 There was no direct way out ofthis except by a coup d’état from above, or by an uprisingfrom below. 
 And however much the sapient pedants may now shake their heads, no one could say beforehand whether the government’s coup d’état would be successful, whetherit would pass off smoothly, or whether Nicholas II wouldbreak his neck in the attempt. 
 The slogan, “the revolutionis not over”, had a most vital, immediately important,practically palpable significance, for it alone correctly expressed things as they really were and whither they were tending by virtue of the objective logic of events. 
 Andnow that the otzovists themselves recognise the presentsituation as “inter-revolutionary”, is not the attempt torepresent otzovism as a “legitimate shade of the revolu-tionary wing”, “prior to the consummation of the revolu-tion”, a hopeless muddle? In order to extricate oneself from this vicious circle of contradictions, one must not use diplomacy towards otzo-vism, but must cut the ideological ground from under it;one must adopt the point of view of the December resolutionand think out all its implications. 
 The present inter-revo-lutionary period cannot be explained away as a mere ac-cident. 
 There is no doubt now that we are confronted by aspecial stage in the development of the autocracy, in thedevelopment of the bourgeois monarchy, bourgeois Black-Hundred parliamentarism and the bourgeois policy of tsar-ism in the countryside, and that the counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie is supporting all this. 
 The present period is undoubtedly a tran sitional period “between two waves of the revolution”, but in order to prepare for the second revolu-tion we must master the peculiarities of this transition, wemust be able to adapt our tactics and organisation to thisdifficult, hard, sombre transition forced on us by the whole trend of the “campaign”. 
 Using the Duma tribune, as well as all other legal opportunities, is one of the humble meth-ods of struggle which do not result in anything “spectacu-lar”. 
 But the transitional period is transitional precisely be-cause its specific task is to prepare and rally the forces , and not to bring them into immediate and decisive action. 
 To know how to organise this work, which is devoid of outwardglamour, to know how to utilise for this purpose all thosesemi-legal institutions which are peculiar to the period ofthe Black-Hundred-Octobrist Duma, to know how touphold even on this basis all the traditions of revolutionary Social-Democracy, all the slogans of its recent heroic past, the entire spirit of its work, its irreconcilability with op-portunism and reformism—such is the task of the Party , such is the task of the moment. 
 We have examined the new platform’s first deviation from the tactics set out in the resolution of the December Conference of 1908. 
 We have seen that it is a deviation towards otzovist ideas, ideas that have nothing in commoneither with the Marxist analysis of the present situationor with the fundamental premises of revolutionary Social-Democratic tactics in general. 
 Now we must examine thesecond original feature of the new platform. 
 This feature is the task, proclaimed by the new group, of “creating” and “disseminating among the masses a new,proletarian” culture: “of developing proletarian science,of strengthening genuine comradely relations among theproletarians, of developing a proletarian philosophy, ofdirecting art towards proletarian aspirations and experi-ence” (p. 
 17). 
 Here you have an example of that naïve diplomacy which in the new platform serves to cover up the essence of thematter! Is it not really naïve to insert between “science” and “philosophy” the “strengthening of genuine comradelyrelations”? The new group introduces into the platform its supposed grievances , its accusations against the other groups (namely, against the orthodox Bolsheviks in the firstplace) that they have broken “genuine comradely relations”. 
 Such is precisely the real content of this amusing clause. 
 Here “proletarian science” also looks “sad and out of place”. 
 First of all, we know now of only one proletarian science—Marxism. 
 For some reason the authors of the plat-form systematically avoid this, the only precise term, andeverywhere use the words “scientific socialism” (pp. 
 13, 15, 16, 20, 21). 
 It is common knowledge that even outright opponents of Marxism lay claim to this latter term in Rus-sia. 
 In the second place, if the task of developing “proletarian science” is introduced in the platform, it is necessary tostate plainly just what ideological and theoretical struggleof our day is meant here and whose side the authors of theplatform take. 
 Silence on this point is a naïve subterfuge,for the essence of the matter is obvious to everyone who is acquainted with the Social-Democratic literature of 1908-09. 
 In our day a struggle between the Marxists and the Mach-ists has come to the fore and is being waged in the domainof science, philosophy and art. 
 It is ridiculous, to say theleast, to shut one’s eyes to this commonly known fact. 
“Platforms” should be written not in order to gloss over differences but in order to explain them. 
 Our authors clumsily give themselves away by the above-quoted passage of the platform. 
 Everyone knows thatit is Machism that is in fact implied by the term “proletarian philosophy”—and every intelligent Social-Democrat willat once decipher the “new” pseudonym . 
 There was no point in inventing this pseudonym, no point in trying to hide behind it. 
 In actual fact, the most influential literary nu-cleus of the new group is Machist, and it regards non-Machistphilosophy as non-“proletarian”. 
 Had they wanted to speak of it in the platform, they should have said: the new group unites those who will fight against non-”proletarian”, i. 
e. 
, non-Machist, theories in philosophy and art. 
 That would have been a straight-forward, truthful and open declaration of a well-knownideological trend, an open challenge to the other tendencies. 
 When an ideological struggle is held to be of great importancefor the Party, one does not hide but comes out with an open declaration of war. 
 And we shall call upon everyone to give a definite and clear answer to the platform’s veiled declaration of a phil-osophical struggle against Marxism. 
 In reality , all the phraseology about “proletarian culture” is just a screen forthe struggle against Marxism . 
 The “original” feature of the new group is that it has introduced philosophy into the Party platform without stating frankly what tendency in philosophy it advocates. 
 Incidentally, it would be incorrect to say that the real content of the words of the platform quoted above is wholly negative. 
 They have a certain positive content. 
 This positive content can be expressed in one name: MaximGorky. 
 Indeed, there is no need to conceal the fact already pro-claimed by the bourgeois press (which has distorted andtwisted it), namely, that Gorky is one of the adherents of the new group. 
 And Gorky is undoubtedly the greatest rep-resentative of proletarian art, one who has done a great deal for this art and is capable of doing still more in thefuture. 
 Any faction of the Social-Democratic Party wouldbe justly proud of having Gorky as a member, but to intro-duce “proletarian art” into the platform on this ground means giving this platform a certificate of poverty, means reducing one’s group to a literary circle , which exposes itself as being precisely “authoritarian”.... 
 The authorsof the platform say a great deal against recognising author-ities, without explaining directly what it is all about. 
The fact is that they regard the Bolsheviks’ defence of ma-terialism in philosophy and the Bolsheviks’ struggle against otzovism as the enterprise of individual “authorities” (agentle hint at a serious matter) whom the enemies of Mach-ism, they say, “trust blindly”. 
 Such sallies, of course, arequite childish. 
 But it is precisely the Vperyodists whomistreat authorities. 
 Gorky is an authority in the domain of proletarian art—that is beyond dispute. 
 The attempt to “utilise” (in the ideological sense, of course) this authority to bolster up Machism and otzovism is an example of how one should not treat authorities . 
 In the field of proletarian art Gorky is an enormous asset in spite of his sympathies for Machism and otzovism. 
 But a platform which sets up within the Party a separate group of otzovists and Machists and advances the developmentof alleged “proletarian” art as a special task of the groupis a minus in the development of the Social-Democratic proletarian movement; because this platform wants toconsolidate and utilise the very features in the activities of an outstanding authority which represent his weak side and are a negative quantity in the enormous service he rendersthe proletariat. 
 II THE “UNITY CRISIS” IN OUR PARTY On reading this title, some readers perhaps will hardly believe their eyes. 
 “Well, that’s the limit! What a lot ofcrises we have had in our own Party, and now all of a suddena new crisis, a unity crisis!” The expression which sounds so queer I have borrowed from Liebknecht. 
 He used it in 1875 in a letter (dated April 21) to Engels, giving an account of the union of the Lassal-leans and the Eisenachers. 
 Marx and Engels thought atthat time that no good would come of this union. 
 94 Liebknecht brushed aside their fears and asserted that the GermanSocial-Democratic Party, which had successfully survived all sorts of crises, would also survive the “unity crisis” (see Gustav Mayer, Johann Baptist von Schweitzer und die Sozialdemokratie , Jena, 1909, S. 
 424). 
 There can be no doubt whatever that our Party too, the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party, will successfullysurvive its unity crisis. 
 That it is now passing through such a crisis is obvious to everyone who is acquainted with the decisions of the plenary meeting of the Central Committeeand with the events that followed. 
 If one were to judgeby the resolutions of the plenum, the union might seem tobe most complete and fully accomplished. 
 But if one wereto judge by what is taking place now in the beginning of May 1910, if one were to judge by the determined struggle of the Central Organ against Golos Sotsial-Demokrata , which is published by the liquidators, by the controversy thathas flared up between Plekhanov and the other pro-PartyMensheviks, on the one hand, and the Golosists on theother, or by the extremely abusive attacks of the “ Vperyod ” group on the Central Organ (see the recent leaflet of the group, entitled “To the Bolshevik Comrades”), then all unity might easily appear to an outsider to be a mere phantom. 
 The avowed enemies of the Party are rejoicing. 
 The Vpe-ryodists, the adherents and screeners of otzovism, areindulging in unbridled abuse. 
 Still more bitter is the abuse levelled by the leaders of the liquidators, Axelrod, Marty-nov, Martov, Potresov and others, in their “NecessarySupplement to Plekhanov’s Dnevnik ”. 
 The “conciliators” are at a loss, complaining and uttering helpless phrases (see the resolution passed on April 17, 1910, by the Vienna Social-Democratic Party Club, which shares Trotsky’s viewpoint). 
 But the most important and fundamental question as to the reasons why our Party union is developing in this and in no other way, why the (seemingly) complete unity at theplenum is now replaced by (seemingly) complete disunity,and also the question of what the trend of the further devel-opment of the Party should be in view of the “relationship of forces” inside and outside our Party—these fundamentalquestions are not answered either by the liquidators ( Golos group) or by the otzovists ( Vperyod group) or the con-ciliators (Trotsky and the “Viennese”). 
 Abuse and phrase-mongering are no answer. 
 1. 
 TWO VIEWS ON UNITY With touching unanimity the liquidators and the otzo-vists are abusing the Bolsheviks up hill and down dale (theliquidators attack Plekhanov as well). 
 The Bolsheviks are to blame, the Bolshevik Centre is to blame, the “’indi-vidualistic’ habits of Lenin and Plekhanov” (p. 
 15 of the“Necessary Supplement”) are to blame, as well as the “irre-sponsible group” of “former members of the Bolshevik Cen-tre” (see the leaflet of the Vperyod group). 
 In this respect the liquidators and the otzovists are entirely at one; their bloc against orthodox Bolshevism (a bloc which more than once characterised the struggle at the plenum, which I deal with separately below) is an indisputable fact; therepresentatives of two extreme tendencies, each of themequally expressing subordination to bourgeois ideas, eachof them equally anti-Party, are entirely at one in their internal Party policy, in their struggle against the Bolshe-viks and in proclaiming the Central Organ to be “Bolshe-vik”. 
 But the strongest abuse from Axelrod and Alexinskyonly serves to screen their complete failure to understandthe meaning and importance of Party unity. 
 Trotsky’s(the Viennese) resolution only differs outwardly from the “effusions” of Axelrod and Alexinsky. 
 It is drafted very “cautiously” and lays claim to “above faction” fairness. 
But what is its meaning? The “Bolshevik leaders” are to blame for everything—this is the same “philosophy of history” as that of Axelrod and Alexinsky. 
 The very first paragraph of the Vienna resolution states: ... “the representatives of all factions and trends ... by theirdecision [at the plenum] consciously and deliberatelyassumed responsibility for carrying out the adopted resolu-tions in the present conditions , in co-operation with the given persons , groups and institutions ”. 
 This refers to “conflicts in the Central Organ”. 
 Who is “responsible for carrying out the resolutions” of the plenum in the Central Organ? Obviouslythe majority of the Central Organ, i. 
e. 
, the Bolsheviksand the Poles; it is they who are responsible for carryingout the resolutions of the plenum—“in co-operation withthe given persons”, i. 
e. 
, with the Golosists and Vperyodists. 
 What does the principal resolution of the plenum say in that part of it which deals with the most “vexed” prob-lems of our Party, with questions which were most dispu-table before the plenum and which should have become leastdisputable after the plenum? It says that bourgeois influence over the proletariat mani-fests itself , on the one hand, in rejecting the illegal Social-Democratic Party and belittling its role and importance,etc. 
, and, on the other hand, in rejecting Social-Democraticwork in the Duma as well as the utilisation of legal possi-bilities, the failure to grasp the importance of both the oneand the other, etc. 
 Now what is the meaning of this resolution? Does it mean that the Golosists should have sincerely and irrevocably put an end to rejecting the illegal Partyand belittling it, etc. 
, that they should have admittedthis to be a deviation, that they should have got rid of it,and done positive work in a spirit hostile to this deviation; that the Vperyodists should have sincerely and irrevocably put an end to rejecting Duma work and legal possibilities,etc. 
, that the majority of the Central Organ should in everyway have enlisted the “co-operation” of the Golosists andVperyodists on condition that they sincerely, consistently and irrevocably renounced the “deviations” described in detail in the resolution of the plenum? Or does the resolution mean that the majority of the Central Organ is responsible for carrying out the resolutions (on the overcoming of liquidationist and otzovist devia-tions) “in co-operation with the given ” Golosists, who continue as before and even more crudely to defend liquida-tionism, and with the given Vperyodists, who continue asbefore and even more crudely to assert the legitimacy ofotzovism, ultimatumism, etc. 
? This question needs only to be put for one to see how hollow are the eloquent phrases in Trotsky’s resolution, to see how in reality they serve to defend the very position held by Axelrod and Co. 
, and Alexinsky and Co. 
 In the very first words of his resolution Trotsky expressed the full spirit of the worst kind of conciliation, “concilia-tion” in inverted commas, of a sectarian and philistine con-ciliation, which deals with the “given persons” and not the given line of policy, the given spirit, the given ideological and political content of Party work. 
 It is in this that the enormous difference lies between real partyism, which consists in purging the Party of liqui-dationism and otzovism, and the “conciliation” of Trotskyand Co. 
, which actually renders the most faithful service to the liquidators and otzovists, and is therefore an evil that is all the more dangerous to the Party the more cunningly,artfully and rhetorically it cloaks itself with professedlypro-Party, professedly anti-factional declamations. 
 In point of fact, what is it that we have been given as the task of the Party? Is it “given persons, groups and institutions” that we have been “given” and that have to be “reconciled” irre-spective of their policy, irrespective of the content of theirwork, irrespective of their attitude towards liquidationismand otzovism? Or have we been given a Party line, an ideological and political direction and content of our entire work, the task of purging this work of liquidationism and otzovism—atask that must be carried out irrespective of “persons,groups and institutions”, in spite of the opposition of “persons,institutions and groups” which disagree with that policyor do not carry it out? Two views are possible on the meaning of and conditions for the achievement of any kind of Party unity. 
 It is ex-tremely important to grasp the difference between these views, for they become entangled and confused in the course of development of our “unity crisis” and it is impossible to orientate ourselves in this crisis unless we draw a sharp line between them. 
 One view on unity may place in the forefront the “recon-ciliation” of “given persons, groups and institutions”. 
 Theidentity of their views on Party work, on the policy ofthat work, is a secondary matter. 
 One should try to keep silent about differences of opinion and not elucidate their causes, their significance, their objective conditions. 
 Thechief thing is to “reconcile” persons and groups. 
 If theydo not agree on carrying out a common policy, that policymust be interpreted in such a way as to be acceptable toall. 
 Live and let live. 
 This is philistine “conciliation”, which inevitably leads to sectarian diplomacy. 
 To “stop up” the sources of disagreement, to keep silent about them,to “adjust” “conflicts” at all costs, to neutralise the con-flicting trends—it is to this that the main attention of such“conciliation” is directed. 
 In circumstances in which theillegal Party requires a base of operations abroad, this sectarian diplomacy opens the door to “persons, groups, and institutions” that play the part of “honest brokers”in all kinds of attempts at “conciliation” and “neutralisa-tion”. 
 Here is what Martov, in Golos No. 
 19-20 relates of one such attempt at the plenum: “The Mensheviks, Pravdists and Bundists proposed a composition of the Central Organ which would ensure ‘ neutralisation ’ of the two op-posite trends in the Party ideology, and would not give a definite ma-jority to either of them, thus compelling the Party organ to work out, in relation to each essential question, that mean course which could unite the majority of Party workers. 
” As is known, the proposal of the Mensheviks was not adopted. 
 Trotsky, who put himself forward as candidatefor the Central Organ in the capacity of neutraliser , was defeated. 
 The candidature of a Bundist for the same post(the Mensheviks in their speeches proposed such a candidate) was not even put to the vote. 
 Such is the actual role of those “conciliators”, in the bad sense of the word, who wrote the Vienna resolution andwhose views are expressed in Yonov’s article in No. 
 4 of Otkliki Bunda , which I have just received. 
 The Mensheviks did not venture to propose a Central Organ with a majority of their own trend, although, as is seen from Martov’s argu-ment above quoted, they recognised the existence of two opposite trends in the Party. 
 The Mensheviks did not even think of proposing a Central Organ with a majority of their trend. 
 They did not even attempt to insist on a CentralOrgan with any definite trend at all (so obvious at the ple-nary session was the absence of any trend among the Men-sheviks, who were only required, only-expected, to make asincere and consistent renunciation of liquidationism). 
The Mensheviks tried to secure “neutralisation” of the Cent-ral Organ and they proposed as neutralisers either a Bundist or Trotsky. 
 The Bundist or Trotsky was to play the part of a matchmaker who would undertake to “unite in wedlock” “given persons, groups and institutions”, irrespective ofwhether one of the sides had renounced liquidationism ornot. 
 This standpoint of a matchmaker constitutes the entire “ideological basis” of Trotsky’s and Yonov’s conciliation. 
 When they complain and weep over the failure to achieve unity, it must be taken cum grano salis . 
 It must be taken to mean that the matchmaking failed. 
 The “failure” of thehopes of unity cherished by Trotsky and Yonov, hopes ofunity with “given persons, groups and institutions” irre-spective of their attitude to liquidationism, signifies only the failure of the matchmakers, the falsity, the hopeless-ness, the wretchedness of the matchmaking point ofview, but it does not at all signify the failure of Partyunity. 
 There is another view on this unity, namely, that long ago a number of profound objective causes, independently of the particular composition of the “given persons, groups and institutions” (submitted to the plenum and at the ple-num), began to bring about and are steadily continuingto bring about in the two old and principal Russian factionsof Social-Democracy changes that create—sometimes un-desired and even unperceived by some of the “given persons, groups and institutions”—ideological and organisa-tional bases for unity. 
 These objective conditions are rootedin the specific features of the present period of bourgeois development in Russia, the period of bourgeois counter-revolution and attempts by the autocracy to remodel itself on the pattern of a bourgeois monarchy. 
 These objective conditions simultaneously give rise to inseparably inter-connected changes in the character of the working-classmovement, in the composition, type and features of theSocial-Democratic vanguard, as well as changes in the ideo-logical and political tasks of the Social-Democratic move-ment. 
 Hence the bourgeois influence over the proletariat that gives rise to liquidationism ( =semi-liberalism, which likes to consider itself part of Social-Democracy) and otzo-vism (=semi-anarchism, which likes to consider itself part of Social-Democracy) is not an accident, nor evil de-sign, stupidity or error on the part of some individual, but the inevitable result of the action of these objective causes, and the superstructure of the entire labour movementin present-day Russia, which is inseparable from the “ba-sis”. 
 The realisation of the danger, of the non-Social-Democratic nature and harmfulness to the labour movementof both these deviations brings about a rapprochement between the elements of various factions and paves the way to Party unity “despite all obstacles”. 
 From this point of view the unification of the Party may proceed slowly, with difficulties, vacillations, waveringsand relapses, but proceed it must. 
 From this point of viewthe process of unification does not necessarily take place among “given persons, groups and institutions”, but ir-respective of given persons, subordinating them, rejectingthose of them who do not understand or who do not wantto understand the requirements of objective development,promoting and enlisting new persons not belonging to those“given”, effecting changes, reshufflings and regroupings within the old factions, trends and divisions. 
 From this point of view, unity is inseparable from its ideologicalfoundation, it can grow only on the basis of an ideologicalrapprochement, it is connected with the appearance, devel-opment and growth of such deviations as liquidationismand otzovism, not by the accidental connection between particular polemical statements of this or that literary controversy, but by an internal, indissoluble link such asthat which binds cause and effect. 
 2. 
 “THE FIGHT ON TWO FRONTS” AND THE OVERCOMING OF DEVIATIONS Such are the two fundamentally different and radically divergent views on the nature and significance of our Partyunity. 
 The question is, which of these views forms the basis of the plenum resolution? Whoever wishes to ponder over it will perceive that it is the second view that forms the basis , but in some passages the resolution clearly reveals traces of partial “amendments” in the spirit of the firstview. 
 However, these “amendments”, while worsening the resolution, in no way remove its basis , its main content, which is thoroughly imbued with the second point of view. 
 In order to demonstrate that this is so, that the “amend-ments” in the spirit of sectarian diplomacy are really in thenature of partial amendments, that they do not alter theessence of the matter and the principle underlying theresolution, I shall deal with certain points and certain pas-sages in the resolution on the state of affairs in the Party, which have already been touched upon in the Party press. 
 I shall start from the end. 
 After accusing the “leaders of the old factions” of doing everything to prevent unity being established, of behavingin the same way at the plenum too so that “every inch ofground had to be taken from them by storm”, Yonov writes: “Comrade Lenin did not want ‘to overcome the dangerous devia-tions’ by means of ‘broadening and deepening Social-Democratic activities’. 
 He strove quite energetically to put the theory of the‘fight on two fronts’ in the centre of all Party activities. 
 He did noteven think of abolishing ‘the state of reinforced protection’ within theParty” (p. 
 22, Art. 
 1). 
 This refers to §4, clause “b”, of the resolution on the situation in the Party. 
 The draft of this resolution wassubmitted to the Central Committee by myself, and theclause in question was altered by the plenum itself afterthe commission had finished its work; it was altered on the motion of Trotsky, against whom I fought without success. 
 In this clause I had, if not literally the words “fighton two fronts”, at all events, words to that effect. 
 Thewords “overcoming by means of broadening and deepening” were inserted on the proposal of Trotsky. 
 I am very glad that Comrade Yonov, by telling of my struggle against this proposal, gives me a convenient occasion for expressing my opinion on the meaning of the “amendment”. 
 Nothing at the plenum aroused more furious—and often comical—indignation than the idea of a “fight on twofronts”. 
 The very mention of this infuriated both the Vpe-ryodists and the Mensheviks. 
 This indignation can be fully explained on historical grounds, for the Bolsheviks have in fact from August 1908 to January 1910 waged a struggle on two fronts, i. 
e. 
, a struggle against the liquidators andagainst the otzovists. 
 This indignation was comical becausethose who waxed angry at the Bolsheviks were thereby onlyproving their own guilt, showing that they were still very touchy about condemnation of liquidationism and otzo-vism. 
 A guilty conscience is never at ease. 
 Trotsky’s proposal to substitute “overcoming by means of broadening and deepening” for the fight on two frontsmet with the ardent support of the Mensheviks and theVperyodists. 
 And now Yonov and Pravda and the authors of the Vienna resolution and Golos Sotsial-Demokrata are all rejoicing over that “victory”. 
 But the question arises: have they,by deleting from this clause the words about the fighton two fronts, eliminated from the resolution the recogni-tion of the need for that fight? Not at all , for since “de-viations”, their “danger”, and the necessity of “explaining” that danger, are recognised, and since it is also recognisedthat these deviations are a “manifestation of bourgeoisinfluence over the proletariat”—all this in effect means that the fight on two fronts is recognised! In one passage an“unpleasant” term (unpleasant to one or other of their friends) was altered, but the basic idea was left intact! The result was only that one part of one clause was con-fused, watered down and marred by phrase-mongering. 
 Indeed, it is nothing but phrase-mongering and a futile evasion when the paragraph in question speaks of overcom-ing by means of broadening and deepening the work. 
 There is no clear idea here at all. 
 The work must certainly at all times be broadened and deepened; the entire third para-graph of the resolution deals with this in detail before it passes on to the specific “ideological and political tasks”, which are not always or absolutely imperative but which result from the conditions of the particular period. 
 §4 is devoted only to these special tasks, and in the preamble toall of its three points it is directly stated that these ideolog-ical and political tasks “ have come to the fore in their turn”. 
 What is the result? It is nonsense, as if the task of broad-ening and deepening the work has also come to the fore in its turn! As if there could be a historical “turn” when this task was not present, as it is always! And in what way is it possible to overcome deviations by means of broadening and deepening Social-Democratic work? In any broadening and deepening of our work thequestion of how it should be broadened and deepened in-evitably rises; if liquidationism and otzovism are not acci-dents, but trends engendered by social conditions, thenthey can assert themselves in any broadening and deepeningof the work. 
 It is possible to broaden and deepen the workin the spirit of liquidationism—this is being done, forinstance, by Nasha Zarya and Vozrozhdeniye 95; it is also possible to do so in the spirit of otzovism. 
 On the other hand, the overcoming of deviations, “overcoming” in thereal sense of the word, inevitably deflects certain forces,time and energy from the immediate broadening and deep-ening of correct Social-Democratic work. 
 The same Yonov,for instance, writes on the same page of his article: “The plenum is over. 
 Its participants have gone their several ways. 
 The Central Committee in organising itswork has to overcome incredible difficulties, among whichnot the least is the conduct of the so-called [only “so-called”, Comrade Yonov, not real, genuine ones?] liquidatorswhose existence Comrade Martov so persistently denied. 
” Here you have the material—little, but characteristic material—which makes it clear how empty Trotsky’s andYonov’s phrases are. 
 The overcoming of the liquidationistactivities of Mikhail, Yuri and Co. 
 diverted the forces andtime of the Central Committee from the immediate broaden-ing and deepening of really Social-Democratic work. 
 Were it not for the conduct of Mikhail, Yuri and Co. 
, were it not for liquidationism among those whom we mistakenly con-tinue to regard as our comrades, the broadening and deepening of Social-Democratic work would have pro-ceeded more successfully, for then internal strife would not have diverted the forces of the Party. 
 Consequently, if we take the broadening and deepening of Social-Democrat-ic work to mean the immediate furthering of agitation,propaganda and economic struggle, etc. 
, in a really Social-Democratic spirit, then in regard to this work the over-coming of the deviations of Social-Democrats from Social-Democracy is a minus, a deduction, so to speak, from “pos-itive activity”, and therefore the phrase about overcomingdeviations by means of broadening, etc. 
, is meaningless. 
 In reality this phrase expresses a vague longing, a pious, innocent wish that there should be less internal strife amongSocial-Democrats! This phrase reflects nothing but this pious wish; it is a sigh of the so-called conciliators: Oh, if there were only less struggle against liquidationism andotzovism! The political importance of such “sighing” is nil, less than nil. 
 If there are people in the Party who profit by “per-sistently denying” the existence of liquidators (and otzo-vists), they will take advantage of the “sigh” of the “concil-iators” to cover up the evil. 
 That is precisely what Golos Sotsial-Demokrata does. 
 Hence the champions of such well-meaning and hollow phrases in resolutions are only so-called “conciliators”. 
 In actual fact, they are the abettors of theliquidators and otzovists, in actual fact, they do not deepen Social-Democratic work but strengthen deviations from it; they strengthen the evil by temporarily concealing itand thereby making the cure more difficult. 
 In order to illustrate for Comrade Yonov the significance of this evil, I shall remind him of a passage in an articleby Comrade Yonov in Diskussionny Listok No. 
 1. 
 Comrade Yonov aptly compared liquidationism and otzovism to a benignant ulcer which “in the process of swelling draws all the noxious elements from the entire organism, thuscontributing to recovery”. 
 That’s just it. 
 The process of swelling, which draws the “noxious elements” out of the organism, leads to recovery. 
 And that which hampers the purification of the organism from such elements is harmful to it. 
 Let Comrade Yonovponder over this helpful idea of Comrade Yonov. 
 3. 
 THE TERMS OF UNITY AND SECTARIAN DIPLOMACY To proceed. 
 The editorial article of Golos on the results of the plenum compels us to touch on the question of thedeletion of the words liquidationism and otzovism from theresolution. 
 This editorial article (in No. 
 19-20, p. 
 18)declares with an audacity unusual and unprecedented (ex-cept among our Golosists) that the term “liquidator” is as elastic as india-rubber, that it has “ engendered all kinds of misunderstandings ” (sic!!), etc. 
, and for this reason “the Central Committee decided to delete this term from theresolution”. 
 What can we call this version of the Central Committee’s decisions on the deletion of the term when the editors of Golos cannot but know that it is contrary to the truth? What calculation was in the minds of these editors, twoof whom were at the plenum and know the “history” ofthe deletion of the term? Did they really count on not beingexposed? The majority of the commission which drew up the resolution approved the retention of the term. 
 Of the twoMensheviks in the commission, one (Martov) voted forits deletion, the other (who repeatedly inclined towards Plekhanov’s position) was against . 
 At the plenum the fol-lowing statement was put forward by all the nationals (2 Poles $2 Bundists $1 Lett) and Trotsky. 
 “Recognising that it would be desirable intrinsically to apply the term ‘liquidationism’ to the trend which, as indicated in theresolution, has to be combated, yet taking into account the statement of the Menshevik comrades that they too consider it necessary to com-bat this trend but that the use of such a term in the resolution is of a factional character directed against them, the Mensheviks—we, in theinterests of eliminating all unnecessary hindrances to the unificationof the Party, propose that this term be dropped from the resolution. 
” Thus the majority of the Central Committee and, more-over, all the non-factional elements, state in writing thatthe word liquidationism is intrinsically correct and that liquidationism must be combated, yet the editorial board of Golos explains that the term was deleted as being intrin-sically unsuitable!! The majority of the Central Committee and, moreover, all the non-factional elements declare in writing that they agree to the deletion of the term, yielding to the insistence of the Mensheviks (more correctly: yielding to an ultima-tum, for the Mensheviks declared that the resolution wouldnot be unanimous otherwise) in view of their promise to“combat this trend ”. 
 And yet the editors of Golos write: the resolution gave an “unequivocal reply to the question of the so-called struggle against liquidationism” (page 18, ibid. 
)!! At the plenum they promise to reform, pleading: do not employ “a term which is directed against us”, for from now on we ourselves are going to combat this trend—yet in thefirst issue of Golos after the plenum they declare that the fight against liquidationism is only a “so-called” fight. 
 Clearly, we have here, on the part of the Golosists, a complete and definite turn to liquidationism, a turn whichbecomes comprehensible if we take a look at what tookplace after the plenum as at something integral, connectedby cause and effect—particularly the utterances of Nasha Zarya , Vozrozhdeniye and gentlemen like Mikhail, Yuri, Roman and Co. 
 Of this we shall speak further on, where it will be our task to demonstrate the utter superficiality ofthe view taken by Trotsky, who is prone to blame everythingon the “violation of moral and political obligations” (theVienna resolution), whereas we are evidently confrontednot by an individual or group “violation of commitments”, not by a moral or juridical act, but by a political act, namely: the rallying of the anti-Party legalists inRussia. 
 For the present we must dwell on another question, name-ly, the question of the causes and significance of the actionof the plenum in deleting the word liquidationism from the resolution. 
 To explain it purely as a result of the misguided zeal of conciliators like Trotsky, Yonov and Co. 
 would beincorrect. 
 There is yet another factor here. 
 The point isthat a considerable portion of the decisions of the plenumwere passed not on the usual principle of the minority sub-mitting to the majority, but on the principle of an agree-ment between the two factions, the Bolsheviks and the Mensheviks, with the mediation of the nationals. 
 Thiscircumstance, apparently, is what Comrade Yonov is hint-ing at in Otkliki Bunda when he writes: “The comrades who are now clinging to formalities know perfectly well how the last plenum would have ended if it had taken a formal point of view. 
” In this sentence, Comrade Yonov speaks in hints. 
 Like Trotsky, he considers such a mode of expressing his thoughtsextremely “tactful”, non-factional and specifically pro-Party. 
 In point of fact, this is the very method employed by sectarian diplomats which does nothing but harm to the Party and the pro-Party cause. 
 Such hints are lost to some,pique the sectarian curiosity of others, and set off morescandalmongering and back-biting. 
 Hence Yonov’s hintsmust be deciphered. 
 If he is not referring here to the plenumseeking an agreement (not merely a majority decision) on a number of questions we shall ask him to express himself more explicitly and not put ideas into the heads of the gos-sips abroad. 
 If, however, Yonov is referring here to the agreement between the factions at the plenum, his criticism of “thecomrades who cling to formalities” vividly shows us yet one more trait of those alleged conciliators who, in effect, are secretly helping the liquidators. 
 A number of unanimous resolutions were adopted at the plenum by agreement between the factions. 
 Why was this necessary? Because actually the relations between the fac-tions were tantamount to a split and, as is always and inevi-tably the case in any split, the discipline of the whole body (in this instance the Party) is sacrificed to the disciplineof the part (in the present instance the faction). 
 Party conditions in Russia being what they are there was no other way to unity than through an agreement be-tween the factions (whether all the factions or the chief ones, whether parts of factions or whole ones, is another question). 
 Hence, the necessity of a compromise, i. 
e. 
, con-cessions on certain points which were not recognised by themajority but were demanded by the minority. 
 One of theseconcessions was the deletion of the word liquidationismfrom the resolution. 
 A particularly conspicuous sign of the compromise character of the resolutions of the plenum was the Bolsheviks’ conditional surrender of their factional property to third persons. 
 One section of the Party condi- /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR tionally hands over its property to third persons (from the international Social-Democratic movement) who will have to decide whether this money should be given to the Cen-tral Committee or returned to the faction. 
 The characterof this contract, which would be quite extraordinary andeven impossible in a normal, intact Party, shows clearly onwhat conditions the Bolsheviks accepted the agreement. 
 The declaration of the Bolsheviks printed in the Central Organ No. 
 11, says clearly that the main ideological and political condition was the passing of the resolution “con-demning liquidationism and otzovism and recognising thefight against these trends to be an inalienable element ofthe political line of the Party”, that one of the guaranteesfor the implementation of this line was the composition of the Central Organ, and that a continuation of their factional organ and factional policy by the Mensheviks would givethe Bolsheviks the right to “demand their money backfrom the trustee”. 
 The Central Committee accepted these conditions, making direct reference to this declaration ofthe Bolsheviks in the resolution on the factional centres. 
 The question is, are these conditions to be kept or not? Are these conditions formal or not? Comrade Yonov, speak-ing disdainfully of “formalities” has not understood themost elementary distinction between the agreement asthe basis of a contract ( =the condition that the Bolsheviks should hand over their money, a condition endorsed by the unanimous resolution of the Central Committee on factional centres) and the observance of the formal conditions of thecontract as the basis for the preservation of unity. 
 If Comrade Yonov, now, after the unanimous resolution of the Central Committee on the factional centres, contemp-tuously dismisses “formalities” he is dismissing the whole resolution of the Central Committee on the factional cen-tres. 
 Comrade Yonov’s sophistry amounts to the following:the aggregate decisions of the Central Committee were reachednot only through the passing of resolutions by a major-ity vote but also through an agreement between the war-ring trends on certain highly important questions—con-sequently, henceforth too these decisions are not formally binding and the minority has the right to demand an agree-ment! Since there is an element of compromise in the deci-sions of the Central Committee these decisions can always be violated because an agreement is a voluntary affair! Is not such sophistry a thinly veiled defence of the liqui-dators? But while Yonov’s sophistries are nothing but ludicrous the endeavour of the Central Committee (the plenum) tomake the maximum possible concessions was psychologi-cally and politically right and proper. 
 The Mensheviks and otzovists joined in furious attacks on the Bolshevik Centre, against which they levelled the most savage accu-sations. 
 Not disagreements in principle, but the “malice”of the Bolshevik Centre—that is what estranges us from theParty above all and before all, said both the Mensheviksand the otzovists. 
 * This is a very important point which must be cleared up if we are to understand why our unity crisis is takingsuch a course and no other. 
 There were no champions of liquidationism and otzovism in principle; neither the Men-sheviks nor the Vperyodists ventured to take such a posi-tion. 
 Here the effect was seen of a feature of the modern “critics” of Marxism and the critics of genuine Marxist tactics, one already commented on in our literature longago (and frequently commented on in the internationalliterature against the opportunists), viz. 
, irresolution, un-principledness, concealment of the “new” policy, the screen-ing of the consistent representatives of liquidationists and otzovists. 
 We are not liquidators, that is a factional term—cried the Mensheviks. 
 We are not otzovists, thatis a factional exaggeration—echoed the Vperyodists. 
 Andthousands of accusations on all manner of occasions, includ-ing that of so-called “criminal actions” (read: expropria-tions), were-hurled against the Bolshevik Centre with the aim of drawing a veil over differences of political principle and of pushing them into the background. 
 To this the Bolsheviks replied: very well, gentlemen, let the Central Committee examine all your accusations *Compare Yonov’s comment: “No less insistent was Comrade Martov in assuring the plenum that the ‘dangerous deviations’ to theRight were an invention of the spiteful Bolsheviks, that the Partyhad only one enemy and that was the Bolshevik Centre with its fac-tional ruling of the roost” (p. 
 22 of the article quoted). 
 and pronounce “judgement and sentence” on them. 
 There are five national Social-Democrats at the plenum—any decision at all depends on them and a unanimous one even more so. 
 Let them be the “judges” to examine your (i. 
e. 
,Menshevik and Vperyodist) accusations and satisfy yourclaims against the Bolshevik Centre. 
 The Bolsheviks wentfurther. 
 They agreed to the maximum compromises in theresolutions demanded by the Mensheviks and Vperyodists. 
 And so the maximum concessions were made in the reso-lutions on the state of affairs in the Party and on the con-ference, all the “accusations” were gone into and all claims against the Bolshevik Centre were satisfied on the basis of a decision by all five national Social-Democrats . 
 This was the only way to deprive the opponents of the Party line, i. 
e. 
, the anti-liquidationist line, of every oppor-tunity to prevaricate , of every opportunity to evade the principles of the question . 
 And they were deprived of this opportunity. 
 If now Axelrod and Martov and Co. 
 in the “Necessary Supplement”, and Alexinsky and Co. 
 in the leaflet of the Vperyodists again try to drag out accusations against the Bolshevik Centre, tittle-tattle, slander, lies and insinua-tions—then these gentlemen condemn themselves. 
 That theplenum unanimously heard all their accusations, rejected all of them by its resolution and put it on record that they were rejected is impossible for anyone to deny, whether these or any other knights of discord. 
 That being so it should now be clear to one and all that the people who areonce more beginning a squabble (Axelrod, Martov, Alexin-sky and Co. 
) are simply political blackmailers who wantto sidetrack questions of principle by scandalmongering. 
And we shall not treat them as anything else but polit-ical blackmailers. 
 We are not going to concern ourselves with any question other than the implementation by theParty of its anti-liquidationist and anti-otzovist policy,leaving Axelrod, Martov and Alexinsky to wallow in themire as much as they like. 
 The compromises and concessions of the Bolsheviks, their assent to resolutions which in many respects were not forceful enough, were necessary for a clear-cut demarcationbased on principle. 
 By meeting all the claims of the Men-sheviks and otzovists that were endorsed by a majority of the nationals, * the Bolsheviks ensured that the sole issue for all Social-Democrats irrespective of trend, except the professional blackmailers, became the implementation ofthe Party’s anti-liquidationist and anti-otzovist policy. 
Under the resolution which depended on the national So-cial-Democrats, access to Party work, to taking part in theimplementation of this policy, was not barred to anyone, to any single member of the Party; no obstacles to its im-plementation, no extraneous hindrances remained. 
 So ifthe liquidators now raise their heads again, more conspic-uously than ever it proves that their extraneous obstacles were a fiction, a blind, scandalmongering dodge, a contriv-ance of sectarian intriguers and nothing more. 
 That is why the process of demarcation and division began in real earnest only after the plenum. 
 This divisionis taking place solely over a most important question ofprinciple—that of the liquidation of our Party. 
 Those“conciliators” who were shocked, aggrieved and astonishedbecause this process of demarcation began after the plenum, only proved by their astonishment that they were under the spell of sectarian diplomacy. 
 A sectarian diplomatmight think that a conditional agreement with Martov andMartynov, Maximov and the second Vperyodist 96 means the end of all demarcation, for a divergence of principleis a minor matter to such a diplomat. 
 Conversely, people who attach primary importance to the fundamental ques-tion of liquidationism and otzovism see nothing surprisingin the fact that a demarcation purely on the basis of prin-ciple had to begin after satisfying all the claims of Martov, Maximov and Co. 
, after the maximum concessions to them on questions of organisation, etc. 
 What has been taking place in the Party since the plenum is not the collapse of Party unity, but the beginning of theunion of all those who are really capable and desirous ofworking in the Party and in the Party spirit, the beginning *Remember that those with the right to vote at the plenum were 4 Mensheviks, 4 Bolsheviks, 1 Vperyodist, 1 Lett, 2 Bundists and 2Poles, i. 
e. 
, the Bolsheviks did not have a majority over the Menshe-viks and the Vperyodists even with the Poles and the Lett; the Bund-ists decided. 
 of the purging of a real Party bloc of Bolsheviks, pro-Party. 
 Mensheviks, nationals and non-factional Social-Democrats from renegades hostile to the Party, from semi-liberals and semi-anarchists. 
 * 4. 
 PARAGRAPH I OF THE RESOLUTION ON THE STATE OF AFFAIRS IN THE PARTY Analysing further the defects of the plenum resolutions I must now dwell on the first point of the resolution on thestate of affairs in the Party. 
 It is true that this point doesnot touch on questions relating directly to one or otherconception of Party unity, but I shall have to make a di-gression since the interpretation of this first point has al-ready given rise to no few disputes in the Party. 
 In my draft of the resolution this point was totally absent and, with the rest of the Proletary editorial board, I most emphatically opposed it. 
 It was inserted by the votes of theMensheviks and the Poles although they were warned mostseriously by a section of the Bolsheviks that the interpreta-tion of this vague, nebulous point would inevitably produce misunderstandings or—worse—render a service to theliquidators. 
 It need scarcely be said that at the plenum I criticised quite a number of the propositions in this point as inane,vacuous and tautological. 
 To say that the tactics of the Social-Democrats are always the same in their basic prin-ciples without defining what these basic principles are ormaking clear which of them (Marxism in general or certain *By the way. 
 The following fact may serve to characterise the bloc of the Golosists and Vperyodists against the Bolsheviks (a blocwhich exactly resembles the bloc of the Jaurès-ists and Hervé-ists against the Guesde-ists). 
 In his “Necessary Supplement” Martov jeers at Plekhanov for attaching any importance to the membership ofthe commission on the school. 
 Martov is playing the hypocrite. 
 At the plenum, this same Martov with all the Mensheviks and with Ma-ximov, and assisted by Trotsky, fought for a resolution that would recognise the otzovist school in X. 
—as a Party school with which the Central Committee should make an agreement ! It was only with dif-ficulty that we managed to defeat this anti-Party bloc. 
 Of course if the Golosists and Vperyodists enter into the Party they have every right to enter into blocs. 
 But it is not a question of right but of the principle underlying the bloc. 
 This is an unprincipled bloc against Party and principle. 
 propositions of Marxism) are involved and why; to say that the tactics of the Social-Democrats are always designed to secure the maximum results without defining either the immediate aim of the struggle (the immediate possibleresults) at the present time, or the specific methods ofstruggle to be applied at this time; to say that the tacticsare designed for the various courses which developmentmight follow without defining them concretely; to repeat truisms to the effect that our tactics must promote the massing of forces and make the proletariat ready both for open strug-gle and for the utilisation of the antagonisms within theunstable regime—all these defects are glaringly obvious andconvert the whole point into unnecessary and useless ballast. 
 But there is something still worse in this point. 
 It con-tains a loophole for the liquidators, as was pointed out at the plenum by various delegates, not only by the Bolshe-viks but also by one of the Bundists and even Trotsky. 
This loophole is a phrase to the effect that the class-con-scious proletariat has “ for the first time , by organising into a Social-Democratic mass party, an opportunity to apply intelligently, systematically and consistently this tactical method of international Social-Democracy”. 
 (What methodis this ? The previous reference was to the basic principles of the tactics not the method, let alone a definite method. 
) Why for the first time ? asked the critics of this point at the plenum. 
 If it means that any step in the development of the country produces something new, something higher in the level of industrial technique and clarity of classstruggle, etc. 
, then again we are faced with a banality. 
 Then any period will infallibly produce something that comes about for the first time compared to a previous pe-riod. 
 But we are living through a definite period, a periodof counter-revolutionary ebb, a period of an enormousdecline in the energy of the masses and the Social-Demo-cratic workers’ movement after a revolutionary upsurge. 
And if it be said that such a period affords the proletariatfor the first time an opportunity to apply consciously, etc. 
, the method of international Social-Democracy, these wordswill lead inevitably to a liquidationist interpretation, apurely liberal exaltation of the Third Duma period, anallegedly peaceful and lawful period, over the period of storm and stress, the period of revolution, when the strug-gle of the proletariat took direct revolutionary forms and the liberals decried it as “spontaneous folly”. 
 In order to direct special attention to this danger of a liquidationist interpretation of this extraordinarily vaguepoint, I submitted a series of written statements at thismeeting of the plenum, emphasising a number of passagesfrom the speeches contributed there. 
 Here are two of my statements: 1) “On Lenin’s demand the following words of Comrade T. 
 97 (Polish S. 
D. 
) are entered in the minutes: ‘that the tac-tics of revolution are belittled here in comparison with thecounter-revolution is an absolutely false interpretation. 
’” 2) “On Lenin’s demand the interjection of Comrade Mar-tov (“quite right!”) to the statement by I. 
 98 (a Bolshevik who defended this point) that the words in dispute do notbelittle but enhance the significance of the revolution andits methods in comparison with the counter-revolutionarymethods, is entered in the minutes. 
” Both statements confirm that the Pole and Bolshevik, with the agreement of Martov, categorically denied the slightest admissibility of a liquidationist interpretationof this point. 
 Of course these two comrades did not at allintend any such interpretation. 
 But it is well known from of old that what is applied is the law, not the motives of the law, not the intentions of the legislator. 
 The significance of the present point in agitation and propaganda is determined not by the goodintentions of any of its authors, not by what they said atthe plenum, but by the objective relationship of forces andtrends inside the Russian section of the S. 
D. 
 (the non-Russian Social-Democrats will scarcely pay special atten-tion to this vague point). 
 Therefore I waited with particular interest to see how this point would now be interpreted in the press, preferring notto hurry with my opinion but to hear first of all the reactionsof the Social-Democrats who were not at the plenum orthe reactions of the Golosists. 
 The first issue of Golos after the plenum provided quite enough material to appraise our dispute as to how this pointwould be interpreted. 
 In Golos ’s leading article on the results of the plenum we read: “It would be quite inconceivable and absurd, of course, to suppose that by these words [“for the first time”, etc. 
]the Central Committee wanted to express an indirect con-demnation of our former tactics, inasmuch as they were adapted to the revolutionary situation ” (author’s italics; No. 
 19-20, p. 
 18). 
 Very good! The author declares a liquidationist inter-pretation to be inconceivable and absurd. 
 However, onreading further, we find the following assertion in the sameparagraph: “These words are an official recognition of the comparative back-wardness of our political life in the past in spite of the revolutionary forms in which it was displayed, and this, incidentally, was one ofthe main causes of the defeat of the revolution; these words are anofficial recognition of the inordinately elementary character of ourformer tactics, to which they were condemned by the backwardnessof the social relationships these words, lastly, were an official recog-nition that whatever the political situation in the future, any attempt to return to the dictatorship of the exclusive illegal circles in themovement with the whole policy associated therewith would be adecided step back. 
” Good, is it not? One hardly knows where to begin in sorting out this collection of “gems”. 
 I shall begin with the triple reference to “official recog-nition”. 
 To think, how much ridicule this same Golos has poured on every official recognition by one or other resolu-tion of an appraisal of the past, of the revolution and ofthe role of the bourgeois parties, etc. 
! There you have aspecimen of the sincerity of the outcries against “officiality”: when the Golosists do not like an explicit decision of the Party they laugh to scorn its claims to “officially” decidecomplex “scientific” questions, and so on and so forth—just as the Sozialistische Monatshefte ridicules the Dresden resolution against the opportunists, or as the Belgianministerialists in our own day ridicule the Amsterdam reso-lution. 
 99 But as soon as a Golosist thinks he sees a loophole for liquidationism, he swears and vows three times over that this is “recognised officially”. 
 And when a Golosist swears and vows a thing you can be sure that he is ... evading the truth. 
 For the author of the article to speak of the “official recognition” of his in-terpretation is all the more absurd because the disputable character of the interpretation of this point was a special subject for debate in the Central Committee. 
 Moreover,from statements officially entered in the minutes —yes, yes! here is something really “official”—statements which quoted these words of the Pole and the Bolshevik, it is clear that they would never have recognised Golos ’s interpretation to be a correct one. 
 Our author has only disgraced himselfwith his talk of official recognition. 
 The words “for the first time” are a recognition of the “comparative backwardness of the past”—we might let that pass, although there is nothing to show why this should be referred specifically to political life and not to otheraspects of social development; but to add “in spite of therevolutionary forms” is to stick out too incautiously theass’s ear of the Vekhist. 
 You can safely bet that of a hun-dred liberals reading this passage not less than ninety will kiss the Golosists for it, and of a hundred workers not less than ninety will turn their backs on the opportunists. 
 And,“incidentally”, the addition about the “causes of the defeatof the revolution” gives away the co-authors of the liquida-tionist Pentateuch completely: under cover of a vagueresolution they want to smuggle in their liberal view on the role of the proletariat in the revolution. 
 Therefore they speak of the “elementary character” and even—mark this!—the inordinately elementary character “of our former tac-tics”. 
 The “inordinately” elementary character of our tac-tics, do you see, ensues from the phrase “to apply ‘for thefirst time’ intelligently, systematically and consistently [in a mass party] the method of international Social-De-mocracy”. 
 * The tactics of the period of open struggle, the *The resolution of the C. 
C. 
 is interpreted in the same spirit also by Comrade An (see his article “Apropos the Letter from the Cauca-sus” in the present issue of Diskussionny Listok ). 
 Comrade An’s ar-ticle confirms the gravest accusations of the author of the Letter from the Caucasus , Comrade K. 
 St. 
100 although he calls this letter a “lampoon”. 
 We shall return again to Comrade An’s article, whichis curious in many respects. 
 period of comparative freedom of the press, mass unions, elections with the participation of the revolutionary par-ties, universal excitement among the population, rapid fluctuations in the policy of the government, the period ofcertain important victories over the government—these tac-tics, evidently, were inordinately elementary in comparison with the non-elementary tactics of the years 1909-10! Howrich in apostasy, how poor in Social-Democratic understand-ing of events must on be to make such interpretations! But to deduce from the words “for the first time” a con-demnation of the “dictatorship [!!] of the exclusive illegalcircles”—this is simply priceless. 
 In the time of the “inor-dinately elementary” tactics of 1905-07 the leadershipof the workers’ party was, do you see, much more like a “dictatorship” than in 1909-10, it emanated to a far great-er extent from the “underground” organisations and indeed“circles”, which were more “exclusive” than in our time!To give this laughable profundity a semblance of truth onehas to remember that the opportunists and Cadetophilesfelt that they were an “exclusive circle” among the workers during the revolution and find that now, in the struggle for legality (don’t laugh!) they are not “exclusive” (Milyu-kov himself is at our side), they are not a “circle” (we haverenegade periodicals published openly), they are not “under-ground”, and so on and so forth. 
 For the first time the proletariat, organising into a mass Social-Democratic Party, observes among people who would like to consider themselves the leaders of the proletariatsuch a systematic and consistent gravitation towards liberal renegacy. 
 This lesson of the interpretation of the notorious point concerning “ for the first time ” will have to be reckoned with whether they like it or not by the Polish comrade and the Bolshevik * comrade who officially declared that in their opinion a liquidationist interpretation of their point would be absolutely false. 
 *At the plenum, these comrades interpreted §1 as pointing to the growth of class differentiation, the progress of the purely socialistconsciousness of the mass of the workers, the strengthening of bour-geois reaction. 
 These thoughts are correct, of course, but they are not expressed (and it is not they which are expressed) in the propositions comprising §1. 
 5. 
 THE SIGNIFICANCE OF THE DECEMBER (1908) RESOLUTIONS AND THE ATTITUDE OF THE LIQUIDATORS TO THEM These last comments on the defects of the plenum reso-lution must be applied to the introductory words of thefirst point, which read: “Enlarging upon the main proposi-tions of the resolutions of the Party Conference of 1908, theCentral Committee resolves.... 
” This formulation is theresult of a concession to the Mensheviks, and this circum-stance must be dwelt upon all the more for the fact that we have here again a glaring example of disloyalty in returnfor the concession, or a crying incapacity to understand themeaning of the Party’s definitions of our tactics. 
 The draft resolution, which was approved by the major-ity of the commission and was therefore assured of a major-ity vote at the plenum, had the words: “ in confirmation of the resolutions of December 1908 and enlarging upon them.... 
”Here too the Mensheviks put forward in the form of an ulti-matum their demand for a concession, refusing to vote forthe resolution as a whole if the words “in confirmation”were retained, for they regard the resolutions of December 1908 as the height of “factionalism”. 
 We made the concession they demanded by agreeing to vote for the resolution with-out the words about confirmation. 
 I should not be disposedto regret this concession in the slightest if it had achievedits purpose, i. 
e. 
, if the Mensheviks had received it withthe loyalty to a Party decision without which collaboration is impossible. 
 Our Party has no other definition of its main problems of tactics, organisation and parliamentary ac-tivity in the Third Duma period than the one given in theresolutions of December 1908. 
 Without denying that fac-tional strife was very acute at that time, we shall not insiston any particular sharp expression occurring in the resolu-tions then directed against the liquidators. 
 But we certainly do insist on the fundamental propositions of these resolu-tions, for it would be uttering brave words in vain to speakof the Party, the Party principle and Party organisation ifwe brushed aside the only answer, given by the Party andconfirmed by the experience of a year’s work, to cardinal fundamental questions, without an answer to which it is impossible to advance a single step whether in propagan-da, agitation or organisation. 
 We are quite ready to recog-nise the need for collaboration in amending these resolu-tions, in revising them in accordance with the criticism of the comrades of all factions, including, of course, the pro-Party Mensheviks; we know that some propositionsin these resolutions will probably remain open to disputein the Party for quite a long time to come, and it will notbe possible to settle them in the near future otherwise thanby a majority vote. 
 But as long as this revision has not been undertaken and completed, as long as the Party has not given a new answer to the question of the appraisal ofthe Third Duma period and the tasks ensuing from it, weabsolutely demand that all Party Social-Democrats, whatever views they hold, should be guided in their actions by thesevery resolutions. 
 It would seem that this is an elementary point of Party principle? It would seem that there could not be any otherattitude to Party decisions? But the turn to liquidationismwhich Golos has taken after the plenum caused it in this case, too, to utilise the concession of the majority of theParty not for going over to a loyal Party position, but for immediately declaring its dissatisfaction with the extent of the concession! (Only the Golosists have apparentlyforgotten that the side which started the dispute about theunanimously adopted compromise resolution, expressingdissatisfaction with it and demanding new concessions andnew amendments, thereby gave the other side the right to demand amendments in another direction. 
 And we, of course, are going to exercise this right. 
) The editorial in Golos No. 
 19-20, which I have already cited, concerning the results of the plenum says outrightthat the introductory words to the resolution are a compro-mise. 
 This is true, but it becomes untrue if the fact be sup-pressed that the compromise enforced by the ultimatum of the Mensheviks was the refusal of the majority of theCentral Committee to directly confirm all the resolutions of December 1908, and not only the fundamental proposi-tions contained in them. 
 “From our point of view,” continues Golos , “this phrase does not harmonise with the unambiguous content of the main points of the resolution, and while it marks a certainturning-point in the development of the Party, nevertheless it is, of course, connected in sequence with the whole past history of Russian Social-Democracy, but it is least of all [!!] connected with the ‘London heritage’. 
101 However, we should be incorrigible doctrinaires if we thought it possibleto achieve at one stroke absolute unanimity in our Party,if we sacrificed a big step forward in the movement for thesake of parochialism” (!!). 
 “We can leave the correction ofthese mistakes in the resolution to historians. 
” This sounds as though the Golosists who attended the plenum had been rebuked for their “complaisance to theBolsheviks” by their Russian legalists, like Potresov andCo. 
, or by the editors of Golos who were not at the plenum, and as though they were apologising to them. 
 We are notdoctrinaires, let historians correct the mistakes of the resolution! To this magnificent declaration we venture to rejoin that pro-Party Social-Democrats draw up resolutions notfor the benefit of historians, but to derive practical guidance from these resolutions in their work of propaganda, agita-tion and organisation. 
 The Party has no other definition of the problems of this work for the period of the Third Duma. 
 To the liquidators, of course, Party resolutions meannothing, because the whole Party means nothing to them,and, as far as they are concerned, the whole Party (and notonly its resolutions) is a worth-while and interesting studyonly for “historians”. 
 But neither the Bolsheviks nor the pro-Party Mensheviks want to work with the liquidators in one organisation and will not work with them. 
 We shallask the liquidators to join the Bezgolovtsi 102 or the Popu-lar Socialists. 
103 If the Golosists were loyally inclined towards the Party, if they really complied with the interests of the Party and not those of Potresov and Co. 
, the interests of the organi-sation of the revolutionary Social-Democrats, not those ofa circle of legalist literati, they would have expressed theirdissatisfaction with the resolutions of December 1908 ina different manner. 
 Now, after the plenum, they wouldcease unseemly, contemptuous sniggering which is the special characteristic of the Cadets, at some kind of “de-cisions” from “underground”. 
 They would set about analys-ing these decisions in a business-like manner and amending them in accordance with their own point of view, in accord-ance with their own view of the experience of 1907-10. 
 That would be working for real Party unity, for a rapproche-ment on a single line of Social-Democratic activity. 
 Byrefusing to do so the Golosists are in fact carrying out theprogramme of the liquidators. 
 What, indeed, is the programmeof the liquidators on this question? It consists in ignoringthe decisions of the underground Party which is doomed to perdition, etc. 
, counterposing to the decisions of the Party the amorphous “work” of free lances who call them-selves Social-Democrats and who have ensconced themselvesin various legal journals, legal societies, etc. 
, cheek byjowl with liberals, Narodniks and Bezzaglavtsi. 
 We donot need any resolutions, any “estimate of the situation”, any definition of our immediate aims of struggle or our attitude to the bourgeois parties—we call all this (followingMilyukov!) the “dictatorship of exclusive undergroundcircles” (without noticing that by our amorphousness, lackof organisation and fragmented state we are actually sur-rendering the “dictatorship” to the liberal circles!). 
 Yes, yes, there is no doubt that the liquidators can demand nothing more from the Golosists as regards their attitudeto Party decisions than that they should deride them con-temptuously and ignore them. 
 It is impossible to discuss seriously the opinion that the resolution of the Central Committee on the state of affairs in the Party in 1909-10 is “least of all” connected with the London heritage, because the absurdity of this opinionleaps to the eye. 
 It is nothing but mockery of the Partyto say: we are prepared to take into account its “whole pasthistory” but not that part of it which is directly connectedwith the present, nor the present itself! In other words: we are prepared to take into account anything that does not define our present actions. 
 We are prepared (in 1910) totake into account “the whole past history” of Social-Democ-racy except the past history which contains the resolutionsadopted on the Cadet Party in the years 1907-08-09,on the Trudovik parties in 1907-08-09, on the aims of our struggle in 1907-08-09. 
 We are prepared to take into account everything except what is essential tobecoming pro-Party in practice here and now, to conduct-ing Party work, to carrying out Party tactics, to guiding in a Party manner the activity of the Social-Democrats in the Third Duma. 
 To the shame of the Bund it has to be said that it pro-vides space in its party paper for the same liquidationistsneers at the London heritage in Comrade Yonov’s article(p. 
 22): “Tell me, if you please,” writes Yonov, “what havethe resolutions of the London Congress to do with the pres-ent moment and the questions which are now on the order of the day? I venture to hope that Comrade Lenin too andall his fellow-thinkers do not know. 
” Indeed, who am I to know such a mystery! How am I to know that there has been no change of any importance inthe main groups of the bourgeois parties (Black Hundreds, Octobrists, Cadets, Narodniks), in their class composition, in their policy, in their attitude to the proletariat and therevolution from the spring of 1907 to the spring of 1910?How am I to know that the small minor changes, whichcould and should be noted in this sphere, are indicated in theresolutions of December 1908? How am I to know all this? In Yonov’s estimation, it would seem, all this has noth-ing to do with the present moment and the questions onthe order of the day. 
 To him it is superfluous—some Partydefinition or other of the tactics to be adopted towardsthe non-proletarian parties. 
 Why burden oneself? Thiseffort to elaborate a Party definition of proletarian tactics— would it not be simpler to call it “special protective meas-ures” or something like that? Would it not be simpler toconvert the Social-Democrats into free lances, let themrun wild to settle current questions “freely”, without any “reinforced protection”, today with the liberals in the maga-zine Nashi Pomoi , tomorrow with the Bezgolovtsi at a congress of literary hangers-on, the day after tomorrow with the Posse-ists in the co-operative movement. 
 104 Only— only, dear humble creature, how will this differ from whatthe legalist liquidators are out for? There will be no differ-ence at all! Pro-Party Social-Democrats who are dissatisfied with the London decisions or the resolutions of December 1908 and want to work in the Party, in a Party manner, willcriticise these resolutions in the Party press, they will propose amendments, try to convince the comrades, try to win a majority in the Party. 
 We may disagree with such people, but their attitude will be a Party attitude, they will not sow confusion as Yonov, Golos and Co. 
 are doing. 
 Just look at Mr. 
 Potresov. 
This “Social-Democrat”, in order to demonstrate publicly his independence from the Social-Democratic Party, ex-claims in Nasha Zarya No. 
 2, p. 
 59: “And how numerous they are, these questions, without the solution of which it is impossible to move a step, impossible for Russian Marx-ism to become an ideological trend truly investing itselfwith all the energy and power [couldn’t you manage withless rhetoric, dear Mr. 
 Independent!] of the revolutionarymood of the time! How is the economic development of Russia proceeding, what shifting of forces is it producing under the damper of the reaction, what is going on in thecountryside and in the towns, what changes is this develop-ment producing in the social composition of the workingclass of Russia, and so on and so forth? Where are the an-swers or attempts to answer these questions, where is the eco-nomic school of Russian Marxism? And what has become of the play of political thought which was once the very life ofMenshevism? What has become of its search for organisationalforms, its analysis of the past, its estimation of the present?” If this independent were not so fond of casting laboured phrases to the wind and really thought about what he was saying, he would notice a very simple thing. 
 If it is true that a revolutionary Marxist cannot move a step until thesequestions are settled (and it is true), their settlement—notin the sense of scientific finality and scientific research butof defining what steps have to be taken and how—is a matterwith which the Social-Democratic Party must concern it-self. 
 For “revolutionary Marxism” outside the Social-Dem-ocratic Party is simply a parlour phrase of the legal-minded windbag who sometimes likes to boast that “wetoo” are almost Social-Democrats. 
 The Social-DemocraticParty gave the first steps to an answer to these questions, and it was in the resolutions of December 1908 that it gave them. 
 The independents have arranged things for themselves rather cunningly: in the legal press they beat their breasts and ask “where are the first steps to an answer on the part of the revolutionary Marxists?” The independents know that it is impossible to answer them in the legal press. 
 And in the illegal press the friends of these independents(the Golosists) contemptuously refrain from answering thequestions “without a settlement of which it will be impos-sible to move a step”. 
 Everything is achieved that is re-quired by the independents (i. 
e. 
, the renegades of socialism) the world over: the resounding phrase is there, actual inde-pendence from socialism and the Social-Democratic Partyis there as well. 
 6. 
 THE GROUP OF INDEPENDENT -LEGALISTS Let us now proceed to ascertain what took place after the plenum. 
 To this question Trotsky and Yonov give auniform and simple answer. 
 “Neither in the external condi-tions of political life,” states the Vienna resolution, “norin the internal relations of our Party did any real changes take place after the plenum that might hinder the work of building up the Party.... 
” A factional relapse, the surviving heritage of factional relations—that is all. 
 Yonov supplies the same explanations “personalised”. 
“The plenum is over. 
 Its participants have gone their several ways.... 
 The leaders of the old factions found them-selves at liberty and emancipated themselves from all outside influences and pressure. 
 Moreover, considerable reinforcements arrived: for some of them—in the shape ofComrade Plekhanov, who of late has been ardently advocat-ing that a state of martial law be declared in the Party;for others—in the shape of the sixteen ‘old Party members,well known to the editorial board of Golos Sotsial-Demo-krata ’” (see No. 
 19-20, “Open Letter”). 
 “Under these condi-tions, how could one refrain from throwing oneself into thefray? And so they resumed the old ‘game’ of mutual exter-mination” ( Otkliki Bunda No. 
 4, p. 
 22). 
 “Reinforcements” arrived from the factionalists and— another fight ensued, that is all. 
 True, the “reinforcements” for the Bolsheviks arrived in the person of a pro-Party Men-shevik, Plekhanov; he “arrived” to make war on the liquida-tors, but that is immaterial to Yonov. 
 Yonov apparently does not like Plekhanov’s polemics against Potresov, Com-rade I. 
105 (who proposed “to dissolve everything”), etc. 
 Of course, he has the right to censure these polemics. 
 But how can this be called “declaring martial law in the Party ”? War on the liquidators means declaring martial law in the Party —let us remember this “philosophy” of Comrade Yonov’s. 
 The reinforcements for the Mensheviks abroad were the Russian Mensheviks. 
 But this circumstance does not at all give Comrade Yonov something to think about. 
 It is obvious what practical conclusion Trotsky and Yonov draw from such an “estimate of the situation”. 
 Noth-ing out of the ordinary has occurred. 
 Simply a factionalwrangle. 
 Install new neutralisers and the trick is done. 
 Everything is explained from the standpoint of sectarian diplomacy. 
 All the practical prescriptions are nothing butsectarian diplomacy. 
 Given here are those who “rushed intobattle”, those who desire to “reconcile”: here delete thereference to the “foundation”, there add the name of so-and-so to be included in the “institution”, and in yet another place “give in” to the legalists in regard to the methods of convening the conference.... 
 It is the old but ever newstory of the sectarian spirit abroad. 
 Our view of what took place after the plenum is different. 
Having succeeded in getting the resolutions adopted unanimously, and having eliminated all the “squabbling” accusations, the plenum forced the liquidators to the wall. 
 It is no longer possible to hide behind squabbles, it is nolonger possible to refer to obduracy and “mechanical sup-pression” (or the other variants: “special protective meas-ures”, “martial law”, “state of siege”, etc. 
). 
 It is now pos-sible to leave the Party only because of liquidationism (just as the Vperyodists can leave it only because of otzovism and anti-Marxist philosophy). 
 Forced to the wall, the liquidators have had to show their true colours. 
 Their Russian centre—it matters notwhether it is a formal or an informal, a semi-legal (Mikhailand Co. 
) or entirely legal centre (Potresov and Co. 
)— an-swered the call to return to the Party by a refusal . 
 The Rus-sian legalist-liquidators have finally broken with the Partyand have united in a group of independent socialists (inde-pendent of socialism and dependent on liberalism, of course). 
 The answer of Mikhail and Co. 
, on the one hand, and the writings of Nasha Zarya and Vozrozhdeniye , on the other, mark precisely the fusion of the anti-Party circles of “So-cial-Democrats” (to be more exact—quasi-Social-Demo-crats) into a group of independent socialists . 
 Hence the “conciliatory” efforts of Trotsky and Yonov are now ridicu-lous and miserable. 
 These efforts can only be explained by a complete failure to understand what is taking place. 
 They are harmless efforts now, for there is no one behindthem except the sectarian diplomats abroad, except igno-rance and lack of intelligence in some out-of-the-way places. 
 The conciliators à la Trotsky and Yonov mistook the special conditions which allowed conciliationist diplomacy to blossom forth at the plenum for the general conditions of present-day Party life. 
 They made the mistake of takingthis diplomacy—which played its part at the plenumowing to the presence of conditions that gave rise to a deep striving for conciliation (i. 
e. 
, for Party unity) in bothof the principal factions—as an aim in itself, as a lasting instrument in the game between “given persons, groups and institutions”. 
 Certainly there was scope for diplomacy at the plenum, for it was necessary to secure the Party union of pro-PartyBolsheviks and pro-Party Mensheviks; and this was impos-sible without concessions, without compromise. 
 In deter-mining the extent of such concessions the “honest brokers” inevitably came to the front—inevitably, because for thepro-Party Mensheviks and pro-Party Bolsheviks the ques-tion of the extent of the concessions was a secondary one, aslong as the basis in principle of the union as a whole re-mained intact. 
 The “conciliators” à la Trotsky and Yonov— having pushed their way to the front at the plenum, and having obtained the opportunity to play their part as“neutralisers”, as “judges”, in eliminating squabbles andsatisfying “claims” against the Bolshevik Centre—imaginedthat as long as the “given persons, groups and institutions”existed they could always play this part. 
 An amusing delu-sion. 
 Brokers are needed when it is necessary to determine the extent of the concessions needed for obtaining unanim-ity. 
 The extent of the concessions has to be determined when there is an acknowledged common basis in principle for a union. 
 The question as to who was to join this union after all the concessions had been made remained open at that time; for in principle the provisional assumption wasinevitable that all the Social-Democrats would want toenter the Party, that all the Mensheviks would want loyallyto carry out the anti-liquidationist resolution, and thatall the Vperyodists would want to do the same in regard to the anti-otzovist resolution. 
 Now, however, brokers are not required; there is no place for them, because there is no question of the extentof concessions. 
 And this question does not arise becausethere is no question of any concessions at all. 
 All the con-cessions (and even excessive ones) were made at the plenum. 
 Now it is exclusively a question of a principled stand in the struggle against liquidationism, moreover not againstliquidationism in general, but against a definite groupof liquidator-independents, the group of Mikhail and Co. 
,the group of Potresov and Co. 
 Should Trotsky and Yonovtake it into their heads to “reconcile” the Party with the given persons, groups and institutions, then we all pro-Party Bolsheviks and all pro-Party Mensheviks wouldregard them simply as traitors to the Party, and nothingmore. 
 The conciliator-diplomats were “strong” at the plenum exclusively because and insofar as both the pro-Party Bolsheviks and the pro-Party Mensheviks wanted peace and attached subordinate importance to the question ofthe conditions of peace compared with-the question of theanti-liquidationist and the anti-otzovist tactics of the Party. 
I, for instance, considered the concessions excessive andfought over the extent of these concessions (this is hinted at by Golos in No. 
 19-20 and is openly stated by Yonov). 
 But I was ready then and would be ready now to reconcilemyself even to excessive concessions, provided the line of the Party was not thereby undermined, provided theseconcessions did not lead to the negation of that line, pro-vided these concessions paved the way for bringing people back from liquidationism and otzovism to the Party. 
 But now that Mikhail and Co. 
 and Potresov and Co. 
 have unitedand come out against the Party and against the plenum, I refuse to enter into any negotiations about any conces-sions, since the Party is obliged now to break with these independents, to fight against them resolutely as full-fledged liquidators. 
 And I can speak with confidence not only formyself but for all the pro-Party Bolsheviks. 
 The pro-Party Mensheviks, through Plekhanov and others, have expressedthemselves clearly enough in the same spirit; and sincethis is the state of affairs in the Party, the “conciliator”-diplomats à la Trotsky and Yonov will either have to aban-don their diplomacy or leave the Party and join the inde-pendents. 
 In order to convince oneself that the legalists have definitely united into a group of independent socialists, onehas only to review the events after the plenum, to appraise them in essence, and not merely from the standpoint of the petty history of “conflicts”, to which Yonov wronglyconfines himself. 
 1) Mikhail, Roman and Yuri declare that the Central Committee (plenum) resolutions and the very existence ofthe Central Committee are harmful. 
 About two months have elapsed since this fact was published and it has not been refuted. 
 It is obvious that it is true. 
 * 2) Sixteen Russian Mensheviks, including at least two of the three mentioned above, and a number of the mostprominent Menshevik writers (Cherevanin, Koltsov, etc. 
),published in Golos , with the approval of the editors, a purely liquidationist manifesto, justifying the Mensheviks’ withdrawal from the Party. 
 3) The Menshevik legally published magazine, Nasha Zarya , publishes a programmatic article by Mr. 
 Potresov in which it is bluntly stated that “the Party, as an integraland organised hierarchy of institutions, does not exist” (No. 
 2, p. 
 61), that it is impossible to wind up “what in reality no longer exist” as an organised whole” (ibid. 
). 
Among the contributors to this journal are Cherevanin, *Number 21 of Golos Sotsial-Demokrata has just appeared. 
 On page 16, Martov and Dan confirm the correctness of this fact, when they speak of the “refusal of three comrades [??] to join the CentralCommittee”. 
 Moreover, as usual, they try to hide by wild abuse of “Tyszka-Lenin” the fact that the group of Mikhail and Co. 
 has finally turned into a group of independents. 
 Koltsov, Martynov, Avgustovsky, Maslov, Martov—the same L. 
 Martov who is capable of occupying a place in the “organised hierarchy of institutions” of the illegal Party which has a centre like that of an “organised body”, and atthe same time is capable of belonging to the legal group,which with the gracious permission of Stolypin declaresthis illegal Party to be non-existent. 
 4) In the popular Menshevik magazine Vozrozhdeniye (No. 
 5, March 30, 1910), which has the same contributors, an unsigned, i. 
e. 
, editorial article praises the above-men-tioned article by Mr. 
 Potresov in Nasha Zarya and adds, after quoting the same passage quoted by me above: “There is nothing to wind up—and we [i. 
e. 
, the editors of Vozrozhdeniye ] would add on our part—the dream of re-establishing this hierarchy in its old underground form is simply a harmful reactionary utopia, which indicatesthe loss of political intuition by the representatives of aparty which at one time was the most realistic of all” (p. 
 51). 
 Anyone who regards all these facts as accidental appar-ently does not want to see the truth. 
 Anyone who intends to explain these facts as “a relapse into factionalism” is lulling himself with a phrase. 
 What have these facts to dowith factionalism and the factional struggle, from whichboth the group of Mikhail and Co. 
 and the group of Potre-sov and Co. 
 have been standing aside for a long time. 
 No,for one who does not deliberately want to shut his eyes no doubts are possible here. 
 The plenum removed all obsta-cles (real or imaginary) to the return of the pro-Party legal-ists into the Party, it removed all obstacles in the wayof building up an illegal Party, taking into account thenew conditions and new forms of utilising legal possibili-ties. 
 Four Menshevik members of the Central Committee and two editors of Golos have admitted that all obstacles in the way of joint Party work have been removed. 
 Thegroup of Russian legalists has given its answer to the plenum . 
 This answer is in the negative : we do not want to engage in the restoration and strengthening of the illegal Party,for that is a reactionary utopia. 
 This answer is a fact of the greatest political importance in the history of the Social-Democratic movement. 
 Thegroup of independent socialists (independent of socialism) has definitely rallied together and has definitely broken with the Social-Democratic Party. 
 To what extent this group has crystallised, whether it consists of one organi-sation or of a number of separate circles very loosely con-nected—this we do not know as yet, nor is it important. 
What matters is that the tendency to form groups independ-ent of the Party—a tendency which has long been prevalentamong the Mensheviks—has now brought about a new political formation. 
 And henceforth all Russian Social-Democrats who do not want to deceive themselves mustreckon with the fact that this group of independents exists. 
 In order that the significance of this fact may become clear, let us recall first of all the “independent socialists”in France who, in that most progressive bourgeois state, which more than any other has been purged of all that is old, carried this political trend to its logical conclusion. 
Millerand, Viviani and Briand belonged to the SocialistParty, but repeatedly acted independently of its decisions,in defiance of them, and Millerand’s entry into a bourgeoiscabinet, on the pretext of saving the republic and safe-guarding the interests of socialism, led to his break with the party. 
 The bourgeoisie rewarded the traitors to socialismwith ministerial portfolios. 
 The three French renegadescontinue to call themselves and their group independentsocialists, and continue to justify their behaviour on thegrounds of the interests of the labour movement and social reform. 
 Bourgeois society cannot, of course, reward our inde-pendents quite as rapidly; they start under conditionsimmeasurably more backward and they must be satisfiedwith praises and assistance from the, liberal bourgeoisie(which has long been supporting the Mensheviks’ tendencies towards “independence”). 
 But the basic tendency is the same in both cases: being independent of the Socialist Party isjustified on the grounds of the interests of the labour move-ment; “the fight for legality” (the slogan in Dan ’s formula-tion, taken up very zealously by the renegade Vozrozhdeniye No. 
 5, page 7) is proclaimed the slogan of the working class; in reality the bourgeois intellectuals group themselves together (parliamentarians in France, literary writers inour country) and act in combination with the liberals; subordination to the Party is rejected; the Party is declared to be insufficiently “realistic” both by Millerand and Co. 
 and by Vozrozhdeniye and Golos ; they characterise the Party as a “dictatorship of exclusive, underground circles” ( Golos ), and declare that it reduces itself to a narrow, revolutionaryassociation which is harmful to broad progress (Millerandand Co. 
). 
 Furthermore, in order to make clear the position of our independents, take the history of the formation of our Russian Popular Socialist Party. 
 This history will helpto clarify the position for those who fail to see the kinshipbetween our independents and Millerand and Co. 
 owingto the vast difference in the external conditions of their“work”. 
 It is common knowledge that our Popular Social-ists represent the legalist and moderate wing of petty-bourgeois democracy, and I believe none of the Marxistshave any doubts about this. 
 At the congress of the Social-ist-Revolutionaries at the end of 1905, the Popular Social-ists came out as liquidators of the programme, tactics andorganisation of the revolutionary party of the petty-bour-geois democrats; they acted in the closest alliance with the Socialist-Revolutionaries in the newspapers of the days offreedom in the autumn of 1905 and in the spring of 1906. 
They legalised themselves and seceded, forming an inde-pendent party in the autumn of 1906, a fact which did notprevent them, during the elections to the Second Duma and in the Second Duma itself, from merging from time to time with the Socialist-Revolutionaries. 
 In the autumn of 1906, I had occasion to write in Pro-letary about the Popular Socialists, and I called them “So-cialist-Revolutionary Mensheviks”. 
 * Three-and-a-half years have passed since then, and Potresov and Co. 
 have man-aged to prove to the pro-Party Mensheviks that I was right. 
 It must be acknowledged, however, that even Peshekhonovand Co. 
 acted more honestly in a political sense than didPotresov and his group; after a series of political acts whichwere in effect independent of the Socialist-RevolutionaryParty, they openly declared themselves to be a separate political party independent of the Socialist-Revolutionaries. 
 *See present edition, Vol. 
 11, pp. 
 197-206. 
— Ed. 
 Of course, this “honesty” is conditioned, incidentally, by the relationship of forces: Peshekhonov was of the opinion that the Socialist-Revolutionary Party was powerless, and thought that it was he who stood to lose by an informal alliance with it, whereas Potresov thinks he stands to gain by political Azefism,106 i. 
e. 
, by formally continuing to be a Social-Democrat while in reality acting independentlyof the Social-Democratic Party. 
 For the present, Mr. 
 Potresov and Co. 
 deem it most ad-vantageous for themselves to hide behind a borrowed name,using the prestige of the Russian Social-Democratic La-bour Party in a thievish manner, corrupting it from within,acting not only independently of it but really against it. 
 Itis quite likely that our group of independents will try to parade in borrowed plumes as long as possible; it is quite likely that if the Party is dealt a severe blow, after somebig raid upon the illegal organisation, or when circum-stances prove particularly tempting, such as, for example,the possibility of being elected to the Duma independentlyof the Party, the independents themselves will throw off their mask; we cannot foresee all the possible episodes in their political chicanery. 
 But one thing we know for certain, and that is that the covert activities of the independents are harmful and ruin-ous to the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, the party of the working class, andthat we must expose these activities at all costs, we must force the independents into the open and declare that all their connections with the Party are broken off. 
 The plenumtook a big step forward in this direction. 
 However strangeit may appear at first sight, it was just the consent (insin-cere or unconscious) of Martov and Martynov, just themaximum, even excessive, concessions that were made to them that helped to reveal the ulcer of liquidationism, the ulcer of “independence” in our Party. 
 No honest Social-Democrat, no Party member, whatever faction he maysympathise with, can deny now that the group of Mikhailand Co. 
, the group of Potresov and Co. 
 are independents , that in reality they do not recognise the Party, do not want the Party and are working against the Party. 
 How rapidly, or how slowly, the process of secession and formation of a separate party by the independents matures depends, of course, on many causes and circumstances that cannot be estimated. 
 The Popular Socialists had a special group before the revolution, and the secession of that group, which was temporarily and loosely affiliatedwith the Socialist-Revolutionaries, was particularly easy. 
Our independents still have some personal traditions, tieswith the Party, which retard the process of secession, butthese traditions are becoming ever weaker, and, besides, the revolution and counter-revolution bring forward new people, free of all revolutionary or Party traditions. 
 Thesurrounding atmosphere of “Vekhist” moods is very rapidlyimpelling the spineless intelligentsia towards “independence”. 
The “old” generation of revolutionaries is leaving thestage. 
 Stolypin is doing his utmost to hunt down the rep-resentatives of this generation most of whom had divulged all their pseudonyms and their secret channels of work inthe days of freedom, in the years of revolution. 
 Prison,exile, penal servitude and emigration constantly increasethe number of those withdrawn from the ranks, while thenew generation grows slowly. 
 Among the intelligentsia, especially that section of it which has “hitched on” to one or another form of legal activity, there is developing a com-plete lack of faith in the illegal Party and a disinclinationto spend efforts on work which is particularly difficultand particularly thankless in our times. 
 “Friends in needare friends indeed”, and the working class, which is passing through the difficult times of attack both by the old and the new counter-revolutionary forces, will inevitably wit-ness the defection of very many of its intellectual “friendsof an hour”, fine-weather friends, friends only for the dura-tion of the revolution, friends who were revolutionariesduring the revolution, but who are yielding to the general depression and are ready to proclaim the “fight for legality” at the first successes of the counter-revolution. 
 In a number of European countries, the counter-revolu-tionary forces succeeded in making a clean sweep of theremnants of the revolutionary and socialist organisationsof the proletariat, for instance after 1848. 
 A bourgeois intellectual, who in the days of his youth joined the Social-Democratic movement is inclined, because of his petty-bourgeois psychology, to give up the struggle: so it was, so it will be; to defend the old illegal organisation is hope-less, to create a new one is still more hopeless; generally speaking, we “overestimated” the forces of the proletariat in the bourgeois revolution, we erroneously ascribed “uni-versal” importance to the role of the proletariat—all ofthese little ideas of the renegade Social Movement directly and indirectly drive towards renunciation of the illegalParty. 
 Once on the slippery slope, the independent fails to observe that he is sliding lower and lower, he does not realise that he is working hand in glove with Stolypin:Stolypin destroys the illegal Party physically, with the aidof the police, the gallows and penal servitude; the liberalsdo exactly the same thing directly, by their open propa-ganda of Vekhist ideas; the independents among the So-cial-Democrats indirectly assist in the destruction of the illegal Party by their shouts about its “atrophy”, by theirrefusal to help it and by their attempts (see the letter ofthe Sixteen in Golos No. 
 19-20) to justify desertion from it. 
 One step leads to another. 
 Let us not shut our eyes to the fact that the longer the counter-revolutionary period lasts the more difficult will our fight for the Party become. 
 That our Party comradesdo not underestimate the danger, that they look it squarelyin the face, is shown, for instance, by the article of Com-rade K. 
 in No. 
 13 of the Central Organ. 
 But the resoluteand frank recognition of the weakness of the Party, of the disintegration of the organisations and the difficulties of the situation does not make Comrade K. 
 (or any of the Partycomrades) waver for one moment on the question of whetherthe Party is necessary, whether it is necessary to work forits restoration. 
 The greater the difficulties of our position,the greater the number of enemies (the day before yester-day they were joined by the Vekhists, yesterday by the Popular Socialists, today by the independent Social-Demo-crats)—the more closely will all the Social-Democrats,irrespective of their shades of opinion, rally in defence ofthe Party. 
 Many Social-Democrats who might be dividedon the question how the revolutionary masses who trust Social-Democracy should be led in the attack cannot fail to be united on the question of the imperative need to fightfor the preservation and consolidation of the illegal Social-Democratic Labour Party that was formed in the period of 1895-1910. 
 As regards Golos and the Golosists, they have most strik-ingly confirmed what was said of them in the resolutionof the enlarged editorial board of Proletary in June of last year. 
 That resolution (see Supplement to No. 
 46 of Pro-letary , p. 
 6) reads: “In the Menshevik camp of the Party, whose official organ, Golos Sotsial-Demokrata , is fully controlled by the Menshevik liquidators, the minority of this faction, having explored the path of liquidationismto the very end, is already raising its voice in protestagainst that path and is again seeking a party basis for itsactivities.... 
” * The distance to the “end” of the path of liquidationism proved longer than we imagined at the time, but the correctness of the basic idea underlying these words has since been proved by facts. 
 The correctness ofthe expression “captive to the liquidators”, as applied toGolos Sotsial-Demokrata , has been particularly confirmed. 
 They are indeed captives of the liquidators, for they darenot either openly defend liquidationism or openly rebel against it. 
 Even at the plenum they unanimously adopted the resolutions not as free men but as captives, who for ashort while had obtained leave from their “masters” andwho returned to slavery on the day after the plenum. 
 Un-able to defend liquidationism, they laid the utmost stress onall possible (and imaginary!) obstacles, which had nothing to do with questions of principle, but which prevented them from renouncing liquidationism. 
 And when all these “ob-stacles” were removed, when all their extraneous, personal,organisational, financial and other claims had been satis-fied, they “voted” against their will for the renunciationof liquidationism. 
 Poor fellows! They did not know at that time that the Manifesto of the Sixteen was already on its way to Paris, that the group of Mikhail and Co. 
, the groupof Potresov and Co. 
 had stiffened in their defence of liqui-dationism. 
 And they obediently turned round and followedthe Sixteen, Mikhail and Potresov back to liquidationism! The heinous crime of the spineless “conciliators” like Yonov and Trotsky, who defend or justify these people, *See present edition, Vol. 
 15, p. 
 448. 
— Ed. 
 is that they are causing their ruin by making them more dependent on liquidationism. 
 Whereas the decisive action of all the non-factional Social-Democrats against Mikhail and Co. 
 and against Potresov and Co. 
 (surely, neither Trot-sky nor Yonov would venture to defend these groups!) might have brought some of the Golos captives of liquidation-ism back into the Party—the grimaces and the affectationof the “conciliators”, while in no way reconciling the Party with the liquidators, only inspire the Golosists with “in-sensate hopes”. 
 Incidentally, these grimaces and this affectation of the “conciliators” are, undoubtedly, to a large extent due sim-ply to a failure to understand the situation. 
 It is only owingto lack of understanding that Comrade Yonov can confine himself to the question of the publication or non-publica-tion of Martov’s article, and that the Viennese supportersof Trotsky can reduce the question to “conflicts” on theCentral Organ. 
 Both Martov’s article (“On the Right Path” ...to liquidationism) and the conflicts on the Central Organare only particular episodes which cannot be understood apart from their connection with the whole situation. 
 For instance, Martov’s article clearly showed us, who duringthe past year have studied all the shades of liquidationismand Golosism, that Martov has turned (or was turned). 
 The Martov who signed the “Letter” of the Central Commit-tee on the conference could not be the same Martov who wrote such article as “On the Right Path. 
” By divorcing Martov’s article from the chain of events, from the “Letter”of the Central Committee that preceded it, from No. 
 19-20of Golos that followed it, from the Manifesto of the Sixteen, from the articles of Dan (“The Fight for Legality”), Potresovand Vozrozhdeniye , and by divorcing from the same chain of events the “conflicts” on the Central Organ, Trotsky and Yonov deprive themselves of the possibility of understand-ing the events that are taking place. 
 * And, conversely, everything becomes quite intelligible as soon as we focus our *Take also, for instance, “the theory of equal rights” for legal individuals in the illegal Party. 
 Is it not clear after the actions of Mikhail and Co. 
 and Potresov and Co. 
 that the meaning and signifi-cance of this theory is the recognition of the group of independent-legalists and the subordination of the Party to them? attention on what lies at the root of it all , namely, the final consolidation of the Russian independents and their final break with the “reactionary utopia” of re-establishing and strengthening the illegal Party. 
 7. 
 PRO-PARTY MENSHEVISM AND ITS EVALUATION The last question which we must consider in order to understand the “unity crisis” in our Party is the question of so-called pro-Party Menshevism and the appraisal of its significance. 
 The views held by the non-factionalists, i. 
e. 
, by those who wish to be regarded as outside the factions—Yonov andTrotsky ( Pravda No. 
 12, and the Vienna resolution)—are very characteristic in this respect. 
 Trotsky determinedly and persistently ignores pro-Party Menshevism (this was already pointed out in No. 
 13 of the Central Organ), whileYonov reveals the “cherished” idea of his fellow-thinker bydeclaring that the significance of “Comrade Plekhanov’s”utterances (Yonov refuses to notice any other pro-PartyMensheviks) consists in their “reinforcing” the factional struggle of the Bolsheviks and in advocating that “martial law be declared in the Party”. 
 That this position of Yonov and Trotsky is wrong should have been obvious to them for the simple reason that itis refuted by facts. 
 From No. 
 13 of the Central Organ *, we see that in no fewer than seven of the groups abroad assist-ing the Party (in Paris, Geneva, Berne, Zurich, Liége, Nice, San Remo), the Plekhanovites, or more correctly,the pro-Party Mensheviks, rose against Golos and demanded the fulfilment of the decisions of the plenum, demanded thatGolos cease publication and pointed out the liquidationist nature of the ideological position taken up by Golos i n No. 
 19-20. 
 The same process is taking place among the Party workers in Russia, though perhaps less conspicuously. 
 Itis ridiculous to keep silent about these facts. 
 To attempt,despite them, to represent Plekhanov’s struggle againstthe Golosists as a journalistic “factional” struggle means—objectively —taking the side of the group of independent legalists against the Party. 
 *See pp. 
 189-90 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 The obviously false and untenable position taken up by the above-mentioned “conciliators” should have opened their eyes to the fact that they are wrong in their point of departure, namely, that the political significance of theunity reached at the plenum lies In the agreement with“given persons, groups and institutions”. 
 We must not al-low ourselves to be deceived by the outward forms of Partyevents and their individual peculiarities; it is necessary to appraise the ideological and political significance of what is taking place. 
 Judging by outward appearances the agree-ment was made with specified Golosists. 
 But the basis,the condition for agreement was the adoption by the Golos-ists of Plekhanov’s position; that is evident from the anal-ysis given above of the resolution on the state of affairs in the Party. 
 * Outwardly it was the Golosists who appeared as the representatives of Menshevism in the Party judging,for example, by the composition of the Central Organ. 
In reality, after the plenum the Central Organ began totransform itself into an organ of “collaboration” betweenthe pro-Party Bolsheviks and the Plekhanovites, with the Golosists in full opposition. 
 The result was a zigzag in the development of Party unity; at first there was somethingin the nature of an indiscriminate conciliatory mass withouta clear definition of the ideological basis for unity, but lateron the logic of political tendencies gained the upper hand,the sifting of the independents from the Party was accel-erated by the maximal concessions that were made to the Golosists at the plenum. 
 When I heard at the plenum and saw in Golos (No. 
 19-20, p. 
 18) fierce attacks on the slogan “an agreement betweenthe strong factions for the fight against the liquidators ofthe Right and of the Left” (this slogan is put in quotation marks by Golos , but for some reason it is not stated openly that I defended this slogan both before and at the plenum)— *Of the four Menshevik members of the Central Committee who were present at the plenum, two directed all their efforts to winningover the Golosists, in effect to Plekhanov’s position—by makingthe maximum concessions to them. 
 This does not mean that thesetwo were firm pro-Party men, that they were proof against a returnto the Golos camp. 
 It merely means that Menshevism was caught at the moment when it could not as yet renounce the Party principle. 
 I thought to myself: “ abwarten !” “wait and see”. 
 Just wait, gentlemen of Golos , you are reckoning “without your host”. 
 The point is not that the plenum offered the opportunity of taking part in the agreement to everyone, and not onlyto the “strong” factions, strong because of their ideologicaland political position. 
 The point is, will your “host”, i. 
e. 
,the groups of independent-legalists, allow this opportunityto become a reality? Some months have elapsed, and only the blind can fail to see now that, in reality, it is precisely the “agreementbetween the strong factions” that constitutes Party unityand drives it forward “despite all obstacles”. 
 That is howit should be, that is the only way it can be in view of thereal relationship of forces in the Party. 
 No doubt, in the near future, either all the leading organs of the Party will be formally reconstructed in such a way as to express thisagreement, or the life of the Party and the progress of itsunity will proceed for a time irrespective of its leadingorgans. 
 No doubt, at first sight, it may seem strange to call the pro-party Mensheviks a “strong faction”, for at the present moment—at any rate abroad—the Golosists are apparentlystronger. 
 However, we Social-Democrats judge strength notby the statements of the emigrant groups, not by the way theMenshevik writers group themselves, but from the stand-point as to which position is objectively correct, and which is condemned by the logic of the political situation to su-bordination to the “independents” from 1898 to 1900, theRabocheye Dyelo -ists were stronger than the Iskrists both abroad and in Russia, yet they did not constitute a “strongfaction”. 
 Now that the Golosists have mobilised all their forces against Plekhanov and brought out all their slop-pails to pour on him—including Mr. 
 Potresov and the recollectionsof how Martov was “offended” in 1901-03 (sic!)—the im-potence of the Golosists becomes particularly obvious. 
Axelrod and Co. 
 were hopelessly behind the times politi-cally when they published abroad, in April, a symposium of personal abuse against Plekhanov, while in Russia Nasha Zarya in its February issue and Vozrozhdeniye in its March issue had already shifted the question to a completely differ-ent plane, and Plekhanov in No. 
 13 of the Central Organ had already passed from the history of his clashes with the Golosists to a fight against their present-day policy. 
 The Golosists, in recalling old “insults” (right up to 1901!),are floundering as helplessly as the Vperyodists, who arestill appealing to the kind-hearted to protect them fromthe Bolshevik Centre. 
 And see how our “offended” ones, who in 1910 are rav-ing at the very thought of a “Lenin-Plekhanov” agreement (their terminology!) in just the same way as Maximov did ayear ago over the same thing, are more and more betrayingthemselves. 
 Like Maximov, the Golosists try to make itappear that it is a question of almost a personal agreement“between Lenin and Plekhanov”, moreover the actions of the latter are explained as a “wild caprice” (p. 
 16 of the “Necessary Supplement”), as the “transformation of Saulinto Paul”, as “fluttering”, etc. 
, etc. 
 By recalling Plekha-nov’s “ five years of activity ” (ibid. 
) as a Menshevik, Martov is doing his utmost to compromise him (retrospectively) forthis fluttering, without noticing that by doing so he is disparaging himself most of all. 
 In the very same “Necessary Supplement”, the collective editorial board of Golos assures us (p. 
 32) that Plekhanov was “great” precisely during the above-mentioned five-year period (1904-08). 
 Just see what follows from this. 
The Mensheviks proclaim Plekhanov to be “great” not because of his activity during the twenty years (1883-1903) when he remained true to himself, when he was neither aMenshevik nor a Bolshevik, but the founder of Social-De-mocracy, but because of his activity during the five yearswhen, as the Mensheviks themselves admit, he was “flut-tering,” i. 
e. 
, was not following a consistent Menshevik line. 
 It follows that his “greatness” consisted in that he did not sink entirely into the morass of Menshevism. 
 But it is precisely the five-year history of Menshevism, which Axelrod and Martov recalled to their own disadvan-tage, that furnishes a number of facts which help to explain the split among the Mensheviks by causes other than those petty, personal causes stressed by Martov. 
 Plekhanov co-opted Axelrod and Martov in 1903, declar-ing in Iskra No. 
 52, in an article entitled “What Should Not Be Done”, that he wanted to manoeuvre with the oppor-tunists and, by these manoeuvres, reform them. 
 And in so doing he resorted to the most extreme attacks on the Bolshe-viks. 
 At the end of 1904 he tried to save Axelrod, who hadobviously slipped into liberalism (“The Plan of the ZemstvoCampaign”), but did it in such a manner as to avoid sayinga single word about such gems as proclaiming demonstra-tions before the Zemstvo members to be “the highest type of demonstration” (in the pamphlet Letter to the Central Committee , published for Party members only ). 
 In the spring of 1905 Plekhanov became convinced of the hope-lessness of these “manoeuvres”, left the Mensheviks andstarted Dnevnik , advocating reunion with the Bolsheviks. 
 Number 3 of Dnevnik (November 1905) is not Menshevik at all. 
 Having wasted about a year and a half on manoeuvres with the opportunists within the Party (from the end of1903 to the spring of 1905), Plekhanov, from the beginningof 1906 and during 1907, engaged in manoeuvring with the Cadets. 
 In this he went to far greater opportunist extremes than the other Mensheviks. 
 But when Plekhanov, who proclaimed the tactics of “manoeuvring” at the time of theFirst Duma and after its dispersal (see Dnevnik No. 
 6), proposed an agreement between the revolutionary partiesfor a struggle for a constituent assembly, Proletary (No. 
 2 of August 29, 1906, in the article, “Vacillating Tactics”) immediately pointed out that this position was not Menshe-vik at all. 
 * At the London Congress in the spring of 1907, Plekha-nov (according to Cherevanin’s account, already cited byme in the preface to the symposium Twelve Years ) fought the organisational anarchism of the Mensheviks. 
 ** H e wanted a “labour congress” as a manoeuvre for the develop-ment of the Party and not against the Party. 
 During the second half of 1907, as we learn from Martov in the “Neces-sary Supplement”, Plekhanov “had to expend a good dealof eloquence” to uphold the need for an illegal (i. 
e. 
, Party)Menshevik organ in opposition to Axelrod (who apparently *See present edition, Vol. 
 11, pp. 
 179-83. 
— Ed. 
 **See present edition, Vol. 
 13, pp. 
 94-113. 
— Ed. 
 preferred legal organs, which in fact were non-Party). 
 In 1908, the conflict over Potresov’s article served as an occa-sion for his break with the liquidators. 
 What do these facts prove? They prove that the pres-ent split among the Mensheviks is not accidental but inev-itable. 
 “Manoeuvring” does not exonerate the one who mademistakes for the sake of carrying out manoeuvres, and Iwithdraw nothing of what I wrote against those mistakes of Plekhanov. 
 However, “manoeuvring” explains why it is easy for some Mensheviks to go over to the independents,while for others it is difficult and even impossible. 
 A Social-Democrat who by his manoeuvres leads the working classto follow the Cadets does it no less harm than he who actsin this way because of his immanent gravitation towards opportunism. 
 But whereas the former will be able and will manage to call a halt in time, the latter will end up in theditch. 
 A Russian proverb says: make a certain person prayand he will do it with such zeal that he will bang his foreheadagainst the ground! Plekhanov might have said: makethe Potresovs and the Dans go to the Right for the sake of a manoeuvre and they will go to the Right on princi-ple. 
 The stand taken by certain Mensheviks fully justifies their appellation, “pro-Party Mensheviks”. 
 They took theirstand upon the struggle for the Party—against the independ-ent-legalists. 
 Mr. 
 Potresov and the editors of Golos Sotsial-Demokrata in the “Necessary Supplement” vainly try to evade this simple and obvious question. 
 Engels too fought the S. 
D. 
F. 
 (the British Social-Demo-crats)—says Potresov, wriggling (p. 
 24). 
 This is sophistry,my dear sir. 
 Engels corrected the Party, 107 but you do not say how the Party is to be corrected; you do not even say straightforwardly whether an illegal Social-Democratic Party is necessary now, whether the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 is necessaryor not. 
 In front of Stolypin you say: No (Nasha Zarya ), but in front of Party members, in the illegal press, you darenot say this, you wriggle and twist. 
 “Lenin-Plekhanov recommend a war against the new forms of the labour movement” (p. 
 31), “we start out from ... the position, conditions and requirements of the real labourmovement” (p. 
 32)—the editors assure us. 
 Sophistry, my dear sirs. 
 You yourselves have acknowledged that the ple-num did everything to recognise these new forms, and the Bolsheviks, too, by the struggle they waged before the plenum, proved it. 
 What we differ on is not the question whether “new forms are necessary”, whether it is necessaryto conduct legal work, or to found legal societies; we donot differ on this at all. 
 What we differ on is whether it ispermissible for legalists conducting such work, like the group of Mikhail and Co. 
, like the group of Potresov and Co. 
, to consider themselves Social-Democrats while being independent of the Party of the Social-Democrats , or whether Social-Democratic Party members are obliged to recognise the Party, to advocate the need for it, to work in it, towork on its organisation, to set up illegal Party units ev-erywhere and in all unions for regular communications with the Party, etc. 
 And you understand perfectly wellthat we differ now —after the plenum—on this account and only on this account. 
 The Golosists try to represent our efforts to draw closer to the pro-Party Mensheviks, to enter into an agreement with them in order to fight for the Party against the inde-pendents, as a personal bloc between “Lenin and Plekha-nov”. 
 They violently abuse the author of the article againstPotresov, in No. 
 47-48 of Proletary , for his tone of a “flat-tering courtier” who; they allege, is “speculating on anagreement” with Plekhanov. 
 I turn to this article and read on p. 
 7: “Of course, all the mistakes committed by Plekhanov during the revolution occurred precisely because he did not consistently carry out the policy which he himself had advocated in the old Iskra . 
” Let the reader judge what looks more like “flattery” and “speculation”: this blunt indication of what the Bol-sheviks regard as Plekhanov’s mistake, or the declarationthat Plekhanov was “great” precisely in the period whenhe was a Menshevik and, according to the Mensheviks,was “fluttering”. 
 “Plekhanov will be with us,” the editors of Golos Sotsial-Demokrata write, when “the time comes again for responsible [Golos ’s italics] political actions” (p. 
 32 of the “Necessary Supplement”). 
 This betrays political illiteracy, but is clear enough as regards “speculation”. 
 It is illiterate because now i s just the time which calls for political actions a hundred times more responsible for the old leaders than during an open struggle when the masses themselves will much moreeasily find the way. 
 It is clear in the sense of “speculation”,because it expresses readiness to recognise Plekhanov asa Menshevik once more as soon as he starts “manoeuvring” again. 
 We are surprised that the Golosists do not realise the significance of outbursts of this kind on their part along-side, for example, Axelrod’s phrase: “We did not want tostoop” (before Plekhanov) “to the role of toadying flunkeys”(p. 
 19). 
 You are behaving exactly like the type of people mentioned in your concluding words. 
 Your attitude towards Plekhanov corresponds precisely to the “formula” of suchpeople: “either coats off, or let’s have your hand. 
” For five years you have been asking for his “hand”, now on thirty-two double-sized pages you are “smacking hisface”, and on the thirty-second page you “express readiness”, you are prepared to recognise him as a Menshevik once more and kiss his hand. 
 As regards ourselves, we are entitled to say that at the time of his “fluttering”, Plekhanov was never a Bolshevik. 
We do not and never will consider him a Bolshevik. 
 Butwe do consider him a pro-Party Menshevik, as we do any Menshevik capable of rebelling against the group of inde-pendent-legalists and carrying on the struggle against themto the end. 
 We regard it as the absolute duty of all Bolshe-viks in these difficult times, when the task of the day isthe struggle for Marxism in theory and for the Party inthe practical work of the labour movement, to exert every effort to arrive at a rapprochement with such Social-Demo-crats. 
 8. 
 CONCLUSION. 
 THE PLATFORM OF THE BOLSHEVIKS The Party conference fixed by the plenum cannot and must not confine itself to the agenda proposed by the ple-num on condition that all the Mensheviks come over to the Party position. 
 This did not happen, and it is not fittingfor us to play hide-and-seek with ourselves. 
 The election slogan for this conference, the slogan under which it is to be convened and prepared must be the rally-ing of the Party members in the struggle against the group of independent-legalists. 
 In accordance with this task andtaking into account the anti-Party position of the Golos-ists, we must resolutely reorganise all the leading insti-tutions of the Party, so that they shall be concerned notwith the squabbles which every Golosist is preparing and will henceforth be preparing for them, but with the real work of building the Party . 
 The Golosists do not want to build the Party, they want to help secretly the group ofindependent-legalists. 
 The following must be the platform of the Bolsheviks for this conference: to build the Party in accordance with the December (1908) resolutions and in their spirit; to con-tinue the work of the plenum, making the above-mentionedcorrections of its decisions, corrections which have beendictated by the entire course of events since the plenum;to concentrate all our efforts on a systematic, undeviating,comprehensive and persistent utilisation of each and every legal possibility in order to gather the forces of the prole-tariat, to help it to group and consolidate itself, to helpit to train itself for the struggle and stretch its limbs; andalso steadily to restore the illegal Party units, to learn howto adapt them to new conditions, to restore the illegalpurely Party organisations, and, first and foremost, the purely proletarian organisations, which alone are capable of directing all the work in the legal organisations, to imbuethis work with the revolutionary Social-Democratic spirit,to carry on an irreconcilable struggle against the renegadesand the independent-legalists, and to prepare for the timewhen our Party, our R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, having preserved all the traditions of the revolution and of the great victories of the proletariat in 1905, and having strengthened and en-larged the proletarian army of the Party, will lead it intoa new battle, to new victories. 
 THE JUBILE E NUMBE R OF ZIHV A108 When the comrade delegated by the Central Committee of the Social-Democratic Party of the Lettish Region made a report on the status of work in the Social-Democratic Party of the Lettish Region at the plenary meeting of the Central Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 (this report was summarisedin No. 
 12 of our Party’s Central Organ), we were left withthe impression of an unusually “normal” and painless devel-opment of the Lettish Social-Democratic movement duringthe difficult times through which we are passing. 
 What created this impression was that the Social-Democratic Party of the Lettish Region, being the most proletarianin composition and with a mainly working-class leadership,has already, in accordance with the demands of objectivecircumstances, proceeded to work out special tactics andsolve the organisational problems of this protracted period of counter-revolution. 
 During the revolution the Lettish proletariat and the Lettish Social-Democratic Party occupiedone of the first and most prominent places in the struggleagainst the autocracy and all the forces of the old order. 
Incidentally, it is not without interest to note that the of-ficial strike statistics of 1905 (published by the Ministry of Trade and Industry) 109 show that Livonian Gubernia takes first place for the persistence of the proletarian strike movement. 
 In 1905 the number of factory workers in Li-vonian Gubernia totalled 53,917, while the number ofstrikers was 268,567, i. 
e. 
, almost five times (4. 
38) as many!In that year every worker in Livonian Gubernia went on strike on the average 5 times. 
 Next after Livonian Gu-bernia comes Baku Gubernia, where each factory workerstruck 4. 
56 times, Tiflis Gubernia—4. 
49 times, Petrokov /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR Gubernia—4. 
98 times and St. 
 Petersburg—4. 
19. 
 In Moscow Gubernia in 1905 the number of workers on strike came to 276,563, i. 
e. 
, only a few more than in Livonian Guber-nia, although the total number of factory workers in Mos-cow Gubernia is five times as large as in Livonian Guber-nia (285,769 against 53,917). 
 We see from this how muchmore class-conscious, unanimous and revolutionary theLettish proletariat was in its activity. 
 But we also know that its role of vanguard in the offensive against absolut-ism was not limited to strike action: it was in the van ofthe armed uprising, it contributed most of all to raisingthe movement to the highest level, i. 
e. 
, the level of an up-rising. 
 It succeeded more than any other in drawing theLettish agricultural proletariat and the Lettish peasantry into the great revolutionary struggle against tsarism and the landlords. 
 Besides being one of the leading contingents of Russian Social-Democracy during the revolution, the Lettish work-ers’ party has proved to be in the front ranks too duringthe difficult period of counter-revolution. 
 We learned from the report mentioned above that no special trend has arisen among the Lettish Social-Democrats either of an infatua-tion for revolutionary phrases (like our “otzovists”) or ofan infatuation for legal opportunities (like our liquidators , who reject the illegal Party and stand aside from the taskof restoring and strengthening the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
). 
 The Let-tish Social-Democratic workers have succeeded in setting about the work of utilising all kinds of legal avenues: thelegal unions, various workingmen’s associations, the Dumatribune, etc. 
 Moreover they have not in the least “liquidat-ed” the illegal, revolutionary Social-Democratic Party;on the contrary, they have everywhere preserved the work-ers’ illegal Party units, which will uphold and continue the traditions of the great revolutionary struggle, trainingby steady and persistent effort increasingly numerous andclass-conscious masses of combatants drawn from the younggenerations of the working class. 
 There is no doubt that among the causes to which the success of the Lettish Social-Democrats is due we must assign the foremost place to the higher development ofcapitalism, both in town and countryside, the greater clarity and definiteness of the class contradictions, their aggrava-tion by national oppression, the concentration of the Let-tish population and its superior cultural development. 
 In all these respects the situation in which the Russianworking class has to develop and operate is much less devel-oped. 
 It is this underdevelopment that is now engenderinga more acute crisis in the Russian section of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
The petty-bourgeois intellectuals in our movement play a big role. 
 They bring liabilities as well as assets: they bring not only the elaboration of questions of theory and tacticsbut an “elaboration” of every deviation from the Social-Democratic path into a distinct “trend”, as, for example,“otzovism” and “liquidationism”. 
 We venture to express the hope that the Lettish Social-Democrats, who have every reason to be proud of their successes, will not consider these vexed questions of theR. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 beneath their dignity. 
 The more class-conscious the proletariat, the more clear-ly does it visualise its Social-Democratic aims, the morevigorously does it fight against all petty-bourgeois distor-tions in the workers’ movement, the more is it concerned to free its less developed working-class comrades from theinfluence of petty-bourgeois opportunism. 
 The liquidationist trend in the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 is a product of the petty-bourgeois relations in Russia. 
 The whole lib-eral bourgeoisie takes its stand against the revolution, re-pudiates it, anathematises the tactics of 1905, which, it says, were “bloody and abortive”, grovels before the powersthat be, exhorts the people to confine themselves to legal methods of struggle. 
 And the petty-bourgeois intellectualsin our Party succumb to the influence of counter-revolu-tionary liberalism. 
 A history of the revolution has been published in five volumes ( The Social Movement in Russia at the Beginning of the Twentieth Century , edited by Maslov, Martov and Potresov). 
 This history in effect propagatesthe doctrine of the renegades, that the proletariat “over-estimated” its strength and “underestimated” the strengthof the bourgeoisie, and so forth. 
 Actually what the masses of the proletariat did underestimate was the treachery of the bourgeoisie; they overestimated the strength of thebourgeoisie in the fight for freedom, and underestimated their own forces—the force of the offensive of the oppressed and exploited millions. 
 Legal journals are being published ( Nasha Zarya and Vozrozhdeniye ) which preach the doctrine that to restore and strengthen the illegal Party, our old R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 thathas stood the test of years, is a “reactionary utopia”. 
 Theillegal Menshevik organ Golos Sotsial-Demokrata —comes out in defence of such gentlemen and proclaims the slogan: “Fight for legality. 
” One of the most prominent leaders of Menshevism, Plekhanov, leaves the editorial board andstaff of contributors of all these publications, declaringwar on them and appealing to the Mensheviks— the pro-Party Mensheviks —to support and strengthen the revolu-tionary, illegal party of the proletariat—the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Thus our Party has begun a decisive fight against groups of independent legalists who wrongly call themselves So-cial-Democrats. 
 In reality they are wrecking the causeof the Social-Democrats, they are destroying the Social-Democratic organisation of the working class, changingit into amorphous legal groups which have no principles and which are in fact making the working class dependent on the ideology of the liberals and on liberal political lead-ership. 
 About ten years ago our Party carried through a struggle against so-called Economism, which was very much akinto the liquidationism of today. 
 Now the struggle is more difficult, since all the forces of the counter-revolution— not only of the old but also of the new (modern), liberal-bourgeois counter-revolution—are bent on doing away withthe traditions of 1905 among the proletariat and destroyingits illegal Social-Democratic Party. 
 But the working class,which knew how to lead the Revolution of 1905, will un-doubtedly overcome all these deviations from the Social-Democratic path. 
 Before the Revolution of 1905 the Social-Democrats worked for twenty years in totally illegal circles and builtup a party which is leading millions towards the overthrowof the autocracy. 
 Now, after the revolution we can—and, consequently, we must—not only continue the work of the illegal Party units, but increase this work tenfold,surround the Party units with a dense network of legal organisations, utilise the tribune of the black-reactionary Duma for our agitation, instil among the mass of the workers the lessons learned in the revolutionary struggle, and create a Social-Democratic Party which will lead tens of mil-lions of people to a new onslaught against the autocracy. 
 Printed in July, 1910 Published according to in the newspaper Zihna No. 
 100 the text in the newspaper Signed: N. 
 Lenin Translated from the Lettish DRAF T RESOLUTIO N ON CO-OPERATIV E SOCIETIES FRO M THE RUSSIAN SOCIAL-DEMOCRATIC DELEGATIO N AT THE COPENHAGE N CONGRES S The Congress is of the opinion, 1) that proletarian co-operative societies enable the work-ing class to better its conditions by reducing exploitation by middlemen, influencing the working conditions in thesupplying firms, improving the situation of office workers,and so forth; 2) that proletarian co-operative societies are assuming increasing importance in the mass economic and politicalstruggle, giving assistance in strikes, lock-outs and in casesof victimisation, etc. 
; 3) that proletarian co-operative societies, when they organise the mass of the working class, teach them inde-pendent management and the organisation of distribution, preparing them in this sphere for the role of organiser of economic life in the future socialist society. 
 On the other hand the Congress is of the opinion, 1) that the improvements secured by co-operative socie-ties are confined within very narrow limits as long as themeans of production and distribution remain in the hands of the class whose expropriation is the chief aim of socialism; 2) that co-operative societies, being purely commercial establishments and subject to the pressure of competitive conditions, have a tendency to degenerate into bourgeoisshare companies; 3) that co-operative societies, not being organisations for the direct struggle against capital, are capable of engen-dering and do engender the illusion that they are a meansof solving the social problem. 
110 Therefore the Congress calls on the workers of all countries: a) to join the proletarian co-operative societies and pro-mote their development in every way, directing their or-ganisation along strictly democratic lines (a low entrancefee, one share per person, etc. 
); b) by untiring socialist propaganda and agitation within the societies to help to spread the ideas of class struggle and socialism among the mass of the workers; c) with the growth of socialist understanding in the co-operative societies, to develop and strengthen organic tiesbetween the co-operative societies and the socialist party,and also with the trade unions; d) at the same time the Congress points out that producer co-operatives can contribute to the struggle of the working class only if they are component parts of consumer co-oper-atives. 
 Written August 16-17 (29-30 ), 1910 First published in 1929 Published according to in the second and third the manuscript editions of Lenin’s Collected Works , Vol. 
 XIV TO THE INTERNATIONAL SOCIALIST BUREAU ON THE REPRESENTATION OF THE R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 September 2, 1910, Copenhagen At a plenary session in January 1910, the Central Com-mittee of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party, in order to emphasise its earnest desire for unity, adopted adecision to request the International Socialist Bureau toaccept as representatives of the Party on the Bureau twocomrades: G. 
 Plekhanov and N. 
 Lenin . 
 It goes without saying that the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party lays claim to only one vote in the Bureau but it would like to have fuller representation, as in the case of France. 
 This decision—to add Comrade G. 
 Plekhanov to the present representative, N. 
 Lenin—was unanimously sup-ported by the Social-Democratic delegation at the Congress. 
 Representative of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 on the International Socialist Bureau. 
 N. 
 Lenin Printed in 1911 , in the book: Huitième Congrès socialiste Internationale , Gand (The Eighth International Socialist Congress , Gand). 
 First published in Russian Published according to in 1929 in the second edition the text of the book of V. 
 I. 
 Lenin’s Collected Works Translated from the French THE VPERYOD FACTION The Vperyod group has published in Paris a “symposium of articles on current questions” entitled Vperyod . 
 Together with Comrade Sazhin ’s111 pamphlet ( On the Question of the Regeneration of the Party ), which was “published by private donation” and is obtainable through the editors of the symposium Vperyod , and the separate leaflet issued over the signature of the Vperyod group and the platform of this group, the Party has now more than sufficient ma-terial by which to judge the Vperyodists. 
 The platform of the Vperyodists is characterised by the following three features. 
 Firstly: of all the groups and factions within our Party it has been the first to give prom-inence to philosophy and that under cover of a pseudonym. 
“Proletarian culture”, “proletarian philosophy”—these arethe words used in the platform. 
 They are a pseudonym forMachism , i. 
e. 
, a defence of philosophical idealism under various garbs (empirio-criticism, empirio-monism, etc. 
). 
 Secondly: in the political sphere the group has declaredotzovism “a legitimate shade of opinion” and reported thatsome otzovists, members of this group, disagreed with thedefinition of the Party’s tasks in regard to the State Duma. 
The definition itself given in the Vperyod platform is so unclear and confused that it can only be described as an adaptation to the otzovist ideology. 
 Thirdly, and lastly,the platform emphatically condemned factionalism anddemanded the unification of factions, their coalition intoone party. 
 And so we have as a result—if we begin from the end— one very good aspiration and two screens on the part of very bad ideological and political trends which stand for abreak with Marxism and the subordination of the proletariat to bourgeois ideology and policy. 
 The Vperyod sympo-sium shows vividly what products can result from such a mixture. 
 The author of the leading article in the symposium, Maximov, keeps strictly to the diplomacy used in the plat-form, speaking of “proletarian culture” without any ex-planation of what he means by this. 
 In an article whichclaims to be a popular exposition this game of hide-and-seek is strikingly obvious. 
 What kind of popular exposition is this if not a single reader, unless he happens to be personally acquainted with Maximov or has already followed thewhole controversy about Machism and relating to Machism, is able to understand the true meaning of such a phrase? What kind of popular exposition is this when the same Maximov, on page 4 of the symposium, speaks of the “danger to proletarian socialism” represented by those offshoots ofthe intelligentsia who “uncritically accept and propagateideas of bourgeois science and philosophy that are incorrectand harmful to the proletariat...”? The dots are Maximov’s. 
 We do not know if they are meant to signify a shamefaced silence. 
 But we are quite sure that to speak, especially in a “popular” article, ofthe harmfulness of “ bourgeois philosophy ” to the proletariat without specifying clearly and exactly which philosophy he is referring to, is to have recourse to the worst form offactional diplomacy. 
 If you consider bourgeois philosophy an important question and raise it in the leading article of a “popular” symposium, then have the courage to speakstraight out, defend your ideas and do not concealthem. 
 Comrade Sazhin, presumably in the capacity of a “prac-tical” man, spoils Maximov’s diplomacy most impolitely. 
” * *In the Vperyod symposium another “practical man”, “Tkach I-n”112 of St. 
 Petersburg also gives the game away not very diplomat-ically: “Incidentally,” he writes, “Beltov’s book, The Monist View , is especially likely to give rise to such a wrong notion of historicalmaterialism” (Symposium, p. 
 57). 
 Why, of course! The truest “notionof historical materialism” is given, of course, by the books of the Rus-sian god-builders and Machists—what Vperyodist does not know this?And how can a book which has helped to rear a whole generation of Russian Marxists compete with the philosophical products of the Yushkeviches, Bogdanovs, Valentinovs and Lunacharskys?... On page 31 of his pamphlet he demands that “Party mem-bers” must be “ ensured ” “complete freedom for their revo-lutionary and philosophical thought ”. 
 This slogan is thoroughly opportunist. 
 In all countries this kind of slogan has been put forward in the socialistparties only by opportunists and in practice has meantnothing but “freedom” to corrupt the working class withbourgeois ideology. 
 “Freedom of thought” (read: freedom of the press, speech and conscience) we demand from the state (not from a party) together with freedom of association. 
 Theparty of the proletariat, however, is a free association,instituted to combat the “thoughts” (read: the ideology) of the bourgeoisie, to defend and put into effect one definiteworld outlook, namely, Marxism. 
 This is the ABC. 
 Yet their false political position has caused Maximov, Sazhin and Co. 
 to forget this ABC. 
 It was not their personal hypocrisybut the falsity of their political position that made thempropagate bourgeois slogans. 
 The falsity consists in thefact that some Vperyodists long with all their heart andsoul to drag the proletariat back , to the ideas of bourgeois philosophy (Machism), while others are indifferent to phi-losophy and merely demand “complete freedom” ... forMachism. 
 Hence they are obliged one and all to practice diplomacy, to confuse the issue, to play hide-and-seek andto clutch at bourgeois slogans. 
 And what does “complete freedom of revolutionary thought” really mean? Nothing but freedom for otzovist and other semi-anarchist ideas. 
 In other words, the same thingis said here as is expressed in the “platform” of the Vpe-ryodists by the phrase about recognising otzovism to bea “legitimate shade of opinion”. 
 The result is again pettydiplomacy with ideas, playing hide-and-seek, and hypoc-risy, due entirely to the same false ideological and po-litical position: we are not Machists, but we are in favourof “complete freedom” for Machism (in the Party); we arenot otzovists, but we are in favour of “complete freedom”for the otzovist shade of opinion, or more generally: “forrevolutionary thought”! The confusion is further confound-ed by the fact that two Vperyodists over their personal signatures (Sazhin and Rabochy Ar. 
 113) vigorously main-tain the importance and necessity of utilising legal oppor-tunities and the Duma tribune. 
 “The Social-Democrats,” writes Rabochy Ar . 
, “must combat those who are carrying on agitation [but who is carrying on this agitation, ComradeAr. 
? Is it not your Vperyodists?] against any utilisation whatsoever [think of that!] of legal opportunities, because such a mode of action is not Social-Democratic” (pp. 
 48-49of the symposium). 
 And the same Ar. 
, repeating these words of the Bolsheviks of the Proletary trend, violently abuses Proletary (post factum) because it allegedly painted retreating all along the line, surrendering all your positions,condemning in the press (again without saying it straight-forwardly) those friends of yours, those Vperyodists whoonce passed a resolution, for instance, to boycott a congress of factory doctors—and covering your retreat, your capi-tulation, by a beating of drums for battle. 
 Shabby factionaldiplomacy! Just take a look at the writings of the “Vperyodists” on the question of factions and factionalism. 
 The “platform”condemned factions and demanded their dissolution. 
 Sazhin fulminates against the factional centres, the “lead-ers abroad”, and so on and so forth. 
 The Vperyodists haveshed an ocean of tears over factionalism, have talked them-selves hoarse on the subject. 
 But what have they done? The whole history of the been the formation of a faction from abroad . 
 Here is an excerpt from a letter (July 15, 1910) sent by a Russianfunctionary to a member of the Central CommitteeBureau Abroad: “There is a committee (in St. 
 Petersburg) and, in addi-tion, there is a group of Vperyodists with a separate fund and secretary. 
 Money was received from abroad. 
 In Mos-cow...”—then follows the name of a person who is veryclose to one of the most prominent otzovists and a com-ment on the prosecution of such a policy. 
 Nobody who has any knowledge of Party affairs, or has paid any attention to the policy of the Vperyod literary group, can doubt for a single moment that they have beenorganising a faction from abroad. 
 That the notorious “schoolin X. 
—” was the foreign centre of a new faction was statedVperyod group since the January (1910) “unity” plenum hasthe Vperyodists in strange colours! That is what is called in print in July 1909, * and since then even the most uncon-cerned and uninformed Social-Democrats have become convinced of this fact. 
 The famous “platform” was drawn up abroad by eight intellectuals and seven worker-students. 
The part played by these workers, who hastily gave theirsignatures to the slogans of “proletarian philosophy” andrecognition of otzovism as a “legitimate shade of opinion”is too obvious to deserve any further comment. 
 We have here a clear-cut case of the formation of a faction by a group of literati abroad, who indeed behave like “khans” (Voi-nov’s 114 expression in the Vperyod symposium), for they themselves are conscious of their despotism, concealing from the public what is most dear to them, i. 
e. 
, the bour-geois philosophy of Machism and otzovism. 
 The Vperyodists cry out against “leaders abroad” and at the same time form an organisation which in actual fact is a mere adjunct to a handful of literati abroad; they cry out against factionand themselves secretly create a new, petty, lifeless and sectarianly empirio-monistic faction. 
 The political source of all this hypocrisy is that the real leaders of the faction find it impossible to come out openly and directly in fa-vour of the things that are really dear to them. 
 We shall confine ourselves to two particularly glaring examples of hypocrisy. 
 On page 53 of the symposium,Rabochy Ar . 
 declares that the Bureau of the Central Commit-tee in Russia “is not doing a damned thing” (these words of course are ascribed to a “Leninist” worker who is alleged to have agitated the “Vperyodist” in this strain. 
 Oh, thenaïve cunning of “Rabochy Ar. 
”!) and that the Vperyodist(again with the “Leninist” and, of course, on his instigation)proposed that the “Moscow organisation be declared inde-pendent of the Russian Central Committee and no longer subordinate to its instructions”. 
 Beginning with January 1910 the Bureau of the Russian Central Committee worked hard to restore the central organisation in spite of the opposition both of the Golosist liquidators (the famous Mikhail, Roman and Yuri incident)and of the Vperyodists (who at this time were building their own little faction from abroad against the Central *See present edition, Vol. 
 15, pp. 
 450-51. 
— Ed. 
 Committee). 
 And now all these Vperyodists are shedding crocodile tears over the “inaction” of the Bureau of the C. 
C. 
! These Vperyodists, who are actually entirely “ inde-pendent ” of the Party, and are entirely anti-Party faction-alists, write in a popular symposium that local organisationsmust be declared “independent” of the C. 
C. 
 Another example. 
 In the same symposium an anonymous “member of the Party” exercises himself in some hack writ-er’s criticism of the financial report of the C. 
C. 
 Bureau Abroad. 
 Among other things the anonymous hack writeson p. 
 60: “What kind of ‘trustees’ [the report speaks of moneyreceived from trustees], why they are ‘holding in trust’,or have been ‘holding in trust’, money of the C. 
C. 
, and forwhat ‘special purposes’ this money is destined, is something which nobody will understand here. 
” That is just how it is printed. 
 Nobody will understand . 
 It is written by members of that same Vperyod group which had two representatives at the January plenum thatheard the statement of the Bolsheviks about their condition-al transfer of money to “trustees” (i. 
e. 
, to three of the best known representatives of the International Social-Demo-cratic movement). 
 What money, from what source, whowere the trustees, and so on—all this was fully known to the plenum, i. 
e. 
, to all the factions, i. 
e. 
, to the “Vperyod-ists” as well . 
 Yet in a “popular” symposium for the decep-tion of the workers, the Vperyodists write “nobody will understand. 
” It is written in that same Vperyod symposium, whose first two articles were signed by Maximov and Domov . 
 115 Both these Vperyodists are perfectly aware of the whole history of the receipt of this money by the Bolsheviks and its transfer to the trustees. 
 And now, since it would be “awkward” for them to come forward personally and declare that “nobody will understand”, they select for this commis-sion anonymous hack writers , who call themselves “members of the Party” on the occasion of their anti-Party conduct. 
Through these anonymous hacks Maximov and Domovin a “popular” symposium tell the workers a deliberate untruth , that “nobody will understand” what kind of “trus-tees” these are, and so on. 
 And these gentlemen beat theirbreasts and harangue against “factions” and “leaders abroad”. 
 Through an anonymous “Party member” they “criticise” the financial report of the Central Committee while theythemselves announce on the first page of their symposiumthat hitherto “lack of funds” prevented their group from publishing a newspaper but “ now this obstacle has been re-moved ”. 
 So the Vperyod group has now received funds. 
 Pleasant news for the Vperyodists, no doubt. 
 But what a “nerve” you must have, oh most honourable Vperyodists, to utter in print through an anonymous hack in a “popular”symposium a deliberate untruth about the Central Committee to the effect that “nobody will understand” who the “trus-tees” are and what money is in their possession, and at thesame time say never a word to the C. 
C. 
 or the other factions about what money “Vperyod ” has received and what literati are disposing of it ? The Party, it would seem, is accountable to the Vperyodists but the Vperyodists are not account-able to the Party? It must be repeated over and over again that this hypoc-risy of the Vperyodists is due not to the personal traitsof Peter or Paul but to the political falsity of their whole position; it is due to the fact that the Machist literati andthe otzovists cannot go into battle openly and directly for their non-Social-Democratic pet ideas. 
 Anyone who under-stands these political conditions will not come to a halt bewildered, mystified and downcast at the merely super-ficial aspect of the matter, at the mass of personal conflicts,bickering, abuse, etc. 
 Anyone who understands these polit-ical conditions will not be satisfied by a conciliatory phrase (à la Trotsky) to the effect that what we need is “ not a strug-gle against the otzovists but the overcoming of otzovism”, for this is empty and meaningless phrase-mongering. 
 Theobjective conditions of the counter-revolutionary era, theera of disintegration, the era of god-building, the era ofMachism, otzovism and liquidationism—these objective conditions have put our Party in a state of war against circles of literati who are organising their own factions,and this struggle cannot be evaded by a phrase. 
 To standaside from this struggle is to stand aside from one of thecontemporary tasks of the Social-Democratic Labour Party. 
 Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 15-16 , Published according to August 30 (September 12), 1910 the text in Sotsial-Demokrat THE QUESTION OF CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIES AT THE INTERNATIONAL SOCIALIST CONGRESS IN COPENHAGEN In the present article I intend to confine myself to an account of the transactions of the Congress on thequestion indicated in the heading and to a description of the trends of socialist thought which came into conflict there. 
 Prior to the Congress three draft resolutions on co-opera-tive societies were published. 
 The Belgian draft (in No. 
 5of the Periodical Bulletin of the International SocialistBureau, which is issued irregularly in the three official languages of the International Congresses) begins by warn-ing socialist workers against the doctrine of those whoregard co-operative societies as something self-sufficient,a sort of means for the solution of the social question. 
 Then,admitting that the working class is extremely interested inutilising the co-operative societies as a weapon in their class struggle, the draft resolution of the Belgian party points out the direct advantages of co-operative societies(combating commercial exploitation, improving the work-ing conditions of persons in the employ of the suppliers,etc. 
) and expresses the desire for “organic, closer and closerties” to be established between the socialist parties and the co-operative societies. 
 The draft resolution submitted by the majority of the French Socialist Party is drawn up in the Jaurès spirit. 
The co-operative societies are exalted to the skies and areput forward—exactly in the style of the bourgeois reformers—as a “necessary” element of “social reformation”. 
 There are vague phrases about converting the co-operatives from unions of separate persons into general federations of associations. 
 Proletarian co-operative societies are confused with the co-operatives of petty proprietors (in agriculture). 
 The resolution advocates the neutrality of co-operativesocieties, describing as harmful the imposition of anyobligations on the co-operative societies with respect tothe Socialist Party. 
 Lastly, the draft submitted by the minority of the French socialists (Guesde-ists) declares emphatically that the co-operatives in themselves are by no means class organisa-tions (as, for instance, the trade unions are), and that theirimportance is determined by the use which is made of them. 
The workers, by joining the co-operative societies en masse , can benefit from them in their struggle against capital; from the example they offer, the workers can to some ex-tent get an idea of the socialist society that would be organ-ised after the contradictions of the present social orderhave been eliminated. 
 The draft therefore emphasises thelimited significance of the co-operative societies and callsupon the socialist parties to assist the proletarian co-oper-ative societies, warns against illusions as to the role of co-operative societies, and recommends socialists to unitewithin the co-operative societies in order to explain to themasses their real task: the conquest of political power andthe conversion of the means of production and distributioninto common property. 
 It is quite clear that there are two main lines of policy here: one—the line of proletarian class struggle, recognitionof the value of the co-operative societies as a weapon in thisstruggle, as one of its subsidiary means, and a definitionof the conditions under which the co-operative societieswould really play such a part and not remain simple commer-cial enterprises. 
 The other line is a petty-bourgeois one, obscuring the question of the role of the co-operative socie-ties in the class struggle of the proletariat, attaching to theco-operative societies an importance transcending thisstruggle (i. 
e. 
, confusing the proletarian and the proprietors’view of co-operative societies), defining the aims of the co-operative societies with general phrases that are acceptable even to the bourgeois reformers, those ideologues of theprogressive employers, large and small. 
 Unfortunately these two lines were only sketched in the three drafts that had been prepared beforehand, and they were not opposed one to the other, clearly, distinctly and sharply, as two trends , whose conflict should settle the question. 
 Hence the transactions of the Congress proceededunevenly, confusedly, and as it were spontaneously. 
 It “cameup against” differences of opinion every minute, but theywere not cleared up and the result was a resolution reflect-ing the confusion of ideas, one which did not say everything that could and should have been said in a resolution of aCongress of Socialist Parties. 
 In the commission on the question of co-operative socie-ties two trends immediately became apparent. 
 One wasrepresented by Jaurès and Elm. 
 Elm was one of the four German delegates on the co-operative commission and acted as spokesman for the Germans—adopting a definitely op-portunistic tone. 
 The other trend was the Belgian. 
 Themediator and conciliator was the Austrian, Karpeles, a prom-inent leader of the Austrian co-operative movement, whoupheld no definite line of principle, but (or “because” rather than “but”) who inclined more often than not to the opportu-nists. 
 Moreover, even when the Belgians did challenge Jaurèsand Elm this was due more to the instinct for a really prole-tarian approach to co-operative affairs than to a distinctunderstanding of the hostility and the irreconcilable breachbetween the proletarian and the petty-bourgeois point of view on the question. 
 That is why, for instance, Anseele (chairman of the co-operative commission) made someforceful and excellent speeches to the commission againstneutrality in the co-operative societies, against exaggeratedideas of their importance, and urging the necessity of our being socialist co-operators, not co-operator socialists. 
 Yet when the resolution was being drawn up the same Anseele might have driven anyone to despair by his toleration ofthe formulations put forward by Jaurès and Elm, his re-luctance to inquire into the causes of the dissension. 
 But to return to the meetings of the commission. 
 Natu-rally the course of its work was decisively influenced by the representatives of nations with a strongly developed co-operative movement. 
 Moreover, it immediately becameapparent that there was a difference of opinion between the Belgians and the Germans, vastly to the disadvantage of the latter. 
 At any rate the Belgians pursued a proletarian line, although not quite consistently, not quite distinctly. 
 Elm came out as an opportunist of the first water (especially in the subcommission, of which more later). 
 Naturally, the leading role belonged to the Belgians. 
 The Austrians were sympathetically disposed to them and at the end of the commission’s deliberations an Austro-Belgian resolution was read, while Elm, who submitted the German resolution, declared forthright that he thought it would be quite pos-sible to make it agree with Jaurès’s draft. 
 Since among the French there was a strong minority against Jaurès (there were 202 mandates for his point of view and 142 for Gues-de’s) while among the Germans there would have been a no less strong minority against Elm (if the question of the two points of view had come up clearly and sharply), theAustro-Belgian alliance had real chances of victory. 
 Andit was not so much a question of “victory” in the narrowsense of the word as of consistently upholding the prole-tarian point of view on the co-operative societies. 
 Due to the excessive concessions which the subcommission made to Jaurès and Elm, this consistency was not attained. 
 As for us, the Russian Social-Democrats, we tried to sup-port the Austro-Belgian line in the commission and withthis aim in view, before the reading of the Austro-Belgianconciliatory draft, we submitted a draft resolution of our own, as follows: “ DRAFT RESOLUTION OF THE SOCIAL -DEMOCRATIC DELEGATION OF RUSSIA “The Congress is of the opinion: “1) That proletarian consumers’ societies improve the situation of the working class in that they reduce the amount of exploitationby all kinds of commercial middlemen, influence the labour condi-tions of the workers employed by the supplying firms and improve the situation of their own employees. 
 “2) That these societies can assume great importance for the eco-nomic and political mass struggle of the proletariat by supportingthe workers during strikes, lock-outs, political persecution, etc. 
 On the other hand the Congress points out: “1) that the improvements that can be achieved with the help of the consumers’ societies can only be very inconsiderable as long as the means of production remain In the hands of the class without whose expropriation socialism cannot be attained; “2) that consumers’ societies are not organisations for direct struggle against capital and exist alongside similar bodies organisedby other classes, which could give rise to the illusion that these organi-sations are a means by which the social question may be solved without class struggle and the expropriation of the bourgeoisie. 
 “The Congress calls on the workers of all countries: “a) to join the proletarian consumers’ societies and to promote their development in every way, at the same time upholding the dem-ocratic character of these organisations; “b) by untiring socialist propaganda in the consumers’ societies, to spread the ideas of class struggle and socialism among the workers; “c) to strive at the same time to bring about the fullest possible co-operation between all forms of the labour movement. 
 “The Congress also points out that producers’ co-operatives can be of importance for the struggle of the working class only if they are a component part of consumers’ societies. 
” All the draft resolutions were handed to a subcommission (the commissions at International Congresses are so large—each nation delegating four representatives to each commis-sion—that it is simply out of the question to work out the text of resolutions at a full commission meeting). 
 Thissubcommission consisted of ten persons; two Belgians(Anseele and Vandervelde), one Frenchman (Jaurès), oneAustrian (Karpeles), one German (Elm), one Dutchman(Wibaut—a Marxist), one Italian, one Dane, one Englishman and one Russian Social-Democrat (Voinov and myself— our Social-Democratic delegation was unable to meet toelect a representative—so we both attended and one voted). 
 It was in the subcommission that the real business of drawing up the text of the resolution took place. 
 The textadopted by the Congress, except for some small stylistic changes, is the same as the one drawn up by the subcommis-sion; the reader will find the text of the Congress resolutionelsewhere in this issue. 
 The fight in the subcommissioncentred not on the question of the relations of co-operatorsto the Party—as was the case in the commission—but onthe more fundamental question of the significance and role of co-operative societies. 
 The Belgians tended to define their role, quite correctly in principle, as one of the possible(in certain conditions) auxiliary weapons in the proletarianclass struggle for the “total expropriation” (expropriationintègrale) of the capitalist class. 
 Elm, supported by Jaurès, was strenuously opposed and revealed his opportunism to the full. 
 He said it was not certain that matters would ever come to expropriation, that he personally considered it most improbable that for the “majority” (!) this was adebatable question, there was nothing about expropriationin the programme of the German Social-Democratic Partyand that one should say “Überwindung des Kapitalismus”—“the overcoming of capitalism”. 
 Bebel’s famous words in Hannover, uttered at the conclusion of the controversy with Bernstein, “es bleibt bei der Expropriation”—“we standas before for expropriation,” 116 were forgotten by one of the leaders of German opportunism. 
 In connection with thisdispute the “question of socialisation” arose. 
 Jaurès demandedin the form of an ultimatum that the definition of the sig-nificance of the co-operative societies should include: “They help the workers [and this was included in the text adoptedby the Congress] to prepare the democratisation and social-isation of the means of production and distribution. 
” This is one of those nebulous, indefinite phrases—en-tirely acceptable to the ideologists of the petty proprietor and the theoreticians of bourgeois reformism—at which Jaurès is such an adept and to which he is so partial. 
 Whatis the “democratisation of the means of production and dis-tribution?” (Later in the commission, when the draft cameback from the subcommission, the French altered the word“means”— moyens —to forces, but this did not make the slightest difference. 
) Peasant production (as I told the commission) is “more democratic” than large-scale capital-ist production. 
 Does this mean that we socialists want toestablish small-scale production? And what is “socialisa-tion”? It can be taken to mean conversion into the propertyof the whole community, but it can also be taken to mean any palliatives, any reforms within the framework of capi-talism, from peasant co-operatives to municipal baths andpublic lavatories. 
 In the subcommission Jaurès referredto the Danish agricultural societies, apparently sharingthe view of the bourgeois economists that these are notcapitalistic enterprises. 
 Organising opposition to this opportunism, we (Russian and Polish Social-Democrats) tried appealing from Elm toWurm, the co-editor of the Neue Zeit , who was also repre-senting the Germans on the co-operative commission. 
 Wurm did not approve of the phrase “democratisation and socialisation”, proposed (privately) a number of amend-ments, and negotiated between Elm and the Marxists; butElm was so “adamant” that Wurm’s efforts came to nothing. 
Some time after the Congress I read in the Leipziger Volks-zeitung (No. 
 201, August 31, 1910, 3. 
 Beilage), that the question of the co-operative societies had been brought up in the German delegation the Tuesday before. 
 “R. 
 Fi-scher inquired,” wrote the correspondent of this paper, “ifthere were any differences on the question of co-operativesamong the German delegates. 
” Elm replied: “Yes. 
 And they can’t be eliminated overnight. 
 Congress decisions arealways in the nature of a compromise and on this question too matters will probably end in a compromise. 
” Wurm : “My views on the question of the co-operative societies arequite different ( durchaus andere ) from the views of von Elm; nevertheless, we shall probably find common groundin a combined resolution. 
” After this the delegation consid-ered further discussion unnecessary. 
 This report bears out the fact which was already quite evident at the International Congress in Stuttgart. 
 117 The German delegation is composed equally of Party rep-resentatives and trade union representatives. 
 The latterare almost all opportunists as it is usually the secretariesand other trade union “bureaucrats” who are elected. 
 In general the Germans are incapable of pursuing a consistent line of principle at International Congresses and the hegem-ony in the International often slips from their hands. 
Wurm’s impotence before Elm is but one more illustrationof the crisis in German Social-Democracy which consistsin the growth of an inevitable and decisive breach with the opportunists. 
 On the question of financial support for the Party from the co-operative societies, Elm and Jaurès during the pro-ceedings of the subcommission also won an excessive conces-sion from the Belgians, who agreed to the formula: “Itrests with the co-operative societies of each country to decide whether and to what extent they should assist the political and trade union movement directly from theirown funds. 
” When the subcommission’s draft came back to the com-mission for final adoption these were the two points upon which we fixed our attention. 
 Together with Guesde we moved two (main) amendments: firstly, to replace the words“(the co-operative societies) help the workers to preparethe democratisation and socialisation of production anddistribution” by the words: “(the co-operative societies)help to a certain extent to prepare the functioning of pro-duction and distribution after the expropriation of the cap-italist class. 
” This amendment, which stylistically isnot very happily formulated, does not mean that the co-oper-ative societies cannot help the workers at present, but that the future mode of production and distribution, whichis being prepared now by the co-operative societies, can begin to function only after the expropriation of the capi-talists. 
 The second amendment concerned the point whichspeaks of the relation of co-operative societies to the Party. 
We proposed either to add the words “which (i. 
e. 
, aid tothe workers’ struggle) is in any case desirable from thestandpoint of socialism”, or to replace the whole of this point by another expressly recommending socialists i n the co-operative societies to advocate and insist upon directsupport for the class struggle of the proletariat. 
 Both amendments were rejected by the commission and collected only about 15 votes. 
 The Socialist-Revolutiona-ries—as they always do at International Congresses—voted for Jaurès. 
 Before the Russian public they are not averse to reproaching even Bebel with opportunism, but beforethe European they follow Jaurès and Elm! Wurm tried topatch up the last part of the resolution by rearranging theorder of the last three paragraphs. 
 Let it be said first of allthat the unification of the co-operatives in a single federa-tion is desirable (second paragraph from the end). 
 Then let it be stated that it rests with the co-operative societies todecide whether they should render direct assistance to theParty or not (third paragraph from the end). 
 And let thelast paragraph begin with “but” ( but the congress declares that it would be desirable to have increasingly intimate relations between the Party, the trade unions and the co-operative societies). 
 Then it would be clear from the general context that the Congress recommends the co-operative societies to help the Party. 
 Elm rejected even this amend-ment! Wurm then withdrew it. 
 After that Wibaut moved it in his own name, we voted for it, but the amendment was rejected. 
 As to the line to pursue at the plenary session of the Congress, we had a conference with Guesde. 
 Guesde consid-ered—and his opinion was shared by the German revolu-tionary Social-Democrats—that at the plenary session of the Congress we ought not to start a fight over minor changes, but to vote for the resolution as a whole. 
 Its defects consist in the admission of a revisionist phrase which is not a sub-stitute for the definition of the aim of socialism but standsalongside this definition—and in one insufficiently emphatic expression of the idea that workers’ co-operative societies should help the workers’ class struggle. 
 An attempt should be made to remove such defects but there were no groundsfor starting a fight at the general meeting because of them. 
We agreed with this opinion of Guesde’s and the resolutionwas unanimously adopted at the plenary session of theCongress. 
 To sum up the work of the Congress on the question of co-operative societies, we must say—without concealingthe defects of the resolution either from ourselves or fromthe workers—that the International gave, in essentials, acorrect definition of the tasks of the proletarian co-operativesocieties. 
 Every member of the Party, every Social-Demo-cratic worker, every class-conscious worker-co-operator must be guided by the resolution that was adopted and carry The Copenhagen Congress marks that stage in the develop-ment of the labour movement in which its growth was, so tospeak, mainly in breadth and in which it began to bring the proletarian co-operatives into the orbit of class struggle. 
Differences with the revisionists came to light but therevisionists are still a long way from coming out with anindependent programme. 
 The fight against revisionism hasbeen postponed, but it will come inevitably. 
 Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 17, Published according to September 25 (October 8), 1910 the text in Sotsial-Demokrat Signed: N. 
 Leninon all his activity in the spirit of this resolution. 
 HOW CERTAIN SOCIAL-DEMOCRATS INFORM THE INTERNATIONAL ABOUT THE STATE OF AFFAIRS IN THE R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 In connection with the International Congress in Copen-hagen articles have appeared in a number of publications on the state of affairs in our Party. 
 We shall dwell brieflyon three articles written by spokesmen of three differentParty (or rather anti -Party) trends. 
 The first place for unceremoniousness should go to an article which appeared, sad to relate, in the central press organ of our comrades in Germany ( Vorwärts , August 28). 
 This article is anonymous. 
 It is merely subtitled “FromOur Russian Correspondent”. 
 From it the reader learns that “the Russian emigrants who play a disproportionately great role in our Party, havenever been so remote from the interests and requirements of the Russian labour movement as they are today”, that the Central Organ of our Party, Sotsial-Demokrat , “is being conducted in a narrow factional spirit” and that the Bolshe-viks are noted for “formal and superficial radicalism”,that it is only by a process of evolution that they havefinally come to a “recognition” of parliamentarism, and so on and so forth. 
 The author is extremely dissatisfied with the majority of our Party. 
 He paints a very black pictureof the whole situation in the Party. 
 He sees only one brightspot in the life of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 This is “the workers’newspaper Pravda , published in Vienna, which from the outset has stood completely aloof from factional polemics and devotes itself to political agitation”, and so forth. 
 Don’t you begin to guess, reader, to whose “non-factional” pen this article belongs? You are not mistaken, of course. 
 Yes, it is the “non-factional” Comrade Trotsky, who has no compunction about openly advertising his faction’s prop-aganda sheet. 
 He provides the insufficiently informed * Another literateur, R. 
 Streltso v, set out to libel our Party in the organ of the German revisionists. 
 His article was published in the Sozialistische Monatsheft e, which is edited by Herr Bloch, whom Bebel in Magdeburg justly called a National Liberal. 
 R. 
 Streltsov—who collaborates with Mr. 
 Prokopovich on the newspaper Tovarishc h119— quite openly takes the liquidators under his protection. 
 “Nothing could be more absurd than the accusation which is being made against them. 
” It is the liquidators who are the real Social-Democrats. 
 As for the Party majority, it, you see, “considers superfluous the utilisation of so-calledlegal opportunities, i. 
e. 
, the participation of the Social-Democrats in the trade unions, co-operative societies, legalcongresses, and so forth. 
” Yes, indeed, the German readerwill get a true picture if he studies the history of the Rus-sian revolution from Cherevanin and the contemporary situation and tactical struggle inside our Party—fromStreltsov and Trotsky! ... The third article is from the pen of the ultimatumist (and god-builder) Voinov, writing in Le Peuple , 120 the Party organ of our Belgian comrades. 
 ** And although Voinov gives the Belgian comrades a wrong idea of the “tacticaltrends in our Party” (the heading of his article) still, inone respect, his article has performed a valuable service:it has revealed to us once again the essence of otzovist-ultimatumist tactics. 
 Occasionally we do come acrossblessed writers in the Vperyod group who expound the aims *The fact that this article was published in a Party organ like Vorwärts impelled our delegates at the Copenhagen Congress to make a protest to the Central Committee of the German Party. 
 This protest was lodged by the delegates of our Central Organ (G. 
 V. 
 Plekhanovand A. 
 Varsky) and by the Party’s representative on the InternationalBureau (N. 
 Lenin). 
 118 It was while this question was being discussed by the Social-Democratic delegation that Comrade Trotsky divulgedto us the secret that he himself had written the offending article. 
 **Voinov thoughtfully informs the readers that he is a “delegate at the International Congress in Copenhagen”. 
German readers with the same appraisal of the policy of the Party majority as that made by the liquidators. 
 of the otzovist-ultimatumists openly without veiling them, as is the common practice in the literary utterances of the Vperyodists. 
 Listen for yourselves. 
 What member of the Vperyod group would frankly admit now that the otzovist-ultimatumists are still dreaming about fighting squads,etc. 
? But the candid Voinov writes frankly that he and hisfriends want to “continue and develop our preparation forarmed action”, whereas Lenin, who has swung to the Right, denies “for example, the necessity of training schools” at the present time. 
 What Vperyodist now says openly thatan “ultimatum” must be sent to the Duma group? But thegood Voinov informs us frankly that the “regeneration ofthe Party” is necessary to his friends in order to “presentan ultimatum to our deputies”.... 
 What Vperyodist will tell you in the press for what purpose the otzovist-ultima-tumists require a “Party school” abroad? But the loquaciousVoinov does not omit to inform us that the “school” is nec-essary for preparing a “new congress” of the Party and theelection of a different Central Committee in place of thepresent “Right-wing” Central Committee. 
 * Surely the Vperyod “diplomats” will not thank Voinov for this candour! Trotsky, Voinov and Streltsov have fraternally joined hands in opposing the Party line.... 
 Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 17, Published according to September 25 (October 8), 1910 the text in Sotsial-Demokrat Signed: N. 
 Lenin *In this article Voinov thought it expedient ... to add a little boast that “some members of the C. 
C. 
’s elected at the Congress, but dissatisfied with the C. 
C. 
’s new policy have resigned. 
” Where andwhen was that, Comrade Voinov? First page of Lenin’s manuscript “Announcement on the Publication of Rabochaya Gazeta ”, October 1910 Reduced First page of Lenin’s manuscript “Announcement on the Publication of Rabochaya Gazeta ”, October 1910 Reduced ANNOUNCEMEN T ON THE PUBLICATION OF RABOCHAYA GAZET A121 The deep crisis of the workers’ movement and the Social-Democratic Party in Russia still continues. 
 Disintegration of the Party organisations, an almost universal exodus of the intellectuals from them, confusion and waveringamong the Social-Democrats who have remained loyal,dejection and apathy among fairly wide sections of theadvanced proletariat, uncertainty as to the way out of thissituation—such are the distinguishing features of the present position. 
 Among the Social-Democrats there are not a few who are faint-hearted and of little faith, who are ready todespair of finding their bearings in the prevailing confusion,to despair of restoring and strengthening the Party, theR. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, with its revolutionary aims and traditions,who are ready to stand aloof and to isolate themselves in narrow, petty circles concerned only with “cultural” work and so forth. 
 The crisis continues, but its end is already clearly visible, the way out has been fully indicated and tested by theParty, the confusion and wavering has already been chan-nelled into fairly definite tendencies, trends and factions, a very clear-cut appraisal of which has been made by the Party—while the assumption of definite shape by the anti-Party tendencies and the clear appraisal of them are alreadyhalf-way towards getting rid of confusion and wavering. 
 In order not to give way to despair and disillusion it is necessary only to understand the full depth of the sources of the crisis. 
 One cannot skip over or avoid this crisis, one can only survive it by means of persistent struggle, forit is not accidental but engendered by the special stage of both the economic and the political development of Russia. 
 The autocracy reigns as before. 
 Violence is still more bru-tal. 
 Tyranny is still more powerful. 
 Economic oppression is still more brazen. 
 But the autocracy can no longer main-tain itself merely by the old methods. 
 It is compelled to make a new attempt, an attempt at an open alliance with theBlack-Hundred feudal landlords and the Octobrist capital-ists, an alliance in the Duma and through the Duma. 
 The hopelessness of this attempt and the growth of a new revolutionary crisis are obvious to anyone who is stillcapable of thought. 
 But this revolutionary crisis is beingprepared in a new situation, in which classes and partiesare marked by immeasurably greater consciousness, soli-darity and organisation than before the Revolution of 1905. 
 Russian liberalism has been converted from a well-meaning, dreamy, fragile and immature opposition of be-nevolent aspirations into a strong, parliamentarily-dis-ciplined party of bourgeois intellectuals, who are consciousenemies of the socialist proletariat and of a revolutionarysettlement of accounts with the feudal landlords by the peasant masses. 
 To beg for concessions from the monarchy, to threaten it with revolution (hateful and terrifying tothe liberals themselves), continually to betray the strugglefor emancipation and desert to the enemy—such is the inev-itable lot of the liberal, Constitutional-Democratic Party,inevitable owing to its class nature. 
 The Russian peasantry has shown its capacity for mass revolutionary struggle if the latter is launched by the proletariat, and its capacityfor perpetually vacillating between the liberals and theSocial-Democrats. 
 The Russian working class has shownthat it is the only class that is revolutionary to the end,the only leader in the struggle for freedom, even for bour-geois freedom. 
 And now the great task of continuing the struggle for freedom can and will be accomplished onlyby the revolutionary struggle of the proletariat, drawingwith it the working and exploited masses. 
 Operating in thenew situation, among more conscious and united enemies,the working class must refashion also its own Party, the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 In place of leaders from the intelligentsia it is bringing to the fore leaders from among the workers. 
A new type of working-class member of the Social-Demo-cratic Party is arising, independently carrying on all the activities of the Party and, compared with the previous type, capable of rallying, uniting and organising masses of the proletariat ten times and a hundred times as greatas before. 
 It is to this new worker in the first place that we address our Rabochaya Gazeta . 
 This worker has grown out of the stage of wanting to be talked to in childish language or fed with pap. 
 He needs to know all about the political aims of the Party, how it is built, its inner-Party struggle. 
 Heis not daunted by the unvarnished truth about the Partyon whose strengthening, revival and rebuilding he is engaged. 
He is not helped, but rather harmed, by those revolution-ary phrases in general terms and those sugary conciliatory appeals which he finds in the symposia of Vperyod or in Trotsky’s newspaper Pravda , without obtaining from either the one or the other a clear, precise, straightforwardexposition of the Party’s policy and the Party’s position. 
 The Party’s position is a very difficult one, but the chief difficulty is not that the Party has been terribly weakened and its organisations often completely shattered, nor that inner-Party factional struggle has become acute, but thatthe advanced section of Social-Democratic workers hasnot realised clearly enough the nature and significanceof this struggle, has not rallied sufficiently for waging itsuccessfully, has not intervened in it with sufficient inde-pendence and energy for creating, supporting and consoli-dating that core of the Party which is leading the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 from disorder, collapse and wavering on to a solidly basedroad. 
 This road has been fully pointed out by the decisions of the December Conference of 1908, which were further developed in the decisions of the plenary session of the Central Committee in 1910. 
 This Party core consists ofthat union of orthodox Bolsheviks (opponents of otzovismand bourgeois philosophy) and pro-Party Mensheviks (oppo-nents of liquidationism) which at the present time is carry-ing out in practice, and not by virtue of a merely formal attitude, the main work of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 The workers are being told that this union only intensi-fies and accentuates factional struggle, a struggle against the liquidators and otzovists “instead of” a fight against liquidationism and otzovism. 
 This is sheer phrase-monger-ing, mere childish talk that assumes the worker is not an adult but a child. 
 It is an unpleasant truth that, giventhe weakness of the Party, the shattered state of its organi-sations and the inevitability of a base abroad, every trendeasily becomes a faction abroad that is virtually independ-ent of the Party, but it is ludicrous (or criminal) to hide this truth from the Social-Democratic worker who has to rebuild his Party on the basis of a definite , precise and clear Party line. 
 There is no doubt that the most undesirableforms of factional struggle prevail among us at present, but precisely in order to refashion the forms of this struggle the advanced worker should not dismiss with a phrase or contemptuously turn up his nose at the unpleasant (unpleas-ant for a dilettante, a guest in the Party) task of refashion-ing unpleasant forms of unpleasant struggle, but shouldunderstand the essence and significance of this struggle and arrange the work in the localities in such a way that for each question of socialist propaganda, political agitation, the trade union movement, co-operative work, etc. 
, etc. 
, the boundary is defined beyond which begins the deviation from Social-Democracy to liberal liquidationism or semi-anarchist otzovism, ultimatumism, etc. 
, and should conduct Party affairs along the correct line defined by these bounda-ries. 
 We make it one of the main tasks of Rabochaya Gazeta to help the workers to fix these boundaries for each of the most important concrete problems of contemporary Russian life. 
 The workers are being told: it was the attempt at unity made by the plenary session of the Central Committee inJanuary 1910, which proved the sterility and hopelessness of the inner-Party factional struggle that “disrupted” unity. 
 People who talk like that are either uninformed or quiteincapable of thought, or they are concealing their real aims by means of some sort of resonant phrases that sound wellbut mean nothing. 
 The plenary session “disillusioned”only those who were afraid to face the truth and buoyed themselves up with illusions. 
 However great at times the “conciliatory hotchpotch” at the plenum, the outcome wasexactly that unity which alone is possible and necessary. 
 If the liquidators and otzovists signed the resolution on the fight against liquidationism and otzovism, and the next day still more “zealously” stuck to the past, this only proved how impossible it is for the Party to count on non-Partyelements, it only showed more clearly what these elementsare like. 
 The Party is a voluntary association and unity ispossible and useful only when people unite who are desir-ous and capable of carrying out a common Party policy with at least some degree of conscientiousness, or rather: who are interested (through their ideas or tendencies) in carrying out a common Party policy. 
 Unity is impossible and harmful when it attempts to muddle and obscure theconsciousness of this policy, when it attempts to bind by afictitious tie those who are definitely pulling the Party in an anti-Party direction. 
 And unity between the main groups of Bolshevism and Menshevism was achieved by the plenumand consolidated, if not thanks to the plenum, at leastthrough the plenum. 
 A worker who does not want to be spoken to in childish tones cannot fail to understand that liquidationism and otzovism are just as much non-accidental, deep-rooted trends as Bolshevism and Menshevism. 
 Only inventors offairy-tales “for workers” explain the difference between thesetwo last factions as due to disputes between “intellectuals”. 
In reality these two trends, which have left their mark onthe whole history of the Russian revolution, on all the first years (in many respects the most important years) of the mass workers’ movement in Russia, were producedby the very process of the economic and political reconstruc-tion of Russia from a feudal into a bourgeois country, wereproduced by the influences exerted on the proletariat byvarious bourgeois classes, or more correctly, were pro-duced by the situation of various strata of the bourgeoisie within which the proletariat acted. 
 It follows that Social-Democratic unity in Russia is not possible through the de-struction of one of the two trends which took shape in theperiod of the most open, most extensive, mass, free andhistorically important actions of the working class during the revolution. 
 But it follows also that the foundations for a real rapprochement between the two factions are not tobe found in well-meaning phrases about unity, about the abolition of factions, etc. 
, but only in the internal develop-ment of the factions. 
 It is such a rapprochement that the party of the working class has been experiencing since we Bolsheviks in the spring of 1909 finally “buried” otzovism,122 while the pro-Party Mensheviks, headed by Plekhanov,began a no less determined struggle against liquidationism. 
There is no doubt that the overwhelming majority of theclass-conscious workers of both factions side with the oppo-nents of otzovism and liquidationism. 
 Therefore, however harsh the inner-Party struggle on this basis, a struggle whichis at times difficult and always unpleasant, we must notforget the essence of the phenomenon on account of its form . 
 He who does not see underlying this struggle (which in thepresent state of the Party inevitably takes the form of a struggle of factions) the process of the consolidation of a basic Party core of class-conscious Social-Democraticworkers is like one who fails to see the wood for the trees. 
 It is the aims of such a consolidation of a genuine So-cial-Democratic core that will be served also by Rabochaya Gazeta , which we Bolsheviks are founding, having secured that the pro-Party Mensheviks (headed by Plekhanov) agree to support our publication. 
 It necessarily makes its ap-pearance as a factional publication, as a factional enterpriseof the Bolsheviks. 
 Here, too, perhaps, persons will be foundwho cannot see the wood for the trees and who will raisean outcry about going “ back ” to factionalism. 
 By setting out in detail our view of the nature and significance of the Party unity that is really coming about and is really impor-tant and essential we have already exposed the value ofsuch objections, which would in fact signify only confusing the problem of unity and concealing certain factional aims. 
 We desire above all that Rabochaya Gazeta should help the workers to understand quite clearly from beginning to end the entire Party position and all the Party aims. 
 In embarking on the publication of Rabochaya Gazeta we are counting on the assistance both of the Central Com-mittee of our Party and of the local organisations, as wellas of individual groups of class-conscious workers at present cut off from the Party. 
 We are counting on the assistance of the Central Committee, knowing that for a number ofmonths past it has not succeeded in arranging its work correctly in Russia, its failure being due to the fact that, apart from the Bolsheviks and pro-Party Mensheviks, it has not found help anywhere and has frequently encoun-tered the direct opposition of the other factions. 
 This pain-ful phase in the life of the Central Committee will pass,and in order that this should happen the sooner we mustnot simply “wait” until the Central Committee is re-estab-lished, until it has gathered strength, etc. 
, but immediate-ly, on the initiative of individual groups and local organi-sations, start—even if on the most modest scale at first—that work of strengthening the Party line and real Party unity on which the Central Committee too is primarilyengaged. 
 We count on the assistance of the local organisa-tions and individual groups of workers, for it is only their active work on the newspaper, only their support, their re-actions, their articles, materials, information and commentsthat can put Rabochaya Gazeta on a firm basis and ensure its continuance. 
 Written October 1910 First published May 5, 1937 , Published according to in the newspaper Pravda No. 
 122 the manuscript THE LESSONS OF THE REVOLUTION Five years have elapsed since the working class of Rus-sia, in October 1905, dealt the first mighty blow to thetsarist autocracy. 
 In those great days the proletariat arousedmillions of the working people to struggle against their oppressors. 
 In the space of a few months of that year the proletariat won improvements which during decades theworkers had been vainly waiting from the “superior author-ities”. 
 The proletariat won for the whole Russian people,if only for a short time, something that Russia had neverknown before—freedom of the press, assembly and associa-tion. 
 It swept Bulygin’s fake Duma from its path, extracted from the tsar a manifesto declaring a constitution and madeit impossible once and for all for Russia to be ruled withoutrepresentative institutions. 
 But the great victories of the proletariat proved to be only semi-victories because the tsarist regime was not overthrown. 
 The December insurrection ended in defeat and the tsarist autocracy began to take back the gains ofthe working class one by one as the latter’s offensive weak-ened, as the struggle of the masses declined. 
 In 1907 work-ers’ strikes, peasants’ and soldiers’ outbreaks were muchweaker than they had been in 1905 but were still very for-midable nonetheless. 
 The tsar dispersed the First Duma, during which the militancy of the people had begun to mountagain, but did not dare to change the electoral law allat once. 
 In 1907 the struggle of the workers grew weakerstill, and the tsar, having dispersed the Second Duma,staged a coup d’état (June 3, 1907). 
 He broke all the most solemn promises that he had made not to promulgate laws without the consent of the Duma and changed the electorallaw in such a way that the landlords and the capitalists, First page of Rabochaya Gazeta No. 
 1, October 30 (November 12), 1910, with Lenin’s leading article “The Lessons of the Revolution” Reduced First page of Rabochaya Gazeta No. 
 1, October 30 (November 12), 1910, with Lenin’s leading article “The Lessons of the Revolution” Reduced the party of the Black-Hundred elements and their servi-tors were assured of a majority in the Duma. 
 Both the victories and the defeats of the revolution taught the Russian people some great historical lessons. 
 In honour-ing the fifth anniversary of 1905, let us try to ascertain themain substance of these lessons. 
 The first and main lesson is that only the revolutionary struggle of the masses can bring about worth-while improve-ments in the lives of the workers and in the administration of the state. 
 No “sympathy” for the workers on the partof educated people, no struggle of lone terrorists, howev-er heroic, could do anything to undermine the tsaristautocracy and the omnipotence of the capitalists. 
 Thiscould be achieved only by the struggle of the workers them-selves, only by the combined struggle of millions, and when this struggle grew weaker the workers immediately began to be deprived of what they had won. 
 The Russianrevolution was confirmation of the sentiments expressedin the international hymn of labour: No saviours from on high deliver , No trust have we in prince or peer ; Our own right hand the chains must shiver , Chains of hatred , greed and fear! The second lesson is that it is not enough to undermine and restrict the power of the tsar. 
 It must be destroyed . 
 Until the tsarist regime is destroyed concessions won from the tsar will never be lasting. 
 The tsar made concessions when the tide of the revolution-ary offensive was rising. 
 When it ebbed, he took them allback. 
 Only the winning of a democratic republic, the over-throw of the tsarist regime, the passage of power into the hands of the people, can deliver Russia from the violence and tyranny of officialdom, from the Black-Hundred-OctobristDuma, from the despotic power which the landlords and theirservitors wield over the countryside. 
 If the miseries of thepeasants and the workers have become even harder to bearnow, after the revolution, this is the price they are paying for the fact that the revolution was weak, that the tsarist regime was not overthrown. 
 The year 1905, then the firsttwo Dumas, and their dissolution, taught the people a great /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR deal, taught them above all to fight in common for political demands. 
 At first, upon awakening to political life, the people demanded concessions from the autocracy: that the tsar should convene a Duma, that he should appoint newministers in place of the old, that the tsar should “grant”universal suffrage. 
 But the autocracy did not and could notagree to such concessions. 
 The autocracy answered the re-quests for concessions with bayonets. 
 And then the people began to realise that they would have to fight against the autocratic regime. 
 Now, we may say, this understanding isbeing driven even more drastically into the heads of thepeasants by Stolypin and the reactionary noblemen’s Duma. 
Yes, they are driving it in and they’ll drive it right home. 
 The tsarist autocracy has also learned a lesson from the revolution. 
 It has seen that it cannot rely on the faith of the peasants in the tsar. 
 It is now strengthening itspower by forming an alliance with the Black-Hundredlandlords and the Octobrist industrialists. 
 To overthrowthe tsarist autocracy will now require a much more powerfuloffensive of the revolutionary mass struggle than in 1905. 
 Is such a much more powerful offensive possible? The reply to this question brings us to the third and cardinal lesson of the revolution. 
 This lesson consists in our havingseen how the various classes of the Russian people act. 
 Prior to 1905 many thought that the whole people aspiredto freedom in the same way and wanted the same freedom; at least the great majority had no clear understanding of the fact that the different classes of the Russian peoplehad different views on the struggle for freedom and werenot striving for the same freedom. 
 The revolution dispelledthe mist. 
 At the end of 1905, then later during the Firstand Second Dumas, all classes of Russian society came out openly. 
 They showed themselves in action, revealing what their true ambitions were, what they could fight for andhow strongly, persistently and vigorously they were ableto fight. 
 The factory workers, the industrial proletariat, waged a most resolute and strenuous struggle against the autocra-cy. 
 The proletariat began the revolution with the Ninth of January and mass strikes. 
 The proletariat carried thisstruggle to its uttermost limit, rising in armed uprising in December 1905 in defence of the bullet-riddled, knouted and tormented peasantry. 
 The number of workers who went on strike in 1905 was about three million (and with the railwaymen, post-office employees, etc. 
, probablyreached four million), in 1906—one million, in 1907—three-quarters of a million. 
 The world had never yet seen a strikemovement raised to such a pitch. 
 The Russian proletariatshowed what untold forces there are in the masses of the workers when a real revolutionary crisis matures. 
 The strike wave of 1905, the greatest in the world, did notexhaust all the militant forces of the proletariat by a longway. 
 For instance, in the Moscow factory region therewere 567,000 factory workers and the number of strikerswas 540,000, while in the St. 
 Petersburg factory region, which had 300,000 factory workers, there were a million strikers. 
 This means that the workers in the Moscow areawere still far from developing the same stubbornness in thestruggle as the St. 
 Petersburg workers. 
 In Livonian Gu-bernia (city of Riga) there were 250,000 strikers to the50,000 workers employed there. 
 In other words, each worker on the average struck more than five times in 1905. 
 Now, in all parts of Russia, there cannot be less than three million-factory, mining and railway workers and this number is-growing year by year. 
 With a movement as strong as in-Riga in 1905 they could turn out an army of 15 million strikers. 
 No tsarist regime could withstand such an onslaught. 
 But everyone understands that such an offensive cannot beevoked artificially in accordance with the desires of thesocialists or militant workers. 
 It is possible only when thewhole country is convulsed by a crisis, mass indignationand revolution. 
 In order to prepare such an onslaught we must draw the most backward sections of the workers into the struggle, we must devote years and years to persistent,widespread, unflagging propaganda, agitation and organisa-tional work, building up and reinforcing all forms of prole-tarian unions and organisations. 
 In militancy the working class of Russia was in advance of all the other classes of the Russian people. 
 The very conditions of their lives make the workers capable of strug-gle and impel them to struggle. 
 Capital collects the workers in great masses in big cities” uniting them, teaching them to act in unison. 
 At every step the workers come face to face with their main enemy—the capitalist class. 
 In combat with this enemy the worker becomes a socialist , comes to realise the necessity of a complete reconstruction of thewhole of society, the complete abolition of all poverty andall oppression. 
 Becoming socialists, the workers fight withself-abnegating courage against everything that stands in their path, first and foremost the tsarist regime and the feudal landlords. 
 The peasants too during the revolution went into action against the landlords and against the government, but theirstruggle was much weaker. 
 It has been calculated that amajority of the factory workers (about three-fifths) took part in the revolutionary struggle, in strikes, while un-doubtedly only a minority of the peasants took part: in allprobability not more than one-fifth or one-fourth. 
 Thepeasants fought less persistently, more disconnectedly,with less political understanding, at times still pinningtheir hopes on the benevolence of our Father, the Tsar. 
 In 1905 and 1906 the peasants, properly speaking, only gave the tsar and the landlords a bit of a fright. 
 But fright-ening them is no use. 
 They must be destroyed , their govern-ment—the tsarist government—must be wiped off the face of the earth. 
 Now Stolypin and the Black-Hundred, land-lord Duma are trying to create new landlord farmers from the ranks of the rich peasants, to be the allies of the tsar and the Black Hundreds. 
 But the more the tsar and theDuma help the rich peasants to ruin the mass of the peas-antry, the more politically conscious does this mass become,the less faith will it preserve in the tsar, the faith of feudalslaves, the faith of downtrodden and ignorant people. 
 Each year that passes swells the ranks of the agricultural labourers in the countryside, they have nowhere to seek salvationexcept in an alliance with the urban workers for joint strug-gle. 
 Each year that passes fills the countryside with moreruined peasants, utterly destitute, driven to desperationby hunger. 
 When the urban proletariat rises again, mil-lions upon millions of these peasants will throw them-selves into the struggle against the tsar and the landlordswith greater determination and solidarity. 
 The bourgeois liberals too took part in the revolution, i. 
e. 
, the liberal landlords, industrialists, lawyers, pro-fessors, etc. 
 They constitute the party of “people’s freedom” (the Constitutional-Democrats or Cadets). 
 They promisedthe people a whole lot of things and made a lot of noiseabout freedom in their newspapers. 
 They had a majorityin the First and Second Dumas. 
 They held out a promise ofgaining freedom by “peaceful means”, they condemned the revolutionary struggle of the workers and peasants. 
 The peasants and many of the peasant deputies (“Trudoviks”)believed these promises and followed humbly and obedientlyat the heels of the liberals, standing aside from the revolu-tionary struggle of the proletariat. 
 This was the greatestmistake committed by the peasants (and many townfolk) during the revolution. 
 With one hand, and at that very, very rarely, the liberals assisted the struggle for freedom,while they kept offering the other hand to the tsar, promisingto preserve and strengthen his power, to make peace betweenthe peasants and the landlords, to “pacify” the “turbulent”workers. 
 When the revolution came to the point of a pitched bat-tle with the tsar, the December uprising of 1905, the lib-erals in a body basely betrayed the freedom of the peopleand recoiled from the struggle. 
 The tsarist autocracy tookadvantage of this betrayal of the people’s freedom by theliberals, took advantage of the ignorance of the peasants, who to a large extent believed the liberals, and defeated the insurgent workers. 
 And when the proletariat was defeat-ed, no Dumas, no honeyed speeches and promises on thepart of the Cadets, could hold back the tsar from abolishingall the vestiges of freedom and restoring the autocracy andthe despotic power of the feudal landlords. 
 The liberals found themselves deceived. 
 The peasants have received a severe but useful lesson. 
 There will be nofreedom in Russia as long as the broad masses of the peo-ple believe in the liberals, believe in the possibility of“peace” with the tsarist regime and stand aloof from therevolutionary struggle of the workers. 
 No power on earth can hold back the advent of freedom in Russia when the mass of the urban proletariat rises in struggle, brushesaside the wavering and treacherous liberals, and enlists under its banner the rural labourers and impoverished peasantry. 
 And that the proletariat of Russia will rise in such a struggle, that it will take the lead in the revolution again,is warranted by the whole economic situation of Russia,all the experience of the revolutionary years. 
 Five years ago the proletariat dealt the first blow to the tsarist autocracy. 
 The first rays of freedom gleamed for the Russian people. 
 Now the tsarist autocracy has been restored, the feudal lords are reigning and ruling again,the workers and peasants are everywhere being crusheddown again, everywhere the Asiatic despotism of the au-thorities and infamous maltreatment of the people prevails. 
But these hard lessons will not have been in vain. 
 The Russian people are not what they were prior to 1905. 
 The proletariat has taught them to fight. 
 The proletariat willbring them to victory. 
 Rabochaya Gazeta No. 
 1, Published according to October 30 (November 12), 1910 the text in Rabochaya Gazeta TWO WORLDS Much has been written in all the newspapers about the Magdeburg Congress of the German Social-DemocraticParty. 
 All the main events of this Congress, all the vicissi-tudes of the struggle are sufficiently known. 
 The outward aspect of the struggle of the revisionists with the orthodox, the dramatic episodes of the Congress overmuch engagedthe attention of the readers, to the detriment of a clarifica-tion of the principles involved in this struggle, the ideolog-ical and political roots of the divergence. 
 Yet the debatesin Magdeburg—above all on the question of the Badenites voting for the budget—provide exceedingly interesting material for characterising the two worlds of ideas and thetwo class tendencies within the Social-Democratic Labour Party of Germany. 
 The voting for the budget is but oneof the manifestations of this division into two worlds, adivision which is so deep that it is undoubtedly bound to be expressed on much more serious occasions, much more profound and important. 
 And now, when, as everybody cansee, a great revolutionary storm is impending in Germany, the Magdeburg debates should be regarded as a small reviewof forces covering a small fraction of the army (for the ques-tion of voting for the budget is only a small fraction of the fundamental questions of Social-Democratic tactics) before the beginning of the campaign. 
 What has this review shown as to how different sections of the proletarian army understand the tasks that confrontthem? How, judging by this review, will these differentsections of the army conduct themselves when the time comes?—these are the questions on which we intend to dwell. 
 We will begin with one minor (at first glance) clash of opinion. 
 The leader of the revisionists, Frank, strongly insisted, like all the Badenites, that although the Minister, von Bodman, had originally denied “parity of rights” of the Social-Democrats with the other, bourgeois, parties he had subsequently retracted this “affront”. 
 Bebel in hisreport made the following reply on this point: “If the minister of a modern state, a representative of the existing state system and social order—and the purposeof the present-day state, as a political institution, is to defend and support the existing state system and social order against all attacks from the Social-Democratic camp,to defend it by force too in case of need—if such a ministerdeclares that he does not recognise parity of rights of theSocial-Democrats, then he is quite right from his own pointof view. 
” Frank interrupted Bebel with the cry “outra-geous!” Bebel continued in reply to him: “I find this quite natural. 
” Frank again exclaimed “outrageous!” Why was Frank so indignant? Because he is thoroughly imbued with faith in bourgeois “legality”, in bourgeois“parity of rights”, without understanding the historicallimits of this legality, without understanding that all this legality must inevitably be cast to the four winds when the fundamental and cardinal question of the preservation ofbourgeois property is affected. 
 Frank is steeped in petty-bourgeois constitutional illusions; that is why he does notunderstand the historical conditionality of constitutional institutions even in a country like Germany; he believes in the absolute value, the absolute power of the bourgeois (more correctly: bourgeois-feudal) constitution in Germany,and is sincerely affronted when a constitutional minister does not wish to recognise his, Frank’s, “parity of rights”as a member of parliament, as a man who acts in strict ac-cordance with the law. 
 Intoxicated by this legality, Frank goes so far as to forget the implacable hostility of the bour-geoisie towards the proletariat and, without noticing it,adopts the position of those who regard this bourgeois le-gality as something eternal, who think that socialism canbe fitted inside the framework of this legality. 
 Bebel brings down the question from these constitutional illusions, which are characteristic of bourgeois democrats, to the firm realities of the class struggle. 
 Can we allow our-selves to be “affronted” because we, the enemies of the whole bourgeois order, are not accorded parity of rights on the basis of bourgeois law by a champion of this order? Why the very admission that this could affront me, would show me to be unstable in my socialist convictions! And Bebel tried to drive Social-Democratic views into Frank’s head by concrete examples. 
 We could not be “affront-ed”, Bebel told Frank, by the Anti-Socialist Law; we werefilled with anger and hatred, “and if it had been in our power at that time, we would have flung ourselves into battle, as we were longing to do heart and soul, we wouldhave smashed to smithereens everything that stood in ourpath” (here the verbatim report records loud cries of approv-al). 
 “We would have been traitors to our cause not to have done so” ( Hear , hear !). 
 “But it was not in our power. 
” I take it as an affront that a constitutional minister does not recognise the parity of rights of the socialists, arguesFrank. 
 You must not be affronted, says Bebel, becauseyour parity of rights has been denied by a man who not solong ago was strangling you, riding roughshod over all“principles”, whose duty it was to strangle you in defence of the bourgeois order, who will put a stranglehold on you tomorrow (Bebel did not say this, but he hinted at it broadlyenough; we shall explain in the proper place why Bebelso cautiously confines himself to hints). 
 We would havebeen traitors if, having the opportunity, we had not throt-tled these enemies of the proletariat. 
 Two worlds of ideas: on the one hand, the point of view of the proletarian class struggle, which in certain historicalperiods can proceed on the basis of bourgeois legality,but which leads inevitably to a denouement, an open colli-sion, to the dilemma: either “smash” the bourgeois state“to smithereens” or be defeated and strangled. 
 On the other hand, the point of view of the reformist, the petty bourgeois who cannot see the wood for the trees, who cannot, throughthe tinsel of constitutional legality, see the fierce classstruggle, who forgets in the backwoods of some diminutivestate the great historical problems of the present day. 
 The reformists imagine themselves to be realist politi-cians, doers of positive work, statesmen. 
 It is in the inter-ests of the masters of bourgeois society to encourage thesechildish illusions in the ranks of the proletariat, but the Social-Democrats must destroy them ruthlessly. 
 The talk of parity of rights is “nothing but meaningless phrases”, said Bebel. 
 “Anyone who can take in a whole socialist faction with these phrases is certainly a statesman,” said Bebel, amid general laughter from the Party Congress, “but those who let themselves be taken in are anything but statesmen. 
” This is a home thrust at all the opportun-ists in the socialist movement who let themselves be taken in by the National Liberals in Germany and the Cadets inRussia. 
 “Negators,” said Bebel, “often achieve far more than those who stand for so-called positive work. 
 Sharp criticism, sharp opposition always falls on fertile groundif this criticism is just, as ours unquestionably is. 
” The opportunist phrases about positive work mean in many cases working for the liberals , in general working for others, who hold the reins of power, who set the course of the given state, society, community. 
 And Bebel drew this conclusion frankly, declaring that “in our Party there areno few National Liberals of this kind, pursuing a National-Liberal policy”. 
 As an example he mentioned Bloch , the well-known editor of the so-called ( so-called is Bebel’s word) Socialist Monthly (Sozialistische Monatshefte ). 
 “Na-tional Liberals have no place in our Party,” declared Bebel outright, to the general approval of the Congress. 
 Look at the list of contributors to the Socialist Monthly . 
 You will find there all the representatives of international opportunism. 
 They cannot find praise high enough for thebehaviour of our liquidators. 
 Are there not two worlds of ideas here when the leader of the German Social-Democrats calls the editor of this journal a National Liberal? Opportunists throughout the world favour the policy of a bloc with the liberals, now openly and outrightly pro-claiming and implementing it, now advocating or justify-ing election agreements with the liberals, support of their slogans, etc. 
 Bebel has time and again exposed the sheer falsity, the sheer mendacity of this policy, and we cansay without exaggeration that every Social-Democratshould know and remember his words. 
 “If I, as a Social-Democrat, enter into an alliance with bourgeois parties, it is a thousand to one that the bourgeois parties will gainby it, not the Social-Democrats. 
 We shall be the losers. 
 It is a polit-cal law , that wherever the Rights and Lefts enter an alliance, the Lefts lose, the Rights win.... 
 “If I enter into a political alliance with a party whose principles are hostile to mine, I must of necessity modify my tactics, i. 
e. 
, my methods of struggle, in order not to break this alliance. 
 I can no lon-ger criticise ruthlessly, I cannot fight for principles, because thiswould give offence to my allies; I have to keep quiet, cover up a lot ofthings, make excuses for the inexcusable, gloss over matters thatcannot be glossed over. 
” Opportunism is opportunism for the very reason that it sacrifices the fundamental interests of the movement to momentary advantages or considerations based on the most short-sighted, superficial calculations. 
 Frank pathetically declared in Magdeburg that the ministers in Baden “wantus, Social-Democrats, to work together with them”! We must look not above but below, we said during the revolution to our opportunists who were repeatedly ledastray by various prospects held out by the Cadets. 
 Bebel, with the Franks arrayed before him, said in his closing remarks at Magdeburg: “The masses cannot understand thatthere are Social-Democrats who support with a vote ofconfidence a government which the masses would muchprefer to do away with altogether. 
 I often get the impres-sion that a section of our leaders has ceased to understand the sufferings and afflictions of the masses ( thunderous applause ), that the position of the masses has become alien to them. 
” Yet “all over Germany an enormous resentmenthas accumulated among the masses”. 
 “We are living through a time,” said Bebel in another part of his speech, “when rotten compromises are particu-larly impermissible. 
 Class contradictions are not subsiding, but growing more acute. 
 We are on the threshold of very,very grave times. 
 What will happen after the forthcomingelections? We shall wait and see. 
 If matters come to theoutbreak of a European war in 1912 you will see what weare in for, where we shall have to take our stand. 
 It will probably not be where the Badenites are standing today. 
” While some people are becoming smugly content with the state of affairs which has become customary in Germany, Bebel himself turns all his attention to the inevitable change which is impending and advises that the Party’s attention should be turned to it. 
 “All our experiences so far have been skirmishes at the outposts, mere trifles,” said Bebel in his closing remarks. 
 The main struggle lies ahead. 
 And from the standpoint of this main struggle, the whole tactics of the opportunists are the height of spineless-ness and short-sightedness. 
 Bebel only speaks in hints about the coming struggle. 
 Never once does he say outright that revolution is impend-ing in Germany, although such, undoubtedly, is the idea in his mind—all his references to the aggravation of contra-dictions, the difficulty of reforms in Prussia, the inextri-cable position of the government and the classes in com-mand, the growth of resentment among the masses, the dangerof a European war, the intensification of the economic yoke as a result of the high cost of living, the amalgamation of the capitalists in trusts and cartels, etc. 
, etc. 
—all are clearlyintended to open the eyes of the Party and the masses tothe inevitability of a revolutionary struggle. 
 Why is Bebel so cautious? Why does he confine himself to pointed references? Because the maturing revolution in Germany encounters a special, peculiar political situation that does not resemble other pre-revolutionary periods inother countries and for that reason requires from the leadersof the proletariat the solution of a somewhat new problem. 
 The chief feature of this peculiar pre-revolutionary situa-tion consists in the fact that the coming revolution must inevitably be incomparably more profound, more radical, drawing far broader masses into a more difficult, stubbornand prolonged struggle than all previous revolutions. 
 Yetat the same time this pre-revolutionary situation is markedby the greater (in comparison with anything hitherto)domination of legality , which has become an obstacle to those who introduced it. 
 There lies the peculiarity of the situation, there lies the difficulty and novelty of the prob-lem. 
 The irony of history has brought it about that the ruling classes of Germany, who have created the strongest stateknown in the whole second half of the nineteenth century, who have consolidated conditions for the most rapid capi-talist progress and conditions for the most stable constitu-tional legality, are now most unmistakably coming to a point when this legality, their legality, will have to be shattered—so that the domination of the bourgeoisie may be preserved. 
 For about half a century the German Social-Democratic Labour Party has made exemplary use of bourgeois legality,having created the best proletarian organisations, a mag-nificent press, having raised to the highest pitch (that ispossible under capitalism) the class-consciousness and soli-darity of the proletarian socialist vanguard. 
 Now the time is drawing near when this half-century phase of German history must , by force of objective causes, be replaced by a different phase. 
 The era of utilising thelegality created by the bourgeoisie is giving way to an era of tremendous revolutionary battles, and these battles, in effect , will be the destruction of all bourgeois legality, the whole bourgeois system, while in form they must begin (and are beginning) with panicky efforts on the part ofthe bourgeoisie to get rid of the legality which, thoughit is their own handiwork, has become unbearable to them!“You shoot first, Messieurs the Bourgeoisie!”—with these words, spoken in 1892, Engels summed up the peculiarity of the position and the peculiarity of the tactical problemsof the revolutionary proletariat. 
 123 The socialist proletariat will not forget for a moment that it is confronted, inevitably confronted, with a revolu-tionary mass struggle that must sweep away all the legali-ties of the doomed bourgeois society. 
 But, at the same time, a party which has magnificently utilised a half-cen-tury of bourgeois legality against the bourgeoisie has not the slightest reason to renounce those conveniences in thestruggle, that advantage in battle afforded by the factthat the enemy is caught in the toils of his own legality, that the enemy is compelled to “shoot first”, is compelled to shatter his own legality. 
 There lies the peculiarity of the pre-revolutionary situa-tion in modern Germany. 
 That is why old Bebel is so cau-tious, fixing all his attention on the great struggle whichis to come, exerting all the power of his vast talent, his experience and authority against the short-sighted, spine-less opportunists, who do not understand this struggle,who are not fit to lead it, who during the revolution will probably find themselves degraded from the leaders to the led or even cast aside. 
 In Magdeburg these leaders were remonstrated with, they were censured, they were given an official ultimatumas the representatives of all that was unreliable that hadaccumulated in the great revolutionary army, of all thatwas weak, infected with bourgeois legality and stupefiedby pious prostrations before this legality, before all the limitations of what is one of the eras of slavery, i. 
e. 
, one of the eras of bourgeois supremacy. 
 In condemning theopportunists, threatening them with expulsion, the Germanproletariat thereby expressed its condemnation of all theelements in its mighty organisation personifying stagnation,diffidence, flabbiness and inability to break with the psy-chology of moribund bourgeois society. 
 In condemning the bad revolutionaries in its own ranks the vanguard classheld one of the last reviews of its forces before entering uponthe path of social revolution. 
 * * * While the attention of all revolutionary Social-Demo-crats throughout the world was concentrated on seeing howthe German workers were preparing for action, selecting themoment for action, keeping a watchful eye on the enemy andpurging themselves of the weaknesses of opportunism—the opportunists throughout the world were gloating over the differences which had arisen between Luxemburg andKautsky in their estimate of the present situation, on thequestion whether one of those turning-points like the Ninthof January in the Russian revolution was due now or not just yet , this very minute or the next . 
 The opportunists gloated. 
 They did their utmost to make a burning issue of these differences, which were not of prime importance,in the columns of Socialist Monthly , Golos Sotsial-De-mokrata (Martynov), Zhizn , Vozrozhdeniye and suchlike liquidationist papers and Neue Zeit (Martov) *. 
 The shab-biness of these methods of the opportunists in all coun-*In Neue Zeit Martov was met with an emphatic rebuke from Com-rade Karsky. 
 tries was indelibly registered in Magdeburg, where differ-ences of opinion among the revolutionary Social-Demo-crats of Germany did not play any appreciable role. 
 The opportunists however gloated too soon. 
 The MagdeburgCongress adopted the first part of the resolution proposed by Rosa Luxemburg , in which there is direct reference to the mass strike as a means of struggle. 
 Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 18, Published according to November 16 (29), 1910 the text in Sotsial-Demokrat THE DEMONSTRATION ON THE DEATH OF MUROMTSEV A COMMENT “This Duma,” writes the Cadet newspaper Rech about the first sitting of the fourth session of the Black-Hundred Duma, “has today divorced itself finally and irrevocably from pop-ular feeling and the national conscience. 
” This is said, ofcourse, with reference to the refusal of the Black-Hundredand Octobrist deputies to honour the memory of Muromtsev,who presided over the First Duma. 
 It would be difficult to express more conspicuously than in the phrase quoted above the utter falsity of that point ofview which our liberals take towards the struggle for freedomin general and the demonstration on the death of Murom-tsev in particular. 
 There is no doubt that a demonstration against the tsarist government, against the autocracy, against the Black-Hun-dred Duma was called for on the occasion of Muromtsev’sdeath, that a demonstration did take place, that the mostdiverse and broadest sections of the population took part init, the most diverse parties extending from the Social-Demo-crats to the Cadets, “progressists” and Polish Octobrists (the Polish Kolo 124). 
 Nor is there any doubt that the Ca-dets’ appraisal of this demonstration shows for the hundredthand thousandth time how alien they are to democracy, howruinous to the cause of democracy in Russia it is for our Cadets to have the conduct of this cause or even to play aleading part in it. 
 All democrats and all liberals took part and had neces-sarily to take part in the demonstration on the death ofMuromtsev, for in the darkness of the regime of the Black-Hundred Duma such a demonstration afforded an opportu-nity to express openly and on a comparatively broad scale a protest against the autocracy. 
 The tsarist autocracy waged a desperate struggle against the introduction of representa-tive institutions in Russia. 
 The autocracy gerrymanderedand distorted the convocation of the first parliament in Rus-sia, when the proletariat and revolutionary peasantry com-pelled it by mass struggle to convoke this assembly. 
 The autocracy cynically flouted and rode roughshod over democ-racy and the people, insofar as the voice of the people, the voice of democracy, resounded in the First Duma. 
 Now theautocracy is persecuting even the recollection of this feebleexpression of the demands of democracy in the First Duma(the expression of these demands was much feebler, poorer, narrower, less lively during the First Duma and from the rostrum of the First Duma than in the autumn of 1905 fromthe rostrums which were created by the wave of open massstruggle). 
 That is why democracy and liberalism could and had to come together in a demonstration of protest against the autocracy on any occasion that put the masses in mind of the revolution. 
 But, coming together in a common demon-stration, they could not but express their attitude both to the appraisal of the aims of democracy in general and to the his-tory of the First Duma in particular. 
 And the first approachto such an appraisal brought out the insufferable thread-bareness, political impotence and political ineptitude of our bourgeois liberalism. 
 Just think: the Black-Hundred Duma has “today”, Octo-ber 15, 1910, “divorced itself finally and irrevocably” fromthe people! That is to say, hitherto it was not divorced fromthem irrevocably. 
 That is to say, participation in honouring the memory of Muromtsev would have remedied, could have remedied the “divorcement” from “popular feeling”, i. 
e. 
,the divorcement of various of our counter-revolutionariesfrom democracy. 
 Understand, gentlemen, you who lay claimto the lofty title of democrats, that you yourselves, morethan anyone else, are detracting from the significance of the demonstration, making it cheap, when you put the ques-tion in such a light. 
 “Even putting the lowest moral andpolitical value on the Third Duma,” says Rech , “it seemed absurd to think that it would be capable of declining this elementary duty of honouring from the tribune the name of the man who so worthily and brilliantly inaugurated it [!!] and sanctified it. 
” A fine tribute, indeed! Muromtsev in-augurated and sanctified “it”, the Third Duma! Inadvertent-ly the Cadets have blurted out the bitter truth that the be-trayal of the revolutionary struggle and of the insurrectionat the end of 1905 by Russian liberalism and the Russian bourgeoisie “inaugurated and sanctified” the era of counter-revolution in general and the Third Duma in particular. 
“It was believed,” says Rech , “that a handful of political rowdies would not be able to stifle the voice of commondecency and tact in the Duma majority. 
” So! It was a mat-ter of “common decency and tact”, not of protesting against the autocracy. 
 The question is put in the aspect not of de-mocracy “ divorcing itself ” from the counter-revolution but of liberalism joining forces with the counter-revolution. 
 Here liberalism is seeking common ground with the counter-revolution, inviting its representatives, the Octobrists, tojoin them in honouring the memory of Muromtsev not as an expression of protest against the autocracy, but for the observance of “common decency and tact”. 
 Muromtsev“inaugurated and sanctified” (such vile words do exist!)the first pseudo-parliament convened by the tsar; you Octo-brist gentlemen have seats in the third pseudo-parliamentconvened by the tsar—will it not be “indecent and tactless” to refuse to fulfil “an elementary duty”? How excellently this quite trivial instance, this one sentiment alone expressedby the Cadets’ official organ, reflects the ideologicaland political rottenness of liberalism in our country. 
 Its pol-icy is to persuade the autocracy, the Black-Hundred land-lords and their allies, the Octobrists, and not to develop the democratic consciousness of the masses. 
 Therefore, its portion —the inevitable and unescapable portion of such bourgeoisliberalism in any bourgeois-democratic revolution—is toremain for ever the slave of the monarchy and the feudallords, for ever to be the recipient of kicks from theirjackboots . 
 If the Cadet deputies had a particle of understanding of the aims of democracy their concern in the Third Dumawould have been not for the performance of an “elementary duty” by the Octobrists but for a demonstration before the people . 
 What was required for this was not the presentation of a statement to the Chairman (the reading of such a state-ment, according to Clause 120 of the standing orders, is atthe discretion of the Chairman), but to have had the ques-tion brought up for discussion in one way or another. 
 If the Cadet writers had even a particle of understanding of the aims of democracy they would not have reproached the Octobrists with lack of tact but would have explained that it is the behaviour of the Third Duma that underlinesthe significance of the demonstration on the death of Murom-tsev, and raises the question from conventional philistine chatter about “decency and tact” to the higher plane of apolitical appraisal of the present regime and the role of the different parties. 
 But the demonstration on the death of Muromtsev could not fail to raise another question, namely, the question ofthe historical significance of the First Duma. 
 Needless tosay, the Cadets, who had the majority in it and at that timeentertained high hopes of a Cadet Cabinet, of a “peaceful” transition to freedom, and the consolidation of their hegem-ony in the democratic camp, are praising Muromtsev tothe skies as a “national hero”. 
 The Trudoviks, in the personof Mr. 
 Zhilkin, sank so low that they added their voicesto this liberal chorus and openly honoured Muromtsev asthe political “educator” of the Left parties. 
 Such an appraisal of the First Duma coming from the Cadets and the Trudoviks is important as an indication ofthe extremely low political level of Russian “society”. 
 A“society” that is enraptured by the political role of the Ca-dets in the First Duma has no right to complain of Stolypinor the Third Duma: it has the very government that it de-serves. 
 The hegemony of liberalism in the Russian move-ment for emancipation inevitably implies the weakness ofthis movement and the impregnability of the dominance ofthe die-hard landlords. 
 Only the brushing aside of the lib-erals by the proletariat and the hegemony of the latter haveafforded victories for the revolution and can give more of them in the future. 
 The period of the First Duma was a time when the prole-tariat was mustering forces for a new offensive after its de-feat in December. 
 Revolutionary strike action, which had weakened after December, again raised its head mightily; the peasants fell into line behind the workers (in the spring of 1906 peasant unrest spread over 46 per cent of the uyezdsof European Russia); soldiers’ “mutinies” increased. 
 Thebourgeois liberals were faced with a dilemma: to assist thenew revolutionary offensive of the masses, and then victory over tsarism would have been possible—or to turn away from the revolution and thereby facilitate the victory of tsarism. 
 A new upsurge of mass struggle, new vacillations of thebourgeoisie, tsarism irresolute and playing a waitinggame—such was the essence of the First Duma period, such was the class basis of this phase in Russian history. 
 The Cadets as the dominating party in the First Duma and Muromtsev, as one of the leaders of this party, betrayed an utter incomprehension of the political situation andcommitted a new betrayal of democracy. 
 They turned asidefrom the revolution, condemned mass struggle, put everypossible obstacle in its path and tried to take advantageof the irresolution of the tsarist government, holding up the bogey of revolution and demanding a deal ( =a Cadet Cabinet) i n t he na me of the revolution. 
 It is clear that such tactics were a betrayal as regards democracy, and as regards tsarism they were impotent, pseudo-“constitutional” brag-gadocio. 
 It is clear that tsarism was only playing for time toconcentrate its forces, “ playing ” at negotiations with the Cadets while preparing to dissolve the Duma and stage a coup d’état. 
 The proletariat and a section of the peasantrylaunched a new struggle in the spring of 1906—their faultor their misfortune was that they did not fight resolutelyenough or in sufficient numbers. 
 In the spring of 1906 theliberals were absorbed in playing at constitution-making and negotiating with Trepov, decrying those, and obstruct-ing the cause of those, who alone could have smashed the Trepovs. 
 The bourgeois pharisees are fond of the proverb: “ de mor-tuis aut bene aut nihil ” (say nothing but good of the dead). 
 The proletariat needs the truth about political leaders, whether living or dead, for those who really deserve to be called political leaders do not become dead as regards poli-tics upon their physical demise. 
 To repeat a conventional lie about Muromtsev is to harm the cause of the proletariat and the cause of democracy and to corrupt the minds of the masses. 
 To speak the bitter truth about the Cadets and those who allowed themselves to be led (and taken in) bythe Cadets is to honour all that is great in the first Russianrevolution and to promote the success of the second. 
 Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 18, Published according to November 16 (29), 1910 the text in Sotsial-Signed: N. 
 Lenin Demokrat IS THIS THE TURN OF THE TIDE? The present issue was already set up when we received the St. 
 Petersburg and Moscow newspapers of November 12. 
However inadequate the information supplied by the legalpress, it is evident beyond doubt that in a number of cities there have been students’ meetings, demonstrations and street processions with protests against capital punishmentand with speeches against the government. 
 The St. 
 Peters-burg demonstration of November 11, even according to theinformation of the quite Octobrist-minded Russkiye Vedo-mosti , 125 drew a gathering of not less than 10 ,000 people on the Nevsky. 
 The same newspaper reports that on the St. 
 Petersburg side “large numbers of workers joined the pro-cession as it passed the People’s House. 
 At Tuchkov Bridgethe procession came to a halt. 
 The police were quite power-less to stop the procession and the crowd proceeded withsongs and flags to the Bolshoi Prospekt on Vasilyevsky Ostrov. 
 Only at the university did the police manage to dis-perse the crowd. 
” The police and the troops, of course, behaved in the true-blue Russian way. 
 While we shall postpone to the next issue our appraisal of this unmistakably democratic upsurge, we cannot abstain from saying a few words about the attitude of the various parties to the demonstration. 
 Russkiye Vedomosti , which on the 11th published a false report that the demonstration had been called off, reported on the 12th that the Social-Democrats had adopted no decision, while some of theirdeputies had even expressed their disapproval, and only the Trudoviks in the resolution they adopted considered it impossible to hinder the demonstration. 
 We have no doubtthat this report which is so discreditable to our Social-Democratic deputies, is false; in all probability it is just as much a malicious invention of Russkiye Vedomosti as their report of the day before that the demonstration had been called off. 
 Golos Moskvy126 reported on the 12th that “with the exception of the Social-Democrats the deputies of allparties disapprove of the students coming out on the streets” It is clear that the Cadet and Octobrist newspapers are very widely “swerving from the truth”, intimidated by the utterly absurd and ludicrous cries from the Right that “the springs preparing the demonstration are being manipu-lated from the Taurida Palace”. 
 That the Cadets behaved in an unworthy manner is a fact. 
 On the 11th, the day of the demonstration, Rech published a manifesto of the Cadet deputies calling for the demonstra-tion not to be held. 
 The reasons urged both in the manifesto and in Rech ’s leading article are truly infamous: “not to cast a shadow over” the days of mourning! “to hold mani-festations, to associate them with the memory of Tolstoy” isto display “a lack of sincere affection for his sacred memo-ry”!! and so on, in a purely Octobrist spirit (compare the leading article in Golos Moskvy on the 11th, with almost identical phrases). 
 Fortunately the vile spoke thrust in the wheel of democ-racy by the Cadets had no effect. 
 The demonstration washeld just the same. 
 And if the police news-sheet Rossiya continues to blame the Cadets for everything, even con-triving to detect a note of “incitement” in their manifesto in the Duma, according to Golos Moskvy , the Octobrists and the extreme Rights (Shulgin) appreciated the service ren-dered by the Cadets, recognising that they were “opposed tothe demonstration”. 
 If there is anyone who has not learned from the entire course of the Russian revolution that the cause of the move-ment for emancipation in Russia is hopeless as long as it is led by the Cadets, as long as he is unable to safeguardhimself from the treachery of the Cadets, let him study andlearn from the facts of contemporary politics, the historyof the demonstration of November 11. 
 At the first sign of a democratic revival the Cadets begin their dirty games again. 
 We note also a report in Golos Moskvy that the workers’ approached the students with a view to holding a grand dem-onstration on the 14th. 
 There is probably some truth in it, for today (November 15 [28]) the Paris papers report thearrest in St. 
 Petersburg of 13 members of the bureau of tradeunions for an attempt to organise a workers’ demonstration. 
 Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 18, Published according to November 16 (29), 1910 the text in Sotsial-Demokrat L. 
 N. 
 TOLSTOY Leo Tolstoy is dead. 
 His universal significance as an artist and his universal fame as a thinker and preacher re-flect, each in its own way, the universal significance of theRussian revolution. 
 L. 
 N. 
 Tolstoy emerged as a great artist when serfdom still held sway in the land. 
 In a series of great works, whichhe produced during the more than half a century of his liter-ary activity, he depicted mainly the old, pre-revolutionaryRussia which remained in a state of semi-serfdom even after1861—rural Russia of the landlord and the peasant. 
 In de-picting this period in Russia’s history, Tolstoy succeeded in raising so many great problems and succeeded in risingto such heights of artistic power that his works rank amongthe greatest in world literature. 
 The epoch of preparation forrevolution in one of the countries under the heel of the serf-owners became, thanks to its brilliant illumination by Tol-stoy, a step forward in the artistic development of humanity as a whole. 
 Tolstoy the artist is known to an infinitesimal minority even in Russia. 
 If his great works are really to be made thepossession of all, a struggle must be waged against the sys-tem of society which condemns millions and scores of mil-lions to ignorance, benightedness, drudgery and poverty— a socialist revolution must be accomplished. 
 Tolstoy not only produced artistic works which will al-ways be appreciated and read by the masses, once they havecreated human conditions of life for themselves after over-throwing the yoke of the landlords and capitalists; he suc-ceeded in conveying with remarkable force the moods of the large masses that are oppressed by the present system,in depicting their condition and expressing their spontaneous feelings of protest and anger. 
 Belonging, as he did, primarily to the era of 1861-1904, Tolstoy in his works—both as an artist and as a thinker and preacher—embodied in amazingly bold relief the specific historical features of the entire firstRussian revolution, its strength and its weakness. 
 One of the principal distinguishing features of our revolu-tion is that it was a peasant bourgeois revolution in the era of the very advanced development of capitalism throughout the world and of its comparatively advanced development in Russia. 
 It was a bourgeois revolution because its imme-diate aim was to overthrow the tsarist autocracy, the tsaristmonarchy, and to abolish landlordism, but not to overthrowthe domination of the bourgeoisie. 
 The peasantry in partic-ular was not aware of the latter aim, it was not aware of the distinction between this aim and the closer and more imme-diate aims of the struggle. 
 It was a peasant bourgeois revo-lution because the objective conditions put in the forefrontthe problem of changing the basic conditions of life for thepeasantry, of breaking up the old, medieval system of land-ownership, of “clearing the ground” for capitalism; the ob-jective conditions were responsible for the appearance of the peasant masses on the arena of more or less independent his-toric action. 
 Tolstoy’s works express both the strength and the weak-ness, the might and the limitations, precisely of the peasantmass movement. 
 His heated, passionate, and often ruthlessly sharp protest against the state and the official church that was in alliance with the police conveys the sentiments ofthe primitive peasant democratic masses, among whom cen-turies of serfdom of official tyranny and robbery, and ofchurch Jesuitism, deception and chicanery had piled upmountains of anger and hatred. 
 His unbending opposition to private property in land conveys the psychology of the peasant masses during that historical period in which theold, medieval landownership, both in the form of landedestates and in the form of state “allotments”, definitelybecame an intolerable obstacle to the further developmentof the country, and when this old landownership was inevi-tably bound to be destroyed most summarily and ruthlessly. 
 His unremitting accusations against capitalism—accusa-tions permeated with most profound emotion and most ardent indignation—convey all the horror felt by the pat-riarchal peasant at the advent of the new, invisible, incom-prehensible enemy coming from somewhere in the cities, or from somewhere abroad, destroying all the “pillars” ofrural life, bringing in its train unprecedented ruin, poverty,starvation, savagery, prostitution, syphilis—all the calam-ities attending the “epoch of primitive accumulation”,aggravated a hundredfold by the transplantation into Rus-sian soil of the most modern methods of plunder elaborated by the all powerful Monsieur Coupon. 
 127 But the vehement protestant, the passionate accuser, the great critic at the same time manifested in his works afailure to understand the causes of the crisis threateningRussia, and the means of escape from it, that was character-istic only of a patriarchal naïve peasant, but not of a writer with a European education. 
 His struggle against the feudalpolice state, against the monarchy turned into a repudiationof politics, led to the doctrine of “non-resistance to evil”,and to complete aloofness from the revolutionary struggleof the masses in 1905-07. 
 The fight against the official church was combined with the preaching of a new, purified religion, that is to say, of a new, refined, subtle poison for the op-pressed masses. 
 The opposition to private property in landdid not lead to concentrating the struggle against the realenemy—landlordism and its political instrument of power,i. 
e. 
, the monarchy—but led to dreamy, diffuse and impotent lamentations. 
 The exposure of capitalism and of the calam-ities it inflicts on the masses was combined with a whollyapathetic attitude to the world-wide struggle for emancipa-tion waged by the international socialist proletariat. 
 The contradictions in Tolstoy’s views are not contradic-tions inherent in his personal views alone, but are a reflection of the extremely complex, contradictory conditions, social influences and historical traditions which determined thepsychology of various classes and various sections of Russiansociety in the post-Reform, but pre-revolutionary era. 
 That is why a correct appraisal of Tolstoy can be made only from the viewpoint of the class which has proved, by its political role and its struggle during the first denoue-ment of these contradictions, at a time of revolution, thatit is destined to be the leader in the struggle for the people’s liberty and for the emancipation of the masses from exploi-tation—the class which has proved its selfless devotion to the cause of democracy and its ability to fight against the limitations and inconsistency of bourgeois (including peas-ant) democracy; such an appraisal is possible only from theviewpoint of the Social-Democratic proletariat. 
 Look at the estimate of Tolstoy in the government newspa-pers. 
 They shed crocodile tears, professing their respect for “the great writer” and at the same time defending the “Holy” Synod. 
 As for the holy fathers, they have just per-petrated a particularly vile iniquity; they sent priests tothe dying man in order to hoodwink the people and say thatTolstoy had “repented”. 
 The Holy Synod excommunicatedTolstoy. 
 So much the better. 
 It will be reminded of this exploit when the hour comes for the people to settle ac-counts with the officials in cassocks, the gendarmes in Christ,the sinister inquisitors who supported anti-Jewish po-groms and other exploits of the Black-Hundred tsarist gang. 
 Look at the estimate of Tolstoy in the liberal newspapers. 
 They confine themselves to those hollow, official-liberal, hackneyed professorial phrases about the “voice of civilised mankind”, “the unanimous response of the world”, the“ideas of truth, good”, etc. 
, for which Tolstoy so castigat-ed—and justly castigated—bourgeois science. 
 They cannot voice plainly and clearly their opinion of Tolstoy’s viewson the state, the church, private property in land, capital-ism—not because they are prevented by the censorship; on the contrary, the censorship is helping them out of anembarrassing position!—but because each proposition inTolstoy’s criticism is a slap in the face of bourgeois liberal-ism; because the very way in which Tolstoy fearlessly, frank-ly and ruthlessly poses the sorest and most vexatious prob-lems of our day is a rebuff to the commonplace phrases, trite quirks and evasive, “civilised” falsehoods of our liberal(and liberal-Narodnik) publicists. 
 The liberals are all forTolstoy, they are all against the Synod—and at the sametime, they are for ... the Vekhists, with whom “it is possi-ble to disagree”, but with whom it is “necessary” to live in harmony in one party, with whom it is “necessary” to work together in literature and politics. 
 And yet the Vekhistsare greeted with kisses by Anthony, Bishop of Volhynia. 
 The liberals put in the forefront that Tolstoy is “the great conscience”. 
 Is not this a hollow phrase which is repeated in a thousand variations both by Novoye Vremya and by all such newspapers? Is this not an evasion of the concrete prob-lems of democracy and socialism which Tolstoy posed ? Is this not to put in the forefront the feature that expressesTolstoy’s prejudice, not his intellect, the part of him thatbelongs to the past and not to the future, his repudiation of politics and his preaching of moral self-perfection, but not his vehement protest against all class domination? Tolstoy is dead, and the pre-revolutionary Russia whose weakness and impotence found their expression in the phi-losophy and are depicted in the works of the great artist,has become a thing of the past. 
 But the heritage which he has left includes that which has not become a thing of the past, but belongs to the future. 
 This heritage is acceptedand is being worked upon by the Russian proletariat. 
 TheRussian proletariat will explain to the masses of the toil-ers and the exploited the meaning of Tolstoy’s criticism ofthe state, the church, private property in land—not in order that the masses should confine themselves to self-perfection and yearning for a godly life, but in order that they shouldrise to strike a new blow at the tsarist monarchy and land-lordism, which were but slightly damaged in 1905, and whichmust be destroyed. 
 The Russian proletariat will explain tothe masses Tolstoy’s criticism of capitalism—not in order that the masses should confine themselves to hurling impre-cations at capital and the rule of money, but in order thatthey should learn to utilise at every step in their life and intheir struggle the technical and social achievements of capi-talism, that they should learn to weld themselves into aunited army of millions of socialist fighters who will over-throw capitalism and create a new society in which the people will not be doomed to poverty, in which there will be noexploitation of man by man. 
 Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 18, Published according to November 16 (29), 1910 the text in Sotsial-Demokrat TO THE COMRADE S STUDYIN G AT THE SCHOOL IN BOLOGN A128 Dear Comrades, I cannot agree to your proposal that I should undertake to read lectures in Bologna, firstly, on grounds of principle and secondly, because it is impossible for me to come toBologna. 
 Both the trend and the methods of the group which has organised the school on the island of Capri and in BolognaI consider harmful to the Party and un-Social-Democratic. 
 The “platform” put forward by the organisers of the Capri school and a section (true, a minority) of their pupils,consists of a defence of digressions from Marxism in philos-ophy, in politics, and in the definition of the tactical aimsof our Party. 
 Moreover, the organisation of the school atBologna contradicts both this “platform” and the pro-Party principle, because the organisers are acting schismatical-ly, not only giving no assistance (whether in money theypossess, or in personal service) to the school commissionwhich was appointed by the plenum of the Central Commit-tee in January 1910, but directly sabotaging all the initia-tives taken by this commission. 
 Hence it is clear that I can take no part in anything under-taken by this anti-Party group which is divorcing itselffrom the principles of Social-Democracy. 
 But I should have great pleasure, of course, in giving the students of the Bologna school, irrespective of their views or sympathies, a series of lectures on tactics, on the situa-tion of the Party and on the agrarian question. 
 With this in mind I take the liberty of inviting the student comradesto come to Paris on their way back. 
 A whole series of lectures could be organised there. 
 The travelling expenses could be raised in the following way: 1) The organisers of the Capri school borrowed 500 francs from the Bolsheviks. 
 Now they have money and will probably repay their debt to the Party,i. 
e. 
, to the Central Committee Bureau Abroad. 
 I, on mypart, am prepared to make efforts to get this money al-located to cover the expenses of the journey from Bolognato Paris and I think that the Bolshevik whom we have dele-gated to the Central Committee Bureau Abroad will do everything in his power to help. 
 2) If 500 francs will notbe enough (I do not know how many students there are atBologna and how many could make the journey), there isanother 1,500 francs that the plenum of the C. 
C. 
 assignedfor the school commission with which the organisers of the Bologna school broke off connections. 
 I think it would be possible to get this money assigned for a course of lecturesin Paris for students who might wish to come over from Bo-logna. 
 Paris is big enough for the thing to be arranged there quite secretly (there are districts where there are no Russians at all), moreover, it could be arranged somewhere in the outly-ing suburbs. 
 In closing I express my thanks to the students at Bologna for their comradely invitation and hope that my proposalabout coming to Paris will be accepted. 
 With comradely greetings, N. 
 Lenin Written November 20 (December 3), 1910 First printed in 1911 in Published according to the copy the “Report of the Second in N. 
 K. 
 Krupskaya’s handwriting Social-Democratic College of Propaganda and Agitation for Workers”. 
 Published by the Vperyod group L. 
 N. 
 TOLSTOY AND THE MODER N LABOU R MOVEMEN T129 The Russian workers in practically all the large cities of Russia have already made their response in connection with the death of L. 
 N. 
 Tolstoy and, in one way or another, ex-pressed their attitude to the writer who produced a numberof most remarkable works of art that put him in the ranksof the great writers of the world, and to the thinker whowith immense power, self-confidence and sincerity raiseda number of questions concerning the basic features of the modern political and social system. 
 All in all, this attitude was expressed in the telegram, printed in the newspapers,which was sent by the labour deputies in the Third Duma. 
 130 L. 
 Tolstoy began his literary career when serfdom still existed but at a time when it had already obviously come tothe end of its days. 
 Tolstoy’s main activity falls in that period of Russian history which lies between two of its turn-ing points, 1861 and 1905. 
 Throughout this period tracesof serfdom, direct survivals of it, permeated the whole eco-nomic (particularly in the countryside) and political lifeof the country. 
 And at the same time this was a periodof the accelerated growth of capitalism from below and its implantation from above. 
 In what were the survivals of serfdom expressed? Most of all and clearest of all in the fact that in Russia, mainly an agricultural country, agriculture at that time was inthe hands of a ruined, impoverished peasantry who wereworking with antiquated, primitive methods on the old feudal allotments which had been cut in 1861 for the benefit of the landlords. 
 And, on the other hand, agriculture wasin the hands of the landlords who in Central Russia culti-vated the land by the labour, the wooden ploughs, and the horses of the peasants in return for the “cut-off lands”, meadows, access to watering-places, etc. 
 To all intents and purposes this was the old feudal system of economy. 
 Through-out this period the political system of Russia was alsopermeated with feudalism. 
 This is evident from the consti-tution of the state prior to the first moves to change it in1905, from the predominant influence of the landed nobility on state affairs and from the unlimited power of the offici-als, who also for the most part—especially the higher ranks—came from the landed nobility. 
 After 1861 this old patriarchal Russia began rapidly to disintegrate under the influence of world capitalism. 
The peasants were starving, dying off, being ruined as never before, fleeing to the towns and abandoning the soil. 
 There was a boom in the construction of railways, mills and fac-tories, thanks to the “cheap labour” of the ruined peasants. 
Big finance capital was developing in Russia together withlarge-scale commerce and industry. 
 It was this rapid, painful, drastic demolition of all the old “pillars” of old Russia that was reflected in the works of Tolstoy the artist, and in the views of Tolstoy the thinker. 
 Tolstoy had a surpassing knowledge of rural Russia, the mode of life of the landlords and peasants. 
 In his artisticproductions he gave descriptions of this life that are num-bered among the best productions of world literature. 
 The drastic demolition of all the “old pillars” of rural Russia sharpened his attention, deepened his interest in what wasgoing on around him, and led to a radical change in hiswhole world outlook. 
 By birth and education Tolstoy be-longed to the highest landed nobility in Russia—he broke withall the customary views of this environment and in his later works attacked with fierce criticism all the contemporary state, church, social and economic institutions which werebased on enslavement of the masses, on their poverty, on theruin of the peasants and the petty proprietors in general,on the coercion and hypocrisy which permeated all contem-porary life from top to bottom. 
 Tolstoy’s criticism was not new. 
 He said nothing that had not been said long before him both in European and inRussian literature by friends of the working people. 
 But the uniqueness of Tolstoy’s criticism and its historical significance lie in the fact that it expressed, with a power such as is possessed only by artists of genius, the radical change in the views of the broadest masses of the people inthe Russia of this period, namely, rural, peasant Russia. 
 ForTolstoy’s criticism of contemporary institutions differs fromthe criticism of the same institutions by representativesof the modern labour movement in the fact that Tolstoy’s point of view was that of the patriarchal, naïve peasant, whose psychology Tolstoy introduced into his criticism andhis doctrine. 
 Tolstoy’s criticism is marked by such emotion-al power, such passion, convincingness, freshness, sincerityand fearlessness in striving to “go to the roots”, to find thereal cause of the afflictions of the masses, just because this criticism really expresses a sharp change in the ideas of mil-lions of peasants, who had only just emerged from feudalisminto freedom, and saw that this freedom meant new horrorsof ruin, death by starvation, a homeless life among the lowerstrata of the city population, and so on and so forth. 
 Tolstoymirrored their sentiments so faithfully that he imported their naïveté into his own doctrine, their alienation from political life, their mysticism, their desire to keep aloof fromthe world, “non-resistance to evil”, their impotent impreca-tions against capitalism and the “power of money”. 
 Theprotest of millions of peasants and their desperation—thesewere combined in Tolstoy’s doctrine. 
 The representatives of the modern labour movement find that they have plenty to protest against but nothing to de-spair about. 
 Despair is typical of the classes which areperishing, but the class of wage-workers is growing inevi-tably, developing and becoming strong in every capitalistsociety, Russia included. 
 Despair is typical of those who do not understand the causes of evil, see no way out, and are incapable of struggle. 
 The modern industrial proletariatdoes not belong to the category of such classes. 
 Nash Put No. 
 7, Published according to November 28, 1910 the text in Nash Put Signed: V. 
 I-in AN OPEN LETTER TO ALL PRO-PARTY SOCIAL-DEMOCRATS At the plenary meeting of the Central Committee in Jan-uary 1910, we, as representatives of the Bolshevik faction, dissolved our faction and transferred the money and other property belonging to it to three well-known leaders of theinternational Social-Democratic movement. 
 This transferand equally the dissolution of the faction were conditional steps. 
 Our conditions for taking these steps are known fromour statement at the plenum, a statement adopted by the plenum and published in the very first number of the Cen-tral Organ issued after the plenum. 
 Briefly stated, these conditions were that the other fac-tions (and in the first place the faction of Golosists, i. 
e. 
,the Mensheviks who published and supported Golos Sotsial-Demokrata ) should carry out their duty loyally , i. 
e. 
, sin-cerely and fully, namely, (1) the fight against liquidationism and otzovism, which by a unanimously adopted resolutionof the plenum were declared to be a sign of bourgeois influenceon the proletariat, and (2) the dissolution of their factions. 
 At the present time, after a year ’s experience, a year of waiting, we have become completely and finally convinced that neither the Golosists nor the Vperyodists have ful-filled either of these two conditions. 
 The result of this conviction as far as we are concerned was, firstly, the publication of Rabochaya Gazeta and, sec-ondly, the statement about the return of the money andproperty, a statement we handed recently to the Central Committee on December 5, 1910. 
 After this declaration the state of affairs in form and sub-stance is as follows. 
 We had conditionally handed over all our property and forces to support the anti-liquidationist and anti-otzovist work for the restoration of the Party and its full unity. 
 The violation by the Golosists and Vperyod-ists of the conditions they had accepted is a violation ofour agreement. 
 Cancelling this agreement violated by theliquidators and otzovists, we shall work as before for the re-storation of the Party and its full unity, for the implementa-tion of an anti-liquidationist and anti-otzovist policy, but we must carry out this work not with those allies that at the plenum (owing to faith in their promises) were admitted toparticipation in the Party centres. 
 Since, by general recogni-tion and by repeated statements of delegates of national or-ganisations at the plenum and at other Party meetings, con-ferences, etc. 
, it is our Bolshevik faction that has always been regarded as bearing the greatest responsibility for the state of affairs in the Party, we consider it our duty to setout frankly our views on the state of affairs in the Party andon the significance of the steps we have taken. 
 The January plenum in 1910 was of very great importance in the history of our Party. 
 It definitively laid down thetactical line of the Party for the period of counter-revolution by establishing, in further development of the December resolutions of 1908, that both liquidationism and otzovismare manifestations of the influence of the bourgeoisie on the proletariat. 
 Further, the plenum linked the question of put-ting an end to factions in our Party—that is to say, the ne-cessity of bringing about real unity in the Social-Democratic Labour Party—with the formulation of the Party’s ideo-logical and political aims in the present historical period. 
 We are convinced that these two things accomplished by the plenum in January 1910 are of historic significance and that their results are much more important, much more vital,much more lasting, than they may seem to the superficialobserver. 
 But these results were terribly vitiated by the muddled phrase-mongering about them. 
 There is nothing so inimical to the spirit of Social-Democracy and so harmful as phrase-mongering . 
 And “conciliatory” phrase-mongering is no less harmful and liable to lead people astray than liquidationist and otzovist phrase-mongering. 
 This “conciliatory” phrase-mongering obscures the essence of the matter, substitutes aspirations and good intentions for an estimate of the real tendencies and real relationship of forces in the Party, im-pedes the rapprochement of those who could and should come closer together by attempts at playing at unity with thosewho at the present time do not want to and cannot unite. 
 During the year that has elapsed since the January plenum this phrase-mongering has exhausted itself and shown what its fruits are. 
 If now from bitter experience of the heroes of“conciliatory” phrases the Party learns the lesson how not to set about “conciliation” and the abolition of factions,then the year since the plenum will not have passed in vain. 
 Phrase-mongering amounted to asserting that it is suffi-cient to obtain “promises” about the abolition of factions, to compose the central bodies out of the most heterogeneouselements, to “balance” opposed elements, and an importantstep towards the abolition of factions will have been made. 
 The year’s experience showed, as it could not fail to show, that the phrase-mongers’ method was a complete failure. 
 It is impossible to build anything on promises, it is ludi-crous to base anything on the union of heterogeneous ele-ments that are incapable of uniting. 
 On the morrow of theplenum everything in its decisions and measures that wasbased on phrase-mongering proved to be a soap-bubble. 
 The decisions, resolutions and artificially composed bodies were all in fact a dead letter, lifeless institutions. 
 But what was real in the actions of the plenum underwent development, was strengthened, showed its effects in the work, and becameclothed in new forms of existence outside and apart from the resolutions. 
 It would be difficult to imagine a more striking and in-structive lesson than that of the events which took place during the year following the plenum, a lesson offered tothose people who had delighted in phrase-mongering, vaingood intentions and playing at the allocation of seats invarious bodies and so forth. 
 What was it that was real in the actions of the plenum? What was real was its indication of the connection between the ideological and political content of Party work and the abolition of factions. 
 What was real was the rapprochement of those factions or trends which came together not on the basis of cheap conciliatory phrases, promises, or playing at the allocation of seats in the central bodies, but on the basis of work , agreement in their understanding of the ideo-logical and political tasks of the moment, agreement in actual fact on the formulation of these tasks, and their ac-complishment. 
 As long as magniloquent and cheap phrases about the abo-lition of factions were being uttered by people who under-stood neither the objective source of the disagreements northe actual situation that in-fact ensured the independence from the Party of certain literary groups (such as that of Mr. 
Potresov and Co. 
 or that of the Machist and otzovist litera-ti), for so long the phrases remained empty, impotent phrases. 
 But as soon as, owing to a change in the objective condi-tions, a rapprochement in work , a rapprochement in the un-derstanding of these objective conditions, began to grow in the two basic and main factions that have left their imprinton the whole history of the workers’ movement during therevolution—even more than that, on the whole history of the revolution in Russia—no efforts on the part of intriguers who want to undermine this rapprochement or sow distrustin it can halt the process that has begun. 
 During the past year the actual state of Party affairs aris-ing after the plenum has become quite clear. 
 It is a fact that the Golosists and Vperyodists signed the resolutions on the fight against liquidationism and otzovism but in realityconducted and are conducting all their propaganda and agi-tation, all their practical activity, in such a way as to sup-port and defend liquidationism and otzovism. 
 For anyone who has eyes to see, this fact shows how bankrupt is a policy that is satisfied with paper resolutionsand how harmful are phrases that are not in accord withdeeds. 
 Further, it is a fact that neither the Golosists nor the Vpe-ryodists relinquished their factional independence for a single moment . 
 Both of these factions continue to exist in the fullest actual independence of the Party, with their own funds, their own organs, their own agencies. 
 The factional organisation of the otzovists takes the form of the so-called “school” abroad (in reality it is an institution for systematic selection of agents and planned conduct of organisational work apart from the Party and against the Party). 
 The“school” is supplemented by a separate publishing house andmeans of transport. 
 The Golosists’ factional organisation islooser (“freer”, less definite in form), the chief role being played by the group of Mr. 
 Potresov and Co. 
, the group of the Sixteen, and the group of Mikhail, Roman and Yuri and Co. 
, which are absolutely independent of the Party. 
 The Go-losists take an active part in these groups, directing all propa-gandist, agitational and organisational activity against theParty and at the same time not refraining from participationin the Party centres in order systematically to undermine their significance and demoralise them from within. 
 No pro-Party Social-Democrat can fail to see what such a state of affairs leads to. 
 As regards publication of literature, the year’s experience has shown that the Central Organ is in point of fact being conducted by the Bolsheviks plus the Plekhanovites against the Golosists on the editorial board. 
 Life has overstepped the bounds created by conciliatory phrase-mongering: the “con-ciliators” by promise, the “conciliators” by office, the “con-ciliators” by instruction of the liquidationist centres, haveproved to be a sheer hindrance to the work . 
 Plekhanov and his fellow-thinkers, however, who made no promises at the plenum, and who did not take up any office, proved actual implementers of the Party line. 
 The glaring contradiction between form and substance, between phrases and deeds, between the obviously hypocrit-ical existence of a supposedly pro-Party collegium (the edi-torial board of the Central Organ) and the actual activity in the Central Organ alongside this collegium brings very great demoralisation into Party life. 
 In order to put a stop to thisdemoralisation, this degradation of what are formally Partyinstitutions to a role that evokes deserved ridicule and rejoic-ing on the part of enemies of the Party, we must do awaywith hypocrisy and frankly say what actually exists, frankly admit the conduct of Party work by two factions. 
 As regards unity abroad, absolutely nothing has been done during the year. 
 Wherever the groups were split previously they remain split now. 
 The groups of Menshevik liquidators have openly become groups in support of Golos . 
 The only rapprochement that has been mapped out and actu-ally begun is that between the Bolsheviks and the Plekhano-vites. 
 The Central Committee Bureau Abroad, in itscapacity as co-ordinator of Social-Democratic work abroad,has become an object of ridicule legitimately mocked at bythe Vperyodists and Golosists, who observe with satisfac-tion how the Party centre acts as a collegium for provocatory affairs and for carrying out bureaucratic paper work that isof no use to anyone. 
 In the most important sphere, that of organisational work locally in Russia, absolutely nothing of any use to theParty has been accomplished during the year. 
 The Central Committee, which had to invite the Mikhails, Romans and Yuris on the basis of the “promises” made to the plenum,zealously set about this thankful task so worthy of a revolu-tionary of inviting into the Party those who ridicule it andcontinue to harm it, but even so after a year have not suc-ceeded in “inviting” anyone. 
 During this period, however, the anti-Party factions have strengthened their organisa-tions against the Party: the Vperyod faction has developed and its agency has grown stronger, Mr. 
 Potresov’s group hasgrown stronger, as too have the other liquidationist enter-prises, which have continued to carry on propaganda againstthe Party in a number of clubs, co-operative societies, etc. 
, and to intrigue against the Party among the Social-Demo-cratic group in the Duma. 
 The role of the Central Committee,which during this time has been occupied in “inviting” theliquidators or in a formal correspondenc e on matters concern-ing the “squabbles” of the Golosists and Vperyodists, is arole that is positively humiliating and we cannot permit the enemies of the Party to reduce the Central Committee to this role. 
 Only people quite incapable of thought or desirous of indulging in petty intrigue can still fail to see that the con-tinuance of such a state of the Party centres inevitably pre-pares the way for a triumph of the liquidators and otzovists, who observe with satisfaction how the Central Committee has entangled itself, and continues to entangle itself, inconciliatory phrase-mongering, in playing at conciliation with those who do not want to be reconciled with the Party. 
 The liquidators and otzovists have an excellent under-standing of conciliatory phrase-mongering and make excel-lent use of it against the Party. 
 The hero of such phrases,Trotsky, has quite naturally become the hero and swornadvocate of the liquidators and otzovists, with whom heagrees on nothing theoretically but in everything prac-tically. 
 Favoured with the assistance of this advocate, both the liquidators and the otzovists have thoroughly mastered thetactics that consists of incessantly vowing and swearingthat they are pro-Party. 
 This is repeated by Golos and the platform of the Vperyod group, while they continue in fact to disrupt the Party and carry out all activities in an anti-Party spirit. 
 Formal and verbal “conciliation” has becomea weapon of the Golos liquidators and Vperyodists. 
 It goes without saying that we, as representatives of the Bolshevik trend, cannot play this role of dupes. 
 Havingwaited a whole year, having done everything possible through the pages of the Central Organ to make clear the anti-Party character of the Vperyodists, Golosists and Trotsky,we cannot assume responsibility before the Party for institu-tions which occupy themselves with “invitations” to theliquidators and formal correspondence on “business” raisedby the Vperyodists. 
 We want not squabbles but work. 
 We desire to work jointly with those who want to work in the Party spirit, and have actually proved their abilityto do so, i. 
e. 
, in the first place with the pro-Party Menshe-viks and the really non-factional Social-Democrats. 
 We donot desire to be responsible for squabbles with those whodo not want to work jointly with the Party, but want to work with Mr. 
 Potresov and the otzovists. 
 The state of affairs in Russia is such that intensified and harmonious work is urgently required of the Party organisa-tions abroad. 
 The three-year period of the golden daysof the counter-revolution (1908-10) is evidently coming toa close and being replaced by a period of incipient upsurge. 
 The summer strikes of the current year and the demonstra-tions on the occasion of Tolstoy’s death are a clear indica-tion of this. 
 The Party’s organisational work in Russia has become weak in the extreme and this weakness has been most shamelessly utilised by the Vperyodists and Golosists, who are developing their anti-Party activity with the aid of the Russian and foreign factional centres. 
 Under such conditions to continue playing at concilia-tion with these factional centres, to close one’s eyes hypo-critically to their independence, to “invite” their representa-tives for a joint fight against their own policy, to shield them in the eyes of the Party by accepting their members in the centres—means dooming oneself to hopeless squabbling. 
 Itmeans putting a brake on the work of the centres abroad, which even without that has been slowed down to such anextent that during the year it has not been possible to arrange a single meeting of the Central Committee in Russia, and not only not a single conference, but not even an unofficial meeting of local Party workers (whereas the otzovists’“school” and the liquidators’ legal organs repeatedly man-aged to organise against the Party all sorts of conferencesand meetings of agents, correspondents of journals, andso on). 
 We are obliged to repudiate responsibility for this com-plete stoppage of the work of those who have been entangled in conciliation with the Golosists of these centres and tobegin immediately the most energetic independent workin uniting the orthodox Bolsheviks, pro-Party Mensheviksand non-factional Social-Democrats for organising meetings, conferences, regional bureaux, groups for connections with Party publications, etc. 
 It is to this work, which alone isactually capable of leading the Party out of the impasse and freeing the centres from “courting” the Golosists, thatwe are calling all pro-Party Social-Democrats. 
 Even before the plenum, in the spring of 1909, in the name of the Bolshevik faction, we proclaimed the policy of a rapprochement with the pro-Party Mensheviks, and since then this policy has borne considerable fruit, despite the unsuccessful attempt to trust the “promises” of the Golo-sists and regard them as pro-Party elements. 
 All that hasbeen done since then to really strengthen not the Vperyod-ist propaganda nor the Golosist defence of liquidationism but the line of the Party , to really bring closer together the basic core of both the chief factions, has been done by us independently of these unsuccessful attempts at concilia-tion with the Golosists. 
 And by divesting ourselves of re-sponsibility for continuing these attempts we are confident that we shall achieve a still closer alignment in work through Rabochaya Gazeta , through legal literature and through the activity abroad of the groups of supporters ofRabochaya Gazeta and supporters of Plekhanov. 
 After the plenum, which in the most clear-cut way posed the question of factions and their abolition, for the first time raising this question in connection with the ideological and political line of the factions themselves, i. 
e. 
, on thereal basis of an estimate of actual rapprochement in work and not on the basis of empty promises, formal undertakingsand suchlike phrases—after the plenum and a year’s exper-ience of its results it is impossible to continue the old hypo-critical playing at hide-and-seek. 
 We must act openly. 
 We must have the courage to say what the position is. 
 If the Central Committee desire totell the Party frankly and openly what the position is,this simple statement will be a tremendously powerful weapon in their hands, a hundred times more weighty than any kind of resolutions, wishes, condemnations, ex-pulsions, etc. 
 To say what the position is means acknowledging that the attempt to abolish all factions has, unfortunately, been frustrated by the Golosists and Vperyodists, but the rap-prochement of the basic core, of the really pro-Party elements of the two main factions, their closer alignment with thepro-Party elements of the nationals and non-factional So-cial-Democrats, has made a step forward. 
 If Trotsky andsimilar advocates of the liquidators and otzovists declarethis rapprochement “devoid of political content”, such speeches testify only to Trotsky’s entire lack of principle, the real hostility of his policy to the policy of the actual (and not merely confined to promises) abolition of factions. 
 To prom-ise this abolition after a year’s experience of the results of the plenum is sheer chicanery. 
 But whereas the abolition offactions is a mere phrase, the rapprochement of the main trends in the two chief factions is a fact. 
 No blocs, no magnil-oquent pledges, no promises of the disappearance of disagree-ments, follow from this fact, but what does follow is a real possibility of building the Party in practice , based on the co-operation of part of the Mensheviks and part of the Bol-sheviks. 
 If the Central Committee desires with absolute consist-ency to adopt the course of such an acknowledgement andsuch work, if it desires to make all the central bodies the or-gan of such a rapprochement, to free them completely fromunworthy and harmful “courting” of the Golosists or “invita-tions” to the Golosists, to afford the possibility of working without squabbles, then we shall support this policy withall our heart and soul and all our strength, a policy thatin fact we have been pursuing since the spring of 1909, i. 
e. 
, already for two whole years. 
 If the Central Committee does not want to draw this in-evitable conclusion from the lessons of the plenum and its results, then let it hand over the conduct of Party work—and of work for the restoration of unity—to the alliance ofthe Golosists, Vperyodists and Trotsky. 
 This will be morestraightforward and honest, and we shall keep aloof fromthis alliance which has in actual fact demonstrated its anti-Party character. 
 We are perfectly aware, of course, that in connection with our step certain people (and among them, assuredly, ex-perienced advocates of the liquidators and otzovists) will cry out about a “split”. 
 However stupid and hypocritical such cries may be we must pause to warn uninformed peopleabout these probable objections. 
 In its formal aspect our step—the demand for the return of money and termination of the agreement that we con-cluded on very definite conditions—is absolutely legitimate. 
 The conditions of our agreement with the Central Committee were openly stated, printed in the Central Organ and accept-ed unanimously by the Central Committee at the plenum. 
 By accepting these conditions in the name of the whole Party and printing them in the Party’s Central Organ, the CentralCommittee thereby unequivocally acknowledged that only with the fulfilment in actual fact of these conditions could it demand of us a definite mode of action. 
 No one can deny thatthese conditions have not been fulfilled by the Golosists /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR and Vperyodists, in spite of the resolution they signed. 
 Our formal right to cancel the agreement is therefore indisputa-ble. 
 By cancelling the agreement we proclaim an independent fight for the Party principle, independent work on buildingthe Party without those who have proved by a year’s exper-ience their unwillingness to work on this, together with those Mensheviks and non-factionalists who have proved the opposite. 
 If the agreement, which was directly and explicitly dependent on the Golosists and Vperyodists coming over to the pro-Party position, has proved to have been violatedby them , it is our full right and our duty to cancel the agree-ment with people who have flouted the Party, and to seekall possible forms of closer alignment with people who sup-port the Party. 
 Much more important than the formal aspect, however, is the factual state of affairs. 
 Especially illuminating inthis respect is the hypocrisy of the Golosists and Vperyod-ists, who both at the plenum and after it continued to makedeclarations in the press about their pro-Party attitude. 
 Thehypocrisy of such asseverations, the glaring falsity of cries about a split on the part of such people, is so obvious that it is not worth wasting many words on it. 
 It was the Golos-ists and the Vperyodists who created an actual split imme-diately after the plenum—or rather, who did not cease creat-ing it despite their promises at the plenum; it was they whoduring the whole year continued this split, intensified it, and supported the independence from the Party of the group of Potresov and Co. 
, the group of literati, the organisers ofthe “Machist” school, etc. 
, etc. 
 To allow such splitters toremain in the Party centres means the utter ruin of the Par-ty’s cause. 
 To let the previous position remain, where thesesplitters took advantage of their presence in the Party cen-tres to put a brake on all work, to demoralise the Party from within for the benefit of Mr. 
 Potresov or the leaders of the “Machist” school, means to do tremendous, irreparabledamage to the cause of Party unity. 
 Long ago it was said that not everyone who calls out “Lord, Lord” will enter the kingdom of heaven. 
 And, after the experience of the plenum, we must repeat: not everyone who voices cheap phrases about partyism is really pro-Party. 
The Golosists and Vperyodists split the Party after the plenum. 
 That is a fact. 
 Trotsky was their advocate in this matter. 
 That is also a fact. 
 There is no other way of halting the split, of preventing it from spreading than by strengthening, consolidatingand formally confirming the rapprochement of those whoactually carried out Party activity after the plenum, i. 
e. 
, the pro-Party Mensheviks and Bolsheviks. 
 Announcing our view of Party affairs to all pro-Party Mensheviks, non-factional pro-Party Social-Democrats andBolsheviks, as well as all national Social-Democratic organ-isations, we invite the Bolshevik groups in Russia to beginimmediately to rally around Rabochaya Gazeta and to set about preparing those meetings and conferences which are essential for restoring the Party and which, owing to thepresent state of affairs, must inevitably begin with the mostmodest, unofficial and informal attempts. 
 To give in printmore details about the nature of such attempts would beout of place. 
 We invite the Bolshevik groups abroad to reorganise themselves in such a way as to cease all connection withthe Vperyodists, who have fully proved their anti-Partycharacter, and without the hindrance of these defenders ofotzovism to begin systematic work for strengthening theParty, closer alignment with pro-Party elements of other factions and the creation of joint clubs, lectures, reports, etc. 
, to take preparatory steps towards a real union abroadof all those who do not follow Vperyod and Golos . 
 If the exist-ence of two parallel groups is inevitable where there areGolosists, it is not seemly for Bolsheviks to tolerate anylonger in their group the anti-Party Vperyodists. 
 Let them find a refuge among the Golosists. 
 The Editorial Board of Rabochaya Gazeta Written after November 22 (December 5), 1910 First published January 21, 1932 , Published according to in the newspaper Pravda No. 
 21 the manuscript First page of the newspaper Zvezda No. 
 1, 1910 Reduced First page of the newspaper Zvezda No. 
 1, 1910 Reduced DIFFERENCES IN THE EUROPEA N LABOU R MOVEMEN T131 I The principal tactical differences in the present-day-labour movement of Europe and America reduce themselves to a struggle against two big trends that are departing fromMarxism, which has in fact become the dominant theory inthis movement. 
 These two trends are revisionism (opportun-ism, reformism) and anarchism (anarcho-syndicalism, anar-cho-socialism). 
 Both these departures from the Marxist theory and Marxist tactics that are dominant in the labourmovement were to be observed in various forms and in vari-ous shades in all civilised countries during the more thanhalf-century of history of the mass labour movement. 
 This fact alone shows that these departures cannot be attributed to accident, or to the mistakes of individualsor groups, or even to the influence of national characteristicsand traditions, and so forth. 
 There must be deep-rootedcauses in the economic system and in the character of thedevelopment of all capitalist countries which constantlygive rise to these departures. 
 A small book, The Tactical Differences in the Labour Movement (Die taktischen Differen-zen in der Arbeiterbewegung , Hamburg, Erdmann Dubber, 1909), published last year by a Dutch Marxist, Anton Pan-nekoek, represents an interesting attempt at a scientificinvestigation of these causes. 
 In our exposition we shall ac-quaint the reader with Pannekoek’s conclusions, which, it must be recognised, are quite correct. 
 One of the most profound causes that periodically give rise to differences over tactics is the very growth of the labour movement. 
 If this movement is not measured by the criterion of some fantastic ideal, but is regarded as the prac-tical movement of ordinary people, it will be clear that the enlistment of larger and larger numbers of new “recruits”,the attraction of new sections of the working people mustinevitably be accompanied by waverings in the sphere oftheory and tactics, by repetitions of old mistakes, by a tem-porary reversion to antiquated views and antiquated meth-ods, and so forth. 
 The labour movement of every country periodically spends a varying amount of energy, attentionand time on the “training” of recruits. 
 Furthermore, the rate at which capitalism develops varies in different countries and in different spheres of thenational economy. 
 Marxism is most easily, rapidly, complete-ly and lastingly assimilated by the working class and its ideologists where large-scale industry is most developed. 
Economic relations which are backward, or which lag intheir development, constantly lead to the appearance of sup-porters of the labour movement who assimilate only certainaspects of Marxism, only certain parts of the new world outlook, or individual slogans and demands, being unable to make a determined break with all the traditions of thebourgeois world outlook in general and the bourgeois-demo-cratic world outlook in particular. 
 Again, a constant source of differences is the dialectical nature of social development, which proceeds in contradic-tions and through contradictions. 
 Capitalism is progressive because it destroys the old methods of production and devel-ops productive forces, yet at the same time, at a certainstage of development, it retards the growth of productiveforces. 
 It develops, organises, and disciplines the workers—and it crushes, oppresses, leads to degeneration, poverty, etc. 
 Capitalism creates its own grave-digger, itself creates the elements of a new system, yet, at the same time, withouta “leap” these individual elements change nothing in thegeneral state of affairs and do not affect the rule of capital. 
It is Marxism, the theory of dialectical materialism, that isable to encompass these contradictions of living reality, of the living history of capitalism and the working-class move-ment. 
 But, needless to say, the masses learn from life andnot from books, and therefore certain individuals or groups constantly exaggerate, elevate to a one-sided theory, to a one-sided system of tactics, now one and now another fea-ture of capitalist development, now one and now another “lesson” of this development. 
 Bourgeois ideologists, liberals and democrats, not under-standing Marxism, and not understanding the modern labourmovement, are constantly jumping from one futile extremeto another. 
 At one time they explain the whole matter by asserting that evil-minded persons “incite” class against class—at another they console themselves with the idea thatthe workers’ party is “a peaceful party of reform”. 
 Both anar-cho-syndicalism and reformism must be regarded as a directproduct of this bourgeois world outlook and its influence. 
They seize upon one aspect of the labour movement, elevate one-sidedness to a theory; and declare mutually exclusive those tendencies or features of this movement that are a spe-cific peculiarity of a given period, of given conditions ofworking-class activity. 
 But real life, real history, includes these different tendencies, just as life and development innature include both slow evolution and rapid leaps, breaks in continuity. 
 The revisionists regard as phrase-mongering all arguments about “leaps” and about the working-class movement beingantagonistic in principle to the whole of the old society. 
They regard reforms as a partial realisation of socialism. 
The anarcho-syndicalists reject “petty work”, especially the utilisation of the parliamentary platform. 
 In practice, the latter tactics amount to waiting for “great days” along withan inability to muster the forces which create great events. 
Both of them hinder the thing that is most important andmost urgent, namely, to unite the workers in big, powerfuland properly functioning organisations, capable of function-ing well under all circumstances, permeated with the spirit of the class struggle, clearly realising their aims and trainedin the true Marxist world outlook. 
 We shall here permit ourselves a slight digression and note in parenthesis, so as to avoid possible misunderstand-ings, that Pannekoek illustrates his analysis exclusively b y examples taken from West-European history, especially the history of Germany and France, not referring to Russia at all. 
 If at times it seems that he is alluding to Russia, it is only because the basic tendencies which give rise to definite departures from Marxist tactics are to be observed in our country too, despite the vast difference between Russia and the West in culture, everyday life, and historical and eco-nomic development. 
 Finally, an extremely important cause of differences among those taking part in the labour movement lies inchanges in the tactics of the ruling classes in general and of the bourgeoisie in particular. 
 If the tactics of the bourgeoisie were always uniform, or at least of the same kind, the work-ing class would rapidly learn to reply to them by tacticsjust as uniform or of the same kind. 
 But, as a matter of fact,in every country the bourgeoisie inevitably devises twosystems of rule, two methods of fighting for its interests and of maintaining its domination, and these methods at times succeed each other and at times are interwoven in variouscombinations. 
 The first of these is the method of force, themethod which rejects all concessions to the labour movement,the method of supporting all the old and obsolete institu-tions, the method of irreconcilably rejecting reforms. 
 Such is the nature of the conservative policy which in Western Europe is becoming less and less a policy of the landowningclasses and more and more one of the varieties of bourgeoispolicy in general. 
 The second is the method of “liberalism”,of steps towards the development of political rights, towardsreforms, concessions, and so forth. 
 The bourgeoisie passes from one method to the other not because of the malicious intent of individuals, and not acci-dentally, but owing to the fundamentally contradictory na-ture of its own position. 
 Normal capitalist society cannotdevelop successfully without a firmly established represent-ative system and without certain political rights for the population, which is bound to be distinguished by its rela-tively high “cultural” demands. 
 These demands for a certainminimum of culture are created by the conditions of thecapitalist mode of production itself, with its high technique,complexity, flexibility, mobility, rapid development ofworld competition, and so forth. 
 In consequence, vacilla-tions in the tactics of the bourgeoisie, transitions from the system of force to the system of apparent concessions havebeen characteristic of the history of all European countries during the last half-century, the various countries developing primarily the application of the one method or the other at definite periods. 
 For instance, in the sixties and sev-enties of the nineteenth century Britain was the classi-cal country of “liberal” bourgeois policy, Germany in theseventies and eighties adhered to the method of force, andso on. 
 When this method prevailed in Germany, a one-sided echo of this particular system of bourgeois government was the growth of anarcho-syndicalism, or anarchism, as it was thencalled, in the labour movement (the “Young” at the begin-ning of the nineties, 132 Johann Most at the beginning of the eighties133). 
 When in 1890 the change to “concessions” took place, this change, as is always the case, proved to be even more dangerous to the labour movement, and gave rise to an equally one-sided echo of bourgeois “reformism”: opportu-nism in the labour movement. 
 “The positive, real aim of theliberal policy of the bourgeoisie,” Pannekoek says, “is tomislead the workers, to cause a split in their ranks, to con-vert their policy into an impotent adjunct of an impotent, always impotent and ephemeral, sham reformism. 
” Not infrequently, the bourgeoisie for a certain time achieves its object by a “liberal” policy, which, as Panneko-ek justly remarks, is a “more crafty” policy. 
 A part of theworkers and a part of their representatives at times allowthemselves to be deceived by seeming concessions. 
 The revi-sionists declare that the doctrine of the class struggle is “antiquated”, or begin to conduct a policy which is in facta renunciation of the class struggle. 
 The zigzags of bourgeoistactics intensify revisionism within the labour movementand not infrequently bring the differences within the labourmovement to the point of an outright split. 
 All causes of the kind indicated give rise to differences over tactics within the labour movement and within theproletarian ranks. 
 But there is not and cannot be a Chinesewall between the proletariat and the sections of the pettybourgeoisie in contact with it, including the peasantry. 
It is clear that the passing of certain individuals, groups and sections of the petty bourgeoisie into the ranks of the proletariat is bound, in its turn, to give rise to vacillationsin the tactics of the latter. 
 The experience of the labour movement of various coun-tries helps us to understand on the basis of concrete practical questions the nature of Marxist tactics; it helps the younger countries to distinguish more clearly the true class signifi-cance of departures from Marxism and to combat these de-partures more successfully. 
 Zvezda , No. 
 1, Published according December 16, 1910 to the text in Zvezda Signed: V. 
 Ilyin TOLSTOY AND THE PROLETARIAN STRUGGLE Tolstoy’s indictment of the ruling classes was made with tremendous power and sincerity; with absolute clearness helaid bare the inner falsity of all those institutions by whichmodern society is maintained: the church, the law courts, militarism, “lawful” wedlock, bourgeois science. 
 But his doctrine proved to be in complete contradiction to thelife, work and struggle of the grave-digger of the modern so-cial system, the proletariat. 
 Whose then was the point ofview reflected in the teachings of Leo Tolstoy? Through hislips there spoke that multitudinous mass of the Russian people who already detest the masters of modern life but have not yet advanced to the point of intelligent, consistent, thoroughgoing, implacable struggle against them. 
 The history and the outcome of the great Russian revolu-tion have shown that such precisely was the mass that founditself between the class-conscious, socialist proletariat and the out-and-out defenders of the old regime. 
 This mass, con-sisting mainly of the peasantry, showed in the revolutionhow great was its hatred of the old, how keenly it felt allthe inflictions of the modern regime, how great within it wasthe spontaneous yearning to be rid of them and to find abetter life. 
 At the same time, however, this mass showed in the revo-lution that it was not politically conscious enough in itshatred, that it was not consistent in its struggle and thatits quest for a better life was confined within narrow bounds. 
 This great human ocean, agitated to its very depths, with all its weaknesses and all its strong features found its reflec-tion in the doctrine of Tolstoy. 
 By studying the literary works of Leo Tolstoy the Russian working class will learn to know its enemies better, but in examining the doctrine of Tolstoy, the whole Russian people will have to understand where their own weakness lies, the weakness which did not allow them to carry the cause of their emancipation to its conclusion. 
 This must be under-stood in order to go forward. 
 This advance is impeded by all those who declare Tol-stoy a “universal conscience”, a “teacher of life”. 
 This isa lie that the liberals are deliberately spreading in their desire to utilise the anti-revolutionary aspect of Tolstoy’s doctrine. 
 This lie about Tolstoy as a “teacher of life” isbeing repeated after the liberals by some former Social-Democrats. 
 The Russian people will secure their emancipation only when they realise that it is not from Tolstoy they must learn to win a better life but from the class the significance of which Tolstoy did not understand, and which alone is ca-pable of destroying the old world which Tolstoy hated. 
That class is the proletariat. 
 Rabochaya Gazeta No. 
 2, Published according to December 18 (31), 1910 the text in Rabochaya Gazeta THE BEGINNING OF DEMONSTRATIONS After three years of revolution, from 1905 to 1907, Russia went through three years of counter-revolution, from 1908 to1910, three years of the Black-Hundred Duma, an orgy ofviolence and suppression of rights, a capitalist offensive against the workers, and the retraction of the gains made by the workers. 
 The tsarist autocracy which was half-broken in1905 but not destroyed, has mustered its forces, joined handswith the landlords and capitalists in the Third Duma andhas re-introduced the old order of things in Russia. 
 Strongerthan ever is the capitalists’ oppression of the workers, more brazen than ever the lawlessness and tyranny of the offici-als in the towns and, particularly, in the countryside, moreferocious than ever the reprisals against the champions offreedom, more frequent than ever the infliction of capitalpunishment. 
 The tsarist government, the landlords and thecapitalists have taken furious revenge on the revolutionary classes, and the proletariat above all, for the revolution, as though hastening to utilise the interruption in the massstruggle for the destruction of their enemies. 
 But there are enemies that can be defeated in a few bat-tles, can be kept under for a time, but cannot be destroyed. 
 The complete victory of the revolution is fully possible and such a victory would utterly destroy the tsarist monarchy, would wipe the feudal landlords from the face of the earth,would transfer all their lands to the peasants without com-pensation, would replace the rule of officialdom by democrat-ic self-government and political freedom. 
 Such reforms arenot only possible, they are indispensable , in every country in the twentieth century, they have already been effected more or less completely in all the states of Europe, at the cost of more or less prolonged and persistent struggle. 
 But no victories of the reaction, however complete, no triumph of counter-revolution can destroy the enemies of the tsarist autocracy, the enemies of oppression by the landlords and capitalists, because these enemies are the millions ofworkers who are being massed in ever-greater numbers inthe towns, in the big factories and on the railways. 
 Theseenemies are the ruined peasantry whose life is many timesharder now that the rural superintendents and rich peasants have united for legalised plunder, for the appropriation of the peasants’ land with the sanction of the landlords’ Duma, under the protection of all the landlord and military author-ities. 
 Enemies like the working class and the poor peasantrycannot be destroyed. 
 And now, after three years of the most wanton riot of counter-revolution, we see that the mass of the people , those most oppressed, downtrodden, benighted, intimidated bypersecutions in every form, are beginning to raise their headsagain, to reawaken and resume the struggle. 
 Three years ofexecutions, persecutions and savage reprisals have destroyedtens of thousands of the “enemies” of the autocracy, hun-dreds of thousands have been imprisoned or exiled, many hun-dreds of thousands more have been intimidated. 
 But millionsand tens of millions of people are no longer what they werebefore the revolution. 
 Never yet in the history of Russia have these millions experienced such instructive and vivid lessons,such open class struggle. 
 That a new and profound underly-ing ferment has set in among these millions and tens of mil-lions is evident from this summer’s strikes and the recentdemonstrations. 
 Workers’ strikes in Russia both during the period of the preparation of the revolution and during the revolutionitself were the most widely used means of struggle of the proletariat, of this advanced class, which is the only con-sistently revolutionary class in modern society. 
 Economicand political strikes, now alternating, now inseparablyinterwoven, united the mass of the workers against the capi-talist class and the autocratic government, threw the wholeof society into a ferment, and roused the peasantry for the struggle. 
 When a continuous wave of mass strikes began in 1895 this was the beginning of the phase of preparation for the people’s revolution. 
 When in January 1905 the number of strikers in this one month exceeded 400,000, this was the beginning of the actual revolution. 
 In all the three years of the revolution the number of strikers, though graduallydeclining (almost 3,000,000 in 1905, 1,000,000 in 1906, andthree-fourths of a million in 1907), was higher than had everbeen known in any other country. 
 When the number of strikers dropped abruptly (176,000) in 1908 and was followed by an even more marked decline in 1909 (64,000) this spelt the end of the first revolution or,rather, the first phase of the revolution. 
 And now, since the summer of this year, the tide is begin-ning to rise again. 
 The number of participants in economicstrikes is increasing and increasing very rapidly. 
 The phase of the total domination of the Black-Hundred reaction has come to an end. 
 The phase of a new upsurge is beginning. 
The proletariat, which retreated —although with considerable interruptions between 1905 and 1909, is regaining itsstrength and is beginning to take the offensive . 
 The revival in certain branches of industry leads at once to a revival of the proletarian struggle. 
 The proletariat has begun. 
 Others, the bourgeois, demo-cratic classes and sections of the population are continuing. 
The death of Muromtsev, Chairman of the First Duma, amoderate liberal, a foreigner to democracy, evokes thefirst timid beginning of demonstrations. 
 The death of Leo Tolstoy gives rise—for the first time after a long interval —to street demonstrations with the participation mainly of students but partly also of workers. 
 The fact that quitea number of factories and plants stopped work on the day ofTolstoy’s funeral marks the beginning, though a very modestone, of demonstrative strikes. 
 Very recently, the atrocities of the tsarist gaolers, who in Vologda and Zerentui tortured many of our imprisonedcomrades who are being persecuted for their heroic struggleduring the revolution, have deepened the ferment among thestudents. 
 Assemblies and mass meetings are being held allover Russia, the police are raiding the universities, beating the students, arresting them, prosecuting newspapers for publishing the slightest particle of truth about the disorders,but only aggravating the unrest by all these actions. 
 The proletariat has begun. 
 The democratic youth are continuing. 
 The Russian people are awakening to new strug-gle, advancing towards a new revolution. 
 The first beginning of the struggle has shown us again that the forces are alive which shook the tsarist regime in1905 and will destroy it in the coming revolution. 
 The firstbeginning of the struggle has shown us again the signifi-cance of the mass movement. 
 No persecutions, no reprisals can halt the movement once the masses have risen, once the millions have begun to bestir themselves. 
 Persecutions onlypour oil on the flames, draw ever-new contingents of fightersinto the struggle. 
 No terrorist acts can help the oppressedmasses, and no power on earth can halt the masses when theyrise in revolt. 
 Now they have begun to rise. 
 This upsurge may be rapid, or it may be slow and fitful, but in any case it is leading toa revolution. 
 The Russian proletariat led the way in 1905. 
Remembering this glorious past it must now exert everyeffort to restore, reinforce and develop its own organisation,its own Party, the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party. 
 At present our Party is passing through difficult days but it is invincible, just as the proletariat is invincible. 
 So to work, comrades! Get busy everywhere, building organisations, creating and reinforcing Party units of So-cial-Democratic workers, intensifying economic and politicalagitation. 
 In the first Russian revolution the proletariat taught the masses to fight for freedom, in the second revolu-tion it must lead them to victory! Rabochaya Gazeta No. 
 2, Published according to December 18 (31), 1910 the text in Rabochaya Gazeta -WHAT IS HAPPENING IN THE COUNTRYSIDE? Ex-Minister of Agriculture Yermolov’s new book about the “present epidemic of incendiarism in Russia” has givenrise to controversy in the newspapers. 
 The liberal press haspointed out that fires in the countryside have not decreasedbut rather increased after the revolution. 
 The reactionarynewspapers have taken up Yermolov’s outcry and lamenta-tion about “the impunity of the incendiaries”, “terrorism in the countryside”, and so on. 
 There has been an extraordinaryincrease in the number of fires in rural localities. 
 For in-stance, between 1904 and 1907 the figure went up twofold i n Tambov Gubernia, two and a half times in Orel Gubernia, and threefold in Voronezh Gubernia. 
 “The more or less well-to-do peasants,” writes Novoye Vremya , which acts as a lackey of the government, “want to set up farmsteads and aretrying to introduce new farming methods, but are besieged,as if by guerrillas in enemy territory, by a lawless rural ele-ment that has run wild. 
 They are being burned out andhounded, hounded and burned out until there is nothing left for them to do but ‘abandon everything and flee’. 
” An unpleasant admission indeed for those supporting the tsarist government! For us Social-Democrats the latest in-formation is not lacking in interest as further confirmationof the lies of the government and the pitiful impotence ofliberal policy. 
 The Revolution of 1905 fully showed that the old order in the Russian countryside is irrevocably doomed by history. 
Nothing in the world can bolster up this order. 
 How is itto be changed? The peasant masses gave the answer by theiruprisings in 1905 and through their deputies in the Firstand Second Dumas. 
 The landed estates must be taken away from the landlords without compensation. 
 When 30,000 land-lords (headed by Nicholas Romanov) own 70 million dessia-tines of land and ten million peasant households almost the same amount, the result can be nothing except bondage, ab-ject poverty, ruin and stagnation of the whole national econ-omy. 
 Hence the Social-Democratic Labour Party called on the peasants to take up the revolutionary struggle. 
 Bytheir mass strikes in 1905 the workers throughout Russiarallied the peasants and directed their struggle. 
 The liberalplan to “reconcile” the peasants with the landlords through“redemption payments at a fair valuation” 134 was an empty, miserable, treacherous trick. 
 How does the Stolypin government want to refashion the old order in the countryside? It wants to speed up the com-plete ruin of the peasants, to preserve the landed estates,to help an insignificant handful of rich peasants to set upfarmsteads and grab as much as possible of the land of the village communes. 
 The government has realised that the peasant masses are against it and it is trying to find alliesamong the rich peasants. 
 Stolypin himself once said that “twenty years of tranquil-lity” would be needed to carry out the “reform” proposedby the government. 
 By “tranquillity” he means submissive-ness on the part of the peasants, the absence of any strug-gle against violence. 
 Yet without violence committed by therural superintendents and other authorities, violence atevery step, violence against tens of millions —without sup-pressing the slightest signs of independence on the partof these millions, the Stolypin “reform” cannot be carried out. 
 Not even for three years, let alone twenty, has Stoly-pin been able to bring about “tranquillity”, nor will he beable to do so; this is the unpleasant truth of which the tsar’slackeys have been reminded by the ex-minister’s book aboutfires in the countryside. 
 The peasants do not and-cannot have any other way out of the position of desperate want, poverty, and death by star-vation into which the government has plunged them than bymass struggle together with the proletariat to overthrow thetsarist regime. 
 Preparation of the forces of the proletariatfor this struggle, the creation, development and consolida-tion of proletarian organisations—this is the immediate task of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Rabochaya Gazeta No. 
 2, Published according to December 18 (31), 1910 the text in Rabochaya Gazeta IVAN VASILYEVICH BABUSHKIN AN OBITUARY We are living in accursed conditions when it is possible for such things as the following to happen: a prominent Partyworker, the pride of the Party, a comrade who unselfishlydevoted his life to the cause of the working class, disappears without a trace. 
 Even his nearest relatives, like his wife or his mother, his most intimate comrades do not know foryears what has become of him: whether he is pining some-where in penal servitude, whether he has perished in someprison or has died the death of a hero in battle with the enemy. 
Such was the case with Ivan Vasilyevich, who was shot by Rennenkampf. 
 We learned about his death only quite recently. 
 The name of Ivan Vasilyevich is near and dear not only to Social-Democrats. 
 All who knew him loved and respectedhim for his energy, his avoidance of phrase-mongering, hisprofound and staunch revolutionary spirit and fervent devo-tion to the cause. 
 A St. 
 Petersburg worker, in 1895 with a group of other class-conscious workers, he was very active inthe district beyond the Nevskaya Zastava among the workersof the Semyannikov and Alexandrov factories and the GlassWorks, forming circles, organising libraries and studyingvery hard himself all the time. 
 All his thoughts were fixed on one thing—how to widen the scope of the work. 
 He took an active part in drawing upthe first agitational leaflet put out in St. 
 Petersburg in the autumn of 1894, a leaflet addressed to the Semyannikovworkers, and he distributed it himself. 
 When the League ofStruggle for the Emancipation of the Working Class was formed in St. 
 Petersburg, Ivan Vasilyevich became one of its most active members and worked in it until he was arrested. 
The idea of starting a political newspaper abroad to promote the unification and consolidation of the Social-Demo-cratic Party was discussed with him by his old comrades who had worked with him in St. 
 Petersburg, the founders of Iskra , and received his warmest support. 
 While Ivan Vasilyevichwas at liberty Iskra never went short of genuine workers’ correspondence. 
 Look through the first twenty issues of Iskra , all these letters from Shuya, Ivanovo-Voznesensk, Orekhovo-Zuyevo and other places in Central Russia: they nearly all passed through the hands of Ivan Vasilyevich, who made every effort to establish the closest contact between Iskra and the workers. 
 Ivan Vasilyevich was Iskra ’s most assid-uous correspondent and its ardent supporter. 
 From the centralregion Babushkin made his way to the south, where he wasarrested in Ekaterinoslav and imprisoned in Alexandrovsk. 
 From Alexandrovsk he escaped with another comrade by saw-ing through the window-bars of his cell. 
 Without knowing asingle foreign language he made his way to London, where theIskra editorial office was at the time. 
 A lot of things were talked over there, a lot of questions were discussed withhim. 
 But Ivan Vasilyevich did not get the chance to attend the Second Party Congress ... imprisonment and exile put him out of active service for a long time. 
 The revolutionarywave that arose brought new functionaries, new Party leadersto the fore, but Babushkin at this time was living in theFar North, in Verkhoyansk, cut off from Party life. 
 Butthe time was not wasted for him, he studied, he equipped him-self for the struggle, he was active among the workers who were his comrades in exile, trying to make them class-con-scious Social-Democrats and Bolsheviks. 
 In 1905 came theamnesty and Babushkin set out for Russia. 
 But Siberia toowas seething with struggle and people like Babushkin wereneeded there. 
 He joined the Irkutsk Committee and plunged headlong into the work. 
 He had to speak at meetings, carry on Social-Democratic agitation and organise an uprising. 
While Babushkin and five other comrades—whose names wehave not learned—were taking a large consignment of armsfrom Chita in a separate railway car the train was held up byone of Rennenkampf’s punitive expeditions and all six, without the slightest pretence of a trial were lined up on the edge of a common grave hastily dug on the spot and shot. 
They died like heroes. 
 The story of their death was told by soldiers who saw it and railwaymen who were in the same train. 
 Babushkin fell a victim to the bestial savagery of the tsarist myrmidon but, in dying, he knew that the cause to which he had devoted his life would not die, that it wouldbe continued by tens, hundreds of thousands, millions ofother hands, that other working-class comrades would diefor the same cause, that they would fight until they werevictorious.... 
 * * * Some people have concocted and are spreading a fairy-tale to the effect that the Russian Social-Democratic LabourParty is a party of “intellectuals”, that the workers are iso-lated from it, that the workers in Russia are Social-Demo-crats without a Social-Democratic party, that this was the case particularly before the revolution and, to a con-siderable extent, during the revolution. 
 The liberals arespreading this lie out of hatred for the revolutionarymass struggle which the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 led in 1905, and somesocialists have been repeating this lying theory either out of ignorance or irresponsibility. 
 The life history of Ivan Vasilyevich Babushkin, the ten years’ Social-Democraticactivity of this worker-Iskrist is a striking refutation of this liberal lie. 
 I. 
 V. 
 Babushkin is one of those working-classmilitants who 10 years before the revolution began to create the workers ’ Social-Democratic Party. 
 Had it not been for the tireless, heroically persistent work of such militants among the proletarian masses the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 could not have existed tenmonths let alone ten years. 
 Thanks only to the activities ofsuch militants, thanks only to their support, the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 developed by 1905 into a Party which became inseparably fused with the proletariat in the great days of October and December, which maintained this connection in the person of the workers ’ deputies not only in the Second, but even in the Third, Black-Hundred Duma The liberals (Cadets) want to make a national hero out of the late S. 
 A. 
 Muromtsev who was the Chairman of theFirst Duma. 
 We, the Social-Democrats, must not let the op-portunity slip of expressing our contempt and hatred of the tsarist government, which persecuted even such moderateand inoffensive officials as Muromtsev. 
 Muromtsev was only a liberal official. 
 He was not even a democrat. 
 He was afraid of the revolutionary struggle of the masses. 
 He expected the liberation of Russia to come not from this struggle, but from the good will of the tsarist autocracy, from an agreement with this malicious and ruthless enemy of the Russian people. 
It is ridiculous to regard such people as national heroes ofthe Russian revolution. 
 But there are such national heroes. 
 They are people like Babushkin. 
 They are people who, not for a year or two but for a whole decade before the revolution, whole-heartedlydevoted themselves to the struggle for the emancipation ofthe working class. 
 They are people who did not dissipatetheir energies on the futile terrorist acts of individuals,but who worked persistently and unswervingly among the proletarian masses, helping to develop their consciousness, their organisation and their revolutionary initiative. 
 They are people who stood at the head of the armed mass struggleagainst the tsarist autocracy when the crisis began, whenthe revolution broke out and when millions and millions werestirred into action. 
 Everything won from the tsarist autoc-racy was won exclusively by the struggle of the masses led by such people as Babushkin. 
 Without such men the Russian people would remain for ever a people of slaves and serfs. 
 With such men the Rus-sian people will win complete emancipation from all exploi-tation. 
 The fifth anniversary of the December uprising of 1905 has already passed. 
 Let us honour this anniversary by remem-bering the militant workers who fell in the fight against theenemy. 
 We request our worker comrades to collect and sendus reminiscences of the struggle of that period and additionalinformation about Babushkin and also about other Social-Democratic workers who fell in the uprising of 1905. 
 We intend to publish a pamphlet on the lives of such workers. 
Such a pamphlet will be the best answer to all sceptics anddisparagers of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party. 
Such a pamphlet will be excellent reading matter for youngworkers, who will learn from it how every class-conscious worker should live and act. 
 Rabochaya Gazeta No. 
 2, Published according to December 18 (31), 1910 the text in Rabochaya Gazeta TO THE CENTRAL COMMITTEE Concerning our declaration135 there are in existence lying rumours which are deliberately being circulated by theGolosist liquidators and which we consider it our duty tocounter by a short account of the essentials of the matter and our views. 
 The formal aspect of the matter is that an agreement between the faction and the Party was concluded at the ple-num of January 1910. 
 According to the agreement, our fac-tion undertook to dissolve itself if the other factions dissolved themselves. 
 The condition was not observed. 
 We resume our freedom of struggle against the liberals and anarchists, who are being encouraged by the leader of the “conciliators”,Trotsky. 
 The question of the money is for us a secondary matter, although of course we do not intend to hand over themoney of the faction to the bloc of liquidators $anarchists $ Trotsky, while in no way renouncing our right to expose before the international Social-Democratic movement this bloc, its financial “basis” (the notorious Vperyodist “funds”safeguarded from exposure by Trotsky and the Golosists),etc. 
 * The essential fact is that we divest ourselves of responsibil-ity for the assistance in demoralising the Party rendered by the “conciliatory” policy (i. 
e. 
, the policy indulgent to the Golosist liberals and Vperyodist anarchists). 
 We warned *The right to represent the faction was given to our sextet at the plenum. 
 Of the six votes we have four : three in Paris and one by Mesh-kovsky’s (written) power of attorney. 
 If Meshkovsky were to takeit into his head to back out, we should interrogate the remaining Bolshevik members of the Central Committee and candidate memberselected in London , and also interrogate the Bolsheviks who have de-clared themselves by influential work. 
 the Party officially and openly even before No. 
 12 of the Cen-tral Organ by making a statement about the conspiracy against the Party in the leaflet “ Golos (Voice ) of the Liqui-dators Against the Party”. 
 * If these words may have seemed to anyone an exaggera-tion, events have completely and literally confirmed what wesaid. 
 The liberal liquidators have consolidated themselvesoutside the Party, they have created a faction altogether hostile ( Nasha Zarya , Vozrozhdeniye , Dyelo Zhizni ) to Social-Democracy and ready to disrupt the Party’s cause in the elections to the Fourth Duma. 
 The Golosists have helped Potresov and Co. 
 to demoralise the Party, spoiling and hindering its work from within the central bodies. 
 The Central Committee Bureau Abroad—the only permanent organ in practice—has fallen into the hands of the liquida-tors , thanks in part to the impotence of the Bund and the Letts, and in part to the direct help the Golosists have beengiven by the liquidationist elements of these national organ-isations. 
 The C. 
C. 
 Bureau Abroad not only did nothingto unite the pro-Party elements abroad, and not only gave no help to the fight against the Golosists and Vperyodists, but it concealed the anti-Party “funds” of the anarchists and the steps taken by the liberals. 
 The Vperyodists, thanks to the “conciliatory” support of Trotsky and Golos , have consolidated themselves as a fac-tion with its own transport, its own agency , and have grown many times stronger since the plenum of January 1910. 
 There has been a full development of what was already outlined quite clearly at the plenum (for instance, thedefence of the anarchist school, by Trotsky $the Golosists). 
 The bloc of the liberals and anarchists with the aid of theconciliators is shamelessly destroying the remnants of the Party from outside and helping to demoralise it from within. 
 The formalistic game of “inviting” the Golosists and Trotsky-ists on to the central bodies is finally reducing to impo-tence the already weakened pro-Party elements. 
 Divesting ourselves of responsibility for this game, we shall, while keeping aloof from it, pursue our pro-Party policy of rapprochement with the Plekhanovites and ruth-*See pp. 
 156-64 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 less struggle against the bloc. 
 It stands to reason that we shall in every way support all steps of the Central Committee if it succeeds in meeting in Russia, restoring the Central apparatus there, establishing a Party organisational baseabroad (instead of the liquidationist C. 
C. 
 Bureau Abroad)and beginning work against the liberals and anarchists. 
 Finally, a few words about the split with which the “con-ciliators” are trying to frighten us. 
 At present the split de facto is already complete, for the Potresovites and Vperyod-ists have completely split off and no one will bring them back to the Party line . 
 If the Central Committee emphatically condemns them as liberals and anarchists, there will be nosplit de jure , for they cannot defend their line. 
 If the central bodies cease to play at “inviting” the liberals who are ser-vants of Potresov (the Golosists) and the Vperyodists, there will be no split de jure , and the workers will definitely aban-don both the Vperyodists and the Potresovites. 
 Any other policy will prolong the split by encouraging the Potresovitesand Vperyodists. 
 As far as we are concerned, we shall keepentirely aloof from any such “other” policy, as authorised representatives of the Bolshevik trend , whose guiding signifi-cance was recognised by the plenum of January 1910. 
 The representatives of the Bolshevik trend who signed the agreement with the Central Committee at the plenum andwho are authorised (by Meshkovsky’s power of attorney) tocancel it. 
 Written after January 22 (February 4), 1911 First published in 1933 Published according to in Lenin Miscellany XXV the manuscript HEROE S OF “RESERVATIO N”136 The tenth issue of Nasha Zarya , the magazine of Mr. 
 Pot-resov and Co. 
, which we have just received, provides strik-ing examples of carelessness or, rather, unprinciplednessin the evaluation of Leo Tolstoy, which need to be dealt with at once, if only in brief. 
 Here is an article by V. 
 Bazarov, a new warrior in Potre-sov’s ranks. 
 The editors are not in agreement with “certain propositions” in this article, without of course mentioningwhich propositions they are. 
 That is so much more conveni-ent for covering up confusion! As for ourselves, we find it difficult to point out any propositions in this article that would not arouse the indignation of anyone who has the leastbit of regard for Marxism. 
 “Our intelligentsia,” V. 
 Bazarovwrites, “beaten and dispirited, turned into a sort of amor-phous mental and moral slough, and now at the extreme limitof spiritual demoralisation, has unanimously accepted Tol-stoy—the whole of Tolstoy—as its conscience. 
” That is not true. 
 It is mere phrase-mongering. 
 Our intelligentsia in gen-eral, and particularly that of Nasha Zarya , certainly looks very “dispirited”, but it neither did nor could display any“unanimity” in its appraisal of Tolstoy, and it never did orcould appraise correctly the whole of Tolstoy. 
 It is precisely the absence of unanimity that is concealed behind the utterlyhypocritical talk about “conscience”, a catchword fully wor-thy of Novoye Vremya . 
 Bazarov does not fight the “slough”— he encourages the slough. 
 Bazarov “would like to recall certain instances of injus-tice [!!] with regard to Tolstoy, of which the Russian intel-lectuals in general, and we radicals of various persuasions in particular, are guilty”. 
 The only thing that is true in thisstatement is that Bazarov, Potresov and Co. 
 are indeed “radicals of various persuasions”, dependent on the universal “slough” to such an extent that, at a time when the funda-mental inconsistencies and weaknesses of Tolstoy’s world outlook are being hushed up in the most unpardonable fash-ion, they rush after “everybody” in a challenging fashion,yelling about “injustice” to Tolstoy. 
 They do not want toyield to the intoxication of “that narcotic particularly wide-spread among us, which Tolstoy describes as ‘the virulence of controversy’”. 
 This is the very kind of talk, the kind of tune, that suits the philistines, who turn their backs withsupreme contempt on a controversy over principles that aredefended consistently and in full. 
 “The main power of Tolstoy lies in the fact that, having passed through all the stages of demoralisation typical of modern educated men, he succeeded in finding a synthesis.... 
” This is not true. 
 The very thing that Tolstoy did notsucceed in finding, or rather could not find, either in the phil-osophical foundations of his world outlook or in his social-political doctrine, is a synthesis. 
 “Tolstoy was the first[!] to objectivise, i. 
e. 
, to create not only for himself but for others as well, that genuinely human [Bazarov’s own italics throughout] religion, of which Comte, Feuerbach, and otherrepresentatives of modern culture could only dream subjec-tively [!],” etc. 
, etc. 
 This kind of talk is worse than common philistinism. 
 It is an attempt to adorn the “slough” with spurious flowers, capable only of deluding people. 
 More than half a century ago Feuerbach, unable to “find a synthesis” in his worldoutlook, which represented in many respects “the last word”of German classical philosophy, became embroiled in those“subjective dreams”, the negative role of which has longsince been appraised by the really progressive “representa-tives of modern culture”. 
 To declare now that Tolstoy “was the first to objectivise” these “subjective dreams” is to jointhe camp of the retrograde, to flatter the philistines, to echothe Vekhists. 
 Bazarov writes: “It goes without saying that the movement [!?] founded by Tol-stoy must undergo a profound change if it is really destined to playa great world-wide historic role: the idealisation of the patriarchal-peasant mode of life, the attraction towards a natural economy, and many other utopian features of Tolstoyism, which loom large [!] at the present time and seem to be its most essential features, are actuallynothing but subjective elements not necessarily connected with thebasis of Tolstoy’s ‘religion’. 
” So it turns out that Tolstoy “objectivised” Feuerbach’s “subjective dreams”, whereas that which Tolstoy reflectedboth in his brilliant literary works and in his extremely con-tradictory doctrine, namely, the special economic features of Russia of the past century, noted by Bazarov, are “nothing but subjective elements” of his doctrine. 
 That is what iscalled being wide of the mark. 
 But then, there is nothingthe “intelligentsia, beaten and dispirited” (etc. 
, as quotedabove), enjoys, desires and likes more, there is nothing thathumours its dispiritedness more than this exalting of Feu-erbach’s “subjective dreams” which Tolstoy “objectivised”, and this diversion of attention from the concrete historical economic and political problems “which loom large at thepresent time”! It is obvious that Bazarov is particularly displeased with the “sharp criticism” which the doctrine of non-resistance to evil evoked among the “radical intelligentsia”. 
 To Bazarov it is “clear that there is no reason to speak here of passivityand quietism”. 
 By way of explaining his thought, Bazarovrefers to the well-known tale of “Ivan the Fool” and suggeststhat the reader “imagine that it is not the Tarakan (Cockroach)tsar who sends soldiers against the Fools, but their own ruler Ivan, now become wise; and that Ivan wants to use these sol-diers, whom he recruited from the ranks of the Fools themselvesand who are therefore akin to the latter by their entire wayof thinking, in order to compel his subjects to comply withsome unrighteous demands. 
 It is quite obvious that the Fools,practically unarmed and unfamiliar with military formation, cannot even dream of gaining a physical victory over Ivan’s troops. 
 Even if they resort to the most vigorous ‘resistanceby force’, the Fools cannot defeat Ivan physically, but onlyby means of moral influence, i. 
e. 
, only by means of theso-called ‘demoralisation’ of Ivan’s troops.... 
” “The Fools’resistance by force achieves the same result (only worse and at the cost of great sacrifice) as resistance without force.... 
” “Non-resistance to evil with force or, to use a more generalterm, harmony of means and ends [!!] is an idea that is by no means characteristic only of moral preachers who live secluded from society. 
 This idea is an essential component part of every integral world outlook. 
” Such are the arguments of the new warrior in Potresov’s ranks. 
 We cannot stop to analyse them here. 
 It is perhapssufficient—on this first occasion—just to reproduce his mainargument and to add five words: Vekhism of the purest water. 
 From the final chords of the cantata on the theme that ears do not grow above one’s head: “There is no need to de-scribe our weakness as strength, as superiority over Tolstoy’s‘quietism’ and ‘narrow rationalism’ [and over the inconsist-ency of his reasoning?]. 
 We should not say that, not onlybecause it is at variance with the truth, but also because ithinders us from learning from the greatest man of our times. 
” Well, well. 
 But, then, there is no reason why you should be getting angry, gentlemen, and answer with ridiculousbravado and abuse (as Mr. 
 Potresov did in Nos. 
 8-9 ofNasha Zarya ) if people like Izgoyev bless, praise and kiss you. 
 Neither the old nor the new warriors in Potresov’s rankscan cleanse themselves of these kisses. 
 The general staff of this host provided Bazarov’s article with a “diplomatic” reservation. 
 But the leading article byMr. 
 Nevedomsky, printed without any reservations, is notmuch better. 
 “While he absorbed,” writes this bard of thepresent-day intelligentsia, “and embodied in a consummateform the fundamental aspirations and strivings of the great epoch of the fall of slavery in Russia, Leo Tolstoy proved to be also the purest and most consummate embodiment of theideological principle of humanity in general— the principle of conscience . 
 “ Boom, boom, boom.... 
 While he absorbed and embodied in a consummate form the fundamental manner of declama-tion characteristic of liberal-bourgeois journalism, Mr. 
 Ne-vedomsky proved to be also the purest and most consummateembodiment of the ideological principle of humanity ingeneral—the principle of rant. 
 One more—and final—statement: “All those European admirers of Tolstoy, all those Anatole Frances by whatever name they are called, and the Chambers of Dep-uties, which recently voted by an enormous majority against the abolition of capital punishment and today pay homage to the great integral man—the whole of that kingdom of intermediateness, half-heartedness, reservationism—compared with them, how magnificent,how powerful towers the figure, cast of a single pure metal, of Tolstoy,that living embodiment of an integral principle. 
” Phew! What eloquence—and not a word of truth. 
 The figure of Tolstoy is cast neither of a single nor a pure metal,nor of metal at all. 
 And it is precisely not for his “integrali-ty”, but for his deviation from integrality, that “all those” bourgeois admirers “pay homage” to his memory. 
 There is only one apt word that Mr. 
 Nevedomsky blurted out inadvertently. 
 That is the word “reservationism”, whichfits the gentlemen of Nasha Zarya just as perfectly as V. 
 Ba-zarov’s above-quoted characterisation of the intelligentsiafits them . 
 Throughout it is heroes of “reservation” that con-front us. 
 Potresov makes the reservation that he is not in agreement with the Machists, although he defends them. 
 Theeditors make the reservation that they are not in agreementwith “certain propositions” of Bazarov’s, although it is ob-vious to everyone that it is not a question here of certainpropositions. 
 Potresov makes the reservation that he has been slandered by Izgoyev. 
 Martov makes the reservation that he is not entirely in agreement with Potresov and Levit-sky, although they are the very people whom he rendersfaithful political service. 
 All of them make the reservationthat they are not in agreement with Cherevanin, althoughthey approve more of his second liquidationist pamphlet, in which the “spirit” of his first brain-child is greatly in-creased. 
 Cherevanin makes the reservation that he is not inagreement with Maslov. 
 Maslov makes the reservation thathe is not in agreement with Kautsky. 
 The only thing they all agree on is that they are not in agreement with Plekhanov, and that he slanders them by accusing them of liquidationism, while himself being al-legedly unable to explain his present rapprochement withhis former opponents. 
 There is nothing simpler than the explanation of this rapprochement, which is only inexplicable to people withreservations. 
 When we had a locomotive we differed very strongly on the question as to whether the power of that locomotive, the stock of fuel, etc. 
, warranted a speed of,let us say, 25 or 50 miles an hour. 
 The controversy over this question, as over any question which stirs the opponents deeply, was conducted with passion and often with bitter-ness. 
 That controversy—and this refers to absolutely every question over which it arose—was carried on in the open,in full view of everyone, it was thoroughly thrashed out,without being glossed over by any “reservations”. 
 And noneof us ever thought of retracting anything or of whining overthe “virulence of the controversy”. 
 But today, when the lo-comotive has broken down, when it is lying in a bog, surround-ed by “reservationist” intellectuals who sneeringly declarethat there is “nothing to liquidate” because there is no longerany locomotive in existence, we, the “virulent controversion-alists” of yesterday, are drawn closer together by our com-mon cause. 
 Without renouncing anything, without forget-ting anything, without making any promises about setting aside differences, we are working together for the commoncause. 
 We are devoting all our attention and all our effortsto raise the locomotive, to renovate, strengthen and reinforceit, to put it on the rails—as to its speed, or which way to turnone switch or another, we shall discuss that in due time. 
 In these difficult days the immediate task is to create something that will be capable of giving a rebuff to the people “withreservations” and the “dispirited intellectuals”, who directlyor indirectly promote the prevailing “slough”. 
 The immedi-ate task is to dig—even under the most difficult conditions—for ore, to extract iron, and to cast the steel of the Marx-ist world outlook and of the superstructures corresponding to this world outlook. 
 Mysl No. 
 1, December 1910 Published according to Signed: V. 
 I. 
 the text in Mysl THE HISTORICAL MEANING OF THE INNER-PART Y STRUGGL E IN RUSSI A137 The subject indicated by the above title is dealt with in articles by Trotsky and Martov in Nos. 
 50 and 51 of Neue Zeit . 
 Martov expounds Menshevik views. 
 Trotsky fol-lows in the wake of the Mensheviks, taking cover behindparticularly sonorous phrases. 
 Martov sums up the “Russianexperience” by saying: “Blanquist and anarchist lack ofculture triumphed over Marxist culture” (read: Bolshevism over Menshevism). 
 “Russian Social-Democracy spoke too zealously in Russian ”, in contrast to the “ general European ” methods of tactics. 
 Trotsky’s “philosophy of history” isthe same. 
 The cause of the struggle is the “adaptation ofthe Marxist intelligentsia to the class movement of theproletariat”. 
 “Sectarianism, intellectualist individualism, ideological fetishism” are placed in the forefront. 
 “ The struggle for influence over the politically immature proletar-iat”—that is the essence of the matter. 
 I The theory that the struggle between Bolshevism and Men-shevism is a struggle for influence over an immature prole-tariat is not a new one. 
 We have been encountering it since1905 (if not since 1903) in innumerable books, pamphlets,and articles in the liberal press. 
 Martov and Trotsky are put-ting before the German comrades liberal views with a Marxist coating. 
 Of course, the Russian proletariat is politically far less mature than the proletariat of Western Europe. 
 But of all classes of Russian society, it was the proletariat that dis-played the greatest political maturity in 1905-07. 
 The Russian liberal bourgeoisie, which behaved in just as vile, cowardly, stupid and treacherous a manner as the German bourgeoisiein 1848, hates the Russian proletariat for the very reason that in 1905 it proved sufficiently mature politically to wrest the leadership of the movement from this bourgeoisie and ruthlessly to expose the treachery of the liberals. 
 Trotsky declares: “It is an illusion” to imagine that Men-shevism and Bolshevism “have struck deep roots in the depthsof the proletariat”. 
 This is a specimen of the resonant butempty phrases of which our Trotsky is a master. 
 The roots of the divergence between the Mensheviks and the Bolshe-viks lie, not in the “depths of the proletariat”, but in the economic content of the Russian revolution. 
 By ignoring this content, Martov and Trotsky have deprived themselves ofthe possibility of understanding the historical meaning ofthe inner-Party struggle in Russia. 
 The crux of the matteris not whether the theoretical formulations of the differenceshave penetrated “deeply” into this or that stratum of the proletariat, but the fact that the economic conditions of the Revolution of 1905 brought the proletariat into hostile re-lations with the liberal bourgeoisie—not only over the ques-tion of improving the conditions of daily life of the workers,but also over the agrarian question, over all the politicalquestions of the revolution, etc. 
 To speak of the struggle of trends in the Russian revolution, distributing labels such as “sectarianism”, “lack of culture”, etc. 
, and not to say a wordabout the fundamental economic interests of the proletariat,of the liberal bourgeoisie and of the democratic peasantry,means stooping to the level of cheap journalists. 
 Here is an example: “In the whole of Western Europe,” Martov writes, “the peasant masses are considered suitable for an alliance [with the proletariat] only to the extent thatthey begin to feel the grave consequences of the capitalistrevolution in agriculture; in Russia, however, a picture hasbeen drawn of a numerically weak proletariat combining witha hundred million peasants who have not yet felt, or have hardly felt, the ‘educational’ effect of capitalism, and there-fore have not yet been through the school of the capitalistbourgeoisie. 
” This is not a slip of the pen on Martov’s part. 
 It is the cen-tral point of all the ideas of Menshevism. 
 The opportunist history of the Russian revolution which is being published in Russia under the editorship of Potresov, Martov and Maslov(The Social Movement in Russia at the Beginning of the Twen-tieth Century ) is thoroughly permeated with these ideas. 
 The Menshevik Maslov expressed these ideas still more graph-ically when he stated in the article which sums up this “work”: “a dictatorship of the proletariat and the peasantry would run counter to the whole course of economic develop-ment . 
” It is precisely here that the roots of the divergencies between Bolshevism and Menshevism must be sought. 
 Martov substituted the school of the capitalist bourgeoisie for the school of capitalism . 
 (Let us state in parenthesis that there is no other bourgeoisie in the world than the capitalist bourgeoisie. 
) What is meant by the school of capitalism?That capitalism lifts the peasants from the idiocy of rurallife, rouses them and impels them to fight . 
 What is meant by the school of the “capitalist bourgeoisie”? That “the Germanbourgeoisie of 1848 is without the least compunction betray-ing the peasants, who are its most natural allies ... and without whom it is powerless against the nobility” (KarlMarx in Neue Rheinische Zeitung of July 29, 1848). 
 138 That the Russian liberal bourgeoisie in 1905-07 systematicallyand persistently betrayed the peasants, that it in fact desert-ed to the side of the landlords and tsarism against the fight-ing peasants and put direct obstacles in the path of the de-velopment of the peasant struggle. 
 Under cover of “Marxist” catchwords about the “education” of the peasants by capitalism, Martov is advocating the“education ” of the peasants ( who fought the nobility in revo-lutionary fashion ) by the liberals ( who betrayed the peasants to the nobles ). 
 This is substituting liberalism for Marxism. 
 This is liber-alism embellished with Marxist phrases. 
 What Bebel saidin Magdeburg about there being National Liberals among theSocial-Democrats is true not only of Germany. 
 It is also necessary to observe that most of the ideological leaders of Russian liberalism were brought up on German literature and are deliberately transplanting to Russia theBrentano and Sombart brand of “Marxism”, which recognises the “school of capitalism”, but rejects the school of revolu-tionary class struggle. 
 All the counter-revolutionary liberals in Russia, such as Struve, Bulgakov, Frank, Izgoyev and Co. 
, flaunt similar “Marxist” phrases. 
 Martov compares Russia of the epoch of peasant upris-ings against feudalism with “Western Europe”, which put anend to feudalism long ago. 
 This is a stupendous distortionof the historical perspective. 
 Are there any socialists “in the whole of Western Europe” whose programme contains the demand: “to support the revolutionary actions of thepeasantry including confiscation of the landed estates ”? 139 No, there are none. 
 The socialists “in the whole of Western Europe” do not at all support the small proprietors in theirfight over landownership against the big proprietors. 
 Wherein lies the difference? In the fact that “in the whole of West-ern Europe” the bourgeois system, including, in particular,bourgeois agrarian relations, was established and tookdefinite shape long ago, whereas in Russia it is just now thata revolution is taking place over the question of the form this bourgeois system is to assume. 
 Martov repeats the thread-bare method of the liberals, who always contrast the period of revolutionary conflicts over a given question with periodsin which there are no such revolutionary conflicts becausethe question itself was solved long ago. 
 The tragicomedy of Menshevism lies in the fact that at the time of the revolution it had to accept theses which were incompatible with liberalism. 
 If we support the struggle of the “peasantry” for the confiscation of the land, it means that we admit that victory is possible and economically andpolitically advantageous for the working class and the wholeof the people. 
 But the victory of the “peasantry” led by theproletariat in the struggle for the confiscation of the landed estates is precisely the revolutionary dictatorship of the pro-letariat and the peasantry . 
 (Let us recall what Marx said in 1848 about the need for a dictatorship in a revolution, andMehring’s deserved ridicule of those who accused Marx ofwishing to achieve democracy by setting up a dictatorship. 
 140) The view that the dictatorship of these classes “runs coun-ter to the whole course of economic development” is radically wrong. 
 The very opposite is the case. 
 Only such a dictator-ship could make a clean sweep of the remnants of feudalism and secure the speediest development of the productive forces. 
 The policy of the liberals, on the contrary, entrusts the whole matter to the Russian Junkers, who are retard-ing “the course of the economic development” of Russia a hundredfold. 
 In 1905-07 the contradiction existing between the liberal bourgeoisie and the peasantry became fully revealed. 
 Inthe spring and autumn of 1905, as well as in the spring of 1906, from one-third to one-half of the uyezds of Central Russia were affected by peasant revolts. 
 The peasants de-stroyed approximately 2,000 country houses of landlords (un-fortunately this is not more than one-fifteenth of whatshould have been destroyed). 
 The proletariat alone whole-heartedly supported this revolutionary struggle, directed it in every way, guided it, and united it by its mass strikes. 
 The liberal bourgeoisie never helped this revolutionary struggle; they preferred to “pacify” the peasants and “rec-oncile” them with the landlords and the tsar. 
 The same thingwas then repeated in the parliamentary arena in the first twoDumas (1906 and 1907). 
 During the whole of that period the liberals hindered the struggle of the peasants and betrayed them; and it was only the workers ’ deputies who directed and supported the peasants in opposition to the liberals . 
 The entire history of the First and Second Dumas is full of the struggle of the liberals against the peasants and theSocial-Democrats. 
 The struggle between Bolshevism and Men-shevism is inseparably bound up with that history, being a struggle over the question whether to support the liberalsor to overthrow the hegemony of the liberals over the peas-antry. 
 Therefore, to attribute our splits to the influence ofthe intelligentsia, to the immaturity of the proletariat, etc. 
,is a childishly naïve repetition of liberal fairy-tales. 
 For the same reason Trotsky’s argument that splits in the international Social-Democratic movement are caused bythe “process of adaptation of the social-revolutionary classto the limited (narrow) conditions of parliamentarism”, etc. 
,while in the Russian Social-Democratic movement they arecaused by the adaptation of the intelligentsia to the prole-tariat, is absolutely false. 
 Trotsky writes: “While the real political content of this process of adaptation was limited(narrow) from the standpoint of the socialist, final aim, its forms were unrestrained, and the ideological shadow cast by this process was great. 
” This truly “unrestrained” phrase-mongering is merely the “ideological shadow” of liberalism. 
 Both Martov andTrotsky mix up different historical periods and compareRussia, which is going through her bourgeois revolution,with Europe, where these revolutions were completed longago. 
 In Europe the real political content of Social-Demo-cratic work is to prepare the proletariat for the struggle for power against the bourgeoisie, which already holds fullsway in the state. 
 In Russia, the question is still only one of creating a modern bourgeois state, which will be similar either to a Junker monarchy (in the event of tsarism beingvictorious over democracy) or to a peasant bourgeois-demo-cratic republic (in the event of democracy being victorious over tsarism). 
 And the victory of democracy in present-dayRussia is possible only if the peasant masses follow the leadof the revolutionary proletariat and not that of the treacher-ous liberals. 
 History has not yet decided this question. 
 Thebourgeois revolutions are not yet completed in Russia and within these bounds , i. 
e. 
, within the bounds of the struggle for the form of the bourgeois regime in Russia, “the real po-litical content” of the work of Russian Social-Democratsis less “limited” than in countries where there is no strugglefor the confiscation of the landed estates by the peasants,where the bourgeois revolutions were completed long ago. 
 It is easy to understand why the class interests of the bour-geoisie compel the liberals to try to persuade the workersthat their role in the revolution is “limited”, that the struggleof trends is caused by the intelligentsia, and not by profoundeconomic contradictions, that the workers’ party must be“not the leader in the struggle for emancipation, but a class party”. 
 This is the formula that the Golosist liquidators advanced quite recently (Levitsky in Nasha Zarya ) and which the liberals have approved. 
 They use the term “class party”in the Brentano-Sombart sense: concern yourself only withyour own class and abandon “Blanquist dreams” of leadingall the revolutionary elements of the people in a struggle against tsarism and treacherous liberalism. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR II Martov’s arguments on the Russian revolution and Trots-ky’s arguments on the present state of Russian Social-De-mocracy definitely confirm the incorrectness of their funda-mental views. 
 We shall start with the boycott. 
 Martov calls the boycott “abstention from politics”, the method of the “anarchists and syndicalists”, and he refers only to 1906. 
 Trotsky says that the “boycottist tendency runs through the whole historyof Bolshevism—boycott of the trade unions, of the StateDuma, of local self-government bodies, etc. 
”, that it is theresult of sectarian fear of being swamped by the masses, theradicalism of irreconcilable abstention”, etc. 
 As regards boycotting the trade unions and the local self-government bodies, what Trotsky says is absolutely untrue . 
 It is equally untrue to say that boycottism runs through the whole historyof Bolshevism; Bolshevism as a tendency took definite shapein the spring and summer of 1905, before the question of the boycott first came up. 
 In August 1906 , in the official organ of the faction, Bolshevism declared that the historical con-ditions which made the boycott necessary had passed. 
 * Trotsky distorts Bolshevism, because he has never been able to form any definite views on the role of the proletariatin the Russian bourgeois revolution. 
 But far worse is the distortion of the history of this revo-lution. 
 If we are to speak of the boycott we must start from the beginning, not from the end. 
 The first (and only) victoryin the revolution was wrested by the mass movement,which proceeded under the slogan of the boycott . 
 It is only to the advantage of the liberals to forget this. 
 The law of August 6 (19), 1905 created the Bulygin Duma as a consultative body. 
 The liberals, even the most radical of them, decided to participate in this Duma. 
 The Social-Democrats, by an enormous majority (against the Menshe-viks), decided to boycott it and to call upon the masses fora direct onslaught on tsarism, for a mass strike and an upris-ing. 
 Hence, the question of the boycott was not a ques-tion within Social-Democracy alone. 
 It was a question *See present edition, Vol. 
 11, pp. 
 141-49. 
— Ed. 
 of the struggle of liberalism against the proletariat . 
 The en-tire liberal press of that time showed that the liberals feared the development of the revolution and directed all their efforts towards reaching an “agreement” with tsarism. 
 What were the objective conditions for an immediate mass struggle? The best answer to this is supplied by the sta-tistics of strikes (subdivided into economic and politicalstrikes) and of the peasant movement. 
 We cite here the principal data, which will serve to illustrate the whole of our subsequent exposition. 
 Number of Persons Involved in Strikes per Quarter * (in thousands) 1905 1906 1907 I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV Total 810 481 294 1,277 269 479 296 63 146 323 77 193 Economic Strikes 411 190 143 275 73 222 125 37 52 52 66 30Political Strikes 399 291 151 1,002 196 257 171 26 94 271 11 163 Per cent of uyezds affected by the 14. 
2% 36. 
9% 49. 
2% 21. 
1% peasant movement These figures reveal what enormous energy the proletariat is capable of displaying during a revolution. 
 In the entire decade preceding the revolution the number of strikers in Russia was only 431,000, i. 
e. 
, an average of 43,000 per year,while in 1905 the total number of strikers was 2,863,000—ata time when the total number of factory workers was only1,661,000! The world has never witnessed a strike movementlike it. 
 In the third quarter of 1905, when the question of the boycott arose for the first time, we observe the transition to a new and much more powerful wave of the strike movement *The periods which are of special importance are enclosed in boxes: 1905, I—Jan. 
 9; 1905, IV—the climax of the revolution, Oc-tober and December; 1906, II—the First Duma; 1907, II—theSecond Duma. 
 The figures are from the official statistics of strikes, 141 which I am working on in detail for the outline of the history of theRussian revolution that I am now preparing for the press (see pp. 
 393-421 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
«’‘’» «’‘’»«’‘’» { { { { (and, following it, of the peasant movement). 
 The real his-torical content of the question of the boycott was whether to help the rise of this revolutionary wave and direct it towards the overthrow of tsarism, or whether to allow tsarism todivert the attention of the masses by the game of a consulta-tive Duma. 
 It is therefore easy to see how much trivialityand liberal-like obtuseness there is in the efforts to link theboycott in the history of the Russian revolution with “ab-stention from politics”, “sectarianism”, etc. 
 Under the slo-gan of the boycott adopted against the liberals a movement arose which brought about an increase in the number of polit-ical strikers from 151,000 during the third quarter of 1905to one million during the fourth quarter of 1905. 
 Martov declares that the “chief cause” of the success of the strikes in 1905 was “the growing current of opposition in wide bourgeois circles ”. 
 “The influence of these wide sections of the bourgeoisie extended so far that they, on the one hand,directly instigated the workers to political strikes,” and,on the other, urged the employers “ to pay the wages of the workers during a strike ” (Martov’s italics). 
 We shall contrast this honeyed praise of the “influence” of the bourgeoisie with dry statistics. 
 In 1905 strikes muchmore frequently ended in favour of the workers than in1907. 
 Here are the figures for that year: 1,438,610 strikerspresented economic demands; 369,304 workers won theirfight, 671,590 ended it with a compromise and 397,716 lost. 
 Such in fact (and not according to liberal fables) was the “influence” of the bourgeoisie. 
 Martov distorts the actualattitude of the proletariat towards the bourgeoisie in atruly liberal fashion. 
 It was not because the bourgeoisie,on rare occasions, paid for the strikes, or came forward inopposition that the workers won (in “economics” and in politics), but it was because the workers were winning victories that the bourgeoisie were disaffected and paid. 
 The force of the class attack, the force of the strikes in which millionstook part, the force of the peasant riots and of the uprisingsin the armed forces were the cause, the “ chief cause ”, my dear Martov; the “sympathy” of the bourgeoisie was the effect. 
 Martov writes: “October 17, which opened up prospects of elections to the Duma and made it possible to hold meet-ings, to form workers’ unions and to publish Social-Demo-cratic newspapers, indicated the direction along which the work should have been conducted. 
” But the trouble was that “the idea of the possibility of a ‘strategy of attrition’ did not enter anybody’s head. 
 The whole movement wasbeing artificially pushed towards a serious and decisive clash,i. 
e. 
, towards the December strike and the December “san-guinary defeat”. 
 Kautsky disputed with Rosa Luxemburg whether in Ger-many in the spring of 1910 the moment had come for the tran-sition from the “strategy of attrition” to the “strategy of over-throw”, and Kautsky stated plainly and definitely that thistransition was inevitable if the political crisis developed further. 
 But Martov, clinging to Kautsky’s apron-strings,retrospectively advocated the “strategy of attrition” for the period when the revolution reached its highest intensity. 
 No, my dear Martov, you are merely repeating liberal speeches. 
October 17 did not “open up” “prospects” of a peacefulconstitution—that is only a liberal fairy-tale; it openedcivil war . 
 This war was prepared, not by the subjective will of parties or groups, but by the whole course of events since January 1905. 
 The October Manifesto signified not the ces-sation of the struggle, but the balancing of the contendingforces: tsarism was no longer in a position to govern, the revolution was not yet in a position to overthrow it. 
 The objectively inevitable consequence of this situation was adecisive struggle. 
 Both in October and in November civil war was a fact (and the peaceful “prospects” were a liberal lie); this war found expression not only in pogroms, but alsoin the struggle by armed force against insubordinate unitsof the army, against the peasants in one-third of Russia andagainst the border regions. 
 Those who under such cir-cumstances regard the December armed uprising and mass strike as “ artificial ” can only artificially be classed as So-cial-Democrats. 
 The natural party for such people is the liberal party. 
 In 1848 and in 1871 Marx said that there are moments in a revolution when surrendering to the enemy without astruggle has a more demoralising effect on the masses than defeat in a fight. 
 142 December 1905 was not only such a moment in the history of the Russian revolution, it was thenatural and inevitable culmination of the mass encounters and battles which had been growing in intensity in all parts of the country during the preceding twelve months. 
 Even dry statistics bear witness to this fact. 
 The number of per-sons who took part in purely political strikes (i. 
e. 
, in which no economic demands were presented) was: in January 1905,123,000; in October, 328,000; in December, 372,000. 
 And yet there are people who want us to believe that this growth was“artificial”! We are treated to a fairy-tale to the effect that such a growth of the mass political struggle, in addition t o the mutinies in the armed forces, is possible without its inev-itable development into an armed uprising! No, this isnot a history of the revolution, it is a liberal libel on therevolution. 
 III Concerning the October strike, Martov writes: “Just at this time, when general excitement reigns among the workingmasses ... an attempt is made to merge the struggle for polit-ical liberty and the economic struggle into a single whole. 
 Comrade Rosa Luxemburg’s opinion notwithstanding, this revealed, not the strong, but the weak side of the movement. 
”The attempt to introduce the eight-hour working day byrevolutionary means ended in failure and “disorganised”the workers. 
 “The general strike of the post and telegraphemployees in November 1905 acted in the same direction. 
” This is the way Martov writes history. 
 It is sufficient to glance at the statistics given above to see the falsity of this history. 
 Throughout all the three years of the revolution we observe that every time the polit-ical crisis becomes acute there is an upsurge, not only ofthe political, but also of the economic strike struggle. 
 Not the weakness, but the strength of the movement lay in the combination of the two forms of struggle. 
 The oppositeview is the view of the liberal bourgeois, for the very thinghe wanted was that the workers should take part in politics,without , however, the broad masses being drawn into the revolution and into the struggle against the bourgeoisie. 
 It was precisely after October 11 that the liberal Zemstvo movement finally split; the landlords and industrialistsformed the openly counter-revolutionary party of the “Octo-brists”, who unleashed all the force of reprisals against the strikers (while in the press the “Left” liberals, the Cadets, accused the workers of “madness”). 
 Martov, echoing the Octo-brists and the Cadets, is of the opinion that the “weakness”of the workers lay in the fact that at that very time they weretrying to make the economic struggle still more aggressive. 
In our opinion the weakness of the workers (and still moreof the peasants) lay in the fact that they did not resolutely, widely and quickly enough pass to the aggressive economic and armed political struggle which inevitably resulted from the whole course of events, and not at all from the subjective desires of particular groups or parties. 
 A wide gulf separatesour view from Martov’s and, in spite of Trotsky’s assertions,this gulf between the views of “intellectuals” reflects only the gulf which in fact existed at the end of 1905 between the classes , namely, between the revolutionary proletariat, which fought, and the bourgeoisie, which behaved in atreacherous manner. 
 It must be added that defeats of the workers in the strike struggle are characteristic not only of the end of 1905, which Martov seized upon, but to a still greater extent of 1906 and 1907. 
 The statistics show that during the ten years1895-1904 the employers won 51. 
6 per cent of the strikes(according to the number of strikers involved); in 1905,29. 
4 per cent; in 1906, 33. 
5 per cent; in 1907, 57. 
6 per cent;in 1908, 68. 
8 per cent. 
 Does this mean that the economic strikes of 1906-07 were “mad” and “inopportune”, and that they revealed the “weak side of the movement”? No. 
 Itmeans that inasmuch as the offensive of the revolutionarystruggle of the masses was not strong enough in 1905, defeat(both in politics and in “economics”) was inevitable, butthat if the proletariat had not been able to rise at least twice for a new attack against the enemy ( a quarter of a mil-lion persons involved in political strikes alone during the second quarter of 1906 and also 1907), the defeat wouldhave been still greater ; the coup d’état would have taken place not in June 1907, but a year, or even more than a year,earlier , and the workers would have been deprived of the economic gains of 1905 even sooner than they were. 
 It is this significance of the revolutionary struggle of the masses that Martov absolutely fails to understand. 
 Echoing the liberals, he says, in reference to the boycott at the beginning of 1906, that “for a time the Social-Democrats remained outside the political line of battle ”. 
 From a purely theoretical standpoint such a presentation of the questionof the boycott in 1906 is an incredible simplification andvulgarisation of a very complex problem. 
 What was thereal “line of battle” during the second quarter of 1906—was it parliamentary or extra-parliamentary? Look at the statis-tics: the number of persons involved in “economic” strikes rose from 73,000 to 222,000, the number of those involvedin political strikes rose from 196,000 to 257,000. 
 The num-ber of uyezds affected by the peasant movement rose from36. 
9 per cent to 49. 
2 per cent of the total. 
 It is known thatmutinies in the armed forces also increased greatly and be-came more frequent during the second quarter of 1906 com-pared with the first. 
 It is known further that the First Dumawas the most revolutionary parliament in the world (at thebeginning of the twentieth century), yet at the same time itwas the most impotent; not a single one of its decisions wasput into effect. 
 Such are the objective facts. 
 In the estimation of the liber-als and Martov, these facts show that the Duma was the real“line of battle ”, whereas uprisings, political strikes and the unrest among the peasants and soldiers were the inconse-quential affair of “revolutionary romanticists”. 
 And the deep-thinking Trotsky is of the opinion that the factional differ-ences that arose on this ground represented an “intellectual-ist” “struggle for influence over an immature proletariat”. 
In our opinion the objective data prove that in the springof 1906 there was such a serious upsurge of a real revolution-ary mass struggle that the Social-Democratic Party was obliged to regard precisely that struggle as the principal struggle and exert every effort to support and develop it. 
 In our opinion the specific political situation at that period—when the tsarist government obtained from Europe a twothousand million loan on the security, as it were, of the con-vocation of the Duma, and when the tsarist governmentwas hastily promulgating laws against the boycott of the Duma—fully justified the attempt made by the proletar-iat to wrest the convocation of the first parliament in Russiaout of the hands of the tsar. 
 In our opinion it was not the Social-Democrats, but the liberals , who “remained outside the political line of battle ” at that time. 
 Those constitutional illusions, on the spread of which among the masses the whole career of the liberals in the revolution was based, were mostglaringly refuted by the history of the First Duma. 
 In both the First and the Second Dumas the liberals (Ca-dets) had a majority and occupied the political foregroundwith much noise and fuss. 
 But it was just these liberal “vic-tories” that clearly showed that the liberals remained all the time “outside the political line of battle”, that they werepolitical comedians who deeply corrupted the democraticconsciousness of the masses. 
 And if Martov and his friends,echoing the liberals, point to the heavy defeats of the revo-lution as an object-lesson of “ what should not be done ”, our answer to them is, firstly, that the only real victory gained by the revolution was the victory of the proletariat, whichrejected the liberal advice to enter the Bulygin Duma andled the peasant masses to an uprising; secondly, by the heroicstruggle it waged during the course of three yeas (1905-07)the Russian proletariat won for itself and for the Russian peo-ple gains that took other nations decades to win. 
 It won the emancipation of the working masses from the influence o f treacherous and contemptibly impotent liberalism . 
 It won for itself the hegemony in the struggle for freedom and democ-racy as a pre-condition of the struggle for socialism. 
 It wonfor all the oppressed and exploited classes of Russia the ability to wage a revolutionary mass struggle, without which nothing of importance in the progress of mankind has beenachieved anywhere in the world. 
 These gains cannot be taken away from the Russian prol-etariat by any reaction, or by any hatred, abuse and maliceon the part of the liberals, or by any vacillation, short-sightedness and lack of faith on the part of the socialist opportunists. 
 IV The development of the factions in Russian Social-Democ-racy since the revolution is also to be explained, not by the “adaptation of the intelligentsia to the proletariat”,but by the changes in the relations between the classes. 
 The Revolution of 1905-07 accentuated, brought out into the open and placed on the order of the day the antagonism be-tween the peasants and the liberal bourgeoisie over the ques-tion of the form of a bourgeois regime in Russia. 
 The politi-cally mature proletariat could not but take a most energeticpart in this struggle, and its attitude to the various classesof the new society was reflected in the struggle between Bol-shevism and Menshevism. 
 The three years 1908-10 are marked by the victory of the counter-revolution, by the restoration of the autocracy andby the Third Duma, the Duma of the Black Hundreds andOctobrists. 
 The struggle between the bourgeois classes overthe form of the new regime has ceased to be in the forefront. 
The proletariat is now confronted with the elementary task of preserving its proletarian party, which is hostile both to the reaction and to counter-revolutionary liberalism. 
 Thistask is not an easy one, because it is the proletariat thatsuffers all the brunt of economic and political persecution,and all the hatred of the liberals because the leadership ofthe masses in the revolution has been wrested from them by the Social-Democrats. 
 The crisis in the Social-Democratic Party is very grave. 
 The organisations are shattered. 
 A large number of veteranleaders (especially among the intellectuals) have been arrest-ed. 
 A new type of Social-Democratic worker, who is takingthe affairs of the Party in hand, has already appeared, but he has to overcome extraordinary difficulties. 
 Under such conditions the Social-Democratic Party is losing many ofits “fellow-travellers”. 
 It is natural that petty-bourgeois“fellow-travellers” should have joined the socialists duringthe bourgeois revolution. 
 Now they are falling away fromMarxism and from Social-Democracy. 
 This process is observed in both factions: among the Bolsheviks in the shape of the “otzovist” tendency, which arose in the spring of 1908,suffered defeat immediately at the Moscow Conference, andafter a long struggle was rejected by the official centre of thefaction and formed a separate faction abroad—the Vperyod faction. 
 The specific character of the period of disintegra-tion was expressed in the fact that this faction united those Machists who introduced into their platform the struggle against Marxism (under the guise of defence of “proletarian philosophy”) and the ,”ultimatumists”, those shamefaced otzovists, as well as various types of “days-of-freedom So-cial-Democrats”, who were carried away by “spectacular” slogans, which they learned by rote, but who failed to un-derstand the fundamentals of Marxism. 
 Among the Mensheviks the same process of the falling away of petty-bourgeois “fellow-travellers” was expressed inthe liquidationist tendency, now fully formulated in Mr. 
 Potresov’s magazine Nasha Zarya , in Vozrozhdeniye and Zhizn , in the stand taken by “the Sixteen” and “the trio” (Mikhail,Roman, Yuri), while Golos Sotsial-Demokrata , published abroad, acted as a servant of the Russian liquidators in fact and a diplomatic disguise for them before the Party member-ship. 
 Failing to understand the historical and economic signifi-cance of this disintegration in the era of counter-revolution,of this falling away of non-Social-Democratic elements from the Social-Democratic Labour Party, Trotsky tells the Ger-man readers that both factions are “falling to pieces ”, that the Party is “falling to pieces ”, that the Party is “ demoralised . 
” It is not true. 
 And this untruth expresses, firstly, Trots-ky’s utter lack of theoretical understanding. 
 Trotsky hasabsolutely failed to understand why the plenum describedboth liquidationism and otzovism as a “manifestation of bourgeois influence on the proletariat”. 
 Just think: is theseverance from the Party of trends which have been con-demned by the Party, and which express bourgeois influence on the proletariat, an indication of the Party’s disintegration,of its demoralisation, or is it an indication of its becomingstronger and purer? Secondly, in practice, this untruth expresses the “policy” of advertisement pursued by Trotsky’s faction. 
 That Trots-ky’s venture is an attempt to create a faction is now obvious to all, since Trotsky has removed the Central Committee’srepresentative from Pravda . 
 In advertising his faction Trots-ky does not hesitate to tell the Germans that the Party isfalling to pieces , that both factions are falling to pieces and that he, Trotsky, alone, is saving the situation. 
 Actually, we all see now—and the latest resolution adopted by the Trotskyists (in the name of the Vienna Club, on November26, 1910) proves this quite conclusively—that Trotsky enjoys the confidence exclusively of the liquidators and the Vperyodists. 
 The extent of Trotsky’s shamelessness in belittling the Party and exalting himself before the Germans is shown,for instance, by the following. 
 Trotsky writes that the“working masses” in Russia consider that the “Social-Demo-cratic Party stands outside [Trotsky’s italics] their circle” and he talks of “Social-Democrats without Social-Democ-racy”. 
 How could one expect Mr. 
 Potresov and his friends to refrain from bestowing kisses on Trotsky for such statements? But these statements are refuted not only by the entire history of the revolution, but even by the results of theelections to the Third Duma from the workers’ curia. 
 Trotsky writes that “owing to their former ideological and organisational structure, the Menshevik and Bolshevikfactions proved altogether incapable” of working in legalorganisations; work was carried on by “individual groupsof Social-Democrats, but all this took place outside the fac-tions, outside their organisational influence”. 
 “Even the most important legal organisation, in which the Mensheviks predominate, works completely outside the control of theMenshevik faction. 
” That is what Trotsky writes. 
 But thefacts are as follows. 
 From the very beginning of the existenceof the Social-Democratic group in the Third Duma, the Bol-shevik faction, through its representatives authorised by the Central Committee of the Party, has all the time assisted, aided, advised, and supervised the work of the Social-Demo-crats in the Duma. 
 The same is done by the editorial boardof the Central Organ of the Party, which consists of repre-sentatives of the factions (which were dissolved as factionsin January 1910). 
 When Trotsky gives the German comrades a detailed ac-count of the stupidity of “otzovism” and describes thistrend as a “crystallisation” of the boycottism characteristicof Bolshevism as a whole, and then mentions in a few wordsthat Bolshevism “did not allow itself to be overpowered” byotzovism, but “attacked it resolutely or rather in an unbri-dled fashion”—the German reader certainly gets no idea how much subtle perfidy there is in such an exposition. 
 Trotsky’sJesuitical “reservation” consists in omitting a small, very small “detail”. 
 He “forgot” to mention that at an official meeting of its representatives held as far back as the spring of 1909, the Bolshevik faction repudiated and expelled the otzovists. 
 But it is just this “detail” that is inconvenient forTrotsky, who wants to talk of the “falling to pieces ” of the Bolshevik faction (and then of the Party as well) and not ofthe falling away of the non-Social-Democratic elements! We now regard Martov as one of the leaders of liquidation-ism, one who is the more dangerous the more “cleverly” he defends the liquidators by quasi-Marxist phrases. 
 ButMartov openly expounds views which have put their stampon whole tendencies in the mass labour movement of 1903-10. 
Trotsky, on the other hand, represents only his own person-al vacillations and nothing more. 
 In 1903 he was a Menshe-vik; he abandoned Menshevism in 1904, returned to the Men-sheviks in 1905 and merely flaunted ultra-revolutionaryphrases; in 1906 he left them again; at the end of 1906 headvocated electoral agreements with the Cadets (i. 
e. 
, he wasin fact once more with the Mensheviks); and in the spring of1907, at the London Congress, he said that he differed from Rosa Luxemburg on “individual shades of ideas rather than on political tendencies”. 
 One day Trotsky plagiarises fromthe ideological stock-in-trade of one faction; the next dayhe plagiarises from that of another, and therefore declareshimself to be standing above both factions. 
 In theory Trotsky is on no point in agreement with either the liquidators or the otzovists, but in actual practice he is in entire agreement with both the Golosists and the Vperyodists. 
 Therefore, when Trotsky tells the German comrades that he represents the “general Party tendency”, I am obligedto declare that Trotsky represents only his own faction and enjoys a certain amount of confidence exclusively among the otzovists and the liquidators. 
 The following facts prove the correctness of my statement. 
 In January 1910, the Cen-tral Committee of our Party established close ties with Trots-ky’s newspaper Pravda and appointed a representative of the Central Committee to sit on the editorial board. 
 In Sep-tember 1910, the Central Organ of the Party announced a rupture between the representative of the Central Committee and Trotsky owing to Trotsky’s anti-Party policy. 
 In Co-penhagen, Plekhanov, as the representative of the pro-Party Mensheviks and delegate of the editorial board of the Central Organ, together with the present writer, as the representative of the Bolsheviks, and a Polish comrade, entered an emphat-ic protest against the way Trotsky represents our Partyaffairs in the German press. 
 Let the readers now judge for themselves whether Trotsky represents a “general Party”, or a “general anti -Party” trend in Russian Social-Democracy. 
 Written after September-November of 1910 Published April 29 (May 12), 1911 , Published according in Diskussionny Listok No. 
 3 to the text in Diskussionny Signed: N. 
 Lenin Listok STRIK E STATISTIC S IN RUSSI A143 Written at the end of 1910 Published December 1910 Published according to and January 1911 the text in Mysl in the magazine Mysl Nos. 
 1 and 2 Signed: V. 
 Ilyin STRIKE STATISTICS IN RUSSIA143 Written at the end of 1910 Published December 1910 Published according to and January 1911 the text in Mysl in the magazine Mysl Nos. 
 1 and 2 Signed: V. 
 Ilyin I The well-known publications of the Ministry of Trade and Industry, Statistics of Workers ’ Strikes in Factories and Mills for the decade 1895-1904 and for 1905-08, have been commented on in our press on a number of occasions. 
 There is such a wealth of valuable material collected in these pub-lications that a complete study and thorough analysis of itwill require a great deal of time. 
 The analysis made in themis but a first, and very far from adequate, approach to thesubject. 
 In the present article we intend to acquaint thereaders with the preliminary results of an attempt at a more detailed analysis, deferring a full exposition of the subject for publication elsewhere. 
 To begin with, the fact has been fully established that the strike movement in Russia in the years 1905-07 represent-ed a phenomenon unparalleled anywhere else in the world. 
Here are the figures showing the number of strikers (in thousands) by years and countries: Average Russia U. 
S. 
A. 
 Germany France for 1895-1904 431 ” 1905 2,863 660 527 438 ” 1906 1,108 Maximum number during the ” 1907 740 fifteen years ” 1908 176 1894-1904 ” 1909 64 The three-year period 1905-07 is particularly remarkable. 
 The minimum number of strikers in Russia during thesethree years is greater than the maximum ever attained inany of the most developed capitalist countries. 
 This doesnot mean, of course, that the Russian workers are more highly developed or stronger than the workers in the West. 
 But it does mean that mankind had never known before what energy the industrial proletariat is capable of display-ing in this sphere. 
 The specific feature of the historical course of events was expressed in the fact that the approx-imate dimensions of this capability were first revealed ina backward country which is still passing through a bour-geois revolution. 
 In order to be clear on the question as to how it happened that, with the rather small number of factory workers in Russia compared with Western Europe, the number of strik-ers was so large, we must bear in mind the repeated strikes. 
 Here are figures showing the percentage of repeated strikesby years and the ratio between the number of strikers andthe number of workers: The number of The number of strikers as a per-repeated strikes as Years centage of the a percentage of total number of the total number workers of strikes 1895-1904 1. 
46%-5. 
10% 36. 
2% 1905 163. 
8 85. 
5 1906 65. 
8 74. 
5 1907 41. 
9 51. 
8 1908 9. 
7 25. 
4 Hence we see that the triennium 1905-07, which is conspic-uous for the number of strikers, is also distinguished forthe frequency of repeated strikes and for the high percentage of strikers in relation to the total number of workers. 
 The statistical data cover also the number of establish-ments in which strikes occurred and the number of workerswho took part in those strikes. 
 Here are the figures for thevarious years: Percentage of strikers in estab-lishments affected by strikes, in relation to the total number of workers Aggregate for ten years (1895-1904) 27. 
0% 1905 ...... 60. 
0 1906 ...... 37. 
9 1907 ...... 32. 
1 1908 ...... 11. 
9 This table, like the preceding one, shows that the decline in the number of strikers in 1907 compared with 1906 was, in general, considerably less than the decline in 1906 com-pared with 1905. 
 We shall see further on that some industries and some districts registered not a decline, but an intensifi-cation of the strike movement in 1907 compared with 1906. 
For the time being we shall note that the figures by guberniasof the number of workers who actually participated in strikesreveal the following interesting phenomena. 
 Comparedwith 1905 the percentage of workers who took part in strikes in 1906 declined in the overwhelming majority of industri-ally developed gubernias. 
 On the other hand, there were anumber of gubernias in which this percentage increased i n 1906. 
 They were those least developed industrially, and mostout-of-the-way, as it were. 
 They include, for instance, thegubernias of the Far North: Archangel (11,000 factory work-ers; in 1905, 0. 
4 per cent of the workers took part in strikes, in 1906—78. 
6 per cent); Vologda (6,000 factory workers;26. 
8 and 40. 
2 per cent for the years mentioned), Olonets(1,000 factory workers; 0 and 2. 
6 per cent); then there isChornoye Morye (Black Sea) Gubernia (1,000 factory work-ers; 42. 
4 and 93. 
5 per cent); of Volga Region—Simbirsk (14,000 factory workers; 10 and 33. 
9 per cent); of the central agricultural gubernias—Kursk (18,000 factory workers;14. 
4 and 16. 
9 per cent); in the Eastern border area, Oren-burg (3,000 factory workers; 3. 
4 and 29. 
4 per cent). 
 The significance of the increase in the percentage of work-ers who took part in strikes in these provinces in 1906 compared with 1905 is clear: the wave had not reached them in 1905; they began to be drawn into the movement onlyafter a year of unparalleled struggle on the part of the moreadvanced workers. 
 We shall come across this phenomenon—one very important for an understanding of the historical course of events—more than once in our further exposition. 
 On the other hand, in 1907 compared with 1906 the per-centage of workers who took part in strikes increased in somegubernias that are very highly developed industrially: forinstance St. 
 Petersburg (68 per cent in 1906 and 85. 
7 percent in 1907—almost as high as in 1905, when 85. 
9 per centof the workers took part in strikes), Vladimir (37. 
1 and 49. 
6per cent), Baku (32. 
9 and 85. 
5 per cent), Kiev (10. 
9 and 11. 
4 per cent), and several others. 
 Consequently, while the in-creased percentage of strikers in 1906 compared with 1905 in a number of gubernias reveals the rearguard of the working class, which had lagged behind at the moment of the highest development of the struggle, the increase of this percentage in 1907 as compared with 1906 in a number of other guber-nias shows us the vanguard of the working class strivingto raise the struggle again, to halt the retreat that had be-gun. 
 In order to make this correct conclusion even more pre-cise, we shall quote the absolute figures of the number of workers and the number of actual strikers in the guberniasof the first and of the second category: Gubernias in which the percentage of workers who took part in strikes increased in 1906 compared with 1905 : Number of Number of Number of workers who such factory wor-actually took part in gubernias kers in them strikes in 1905 in 1906 10 61,800 6,564 21,484 The average number of factory workers per gubernia is 6,000. 
 The increase in the number of workers who actuallytook part in strikes totalled 15,000. 
 Gubernias in which the percentage of workers who took part in strikes increased in 1907 compared with 1906 : Number of Number of Number of workers who such factory wor-actually took part in gubernias kers in them strikes in 1906 in 1907 19 572,132 186,926 285,673 The average number of factory workers per gubernia is 30,000. 
 The increase in the number of workers who actually took part in strikes amounted to 100,000, or, if we exclude the Baku oil workers who were not included in the figuresfor 1906 (probably not more than 20-30,000), to about70,000. 
 The role of the rearguard in 1906 and of the vanguard in 1907 is clearly seen from these figures. 
 For a still more exact idea of the extent of the movement we must take the figures for the various areas of Russiaand compare the number of strikers with the number of fac-tory workers. 
 Here is a summary of these figures: Number of strikers (in thousands) Number of per year factory work-Factory areasers in 1905 1895-(thousands) 1904 1905 1906 1907 1908 total I. 
 St. 
 Petersburg . 
 298 137 1,033 307 325 44 II. 
 Moscow .... 
 567 123 540 170 154 28 III. 
 W arsaw .... 
 252 69 887 525 104 35 IV. 
 —VI. 
 Kiev, Volga and Kharkov . 
 543 102403 106 157 * 69* Total ... 1,660 431 2,863 1,108 740 176 The extent to which the workers took part in the move-ment varied in the different districts. 
 Altogether there were2,863,000 strikers in 1905 to a total of 1,660,000 workers,or 164 strikers for every 100 workers; in other words, on theaverage more than half of all the workers struck twice in that year. 
 But this average glosses over the fundamental distinction between the St. 
 Petersburg and Warsaw areas, on the one hand, and all the other areas, on the other. 
 The St. 
 Petersburg and Warsaw areas together comprise one-thirdof all the factory workers (550,000 out of 1,660,000), butthey accounted for two-thirds of all the strikers (1,920,000out of 2,863,000). 
 In these areas every worker struck, on theaverage, nearly four times in 1905. 
 In the other areas there were 943,000 strikers to 1,110,000 workers, i. 
e. 
, the propor-tion of strikers was only a quarter of that in the two above-mentioned areas. 
 This by itself shows how wrong are the assertions of the liberals, which are repeated by our liquida-tors, that the workers overestimated their strength. 
 On the contrary, the facts prove that they underestimated their strength, for they did not make full use of it. 
 Had the energyand persistence displayed in the strike struggle (we referhere only to this one form of struggle) been the same through-*These figures are not strictly comparable with the figures for the preceding years, since the oil workers were not included in thedata prior to 1907. 
 The resulting increase is probably not more than20-30,000. 
 out Russia as they were in the St. 
 Petersburg and Warsaw areas, the total number of strikers would have been twice as many . 
 This conclusion can also be expressed in the following way: the workers were able to estimate only one-half of theirstrength in this sphere of the movement, for they had notyet brought the other half into play. 
 In geographical terms,this may be stated as follows: the West and Northwest hadwoken up, but the Centre, the East and the South were still half asleep. 
 The development of capitalism contributes something every day to awakening the tardy. 
 Another important conclusion from the figures by areas is that in 1906 compared with 1905 the movement declinedeverywhere, although unevenly; in 1907 compared with 1906there was a very large decline in the Warsaw area and a rather slight decline in the Moscow, Kiev and Volga areas, whereas in the St. 
 Petersburg and Kharkov areas there wasan increase in the number of strikers. 
 This means that,with the level of political consciousness and preparednessof the population as it was at the time, this particular formof the movement had exhausted itself in 1905; inasmuch as the objective contradictions in social and political life had not disappeared, the movement was bound to pass to a high-er form. 
 But after a year of recuperation, as it were, or ofthe mustering of forces during 1906, there were signs of a newupsurge, which actually began in part of the country. 
 Inappraising this period the liberals, echoed by the liquida-tors, speak contemptuously about “the expectations of the romanticists”; a Marxist, however, must state that by refus-ing to support this partial upsurge the liberals frustratedthe last opportunity of upholding the democratic gains. 
 As regards the territorial distribution of the strikers, it should be noted that the vast majority of them is accounted for by six gubernias with highly developed industries, and with big cities in five of them. 
 The six gubernias are: St. 
 Pe-tersburg, Moscow, Vladimir, Warsaw, Petrokov and Livo-nia. 
 In 1905 there were 827,000 factory workers in these gu-bernias, out of a total of 1,661,000; thus they accounted fornearly half of the total. 
 As for the number of strikers in these gubernias, there were 246,000 in all during the decade 1895-1904, out of 431,000, or about 60 per cent of the total numberof strikers; in 1905 there were 2,072,000 out of a total of Diagram of the number of strikers per quarter, 1910 Shaded area—participants in political strikes Unshaded area—participants in economic strikes (From V. 
 I. 
 Lenin’s rough notebook “Strike Statistics in Russia”, Lenin Miscellany XXV ) 2,863,000, or about 70 per cent; in 1906—852,000 out of a total of 1,108,000, i. 
e. 
, approximately 75 per cent; in 1907— 517,000 out of a total of 740,000, or approximately 70 per cent; in 1908—85,000 out of a total of 176,000, i. 
e. 
, less thana half. 
 * Consequently, the role of these six gubernias was greater during the three-year period 1905-07 than in the period be-fore or after it. 
 It is therefore clear that the big urban cen-tres, including the capitals, displayed a considerably greater energy than all the other localities during these three years. 
The workers scattered in villages and in relatively smallindustrial centres and towns, comprising half of the totalnumber of workers, accounted for 40 per cent of the totalnumber of strikers in the decade 1895-1904, and for only 25-30 per cent during the period 1905-07. 
 Supplementing the conclusion we arrived at above, we may say that the bigcities had woken up, while the small towns and villageswere largely still asleep. 
 As regards the countryside in general, i. 
e. 
, as regards the factory workers living in villages, we have additional statistical data covering the number of strikes (but not that of strikers) in towns and non-urban localities. 
 Here are thefigures: Number of strikes Total for the In cities In non-urban Total ten years localities 1895-1904 1,326 439 1,765 1905 11,891 2,104 13,995 1906 5,328 786 6,114 1907 3,258 315 3,573 1908 767 125 892 In citing these data, the compilers of the official statis-tics point out that, according to the well-known investiga-tions of Mr. 
 Pogozhev, 40 per cent of all the factories in Russia are located in towns, and 60 per cent in non-urbanlocalities. 
 144 Consequently, in the normal period (1895-1904), while the number of strikes in the towns was threetimes as high as in the rural districts, the number of strikes *In 1908, Baku Gubernia topped the list with 47,000 strikers. 
 The last of the Mohicans of the mass political strike! as a percentage of the number of establishments was 42 times as great in the towns as in the rural districts. 
 In 1905 this ratio was approximately 8:1; in 1906 it was 9:1; in 1907 —15:1 and in 1908 *—6:1. 
 In other words, compared with the part played by the factory workers in the villages, the part played by the urban factory workers in the strike movement was considerably greater in 1905 than in the previous years;moreover, their role became greater and greater in 1906 and 1907, i. 
e. 
, proportionately the part played in the movement by the village workers became less and less. 
 The factoryworkers in the villages, less prepared for the struggle by thepreceding decade (1895-1904), showed the least firmness andwere the quickest to retreat after 1905. 
 The vanguard, i. 
e. 
,the urban factory workers, made a special effort in 1906, and a still greater effort in 1907, to halt this retreat. 
 Let us now examine the distribution of the strikers ac-cording to industries. 
 For this purpose we single out fourmain groups of industries: A) metal-workers; B) textile-workers; C) printers, wood-workers, leather-workers, andworkers in chemical industries; D) workers in the mineral products industries and food industries. 
 Here are the figures for the different years: Number of strikers (in thousands) forTotal numberthe yearof factory Groups of industries workers in1895-19041904 1905 1906 1907 1908(thousands)total A 252 117 811 213 193 41 B 708 237 1,296 640 302 56C 277 38 471 170 179 24 D 454 39 285 85 66 55 Total 1,691 431 2,863 1,108 740 176 The metal-workers were best prepared by the decade pre-ceding 1905. 
 During that decade nearly half of them took *The figures for 1908 include 228 strikes. 
, and the figures for 1907 include 230 strikes, in the oilfields, which for the first time came under the Inspectorate in 1906. 
 part in strikes (117,000 out of 252,000). 
 Since they were the best prepared, they made the best showing in 1905 as well. 
 The number of strikers among them was more than three times the total number of workers (811,000 as against 252,000). 
 Their role as vanguard stands out even more clear-ly when we examine the monthly figures for 1905 (it is im-possible to give a detailed analysis of these figures in a shortarticle, and we shall do so elsewhere). 
 In 1905 the month with the maximum number of strikers among the metal-workers was not October, as was the case in all the other groups of industries, but January. 
 The vanguard displayedthe maximum energy in inaugurating the movement; “stir-ring up” the entire mass. 
 In January 1905 alone 155,000metal-workers went on strike, i. 
e. 
, two-thirds of their total number (252,000). 
 In that month alone more metal-workers were on strike than in all the preceding ten years (155,000as against 117,000). 
 But this, almost superhuman, energyexhausted the strength of the vanguard towards the end of1905; in 1906 the metal-workers account for the biggest de-cline in the movement. 
 The maximum drop in the number of strikers is among them: from 811,000 to 213,000, i. 
e. 
, by nearly three-fourths. 
 In 1907 the vanguard had again ga-thered strength: the total decline in the number of strikers wasvery slight (from 213,000 to 193,000), and in the three mostimportant branches—namely, engineering, shipbuilding andfoundries—the number of strikers actually increased from 104,000 in 1906 to 125,000 in 1907. 
 The textile-workers constitute the main mass of the Rus-sian factory workers—a little less than half the total (708,000out of 1,691,000). 
 As regards their preparatory experiencein the ten years prior to 1905 they, occupy the second place:one-third of their number (237,000 out of 708,000) took part in strikes. 
 They also occupy the second place for the intensity of the movement among them in 1905: about 180 strikers toevery 100 workers. 
 They entered the struggle later than themetal-workers: in January the number of strikers amongthem was slightly greater than among the metal-workers(164,000 as against 155,000), but in October they had more than twice as many strikers (256,000 as against 117,000). 
 Having entered the struggle later, this main mass provedto be the most firm of all in 1906: in that year the decline was general, but it was smallest of all among the textile-workers, the number of strikers among them dropping by a half (640,000 as against 1,296,000), compared with a de-crease of nearly three-quarters among the metal-workers(from 811,000 to 213,000) and of from three-fifths to five-sev-enths among the other groups. 
 Only by 1907 was the forceof the main mass also exhausted: in 1907 it was this groupwhich showed the greatest drop, by more than a half com-pared with 1906 (302,000 as against 640,000). 
 Without making a detailed analysis of the figures for the other industries, we shall only note that group D lags behindall of them. 
 It was the least prepared, and its part in themovement was the smallest. 
 If we take the metal-workers asthe standard, it may be said that group D “defaulted” to the extent of over a million strikers in 1905 alone. 
 The relation between the metal-workers and the textile-workers is characteristic as reflecting the relation betweenthe advanced section and the broad mass of the workers. 
Owing to the absence of-free organisations, a free press, aparliamentary platform; etc. 
, during the period 1895-1904, the masses could rally in 1905 only spontaneously, in the course of the struggle itself. 
 This process took the form ofsuccessive waves of strikers; but in order to “stir up” thebroad mass, the vanguard was obliged to spend such a tre-mendous amount of energy at the beginning of the movementthat it proved relatively weakened when the movement reached its apogee. 
 In January 1905, there were 444,000 stri-kers, including 155,000 metal-workers, i. 
e. 
, 34 per cent of thetotal; in October, however, when the number of strikers reached519,000, the number of metal-workers among them was117,000, i. 
e. 
, 22 per cent. 
 It is obvious that this unevennessof the movement was tantamount to a certain dissipation of forces owing to the fact that they were scattered, insuffi-ciently concentrated. 
 This means, firstly, that the effectmight have been heightened if the forces had been betterconcentrated, and, secondly, that owing to the objectiveconditions characteristic of the period under discussion atthe beginning of each wave a number of groping actions, as it were, reconnaissances, trial moves, etc. 
, were inevitable and were necessary for the success of the movement. 
 There-fore, when the liberals, echoed by liquidators like Martov, proceeding from their theory that “the proletariat had over-estimated its forces”, accuse us of having “followed in the wake of the spontaneous class struggle”, these gentlemen are condemning themselves and are paying us, against their will,the greatest compliment. 
 In concluding our review of the strike figures for each year, we shall deal also with the figures showing the sizeand the duration of the strikes, and the losses incurred as a result of the strikes. 
 The average number of strikers per establishment was as follows: In the ten years 1895-1904 .... 
 244 ” 1905 ............ 205 ” 1906 ............ 181 ” 1907 ............ 207 ” 1908 ............ 197 The decrease in the size of strikes (as regards the number of workers involved) in 1905 is explained by the fact that a great number of small establishments joined the struggle,thus lowering the average number of strikers per establish-ment. 
 The further decrease in 1906 apparently reflects thewaning energy of the struggle. 
 1907 shows a certain advance. 
 If we take the average number of workers who took part in purely political strikes, we get the following figures for the various years: 1905—180; 1906—174; 1907—203; 1908—197. 
 These figures indicate even more strikingly the waningenergy of the struggle in 1906 and its new growth in 1907,or (and, perhaps, at the same time) the fact that it was most-ly the biggest establishments that took part in the move-ment in 1907. 
 The number of days on strike per striker was as follows: In the ten years 1895-1904 .... 
 4. 
8 ” 1905 ............ 8. 
7 ” 1906 ............ 4. 
9 ” 1907 ............ 3. 
2 ” 1908 ............ 4. 
9 The persistence of the struggle, as characterised by the above figures, was greatest in 1905; then it diminished rapidly until 1907, showing a new increase only in 1908. 
It should be pointed out that, as regards the persistence of the struggle, strikes in Western Europe are on an incompar-ably higher level. 
 In the five-year period 1894-98 the num-ber of days on strike per striker was 10. 
3 in Italy, 12. 
1 in Austria, 14. 
3 in France, and 34. 
2 in Britain. 
 Taking separately the purely political strikes, the figures are as follows: 1905—7 days per striker, 1906—1. 
5 days,1907—1 day. 
 Economic strikes are always more protracted. 
 If we bear in mind the difference in the persistence of the strike struggles in the different years, we arrive at the con-clusion that the figures of the number of strikers are not suf-ficient to give a proper idea of the relative sizes of the move-ment in these years. 
 An accurate index is provided by fig-ures of striker-days, which were as follows: Of which in purely political strikes In the ten years 1895-1904 a total of 2,079,408 — ”1905 ””” 23,609,387 7,569,708 ”1906 ””” 5,512,749 763,605 ”1907 ””” 2,433,123 521,647 ”1908 ””” 864,666 89,021 Thus we see that the accurate figures representing the size of the movement in the year 1905 alone are more than 11 times as great as those for all the preceding ten years taken together. 
 In other words, the size of the movement in 1905 was 115 times as great as the average per year for the preced-ing decade. 
 This ratio shows us how purblind are those people, whom we encounter only too often among the representatives ofofficial science (and not only among them), who consider thetempo of social-political development in the so-called “peace-ful”, “organic”, “evolutionary” periods as the standard for all times, as the index of the highest possible pace of develop-ment modern humanity can achieve. 
 Actually, the tempo of“development” in the so-called “organic” periods is an in-dex of the greatest stagnation, of the greatest obstaclesplaced in the way of development. 
 The compiler of the official statistics uses the figures of the number of striker-days to determine the losses incurredby industry. 
 These losses (representing the drop in output)amounted to 10,400,000 rubles in the ten years 1895-1904, to 127,300,000 rubles in 1905, to 31,200,000 rubles in 1906, to 15,000,000 rubles in 1907, and to 5,800,000 rubles in 1908. 
 In the three years 1905-07, therefore, the drop in output amounted to 173,500,000 rubles. 
 The losses of the workers in unpaid wages for strike days (determined in accordance with the average daily wages inthe various industries) were as follows: Losses incurred by workers as a result Groups of indust-Number of factory of strikes (in thousands of rubles) ries (see above workers in 1905 p. 
 18*) (thousands) 1895-1904 1905 1906 1907 1908 total A 252 650 7,654 891 450 132 B 708 715 6,794 1,968 659 228 C 277 137 1,997 610 576 69 D 454 95 1,096 351 130 22 Total 1,691 1,597 17,541 3,820 1,815 451 In the three years 1905-07 the losses of the workers amount-ed to 23,200,000 rubles, or over 14 times more than in the entire preceding decade. 
 ** According to the calculation of the compiler of the official statistics, the average loss perworker employed in factories (and not per striker) amounted *See p. 
 402 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 **It should be borne in mind that in the period when the move-ment was at its height the workers compelled the employers to coverpart of these losses. 
 Beginning with 1905, the statistics had to deal with a special cause of strikes (Cause Group 3 b, according to the of-ficial nomenclature): demand of pay for the time of the strike . 
 In 1905 there were 632 cases when this demand was presented in 1906—256 cases, in 1907—48 cases, and in 1908—9 cases (prior to 1905 thisdemand was never presented). 
 The results of the struggle of the work-ers for this demand are known only for the years 1906 and 1907, andonly two or three cases when this was the main demand: in 1906, out of 10,966 workers who struck primarily for this demand: 2,171 won the strike, 2,626 lost, and 6,169 concluded a compromise. 
 In 1907, out of 93 workers who struck primarily for this demand, not one wonthe strike, 52 lost, and 41 compromised. 
 From what we know of thestrikes in 1905 we may surmise that in that year the strikes for thisdemand were more successful than in 1906. 
 to about ten kopeks a year during the first decade, about ten rubles in 1905, about two rubles in 1906, and about one ruble in 1907. 
 But this calculation leaves out of account the enormous differences in this respect between the workers ofthe various industries. 
 Here is a more detailed calculationmade on the basis of the figures quoted in the above table: Average loss (in rubles) caused by strikes, per factory worker Groups of industries Total for 10 years 1905 1906 1907 1908 1895 -1904 A 2. 
6 29. 
9 3. 
5 1. 
8 0. 
5 B 1. 
0 9. 
7 2. 
8 0. 
9 0. 
3 C 0. 
5 7. 
22 . 
2 2 . 
1 0. 
2D 0. 
22 . 
4 0. 
7 0. 
3 0. 
05 Total 0. 
9 10. 
4 2. 
3 1. 
1 0. 
3 Hence, we see that the losses per metal-worker (Group A) amounted to nearly 30 rubles in 1905, or three times morethan the average, and over ten times more than the average loss per worker in the mineral products industries and in the food industries (Group D). 
 The conclusion we arrived atabove, namely, that by the end of 1905 the metal-workershad spent their strength in this particular form of the move-ment, is even more strikingly confirmed by this table: inGroup A the amount of the losses dropped to less than one-eighth in the period from 1905 to 1906; whereas in the other groups it dropped to one-third or one-fourth. 
 This concludes the analysis of the strike statistics by years. 
 In the next section we shall deal with the monthly figures. 
 II A year is too long a period to enable us to investigate the wave-like character of the strike movement. 
 The statis-tics now give us the right to say that during the three years1905-07 every month counted for a year. 
 In those three years the working-class movement advanced a full thirty years. 
 In 1905 there was not a single month when the number of strikers dropped below the minimum per year during the decade 1895-1904; there were but two such months in 1906and two in 1907. 
 It is to be regretted that the treatment of the monthly data, as well as of the data for the separate gubernias, isvery unsatisfactory in the official statistics. 
 Many summariesneed to be worked out anew. 
 For this reason, and also for considerations of space, we shall confine ourselves for the time being to the quarterly data. 
 With regard to the break-down into economic and political strikes, it should be notedthat the official statistics for 1905 and for 1906-07 are notquite comparable. 
 Strikes of a mixed nature—in the officialstatistics Group 12 with economic demands and Group 12 b with economic demands—were classified as political in 1905 and as economic in the subsequent years. 
 We shall classifythem as economic strikes in 1905 too. 
 Number of strikers (in thousands) 145 Year 1905 1906 1907 Quarter I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV Total 810 481 294 1,277 269 479 296 63 146 323 77 193 Of whichEcon. 
 604 239 165 430 73 222 125 37 52 52 66 30 Polit. 
 206 242 129 847 196 257 171 26 94 271 11 163 The boxes indicate the periods during which the wave rose highest. 
 It is obvious from even a cursory glance at the table that these periods coincide with political events of cardinal importance that are characteristic of the entire triennium. 
1905, first quarter—January 9 and its consequences; 1905,fourth quarter—the October and December events; 1906,second quarter—the First Duma; 1907, second quarter—theSecond Duma; the last quarter of 1907 shows the least rise occasioned by the November political strike (134,000 strik-ers) in connection with the trial of the workers’ deputiesof the Second Duma. 
 Hence this period, which completes thetriennium and represents a transition to a new stage in Rus-sian history, is just that exception which proves the rule:the rise of the strike wave in this case does not imply a gen-eral social-political upsurge, but on closer examination we{ see that there was really no strike wave—but only an isolat-ed demonstration strike. 
 The rule applying to the triennium that we are studying is that the rise of the strike wave indicates crucial turning-points in the entire social and political evolution of thecountry. 
 The strike statistics show us graphically what wasthe principal driving force of this evolution. 
 This does notmean, of course, that the form of the movement we are exam-ining was the sole or the highest form—we know that this was not the case; nor does it mean that we can draw directconclusions from this form of the movement with regard toparticular questions of social and political evolution. 
 But itdoes mean that what we have before us is a statistical pic-ture (far from complete, of course) of the movement of the class which was the mainspring responsible for the general direc-tion taken by events. 
 The movements of the other classes aregrouped around this centre; they follow it, their direction isdetermined (in a favourable or unfavourable way) by it,they depend on it. 
 One has only to recall the principal moments in the polit-ical history of Russia during the triennium under review to realise that this conclusion is correct. 
 Let us take the firstquarter of 1905. 
 What did we see on the eve of this period?The well-known Zemstvo banquet campaign. 
 Was it rightto regard the actions of the workers in that campaign as“the highest type of demonstration”? Was the talk about refraining from causing “panic” among the liberals justified? Consider these questions in conjunction with the strike sta-tistics (1903—87,000 strikers; 1904—25,000; January 1905—444,000, including 123,000 political strikers), and the answerwill be obvious. 
 The above-mentioned controversy over thequestion of the tactics in the Zemstvo campaign only reflect-ed the antagonism between the liberal and working-class movements, an antagonism rooted in objective conditions. 
 What do we see after the January upsurge? * The well-known February edicts, which marked the inauguration *The quarterly data would make it appear that there was only one upsurge. 
 Actually, there were two: in January, with 444,000 strikers, and in May, with 220,000 strikers. 
 In the interval between these two months, March accounted for the minimum number ofstrikers—73,000. 
 of a certain amount of change in the organisation of the state. 
 Take the third quarter of 1905. 
 The principal event in the political history was the law of August 6 (the so-calledBulygin Duma). 
 Was that law destined to be put into effect?The liberals thought that it was and decided to act accord-ingly. 
 In the camp of the Marxists a contrary view prevailed,which was not shared by those who objectively support-ed the views of the liberals. 
 The events of the last quarter of 1905 decided the controversy. 
 The figures referring to whole quarters make it appear that there was one upsurge at the end of 1905. 
 Actuallythere were two, separated by an interval during which therewas a slight abatement of the movement. 
 The number of strikers in October was 519,000, including 328,000 involved in purely political strikes; in November 325,000 (including147,000 in political strikes), and in December 433,000 (in-cluding 372,000 in political strikes). 
 Publications dealingwith the history of the period express the view of the lib-erals and our liquidators (Cherevanin and Co. 
), according to which there was an element of “artificiality” in the Decem-ber upsurge. 
 The statistical data refute this view, for theyshow that it was precisely this month that accounted forthe highest number of workers involved in purely political strikes—372,000. 
 The tendencies that impelled the liberalsto arrive at their particular appraisal are obvious, but from a purely scientific standpoint it is absurd to regard a move-ment of such dimensions as at all “artificial”, when in onemonth the number of workers involved in purely politicalstrikes was almost nine-tenths of the total number of strik-ers during a whole decade. 
 Finally, let us consider the last two waves—in the spring of 1906 and in the spring of 1907. 
 * What distinguishes *It should be noted that the history of the strike movement in Russia from 1895 to 1904 shows that there is usually an increase ineconomic strikes in the second quarter of the year. 
 The average numberof strikers per year during the entire decade was 43,000, divided as follows: first quarter, 10,000; second quarter, 15,000; third quarter, 12,000; and fourth quarter, 6,000. 
 A mere comparison of the figuresmakes it quite obvious that the rise in the strike wave in the springof 1906 and in the spring of 1907 cannot be explained by the “general” both of them from the January and May waves in 1905 (of which the first was also stronger than the second) is that they came during the ebb of the movement, whereas the first two waves took place during the rising tide of the movement. 
This distinction is generally characteristic of the two lastyears compared with the first year of the triennium. 
 Hence,the correct explanation of the increase registered during theseperiods of 1906 and 1907 is that they denote a halt in the retreat and an attempt on the part of the retreating forces to resume the offensive. 
 Such is the objective meaningof these upsurges, which is now clear to us in the lightof the final results of the whole “three-year period ofstorm and stress”. 
 The First and the Second Dumas rep-resented nothing else than political negotiations and polit-ical demonstrations on top, prompted by the halt in the retreat below. 
 This clearly shows how short-sighted are the liberals who see in these negotiations something self-sufficient and in-dependent, unrelated to whether a particular halt in the re-treat is going to be of long duration, or what its outcome will be. 
 This also shows clearly the objective dependence on the liberals of those liquidators who, like Martov, now speakwith scorn of the “expectations of the romanticists” duringthe period of retreat. 
 The statistical data show that it wasnot a question of the “expectations of the romanticists”, butof actual interruptions, halts of the retreat. 
 Had it not been for these halts, the coup d’état of June 3, 1907, which was historically absolutely inevitable since the retreat was afact, would have taken place sooner, perhaps a year or evenmore than a year earlier. 
 Now that we have examined the history of the strike movement in its relation to the principal moments of the political history of the period, let us pass on to an investigation of the interrelation between the economicand the political strikes. 
 The official statistics providevery interesting data touching on this subject. 
 Let us firstdeal with the general total for each of the three yearsunder review: causes of the summer increase in the number of strikes in Russia. 
 One has only to glance at the figures showing the number of workers engaged in political strikes. 
 Number of strikes (in thousands) 1905 1906 1907 Economic strikes 1,439 458 200 Political strikes 1,424 650 540 Total . 
 . 
 . 
 2,863 1,108 740 The first conclusion to be drawn from these figures is that there is a very close connection between the economic andthe political strikes. 
 They rise simultaneously and dropsimultaneously. 
 The force of the movement in the periodof the offensive (1905) results from the fact that thepolitical strikes are built, as it were, on the broad basis of the no less powerful economic strikes which, even taken by themselves, far exceed the figures for the entire decade of1895-1904. 
 During the decline of the movement the number of those engaged in economic strikes drops faster than the number ofthose engaged in political strikes. 
 The weakness of the move-ment in 1906, and particularly in 1907, is undoubtedly the result of the fact that the broad and firm base of the economicstruggle was absent. 
 On the other hand, the slower drop inthe number of workers involved in political strikes, in gen-eral, and the particularly insignificant decrease in that num-ber in 1907 compared with 1906, apparently testify to the phenomenon with which we are already familiar: namely, that the advanced sections were exercising their utmostenergy to halt the retreat and to turn it into an offensive. 
 This conclusion is fully corroborated by the data showing the interrelation between economic and political strikes inthe various groups of industries. 
 In order to avoid overbur-dening the article with figures we shall confine ourselves to a comparison of the quarterly data for the year 1905 withreference to the metal-workers and the textile-workers, usingin this instance the summary of the official statistics, * which, as mentioned before, classified the mixed strikesthat took place that year as political strikes. 
 *According to this summary, 1,021,000 workers took part in eco-nomic strikes and 1,842,000 in political strikes in 1905. 
 The propor-tion of the workers who took part in economic strikes thus appearsto be less than in 1906. 
 We have already explained that this is wrong. 
 Number of strikes (in thousands) 1905, Quarters I II III IV Group A Economic 120 42 37 31 (metal-workers) Political 159 76 63 283 Total 279 118 100 314 Group B Economic 196 109 72182 (textile-workers) Political 111 154 53 418 Total 307 263 125 600 Here we see clearly the distinction between the advanced section and the mass of the workers. 
 Among the advanced section those involved in purely economic strikes were a minority from the very beginning, and this holds good forthe whole year. 
 Even in this group, however, in the firstquarter of the year the number of workers involved in purelyeconomic strikes was very high (120,000). 
 Clearly, amongthe metal-workers too there were considerable sections which had to be “stirred up”, and which started off by presenting purely economic demands. 
 Among the textile-workers wesee a very great preponderance of those taking part in purelyeconomic strikes in the initial stage of the movement (inthe first quarter of the year). 
 These become a minority duringthe second quarter, only to become a majority again in the third quarter. 
 In the fourth quarter, when the movement reached its zenith, the number of metal-workers involvedin purely economic strikes was 10 per cent of the total num-ber of strikers and 12 per cent of the total number of metal-workers; while among the textile-workers the number ofthose involved in purely economic strikes represented 30 per cent of the total number of strikers and 25 per cent of the total number of textile-workers. 
 The interdependence between the economic and political strike is thus quite obvious: no really broad, no really massmovement is possible without a close connection between thetwo; the concrete expression of this connection consists, on the one hand, in the fact that at the beginning of the move-ment, and when new sections are just entering it, the purelyeconomic strike is the prevalent form, and, on the other, in{ { the fact that the political strike rouses and stirs the back-ward sections, generalises and extends the movement, and raises it to a higher level. 
 It would be extremely interesting to trace in detail pre-cisely how new recruits were drawn into the movement dur-ing the whole three-year period. 
 The main material containsdata relating to this subject, for the information obtainedwas entered on cards dealing with each strike separately. 
 But the analysis of this information in the official statistics is very unsatisfactory, and a wealth of material containedin the cards has been lost, since it was not included in theanalysis. 
 An approximate idea is given by the followingtable showing the number of strikes as a percentage of thenumber of establishments of different sizes: Number of strikes as a percentage of the number of establishments Total for Groups of establishments 10 years 1905 1906 1907 1908 1895-1904 20 workers or less 2. 
7 47. 
0 18. 
5 6. 
0 1. 
0 21 to 50 workers 7. 
5 89. 
4 38. 
8 19. 
0 4. 
151 to 100 ” 9. 
4 108. 
9 56. 
1 37. 
7 8. 
0 101 to 500 ” 21. 
5 160. 
2 79. 
2 57. 
5 16. 
9 501 to 1,000 ” 49. 
9 163. 
8 95. 
1 61. 
5 13. 
0 Over 1,000 ” 89. 
7 231. 
9 108. 
8 83. 
7 23. 
0 The advanced section, which we have so far observed from the data dealing with the different districts and different groups of industries, now stands out from the data dealingwith the various groups of establishments. 
 The general rulethroughout these years is that as the size of the establish-ments increases there is an increase in the percentage ofestablishments in which strikes occurred. 
 The characteris-tic features of the year 1905 are, firstly, that the bigger the establishment the larger the number of repeated strikes,and, secondly, that compared with the decade 1895-1904 therise in the percentage is the steeper the smaller the establish-ments. 
 This clearly indicates the especial rapidity withwhich new recruits were drawn into the movement, and with which sections that had never before taken part in strikes were enlisted. 
 Rapidly drawn into the movement in the pe-riod of the greatest upsurge, these new recruits proved the least stable: the drop in the percentage of establishments in which strikes occurred in 1907 as compared with 1906 was greatest in the small establishments, and least in the big establishments. 
 It was the vanguard which worked the long-est and the most persistently to halt the retreat. 
 But to return to the interrelation between the economic and the political strike. 
 The quarterly data for the entiretriennium, quoted above, * show, in the first place, that all the great advances in the movement were accompanied by a rise not only in the number of workers involved inpolitical strikes, hut also of those involved in economicstrikes. 
 The only exception was the upsurge in the springof 1907; in that year the largest number of workers involvedin economic strikes was not in the second but in the third quarter. 
 At the beginning of the movement (first quarter of 1905) we see an overwhelming prevalence of workers involved ineconomic strikes over those involved in political strikes(604,000 as against 206,000). 
 The zenith of the movement(fourth quarter of 1905) brings with it a new wave of econom-ic strikes, not as high as in January, however, and with political strikes strongly predominating. 
 The third advance,in the spring of 1906, again shows a very large increase inthe number of participants both in economic and in politi-cal strikes. 
 These data alone are sufficient to refute the opin-ion according to which the combination of the economic with the political strike represented a “weak aspect of the movement”. 
 This opinion has been often expressed by theliberals; it has been repeated by the liquidator Cherevaninin relation to November 1905; recently it has been repeatedby Martov too in relation to the same period. 
 The failure ofthe struggle for an eight-hour day is especially often referred to as confirming this opinion. 
 This failure is an undeniable fact; it is also undeniable that any failure implies that the movement is weak. 
 But theview of the liberals is that it is the combination of theeconomic with the political struggle that is the “weak aspectof the movement”; the Marxist view, on the other hand, is *See p. 
 409 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 that the weakness lay in the insufficiency of this combina-tion, in the insufficient number of workers involved in eco-nomic strikes. 
 The statistical data furnish graphic confir-mation of the correctness of the Marxist view, for they revealthe “general law” of the three-year period—namely, that themovement becomes intensified as a result of the intensifica-tion of the economic struggle. 
 And there is a logical connec-tion between this “general law” and the basic features of every capitalist society, in which there always exist back-ward sections which can be aroused only by the most ex-traordinary accentuation of the movement, and it is onlyby means of economic demands that the backward sectionscan be drawn into the struggle. 
 If we compare the upsurge in the last quarter of 1905 with the one before it and the one after it, i. 
e. 
, with the first quarter of 1905 and the second quarter of 1906, we see clearlythat the upsurge in October-December had a narrower eco-nomic base than either the one before or the one after, i. 
e. 
,as regards the number of workers involved in economic strikesas a percentage of the total number of strikers. 
 Undoubt-edly, the demand for an eight-hour day antagonised many elements among the bourgeoisie who might have sympathisedwith the other aspirations of the workers. 
 But there isalso no doubt that this demand attracted many elements,not of the bourgeoisie, who had not so far been drawn intothe movement. 
 These elements were responsible for 430,000 workers taking part in economic strikes in the last quarter of 1905, their number dropping to 73,000 in the first quarterof 1906 and increasing again to 222,000 in the second quarterof 1906. 
 Consequently, the weakness lay not in the absenceof sympathy on the part of the bourgeoisie, but in the insuf-ficient, or insufficiently timely, support on the part of non-bourgeois elements. 
 It is in the nature of liberals to be dismayed by the fact that a movement of the kind we are discussing always antag-onises certain elements of the bourgeoisie. 
 It is in the na-ture of Marxists to note the fact that this kind of movementalways attracts large sections outside the ranks of the bour-geoisie. 
 Suum cuique —to each his own. 
 The official statistics dealing with the results of the strikes are highly instructive as regards the vicissitudes of the struggle between the workers and the employers. 
 The following is a summary of these statistics: Percentage of workers involved in strikes with the results indicated 10 years Results of strikes 1895-1904 1905 1906 1907 1908 In favour of the workers 27. 
1 23. 
7 35. 
4 16. 
2 14. 
1 Mutual Concessions (compromise) 19. 
5 46. 
9 31. 
1 26. 
1 17. 
0 In favour of the employ-ers (against the work-ers) 51. 
6 29. 
4 33. 
5 57. 
6 68. 
8 The general conclusion to be drawn from this is that the maximum force of the movement signifies also the maximum success for the workers. 
 The year 1905 was the most favour-able for the workers, because in that year the force of thestrike struggle was greatest. 
 That year was also distinguishedby the unusual frequency of compromises: the parties hadnot yet adapted themselves to the new unusual conditions,the employers were bewildered by the frequency of the strikes, which more often than ever before ended in a compromise. 
 In 1906 the struggle became more stubborn: cases of compro-mise were incomparably rarer; but on the whole the workerswere still victorious: the percentage of strikers who won avictory was greater than the percentage of those who lost. 
Beginning with 1907 defeats for the workers continually increased, and cases of compromise became rarer. 
 From the absolute figures it will be seen that in the ten years 1895-1904 the total number of workers who won theirstrikes was 117,000, whereas in 1905 alone more than threetimes as many workers won their strikes (369,000), and in1906, one-and-a-half times as many (163,000). 
 A year, however, is too long a period for a proper study of the wave-like progress of the strike struggle in 1905-07. 
Since the monthly data would take up too much space, weshall cite the quarterly data for 1905 and 1906. 
 We can omitthe data for 1907, since, judging by the results of the strikes,there were no breaks in that year, no declines and rises, but a continuous retreat on the part of the workers and an offen-sive on the part of the capitalists, as has been fully broughtout in the yearly data already cited. 
 The conclusions that follow from these data are highly interesting and require a detailed examination. 
 On the whole, as we have seen, the success of the struggle, as far as the Years 1905 1906 Quarters I II III IV I II III IV Result of strikes: In favour of the workers 158 71 45 95 34 86 37 6 Compromise 267 109 61 235 28 58 46 8In favour of the em-ployers...... 179 59 59 100 11 78 422 3 Total *... 604 239 165 430 73 222 125 37 workers are concerned, depends on the force of their on-slaught. 
 Do the data cited above confirm this conclusion? Thefirst quarter of 1905 appears to have been less favourable for the workers than the second quarter, although in the latter the movement was weaker. 
 This inference would bewrong, however, since the quarterly data combine the up-surge in January (321,000 workers involved in economicstrikes) and the decline in February (228,000) and in March(56,000). 
 If we single out January, the month of upsurge, we find that in this month the workers were victorious: 87,000 won their strikes, 81,000 lost, and 152,000 concludeda compromise. 
 The two months of decline (February andMarch) brought the workers defeat. 
 The next period (the second quarter of 1905) was one of an advance, which reached its climax in May. 
 The rise of the struggle signified victory for the workers: 71,000 won their strikes, 59,000 lost, and 109,000 compromised. 
 The third period (third quarter of 1905 was one of decline. 
 The number of strikers was much less than in the secondquarter. 
 The decline in the force of the onslaught signifiedvictory for the employers: 59,000 workers lost their strikes, and only 45,000 won. 
 The workers who lost their strikes rep-resented 35. 
6 per cent of the total, i. 
e. 
, more than in 1906 . 
 This means that the “general atmosphere of sympathy” withthe workers in 1905, which the liberals talk so much of asbeing the main cause of the workers’ victories (recently *The official statistics provide no monthly totals relating to this question; they had to be obtained by adding up the figures for the various industries. 
 Martov, too, wrote of the sympathy of the bourgeoisie as “the main cause”), in no way prevented the defeat of the workers when the force of their onslaught diminished . 
 “You are strong when society sympathises with you,” the liberalssay to the workers. 
 “Society sympathises with you whenyou are strong,” the Marxists say to the workers. 
 The last quarter of 1905 seems to be an exception: although it was the period of the greatest advance, the workers suffered defeat. 
 But this is only a seeming exception, for this period again combines the month of upsurge in October,when the workers were victorious in the economic sphereas well ( $57,000, —22,000 strikers won and lost respectively) with the two months of November ( $25,000, —47,000) and December ( $12,000, —31,000), when the economic struggle was on the decline and the workers were defeated. 
 Fur-thermore, November—a month that was a turning-point,a month of the greatest wavering, of the most even balancebetween the contending forces, and of the greatest uncer-tainty as regards total results and the general trend of thefurther history of Russia as a whole and of the history of the relations between employers and workers in particular —was a month that shows a larger percentage of strikes ending in compromise than any other month in 1905: of179,000 workers involved in economic strikes in that month,106,000, or 59. 
2 per cent, ended by compromising. 
 * The first quarter of 1906 again seems to be an exception: the greatest decline in the economic struggle coupled with, proportionately, the largest number of workers winning theirstrikes ( $34,000, —11,000). 
 But here, too, we have the com-bination of a month in which the workers suffered defeat—namely, January ( $4,000, —6,000)—with months in which the workers scored victories: February ( $14,000, —2,000) and March ( $16,000, —2,500). 
 The number of workers in-volved in economic strikes is on the decline throughout thisperiod (January, 26,600; February, 23,300; March, 23,200);but there were already clear indications of an upward trendin the movement as a whole (the total number of strikersamounted to 190,000 in January, 27,000 in February, and 52,000 in March). 
 *The total number of workers involved in economic strikes was as follows: October, 190,000; November, 179,000; December, 61,000. 
 The second quarter of 1906 marked a big advance in the movement, which brought with it victories for the workers ($86,000, —78,000); the greatest victories were scored in May and June, the total number of workers involved in eco-nomic strikes in June reaching 90,000—the maximum forthe whole year; whereas April represents an exception: adefeat for the workers, despite the growth of the movementas compared with March. 
 Beginning with the third quarter of 1906, we see, on the whole, an uninterrupted decline of the economic strugglelasting to the end of the year, and, correspondingly, defeatsof the workers (with a slight exception in August 1906, whenthe workers were victorious for the last time in the econom-ic struggle: $11,300, —10,300). 
 Summed up briefly, the vicissitudes of the economic struggle in the years 1905 and 1906 may be formulated asfollows: in 1905 there can be clearly distinguished threemain advances in the strike struggle in general and in theeconomic struggle in particular—January, May and October. 
The number of workers involved in economic strikes in these three months amounted to 667,000, out of a total of 1,439,000 for the whole year; that is to say, not a quarter of the total,but nearly a half. 
 And in all these three months the work-ers scored victories in the economic struggle, that is to say,the number of workers who won their strikes exceeded thenumber of those who lost. 
 In 1906, there is on the whole a clear distinction between the first and the second half of the year. 
 The first half ismarked by a half in the retreat and a considerable advance;the second is marked by a serious decline. 
 In the first halfof the year 295,000 workers took part in economic strikes;in the second half, 162,000. 
 The first half brought the work-ers victories in the economic struggle, the second half brought them defeat. 
 This general summary fully confirms the conclusion that it was not the “atmosphere of sympathy”, not the sympathyof the bourgeoisie, but the force of the onslaught that playedthe decisive part in the economic struggle as well. 
 BLANK THE CAPITALIS T SYSTEM OF MODER N AGRICULTUR E146 Written after September 11 (24), 1910 First published in 1932Published according to in Lenin Miscellany XIX the manuscript Signed: V. 
 Ilyin THE CAPITALIST SYSTEM OF MODERN AGRICULTURE146 Written after September 11 (24), 1910 First published in 1932Published according to in Lenin Miscellany XIX the manuscript Signed: V. 
 Ilyin First page of the manuscript of the article “The Capitalist System of Modern Agriculture, 1910 Reduced First page of the manuscript of the article “The Capitalist System of Modern Agriculture, 1910 Reduced /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR FIRST ARTICLE Social statistics in general and economic statistics in par-ticular have made tremendous advances during the lasttwo or three decades. 
 A series of problems, moreover thosemost fundamental concerning the economic system of mod-ern states and its development, which were previouslydecided on the basis of general considerations and approxi-mate data, cannot nowadays be analysed at all seriously without taking into account the mass of data about thewhole territory of a given country collected according to asingle definite programme and summed up by expert sta-tisticians. 
 In particular, the problems of the economics ofagriculture, which arouse particularly many disputes, re-quire answering on the basis of exact, mass data, the more so since in the European states and in America it is a grow-ing practice to make periodic censuses covering all the agri-cultural enterprises of the country. 
 In Germany, for example, such censuses were made in 1882, 1895 and the last in 1907. 
 The importance of these cen-suses has often been mentioned in our press, and it is diffi-cult to find a book or article on the economics of modernagriculture which does not refer to the statistical data onGerman agriculture. 
 The last census has already occasioneda fair amount of noise in both the German and our own press. 
Writing in Kievskaya Mysl 147 last year, Mr. 
 Valentinov, it will be recalled, loudly clamoured that this census allegedly refuted the Marxist doctrine and Kautsky’s views by provingthe viability of small-scale production and its triumph over large-scale production. 
 Recently, in an article entitled “Ten-dencies in Agrarian Evolution in Germany” published in Ekonomist Rossii148 No. 
 36 of September 11, 1910, Pro-fessor Vobly, on the basis of the data of the 1907 census,tried to refute the applicability to agriculture of “the schemeelaborated by Marx in relation to the development of indus-try” 149 and to prove that “small enterprises not only do not perish in the struggle against large ones in the sphere of agri-culture; on the contrary, each new census registers their success”. 
 We think, therefore, it would be opportune to analyse in detail the data of the 1907 census. 
 True, the publicationof the materials of this census is not yet complete; threevolumes containing all the data of the census * have ap-peared, but a fourth volume devoted to an “exposition of the results of the census as a whole” has not yet appearedand it is not known whether it will appear soon. 
 But thereare no grounds for postponing a study of the results of the census until this concluding volume has appeared, for all the material is already available, as well as the summary of it, and it is being widely used in the press. 
 We shall merely note that to put the question in the form in which it is usually put, confining oneself almost exclu-sively to a comparison of the number of farms of varioussizes (in area) and the amount of land they possessed in var-ious years, is an absolutely incorrect approach to the sub-ject. 
 The real differences between the Marxists and the op-ponents of Marxism on the agrarian question are muchmore deeply rooted. 
 If the aim is to give a complete explana-tion of the sources of the differences, then attention must bedevoted primarily and most of all to the question of the basicfeatures of the capitalist system of modern agriculture. 
 It is just on this question that the data of the German census of June 12, 1907, are particularly valuable. 
 This census *Statistik des Deutschen Reichs , Band 212, Teil 1 a, 1 b and 2 a. 
 Berufs-und Betriebszählung vom 12. 
 Juni 1907. 
 LandwirtschaftlicheBetriebsstatistik, Berlin 1909 und 1910. 
 ( Statistics of the German State, Vol. 
 212, Part 1 a, 1 b and 2 a. 
 Census of occupations and enter-prises of June 12, 1907. 
 Statistics of agricultural production, Berlin, 1909 and 1910. 
— Ed. 
) is less detailed on some questions than the earlier censuses of 1882 and 1895 but, on the other hand, it gives for the first time an unprecedented wealth of data on wage-labour in agriculture. 
 And the use of wage-labour is the chief distin-guishing mark of every kind of capitalist agriculture. 
 We shall therefore endeavour first of all to give a general picture of the capitalist system of modern agriculture,relying chiefly on the data of the 1907 German census and supplementing them with the data of the best agricultural censuses of other countries, namely: the Danish, Swiss,American and the last Hungarian censuses. 
 As regards thefact which most of all strikes the eye on a first acquaintancewith the results of the census and which is being most talkedabout, namely, the reduction in Germany of the number of large farms (large in agricultural area) and the amount of land they possess, we shall turn to an examination of thisonly at the end of our work. 
 For this is one of the complicat-ed facts which are a function of a series of others, and it isimpossible to understand its significance without first eluci-dating several much more important and basic questions. 
 I A GENERAL PICTURE OF THE ECONOMIC SYSTEM OF MODERN AGRICULTURE The German agricultural censuses, like all the European (as distinct from the Russian) censuses of the kind, are basedon information collected separately about each agriculturalenterprise. 
 At the same time the amount of information col-lected usually increases with each census. 
 For instance,in Germany in 1907, although very important information on the number of cattle used in field work was omitted (this information was collected in 1882 and 1895), for the firsttime information was collected on the amount of arable landunder various cereals and on the number of family workersand wage-workers. 
 The information about each farm obtainedin this way is quite sufficient for a politico-economic char-acterisation of the farm. 
 The whole question, the whole difficulty of the task, is how to sum up these data in such a way as to obtain an accurate politico-economic characteri-sation of the different groups or types of farms as a whole. 
 When the summing up is unsatisfactory, when the-grouping is incorrect or inadequate, the result can be—and this con-tinually happens in the treatment of modern census data—that unusually detailed, excellent data on each separate en-terprise disappear, become lost or are wholly missing whendealing with the millions of farms of the entire country. 
 Thecapitalist system of agriculture is characterised by the rela-tions which exist between employers and workers, between farms of various types, and if the distinguishing features ofthese types are taken incorrectly or selected incompletely,then even the best census cannot give a politico-economicpicture of the actual situation. 
 It is clear, therefore, that the methods of summarising or grouping the data of modern censuses are of extreme im-portance. 
 Later on we shall examine an exposition of all the rather diverse methods used in the best censuses enumeratedabove. 
 For the present let us note that the German census,like the vast majority of the others, gives a full summary,grouping the farms exclusively according to a single feature, namely, the size of the agricultural area of each farm. 
 On this basis the census divides all the farms into 18 groups, be-ginning with farms of less than one-tenth of a hectare andending with those over 1,000 hectares of agricultural area. 
That such detailed subdivision is a statistical luxury unjus-tified by politico-economic considerations is felt by the au-thors of the German statistics themselves, who provide a sum-mary of all the data in six—or, by separating a subgroup—seven large groups according to the size of the agriculturalarea. 
 These groups are as follows: farms having less than halfa hectare, one-half to 2, 2 to 5, 5 to 20, 20 to 100, and over100, the last including a subgroup of farms with over 200 hectares of agricultural area. 
 The question arises: what is the politico-economic signif-icance of this grouping? Undoubtedly the land is the chiefmeans of production in agriculture; the amount of land is themost accurate criterion of the dimensions of a farm and,consequently, of its type, i. 
e. 
, for example, whether it is a small, medium or large farm, a capitalist farm or one not using wage-labour. 
 A farm of less than two hectares is usual-ly accounted a small (sometimes called a parcellised or dwarf) farm; from two to 20 hectares (sometimes from two to 100)—a peasant farm, over 100 hectares a large— that is to say , a capitalist farm. 
 And so, the information on wage-labour collected for the first time by the 1907 census gives us above all a first oppor-tunity of verifying from mass data this “usual” supposition. 
For the first time we see the introduction in statisticalprocedure of at least a certain—although far from adequate, as we shall see later—element of rationality, i. 
e. 
, an element taking into account data of the most direct, immediate po-litico-economic significance. 
 In point of fact, much is said about small production. 
 But what is small production? The most usual answer is thatsmall production is one that does not use wage-labour. 
 It is not only Marxists who look at it in this way. 
 Ed. 
 David, for example, whose book, Socialism and Agriculture may be called one of the latest summaries of bourgeois theories onthe agrarian question, writes on page 29 of the Russian trans-lation: “In all those cases where we speak of small produc-tion, we have in mind the economic category which functions without permanent outside assistance and without an auxil-iary occupation. 
” The 1907 census fully establishes first of all that the number of these farms is very small, that in modern agricul-ture farmers who do not hire workers, and who do not hirethemselves out to work for others, are an insignificant minor-ity. 
 Out of the total of 5,736,082 agricultural enterprises in Germany registered by the 1907 census, only 1,872,616,i. 
e. 
, less than one-third, belong to farmers whose chief oc-cupation is the independent conduct of agriculture and whohave no auxiliary occupations. 
 How many of them hireworkers? On this there is no information; that is to say, it existed in the most detailed form on the original cards and was lost during the summarising! The compilers did notwish to calculate (after performing a mass of most detailedand futile calculations) how many farms in each group hirepermanent or temporary wage-workers. 
 In order to determine approximately the number of farms that do without wage-labour, we shall single out those groups in which the number of farms is less than the number of wage-workers. 
 These will be groups with less than ten hec-tares of land per farm. 
 These groups include 1,283,631 farm-ers who regard agriculture as their chief concern and have no auxiliary occupation. 
 These farmers have a total of 1,400,162 wage-workers (if it is assumed that only those farmers who regard agriculture as their chief concern andhave no auxiliary occupations maintain wage-workers). 
 Onlyin the groups of farms with two to five hectares is the numberof independent farmers without an auxiliary occupation greater than the number of wage-workers, namely: 495,439 farms and 411,311 wage-workers. 
 Of course, cultivators who have auxiliary occupations sometimes have wage-workers and, of course, there are some“small” farmers who hire not one but several wage-workers. 
But nevertheless there can be no doubt that farmers who do not hire workers and who do not hire themselves out to work are an insignificant minority. 
 From the data on the number of wage-workers three basic groups of farms in German agriculture are immediatelydistinguishable. 
 I. 
Proletarian farms. 
 These include groups in which the minority of farmers regard the conduct of independent agri-culture as their chief occupation, groups in which the major-ity are wage-workers, and so on. 
 For example, there are2,084,060 farms of less than half a hectare. 
 Of these only97,153 are independent cultivators, and 1,287,312 are wage-workers (in all branches of the national economy) by their chief occupation. 
 The farms with one-half to two hectares of land numbered 1,294,449. 
 Of these only 377,762 are independ-ent cultivators, 535,480 are wage-workers, 277, 735 carry onsmall-scale industry, handicrafts or trade, 103,472 are em-ployees or represent “various and unspecified” occupations. 
Clearly, both these groups of farms are in the main pro-letarian. 
 II. 
Peasant farms. 
 The bulk of the farms included here are those of independent cultivators; moreover, the numberof family workers in them is greater than that of wage-work-ers. 
 These will be groups with two to 20 hectares ofland. 
 III. 
Capitalist farms. 
 Here we include farms with more wage-workers than family workers. 
 The following are the total figures for these groups: Of whichFarms subdivided according to the number of workers Total Groups of farms numberThe workers in them being of farmsindepend-wage-Total num-ent culti-workers ber of vators such farmstotalfamily wage-workers workers I. 
 Less than 2 ha. 
. 
3,378,509 474,9151,822,792 2,669,232 4,353,0523,851,905501,147 II. 
 2-20 ha.... 
. 
2,071,816 1,705,448117,338 2,057,577 7,509,735 5,898,853 1,610,882 III. 
 20 ha or more. 
. 
285,757 277,060 737 285,331 3,306,762 870,850 2,435,912 Total...5,736,082 2,457,423 1,940,867 5,012,140 15,012,14010,169,6084,547,941 This table gives a picture of the economic system of mod-ern German agriculture. 
 At the bottom of the pyramid is a vast mass of proletarian “farms”, almost three-fifths of the total number; at the top is an insignificant minority (one-twentieth) of capitalist farms. 
 Let us point out, anticipatinga little, that this insignificant minority has more than halfof all the land and arable area. 
 They have one-fifth of thetotal number of workers engaged in agriculture and over half the total number of wage-workers. 
 II THE REAL NATURE OF THE MAJORITY OF MODERN AGRICULTURAL “FARMS” (PROLETARIAN “FARMS”) Of the “farmers” with less than two hectares of land, the majority are wage-workers by their chief occupation. 
 For them agriculture is an auxiliary occupation. 
 Of the 3,378,509enterprises in this group, 2,920,119 are auxiliary concerns(Nebenbetriebe). 
 A quite small minority, 14 per cent in all,475,000 out of 3,4 million, are independent cultivators, and this includes those who have in addition an auxiliary, non-agricultural occupation. 
 * ...It is to be noted that the number of wage-workers * ... in this group exceeds the number of independent cultiva-tors. 
 This fact indicates that the statistics here lump together with the mass of proletarians those few capitalist cultivators who carry out large-scale farming on a small plot of land. 
 Weshall repeatedly encounter this type in the course of ourexposition. 
 The question arises of the significance of these masses of proletarian “farmers” in the general system of agriculture. 
 In the first place, they represent the link between the feudal and the capitalist systems of social economy, their closeconnection and their kinship historically, a direct survivalof serfdom in capitalism. 
 If, for example, we see in Germanyand particularly in Prussia that the statistics of agriculturalenterprises include plots of land (known as Deputatland) which the landlord gives the agricultural labourer as part of his *Here the edge of the manuscript is torn off. 
— Ed. 
 wages, is this not a direct survival of serfdom? The difference between serfdom, as an economic system, and capitalism lies in the fact that the former allots land to the worker, whereas the latter separates the worker from the land; the former gives the worker the means of subsistence in kind (or forces him to produce them himself on his “allotment”), the lattergives the worker payment in money, with which he buys the means of subsistence. 
 Of course, in Germany this survival of serfdom is quite insignificant compared with what we see in Russia with her notorious “labour-rent” system of landlordfarming, nevertheless it is a survival of serfdom. 
 The 1907census in Germany counted 579,500 “agricultural enter-prises” belonging to agricultural workers and day-labourers , and of these 540,751 belong to the group of “farmers” with less than two hectares of land. 
 In the second place, the bulk of the “farmers” owning such insignificant plots of land that it is impossible to make aliving from them, and which represent merely an “auxiliaryoccupation”, form part of the reserve army of unemployed i n the capitalist system as a whole. 
 It is, to use Marx’s term, the hidden form of this army. 
 150 It would be wrong to im-agine that this reserve army of unemployed consists only ofworkers who are out of work. 
 It includes also “peasants” or“petty farmers” who are unable to exist on what they getfrom their minute farm, who have to try to obtain their means of subsistence mainly by hiring out their labour. 
 Their kitchen garden or potato plot serves this army of the poor as a means of supplementing their wages or of enabling them toexist when they are not employed. 
 Capitalism requires these“dwarf”, “parcellised” pseudo-farms so that without expenseit can always have a mass of cheap labour at its disposal. 
 According to the 1907 census, out of two million “farms” of less than half a hectare 624,000 have only horticultural land and 361,000 have only a potato field. 
 The total cultivatedarea of these two million “farms” is 247,000 hectares, ofwhich more than half, namely, 166,000 hectares, is under po-tato . 
 The total cultivated area of the million and a quarter “farms” with one-half to two hectares is 976,000 hectares, of which more than a third , namely, 334,000 hectares, is under potato. 
 Deterioration of the people’s diet (replacement ofbread by potatoes) and cheaper labour-power for the employ- /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR ers—such is the significance of the “farming” of three million agricultural “farms” out of the five million in Germany. 
 To conclude the description of these proletarian farms, let us add that almost one-third of them (one million out of3. 
4 million) do not possess livestock of any kind, two-thirds(2. 
5 out of 3. 
4 million) do not have any cattle, more thannine-tenths (3. 
3 out of 3. 
4 million) have no horses. 
 The shareof these proletarian farms in the total agricultural production is minimal: three-fifths of them have less than one-tenth of all the cattle (2. 
7 million out of 29. 
4 million head, reck-oning all livestock in terms of cattle), and one-twentiethof all the cultivated area (1. 
2 out of 24. 
4 million hectares). 
 One can imagine what confusion and falsity is introduced into the subject by statistics which lump together in this group of farms of less than two hectares of land millions of proletarians without horses or cattle and with only akitchen garden or potato field and thousands of big farmers, capitalists, who conduct big cattle-raising or horticulturaland suchlike enterprises on 1-2 dessiatines. 
 That such farm-ers are contained in this group is evident if only from the fact that out of the 3. 
4 million (with less than two hectares of land) 15,428 are farmers each of whom have six or more workers (taking family and wage-workers together),all of these 15,428 together having 123,941 workers, i. 
e. 
,an average of eight workers per farm. 
 Taking into accountthe special features of agriculture as regards machinery, such a number of workers is undoubtedly an indication of large-scale capitalist production. 
 That large-scale cattle-raisingfarms are included among the mass of proletarian “farms” ofless than two hectares, I have already had to point out onthe basis of the data of the earlier census of 1895 (see mybook: The Agrarian Question , St. 
 Petersburg, 1908, p. 
 239 *). 
 It was quite possible to single out these large-scale farms by means of the data both on the number of cattle andon the number of workers, but the German statisticiansprefer to fill hundreds of pages with data on five subdivi-sions of the group of owners having less than half a hectaredivided into still smaller groups according to the amount of land! *See present edition, Vol. 
 5, pp. 
 103-222. 
— Ed. 
 Socio-economic statistics—one of the most powerful means of acquiring social knowledge—are converted in this way into a monstrosity, into statistics for the sake of statis-tics, into a game. 
 That the majority or the great bulk of agricultural enter-prises belong to the category of dwarf, parcellised, proletar-ian farms is a phenomenon that is common to many if notmost European capitalist countries, but not all capitalist countries. 
 In America, for example, according to data of the 1900 census, the average size of the farms is 146. 
6 acres(60 hectares), i. 
e. 
, 7 2 times as large as in Germany. 
 The very small farms, if one includes here those of less than 20 acres(8 hectares) form a little over one-tenth (11. 
8 per cent) ofthe total number. 
 Even the farms of less than 50 acres (20 hectares) form only one-third of the total number. 
 In order to compare these data with the German statistics one musttake into account that farms of less than three acres ( =1. 
2 hectares) are included in the American census only if theirgross income amounts to 500 dollars, i. 
e. 
, the vast majorityof farms of less than three acres are not registered at all. 
 Hence we must exclude also the very small farms from the German data. 
 Let us eliminate even all the farms of less thantwo hectares: of the remaining 2,357,572 farms there willbe 1,006,277 of two to five hectares, i. 
e. 
, over 40 per centof the farms will be very small farms. 
 In America the situa-tion is quite different. 
 It is evident that when the traditions of serfdom are ab-sent (or all traces of it are more thoroughly abolished), andwhen the yoke imposed by land rent on agricultural pro-duction is absent (or weakened), capitalism in agriculturecan exist and even develop with special rapidity withoutcreating a category of a million agricultural labourers and day-labourers with allotments. 
 III PEASANT FARMS UNDER CAPITALISM We have put under the heading peasant farms those groups in which, on the one hand, the majority of cultivators are independent farmers and, on the other hand, the number offamily workers is greater than the number of wage-workers. 
 It was found that the absolute number of wage-workers in such farms is very great—1. 
6 million, more than a third of the total number of wage-workers. 
 Obviously there are not a few capitalist enterprises among the general mass(2. 
1 million) of “peasant” farms. 
 We shall see below theapproximate number and significance of these enterprises,for the present we shall deal in more detail with the relation-ship between family and wage-labour. 
 Let us see how big the average number of workers per farm is: Average number of workers per farm Family Wage-Groups of farms Total workers workers Proletarian Less than 0. 
5 ha 1. 
3 1. 
20. 
1 farms . 
. 
 0. 
5 -2 ha 1. 
9 1. 
7 0. 
2 Peasant2-5 ” 2. 
9 2. 
5 0. 
4 farms . 
. 
5-10 ” 3. 
8 3. 
1 0. 
7 10-20 ” 5. 
1 3. 
4 1. 
7 Capitalist 20 -100 ” 7. 
9 3. 
24. 
7 farms . 
. 
 100 ha or more 52. 
5 1. 
6 50. 
9 Altogether .... 
 3. 
0 2. 
1 0. 
9 We see from this table that, compared with industry, agricultural enterprises are generally of a small size asregards the number of workers. 
 Only owners possessing more than 100 hectares have over 50 wage-workers: the number of such owners is 23,566, i. 
e. 
, less than one-half per cent of thetotal number of farms. 
 The total number of wage-workerson these farms is 1,463,974, i. 
e. 
, a little less than the totalnumber on the two million peasant farms. 
 Among the peasant farms, the group that is seen at once to stand out from the rest is that with 10-20 hectares: this group has an average of 1. 
7 wage-workers per farm. 
 If wesingle out only the permanent workers we shall find that theynumber 412,702 for the 412,741 farms of this group (411,940of the farms distributed according to the number of workers). 
This means that not a single enterprise is able to do without permanent use of wage-labour. 
 That is why we single out this group as that of “Grossbauer”, big peasant farmers orpeasant bourgeoisie. 
 Usually it is owners of 20 or more hec-tares that are reckoned to belong to this category, but the1907 census has shown that the use of wage-labour in agri-culture is more widely distributed than is usually thought,{ {{ and that the boundary at which the constant use of wage-labour begins must be shifted considerably lower. 
 Further, in examining the relationship between family and wage-labour, we find that in proletarian and peasant farm-ing the average number of family workers shows a contin-ual increase parallel to the increase in the number of wage-workers, whereas in capitalist farms the number of familyworkers begins to fall as the number of wage-workers grows larger. 
 This phenomenon is quite natural and confirms our conclusion that farms of over 20 hectares are capitalist farms,in which not only is the number of wage-workers greaterthan that of family workers, but also the average number offamily workers per farm is less than in the case of peasant farms. 
 Long ago, even at the very beginning of the controversy between the Marxists and the Narodniks, it was establishedfrom Zemstvo statistical data that in peasant farming familyco-operation is the basis for the creation of capitalist co-oper-ation, i. 
e. 
, substantial peasant farms notable for their par-ticularly large number of family workers become converted into capitalist farms employing wage-labour to an ever-in-creasing extent. 
 Now we see that the German statistics forthe whole of German agriculture confirm this conclusion. 
 Let us take the German peasant farms. 
 As a whole they differ from the proletarian farms by being enterprises based on family co-operation (2. 
5-3. 
4 family workers per farm)and not enterprises of individuals. 
 The proletarian farmshave to be called the farms of individuals because they donot even average two workers per farm. 
 Among the peasantfarms, however, there is competition over the number of wage-workers taken on: the greater the size of the peasant farm, the higher is the number of its family workers and themore rapidly does the number of its wage-workers increase. 
 The big peasant farms surpass the small peasant farms (of2-5 hectares) by less than one-and-a-half times as regardsthe number of family workers but they exceed them by more than four times as regards the number of wage-workers. 
 We see here a precise statistical confirmation of the car-dinal distinction between the class of small farmers ingeneral, and of small peasants in particular, and the classof wage-workers, a distinction that is always being pointed out by Marxists and which the bourgeois economists and re-visionists are quite unable to grasp. 
 All the circumstances of commodity farming lead to the result that the small peas-ants are unable to exist without striving to consolidateand extend their enterprises, and this struggle implies astruggle to increase the use of outside labour-power and tomake its use cheaper. 
 That is why in every capitalist countrythe mass of small peasants as a whole, of whom only an in-significant minority “rise to prominence”, i. 
e. 
, become real capitalists, are permeated by capitalist psychology and fol-low the agrarians in politics. 
 The bourgeois economists (andthe revisionists, too, in their wake) support this psychology;the Marxists explain to the small peasants that their onlysalvation lies in joining hands with the wage-workers. 
 The data of the 1907 census are also extremely instructive in regard to the proportion between the number of permanentand temporary workers. 
 Altogether the latter are exactlyone-third of the total number: 5,053,726 out of 15,169,549. 
Of the wage-workers 45 per cent are temporary, of the familyworkers 29 per cent are temporary. 
 But these proportions undergo substantial change in the different types of farm. 
 The following are the data for the groups we have distin-guished. 
 Temporary Workers as a Percentage of the Total Number of Workers Groups of farms Family Wage-workers workers Total ILess than 0. 
5 ha 55 79 58 0. 
5 -2 ” 39 78 45 2-5 ” 22 68 29 II 5 -10 ” 11 54 24 10-20 ” 14 422 3 III20-100 ” 14 32 25 100 ha or more 11 33 32 Average .... 
 294 53 3 We see from this table that among the proletarian farms with less than half a hectare (there are altogether 2. 
1 mil-lion such farms!) temporary workers form more than half ofboth the family workers and wage-workers. 
 These are chiefly auxiliary farms which occupy only part of the time of their owners. 
 Among the proletarian farms of 0. 
5-2 hectares, too,{{{ the percentage of temporary workers is very high. 
 As the size of the farm increases the percentage falls—with only one exception. 
 This exception is that among wage-workers of the biggest capitalist farms the percentage of temporary workersincreases slightly, and since the number of family workersin this group is quite negligible, the percentage of temporaryworkers among the workers as a whole increases consider-ably, from 25 to 32 per cent. 
 The difference between peasant and capitalist farms as regards the total number of temporary workers is not verygreat. 
 The difference between the numbers of family andwage-workers is very considerable in all types of farm, andif we take into account that among temporary family work-ers there is, as we shall see, an especially high percentage of women and children this difference becomes still greater. 
 Hence wage-workers are the most mobile element.... 
 IV LABOUR OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN IN AGRICULTURE ... they carry on agriculture. 
 Generally speaking, women’s labour predominates also in the peasant farm, and it is onlyin the big peasant and capitalist enterprises that men con-stitute the majority. 
 There are in general fewer women among wage-workers than among family workers. 
 Obviously, the capitalist cul-tivators in all the groups are among those farmers who obtain the best labour forces. 
 If the predominance of women overmen can be taken as a measure of the straitened circumstancesof the farmer and of the unsatisfactory state of a farm thathas no possibility of using the best labour forces (and thissupposition inevitably follows from all the data on women.... 
 V SQUANDERING OF LABOUR IN SMALL-SCALE PRODUCTION . 
 . 
 . 
 . 
 VI THE CAPITALIST CHARACTER OF THE USE OF MACHINERY IN MODERN AGRICULTURE . 
 . 
 . 
 . 
 VII THE LOW PRODUCTIVITY OF LABOUR IN SMALL-SCALE PRODUCTION AND EXCESSIVE WORK The significance of the data on the use of machinery in agriculture is usually underestimated in economic literature. 
Firstly, the capitalist character of the use of machinery isquite often ignored (always, in the case of bourgeois econo-mists); the economists make no investigation of this prob-lem, they do not know how to raise it or do not even want to do so. 
 Secondly, the use of machinery is considered in isolation and not as a criterion of the different types of farm, different methods of cultivation and different economic con-ditions of farming. 
 If, for example, as a general rule we find an incomparably greater use of machinery in large-scale compared with small-scale production, and a huge concentration of machines inthe capitalist farms, which sometimes even have almost amonopoly of up-to-date implements, this is an indicationof the difference in care for the land among farms of different types. 
 Among the machines registered by the German census are such machines as steam ploughs, seed-drills and potato-planting machines. 
 The fact that they are mainly used incapitalist agriculture means that in this case care for the land is better, the technique of cultivation higher and the productivity of labour greater. 
 Bensing, 151 the author of a well-known monograph on agricultural machinery, basing himself on the data of specialists concerning the effect ofusing various machines, has calculated that, even withoutchanging the system of cultivation, the use of machines byitself raises the net return from farming many times over . 
 These calculations have not been refuted by anyone and bas-ically they cannot be refuted. 
 The small-scale producer who has no opportunity of using up-to-date implements is forced to lag behind in care for the land , and it is only individuals or a few dozen out of hundreds and thousands who can try to “overtake” the bigfarmer by applying more labour to the land while retaining the old tools, and by greater “assiduousness” and a longer working day. 
 The statistics of the use of machinery indicate therefore the existence of excessive labour in small-scale pro-duction, a fact which is always stressed by Marxists. 
 No statistics can take direct account of this fact, but if the statistical data are regarded in the light of their economic significance, it becomes clear which types o f farming are bound to develop, cannot fail to develop, in modern society when machines are used, and when theiruse is impossible. 
 The Hungarian statistics provide an illustration of what has been said. 
 Like the German census of 1907 (and of 1882 and 1895), like the Danish statistics on the use of machinesin 1907, and like the French enquiry in 1909, the Hungariancensus of 1895, which for the first time collected precisedata for the whole country, shows the superiority of capi-talist agriculture and the increased percentage of farms with machines as the size of the farms increases. 
 From this angle there is nothing new here but only a confirmation of theGerman data. 
 The special feature of the Hungarian statistics,however, is that information was collected not only on thefew up-to-date implements and machines, but on the entire , or almost the entire, farm inventory, on the number of the simplest and most essential implements, ploughs, harrows, carts, etc. 
 Thanks to these exceptionally detailed data it becomes possible to establish accurately the, as it were, symptomaticsignificance, characteristic of the whole system of farming,of the information on the use of some agricultural machines and technological “rarities” (such as steam ploughs). 
 Let us take the Hungarian statistical data * on the use of ploughs other than steam ploughs (of which in 1895 there were alto-gether 179 in the whole of Hungary, including 120 in 3,977largest farms). 
 The following are data of the total number of ploughs and of the number of the simplest, most primitive and least *See Landwirtschaftliche Statistik der Länder der ungarischen Krone (Agricultural Statistics of the Lands of the Hungarian Crown ). 
 Budapest, 1900, Vols. 
 4 and 5. 
 The Hungarian statistics divide allthe farms into four chief groups: 1) dwarf farms (less than 5 yokes; one yoke=0. 
57 hectares); 2) small farms (5-100 yokes); 3) medium farms (100-1,000 yokes); 4) big farms (over 1,000 yokes). 
 The secondgroup obviously includes very diverge kinds of farms and thereforeI make four subdivisions of it. 
 strongly built of all the implements of this kind (the simplest comprise single-share ploughs with a wooden pole; the others are: the same but with an iron pole, then two-and three-share ploughs, cultivators, ridging ploughs, and ploughsfor deep ploughing). 
 Groups of Number Number of Including farms of farms ploughs the (total) (total) simplest Dwarf (less than 5 yokes) 1,459,893 227,241 196,852 5-10 yokes ...... 569,534 335,885 290,958 10-20 ”...... 467,038 398,365 329,416 20-50 ”...... 235,784 283,285 215,380 50-100 ”...... 38,86272 ,970 49,312 Total small ...... 1,311,218 1,090,505 885,066 Medium (100 -1,000 yokes) 20,797 125,157 55,347 Large (over 1,000 yokes) . 
 3,977 149,750 51,565 Total .... 
 2,795,885 1,592,653 1,188,830 Without mentioning the dwarf farms, we see that in the small peasant farms (5 -10 yokes, i. 
e. 
, 2. 
8 -5. 
7 hectares) 233,000 out of 569,000 do not own any ploughs at all, and of the middle peasant farms 69,000 out of 467,000 are without ploughs. 
 Only the higher groups, i. 
e. 
, the big peasant andcapitalist farms, all have ploughs, and it is only in the farmsof over 100 yokes (there are only 25,000 such farms =0. 
9 per cent of the total number!) that the more elaborate imple-ments predominate . 
 In the peasant farms the simplest imple-ments, those least strongly built and worst in performance, predominate (and the smaller the farm the more marked isthis predominance). 
 Leaving out of account the dwarf farms, which constitute the majority (52 per cent) of all the farm’s but which occupyan insignificant fraction of the total area (7 per cent), we reach the following conclusion: Over one million small-and middle-peasant farms (5-20 yokes) are inadequately provided with even the simplest implements for tilling the soil. 
 A quarter of a million big peasant farms (20-100 yokes) are tolerably equipped with implements of the simplest kind. 
 And only 25,000 capitalist farms (but possessing, it is true, 55 per cent of the entire area of land) are fully equipped withup-to-date implements. 
{ The Hungarian statistics, on the other hand, calculate how many yokes of arable land there are to one agricultural implement and obtain figures such as the following (we quote only the data for ploughs, harrows and carts, while pointingout that the picture of their distribution among the farms iscompletely analogous to that we saw in regard to ploughs). 
 Yokes of arable land to one to one to one In farms plough harrow cart dwarf ....... 
. 
 787 small ....... 
. 
 1213 15 medium ....... 
 274 54 0 large ....... 
. 
 286 15 3 This means that the proletarian and peasant farms, which are quite unsatisfactorily equipped with all agricultural implements, have an excessively large number of them in rela-tion to the whole amount of the arable land of their farms. 
A beggarly equipment of implements and an unbearablecostliness of maintaining them—such is the lot of small-scale production under capitalism. 
 In exactly the same way the statistics relating to housing in every large town show us thatthe poorest classes of the population, the workers, smalltraders, petty employees, etc. 
, live worst of all, have themost crowded and worst dwellings and pay most dearly of all for each cubic foot. 
 Calculated per unit of space the dwellings of factory barracks or hovels for the poor are more costly than the fashionable dwellings anywhere on the Nevsky. 
 The conclusion to be drawn from this as regards both Ger-many and all the capitalist countries is as follows. 
 If the dataon the utilisation of a few up-to-date implements and agri-cultural machines show us that their employment increases as the size of the farm increases, this means that small-scale production in agriculture is poorly equipped with all neces-sary implements. 
 This means that in small-scale productionsquandering of labour on maintaining an immense quantity of poor and out-of-date implements suitable only for farmingon a minute scale is combined with acute want , causing the peasant to overstrain himself in order somehow to keep going on his plot of land with these obsolete barbaric implements. 
 That is what the data, so simple and so well-known to all, on the use of agricultural machinery tell us if we reflect ontheir socio-economic significance. 
 Capitalism raises the level of agricultural technique and advances it, but it cannot do so except by ruining, depress-ing and crushing the mass of small producers. 
 In order to give a graphic illustration of the social sig-nificance and tempo of this process, we shall conclude bycomparing the data of the three German censuses of 1882,1895 and 1907. 
 For the purpose of this comparison we musttake the data on the number of instances of the use of the five agricultural machines which were registered during the whole of this period (these machines are: steam ploughs,seed-drills, mowing machines and harvesters, steam andother threshing-machines). 
 We obtain the following picture: Number of instances of the use of the chief Groups of farms agricultural machines per hundred farms 18821895 1907 I Less than 2 ha .... 
 0. 
5 1. 
6 3. 
8 2-5 ”.... 
 3. 
9 11. 
9 31. 
2 II 5 -10 ”.... 
 13. 
5 32. 
9 71. 
1 10-20 ”.... 
 31. 
2 60. 
8 122. 
1 III20-100 ”.... 
 59. 
292 . 
0 179. 
1 100 ha or more ... 187. 
1 208. 
9 271. 
9 Average ....... 
 16. 
6 33. 
9 8. 
7 The progress seems considerable: during a quarter of a century the number of instances of the use of the chief ma-chines has grown in general nearly fourfold. 
 But, on making a careful examination, it has to be said that it has required a whole quarter of a century to make the use of at leastone of the five chief machines a regular phenomenon in asmall minority of the farms that cannot do without the con-stant employment of wage-labour. 
 For such use can only becalled regular when the number of instances of it exceeds the number of farms, and we find that this occurs only in relation to the capitalist and big peasant farms. 
 Togetherthey comprise 12 per cent of the total number of farms. 
 The bulk of the small and middle peasants, after a quarter of a century of capitalist progress, have remained in a po-sition in which only a third of the former and two-thirds of the latter can use any of these five machines during the year. 
 (End of first article){{ N O T E S 1 2 3 4 5The All-Russian (December ) Conference of the R. 
 S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 (Fifth Conference of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
) was held in Paris on December 21-27, 1908 (January 3-9, 1909). 
 It was attended by 16 delegates with the right to speak and vote: 5 Bolsheviks, 3 Mensheviks, 5 Polish So-cial-Democrats and 3 Bundists. 
 The representative of the Central Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 was Lenin. 
 He delivered a report at the Conference on “The Present Moment and the Tasks of the Par-ty”, and also spoke on the Social-Democratic group in the Duma, and on the organisational and other questions. 
 At the Conference the Bolsheviks waged a struggle against two kinds of opportunism in the Party: the liquidators and the otzovists. 
 On the proposal of Lenin, the Conference condemned liquidationism and called on all Party organisations to combat vigorously attempts to liquidate the Party. 
 For an appraisal of the decisions of the Conference, see Lenin’s articles “On the Road” and “Liquidation of Liquidationism” (see present edition, Vol. 
 15, pp. 
 343-53, 452-60). 
 p. 
 15 The Bundists —members of the Bund, the shortened title of the General Jewish Workers’ Union of Lithuania, Poland and Russia, founded in 1897. 
 It united mainly semi-proletarian Jewish artisans in Russia’s western regions. 
 The Bund pursued an opportunist, Menshevik policy. 
 p. 
 15 Golos Sotsial-Demokrata (Voice of the Social-Democrat )—organ of the Menshevik liquidators abroad; it was published from February 1908 to December 1911, first in Geneva and later in Paris. 
 p. 
 15 Dnevnik Sotsial-Demokrata (Diary of a Social-Democrat )—a non-periodical organ published by G. 
 V. 
 Plekhanov in Geneva at considerable intervals from March 1905 until April 1912. 
 In all 16 issues appeared. 
 Publication was resumed in 1916 in Petrograd, but only one issue appeared. 
 p. 
 15 Proletary (The Proletarian )—an illegal newspaper formed by the Bolsheviks after the Fourth (Unity) Congress of the Party. 
 It was published from August 21 (September 3), 1906 to November 28 (December 11), 1909, under Lenin’s editorship. 
 Bearing the title of organ of the Moscow and St. 
 Petersburg Party Committees and for a time also of the Moscow District, Perm, Kursk and Kazan Committees Proletary was actually the Central Bolshevik Organ. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR Altogether 50 issues appeared (the first 20 in Vyborg, Finland). 
 From February 13 (26) to December 1 (14), 1908, Proletary w a s published in Geneva, and from January 8 (21) to November 28 (December 11), 1909, in Paris. 
 It printed over 100 articles and items by Lenin. 
 During the Stolypin reaction it played an outstand-ing part in preserving and strengthening the Bolshevik organisa-tions. 
 p. 
 15 Pravda (of Vienna)—a Menshevik newspaper, the factional organ of Trotsky, published in 1908-12 in Vienna. 
 Under cover of “non-factionalism”, it took up a liquidationist position on all main issues, and also supported the otzovists and ultimatumists. 
 In 1912, Trotsky and his Pravda were the organisers of the anti-Party August bloc. 
 p. 
 16 S. 
—Silvestr Djibladze—a Georgian Menshevik liquidator. 
 p. 
 16 Toy manikins —the name given in a story with this title by M. 
 Y. 
 Saltykov-Shchedrin to the dolls of whom Izuverov, the skilful workman who made them, said: “They have no brains, they do nothing, they have no desires, but instead just an outward ap-pearance. 
” p. 
 17 G. 
 V. 
 Plekhanov was a member of the editorial board of the Men-shevik organ Golos Sotsial-Demokrata . 
 The newspaper’s develop-ment towards liquidationism caused Plekhanov to disagree with the other editors. 
 In December 1908 he virtually ceased to take part in the newspaper, first of all giving notice of his resignation from the editorial board of the five-volume work, The Social Movement in Russia , published by the liquidators, and later from the editorial board of Golos as well. 
 Plekhanov’s formal resig-nation from the latter occurred on May 13 (26), 1909. 
 p. 
 17 Otzovists , otzovism (from the Russian word otozvat —recall)—an opportunist trend which arose among a section of the Bolsheviks after the defeat of the 1905-07 Revolution. 
 The otzovists demanded the recall of the Social-Democratic deputies from the Duma and the abandonment of work in legal organisations. 
 In 1908 the otzovists formed a special group and carried on a struggle against Lenin. 
 They refused to take part in the Duma, in the trade unions, co-operatives and other mass legal or semi-legal organisations, and tried to confine themselves to illegal work. 
 Under cover of “revolu-tionary” phraseology, they hindered the extension of the Party’s connections with wide sections of the working class, pursued a poli-cy that cut the Party off from the masses, and thereby weakened the Party. 
 Lenin sharply criticised the otzovists and called them “liquidators of a new type” and “Mensheviks inside-out”. 
 Ultimatumists , ultimatumism —a variety of otzovism. 
 The ulti-matumists proposed that an ultimatum should be presented to the Social-Democratic Duma group as a preliminary and, on its non-fulfilment, that the Social-Democratic deputies should be with-drawn from the Duma. 
6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13God-builders , god-building —a religious-philosophical trend hos-tile to Marxism which arose in the period of the Stolypin reac-tion among a section of the Party literary writers who withdrew from Marxism after the defeat of the 1905-07 Revolution. 
 The “god-builders” (Lunacharsky, Bazarov and others) advocated the creation of a new, “socialist” religion, and tried to reconcile Marxism and religion. 
 The meeting of the enlarged editorial board of Proletary i n June 1909 adopted a resolution which sharply condemned otzovism and ultimatumism, and also god-building. 
 The resolution pointed out that Marxism had nothing in common with these anti-Marxist trends and it called on the Bolsheviks to wage a resolute struggle against them. 
 p. 
 18 Osip —a character in N. 
 V. 
 Gogol’s comedy Inspector-General . 
 p. 
 21 Empirio-criticism —a subjective idealist trend in bourgeois philos-ophy which arose at the end of the last century and is linked with the names of the German philosopher Avenarius and the Aus-trian philosopher Mach. 
 Empirio-criticism denies the objective existence of the material world and its laws, and regards things as complexes of sensations. 
 Underlying the philosophical views of the empirio-critics is an idealist conception of experience, which they interpret as a totality of human feelings and sensations inde-pendent of the external world. 
 In his work Materialism and Empir-io-criticism , Lenin made an annihilating criticism of empirio-criti-cism and its Russian followers, Bogdanov, Bazarov and others (present edition, Vol. 
 14, pp. 
 17-361). 
 p. 
 21 On the Open Letter of the Executive Committee of the Moscow Region-al Committee of the R. 
 S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 (dated August 17 [30], 1909) was written in connection with the discovery of the anti-Party and factional nature of the Capri school. 
 In the “Letter” the Executive Committee reminds those attend-ing the school that it is their duty to keep in close contact with the Moscow Regional Committee and it calls for a full report on the school’s activities. 
 The “Letter” was published in Proletary No. 
 47-48, of September 5 (18), 1909, together with Lenin’s com-ment “From the Editorial Board”. 
 The Capri school —a factional centre of the otzovists, ultima-tumists and god-builders, who joined forces against Bolshevism. 
 It was established on the Italian island of Capri in 1909 by A. 
 Bogdanov (Maximov), Alexinsky and Lunacharsky with the partic-ipation of Maxim Gorky. 
 Under cover of being pro-Party, the Bogdanovists succeeded in having 13 students sent to attend the school from some local Social-Democratic organisations. 
 The school was in existence for about four months (August to December). 
 In November a split occurred among the students: part of them, headed by N. 
 Y. 
 Vilonov, definitely dissociated themselves from the Bogdanovists. 
 The Leninist students sent a letter to the editors of Proletary protesting against the anti-Party behaviour of the lec-14 15 16turers, for which they were expelled from the school. 
 At the end of November (beginning of December) 1909, on Lenin’s invitation, they went to Paris where they attended a course of lectures, includ-ing those by Lenin, viz. 
, “The Present Time and Our Tasks”, “Stolypin’s Agrarian Policy”. 
 In December 1909, the students who remained in Capri, together with the lecturers, founded the anti-Party Vperyod group. 
 A meeting of the enlarged editorial board of Proletary con-demned the Capri school as “a new centre of the faction splitting off from the Bolsheviks”. 
 p. 
 23 September 21 (October 4), 1909, was the date fixed for the by-elec-tion to the Third Duma to replace the St. 
 Petersburg deputy, the Cadet A. 
 M. 
 Kolyubakin, who had been expelled from the Duma. 
 p. 
 24 The Party of Octobrists (Union of October Seventeenth) was found-ed in Russia after the issue of the tsar’s Manifesto of October 17, 1905. 
 It was a counter-revolutionary party which represented and defended the interests of the big bourgeoisie and landlords, whose enterprises were on capitalist lines. 
 It was headed by the well-known industrialist and Moscow house-owner, A. 
 I. 
 Guchkov, and the big landlord M. 
 V. 
 Rodzyanko. 
 The Octobrists supported the foreign and domestic policy of the tsarist government. 
 Black Hundreds —reactionary, monarchist gangs set up by the tsarist police to combat the revolutionary movement. 
 They mur-dered revolutionaries, assaulted progressive intellectuals, and or-ganised anti-Jewish pogroms. 
 p. 
 24 Cadets —members of the Constitutional-Democratic Party, the chief party of the Russian liberal-monarchist bourgeoisie. 
 The Cadet Party was founded in October 1905, its membership includ-ing representatives of the bourgeoisie, Zemstvo functionaries from among the landlords and bourgeois intellectuals. 
 Prominent lead-ers of the Cadets included P. 
 N. 
 Milyukov, S. 
 A. 
 Muromtsev, V. 
 A. 
 Maklakov, A. 
 I. 
 Shingaryov, P. 
 B. 
 Struve, F. 
 I. 
 Rodichev. 
 In order to deceive the working people the Cadets falsely called themselves the party of “people’s freedom”, but in reality they never went beyond the demand for a constitutional monarchy. 
 They considered their main task to be the fight against the revolutionary movement and they tried to persuade the tsar and the feudal land-lords to share power with them. 
 During the First World War the Cadets actively supported the tsarist government’s foreign Policy of conquest. 
 During the bourgeois-democratic revolution of Febru-ary 1917 they tried to save the monarchy. 
 The Cadets in the bour-geois Provisional Government pursued a counter-revolutionary policy favourable to the U. 
S. 
, British and French imperialists. 
 After the victory of the Great October Socialist Revolution the Cadets became irreconcilable enemies of Soviet power and partic-ipated in all the armed counter-revolutionary actions and cam-paigns of the interventionists. 
 When the interventionists and white-guards were defeated, the Cadets fled abroad, where they continued 17 18 19 20 21 22 23The coup d ’état of June 3 , 1907 was carried out by the tsarist government, which dissolved the Second Duma and published a new electoral law that reduced severalfold the already small repre-sentation of workers and peasants in the Duma. 
 The law deprived a large part of the population of Asiatic Russia of electoral rights and reduced by half the representation of the people of Poland and the Caucasus. 
 Black Hundreds and Octobrists predominated in the Third Duma, which was elected on the basis of this law, and opened in November 1907. 
 p. 
 24 Milyukov , P. 
 N. 
 —leader of the Cadet Party. 
 Stolypin , P. 
 A. 
 —a reactionary statesman of tsarist Russia and a big landlord, Chairman of the Council of Ministers and the Minis-ter of the Interior from 1906 to 1911. 
 He headed the regime of savage political reaction after the suppression of the 1905-07 Revolu-tion and organised bloody acts of repression against the revolution-ary workers and peasants. 
 p. 
 25 Rech (Speech )—a daily newspaper, the central organ of the Cadet Party, which was published in St. 
 Petersburg from February 1906. 
 It was closed down by the Revolutionary Military Committee of the Petrograd Soviet on October 26 (November 8), 1917. 
 p. 
 26 Kutler , N. 
 N. 
 —a prominent leader of the Cadet Party. 
 p. 
 26 Vekhi —a Cadet collection of articles by N. 
 Berdayev, S. 
 Bulgakov, P. 
 Struve, M. 
 Herschensohn and other representatives of the coun-ter-revolutionary liberal bourgeoisie, published in Moscow in the spring of 1909. 
 In articles on the Russian intelligentsia these writ-ers tried to discredit the revolutionary-democratic traditions of the finest representatives of the Russian people, including V. 
 G. 
 Belin-sky and N. 
 G. 
 Chernyshevsky, vilified the revolutionary movement of 1905, and thanked the tsarist government for having, “with its bayonets and jails”, saved the bourgeoisie from “the fury of the people”. 
 The writers called upon the intelligentsia to serve the autocracy. 
 Lenin compared the programme of Vekhi , as regards both philosophy and publicist matters, to that of the Black-Hundred newspaper Moskovskiye Vedomosti , and he called the symposium an “encyclopaedia of liberal renegacy”, nothing but p. 
 27 The expression “His Majesty’s Opposition” was used by the leaderof the Cadet Party, P. 
 Milyukov. 
 In a speech at a luncheon given by the Lord Mayor of London on June 19 (July 2), 1909, Milyukov declared: “So long as there is in Russia a legislative chamber which controls the budget, the Russian opposition will remain the opposition of His Majesty and not to His Majesty. 
” ( Rech No. 
 167, June 21 [July 4], 1909). 
 p. 
 27 Trudoviks , Trudovik group —the group of petty-bourgeois democrats“a veritable torrent of reactionary mud poured on the head of democracy” (see pp. 
 123-31 of this volume). 
 24 24aNarodnik persuasion. 
 The Trudovik group was formed in April 1906 from peasant deputies in the First Duma. 
 The Trudoviks put forward demands for the removal of all so-cial-estate and national restrictions, the democratisation of Zem-stvo and urban self-government, and the establishment of universal suffrage for elections to the Duma. 
 The agrarian programme of the Trudoviks was based on Narodnik principles of equalitarian use of the land: the formation of a national fund from state, crown and church lands, and also from privately owned lands if the size of the holding exceeded the established labour norm. 
 It was envisaged that there would be compensation for the privately owned land to be nationalised. 
 Lenin pointed out that the typical Trudovik was a peasant who was “not averse to a compromise with the mon-archy, to settling down quietly on his own plot of land under the bourgeois system; but at the present time his main efforts are con-centrated on the fight against the landlords for land, on the fight against the feudal state and for democracy” (see present edition, Vol. 
 11, p. 
 229). 
 In the Duma the Trudoviks wavered between the Cadets and the Social-Democrats. 
 These waverings were due to the class nature of the small peasant farmers. 
 Nevertheless, owing to the fact that the Trudoviks represented the mass of the peasants, the Bolsheviks in the Duma pursued a policy of concluding agreements with them on particular questions for a joint struggle against the tsarist autoc-racy and the Cadets. 
 In 1917, the Trudovik group merged with the Popular Socialist Party and actively supported the bourgeois Pro-visional Government. 
 After the October Socialist Revolution the Trudoviks sided with the bourgeois counter-revolution. 
 p. 
 27 The Meeting of the Enlarged Editorial Board of “Proletary ” was held in Paris on June 8-17 (21-30), 1909. 
 Nine members of the Bolshevik Centre (elected by the Bolshevik group of the Fifth [London] Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 in 1907) were present at it, headed by Lenin, and representatives of the organisations of St. 
 Petersburg, Moscow Region and the Urals. 
 The meeting was convened to discuss the anti-Party stand of the otzovists and ulti-matumists and took place under Lenin’s leadership. 
 Lenin spoke on all the main questions on the agenda. 
 Otzovism and ultimatum-ism were defended at the meeting by A. 
 Bogdanov (Maximov) and V. 
 Shantser (Marat). 
 Kamenev, Zinoviev, Rykov and Tomsky adopted a double-dealing position. 
 The meeting condemned otzo-vism and ultimatumism as “Left liquidationism”. 
 It also condemned god-building and adopted a decision for a vigorous struggle against it, exposing its anti-Marxist character. 
 Bogdanov, the inspirer of otzovism and ultimatumism, was expelled from the ranks of the Bolsheviks. 
 p. 
 29 Boyeviks —members of the revolutionary fighting squads, who, during the revolutionary struggle, used the tactics of armed ac-tion, helped political prisoners to escape, expropriated state-owned funds for the needs of the revolution, removed spies and agent provocateurs, etc. 
 p. 
 30 25 26 27The Anti-Socialist Law was promulgated in Germany in 1878. 
 The law suppressed all organisations of the Social-Democratic Party, mass working-class organisations, and the labour press; socialist literature was confiscated. 
 The law was annulled in 1890 under pressure of the mass working-class movement. 
 p. 
 30 The July Conference of 1907 was the Third (Second All-Russian) Conference of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 It was held on July 21-23 (August 3-5), 1907, in Finland (Kotka), and was attended by 26 delegates: 9 Bolsheviks, 5 Mensheviks, 5 Polish and 2 Lettish Social-Democrats and 5 Bundists. 
 The Conference was convened to determine the tactics of Social-Democracy in connection with the coup d’état of June 3 and the convocation of the Third Duma. 
 At the Conference Lenin spoke against the boycott of the Duma. 
 A. 
 Bogdanov (Ma-ximov) delivered a report on behalf of the supporters of boycott. 
 Lenin’s resolution was adopted by a majority of votes. 
 p. 
 38 Economists , Economism —an opportunist trend in Russian Social-Democracy at the turn of the century, a Russian variety of inter-national opportunism; its organs were the newspaper Rabochaya Mysl (Workers ’ Thought ) (1897-1902), published in Russia, and the journal Rabocheye Dyelo (Workers ’ Cause ) (1899-1902), pub-lished abroad. 
 The programme of the Economists, whom Lenin called Russian Bernsteinians, was the so-called “Credo”, written in 1899 by Y. 
 D. 
 Kuskova. 
 The Economists restricted the tasks of the working-class move-ment to the economic struggle for higher wages, better working conditions, etc. 
, asserting that the political struggle was the business of the liberal bourgeoisie, and denied the leading role of the workers’ party, which, they considered, should merely observe the spontaneous development of the movement and follow in its wake. 
 In their worshipping “spontaneity” they belittled the im-portance of revolutionary theory and consciousness, declaring that the socialist ideology could grow out of the spontaneous working-class movement; by denying the need for a Marxist party to imbue the workers’ movement with socialist consciousness, they cleared the way for bourgeois ideology. 
 They defended disunity, confusion and parochial amateurish approach which existed in the Social-Democratic ranks and opposed the creation of a centralised work-ing-class party. 
 Economism threatened to divert the working class from the revolutionary class path and reduce it to a political ap-pendage of the bourgeoisie. 
 The following works of Lenin are devoted to an extensive criti-cism of the views of the Economists: “A Protest by Russian Social-Democrats” (directed against Credo, written in Siberian exile in 1899 and signed by 17 exiled Marxists), “A Retrograde Trend in Russian Social-Democracy”, “Apropos of the ‘ Profession de Foi ’”, “A Talk with Defenders of Economism” (see present edition, Vol. 
 4, pp. 
 167-82, 255-85, 286-96; Vol. 
 5, pp. 
 313-20). 
 Lenin completed the ideological rout of Economism by his book What Is To Be /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35Done? (present edition, Vol. 
 5, pp. 
 347-529). 
 Lenin’s Iskra played a great part in combating Economism. 
 p. 
 39 Vsev (Vsevolod)—a pseudonym of the otzovist V. 
 P. 
 Denisov. 
 p. 
 40 Stan (Stanislav)—the otzovist A. 
 V. 
 Sokolov (Volsky), one of the organisers of the anti-Party schools in Capri and Bologna. 
 p. 
 40Rabocheye Znamya (Workers ’ Banner )—an illegal Bolshevik newspaper, organ of the Regional Bureau of the Central Industrial Area, of the Moscow and Moscow District Committees of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 It was published in Moscow from March to December 1908; 7 issues appeared. 
 Beginning with No. 
 5, the newspaper opened its columns to a discussion on the attitude to the Duma and to the Social-Democratic group in the Duma. 
 This issue printed an article by an otzovist entitled “Letter of a Worker (The Plan of Party Work in Connection with an Assessment of the Present Moment)”. 
 The article was edited by St. 
 Volsky (A. 
 V. 
 Sokolov), leader of the Moscow otzovists, at that time member of the Regional Bureau of the Moscow Central Industrial Area. 
 The article evoked sharp protests from the Party organisa-tions of Central Russia, and a rejoinder in the columns of the newspaper Proletary . 
 Lenin criticised the article in his work p. 
 42 The First All-Russian Congress of Factory Doctors and Representa-tives of Factory Industry was held on April 1-6 (14-19), 1909, in Moscow. 
 The delegates to the Congress included 52 workers chosenby trade unions, mainly of the big industrial centres. 
 The speeches of the workers’ delegates, who were predominantly Bolsheviks, were of great political importance and evoked a response through-out the country. 
 Two questions in particular gave rise to lively debates at the Congress, viz. 
, the organisation of health supervi-sion (a resolution proposed by the Bolsheviks was adopted), and election of factory inspectors by the workers. 
 The Congress did not finish its work; it was closed down by the police. 
 p. 
 42 Krichevsky , B. 
 N. 
 and Martynov , A. 
 S. 
 were leaders of Economism. 
 p. 
 42 Lenin is referring to Talleyrand, French diplomat of the end of the eighteenth and beginning of the nineteenth century. 
 p. 
 43 This refers to the Fifth Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 held in London, April 30-May 19 (May 13 June 1), 1907. 
 p. 
 45 Marat —V. 
 L. 
 Shantser, a member of the enlarged editorial board of Proletary , an ultimatumist, later one of the members of the Vperyod anti-Party group. 
 p. 
 45“Two Letters” (see present edition, Vol. 
 15, pp. 
 286-302). 
 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43Tsarevokokshaisk —one of the uyezd towns of tsarist Russia. 
 p. 
 46 “Er”—A. 
 V. 
 Sokolov (Volsky). 
 p. 
 47 Vperyod (Forward )—a Bolshevik mass working-class newspaper, under Lenin’s guidance. 
 It was published illegally in Vyborg by the editors of the newspaper Proletary from September 10 (23), 1906 to January 19 (February 1), 1908; 20 issues appeared. 
 Beginning with No. 
 2 the newspaper was issued as the organ of the local com-mittees of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
; No. 
 2 as the organ of the Moscow, St. 
 Petersburg and Moscow District committees; Nos. 
 3-7 as the organ of the Moscow, St. 
 Petersburg, Moscow District, Perm and Kursk committees; Nos. 
 8-19—as the previous issues with the addition of the Kazan Committee; in the last issue, No. 
 20, the Urals Re-gional Committee took the place of the Perm and Kazan commit-tees. 
 p. 
 56 Lenin’s work The Otzovist-Ultimatumist Strike-breakers has not been found. 
 p. 
 69 The article “ The St. 
 Petersburg Election ” is devoted to the results of the by-election to the Third Duma held in September 1909; it was printed unsigned in Proletary No. 
 49, October 3 (16), 1909. 
 The note written by Lenin was directed against N. 
 Jordansky’s opportunist article, “No Way Out”, published in Novy Dyen No. 
 6. 
 p. 
 76 Novy Dyen (New Day )—a legal Social-Democratic weekly newspa-per, published in St. 
 Petersburg from July 20 (August 21 to Decem-ber 13 (26), 1909, 15 issues appeared. 
 The newspaper was closed down by the police. 
 Two articles by Lenin were printed in Novy Dyen : “Once More on Partyism and Non-Partyism” and “Concern-ing Vekhi ” (see pp. 
 62-64, 123-31 of this volume). 
 p. 
 76 This refers to F. 
 Engels’s “Introduction” to Marx’s work The Class Struggles in France , 1848 to 1850 . 
 When the “Introduction” was published by the German Social-Democrats in 1895 it was distorted and subsequently interpreted by them as a renunciation of an armed uprising and barricade fighting. 
 The complete test of the “Introduction” was published for the first time in the U. 
S. 
S. 
R. 
 alone. 
 (Marx and Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 I, Moscow, 1958, pp. 
 118-38. 
) p. 
 76 The “ Draft Resolution on the Consolidation of the Party and of Its Unity ” was moved by Lenin at the meeting of the editorial board of the Central Organ, Sotsial-Demokrat , on October 21 (No-vember 3), 1909. 
 At this meeting Lenin proposed the publication of an editorial article “Methods of Consolidating the Party and its Unity” (so far this article has not been found). 
 In the article Lenin demanded a determined fight against liquidationism and upheld the need to preserve and consolidate the independence of the Bolshevik organisation. 
 The majority of the editorial board, who 44 45 46 47 48 49were concealed agents of Trotsky (Zinoviev, Kamenev, Varsky), and the Menshevik Martov, rejected Lenin’s article as an edito-rial and proposed that it should be printed over the author’s signa-ture as a contribution to discussion. 
 Thereupon Lenin raised the general question of consolidating the Party and its unity for discus-sion by the editorial board and moved the draft resolution on this subject. 
 The draft, like Lenin’s article, was rejected by the conciliatory-liquidationist majority of the editorial board. 
 p. 
 77 The Central Organ of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
— Sotsial-Demokrat (Social-Democrat )—was published illegally from February 1908 to January 1917. 
 Fifty-eight issues appeared; the first issue was printed in Rus-sia, the rest abroad, in Paris and later in Geneva. 
 In conformity with a decision of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Central Committee, the editorial board consisted of Bolshevik, Menshevik and Polish Social-Demo-crat representatives. 
 Sotsial-Demokrat published over eighty arti-cles and shorter items by Lenin. 
 Within the editorial board,Lenin fought for a consistent Bolshevik line. 
 Part of the editorial board (Kamenev and Zinoviev) took a conciliatory attitude to-wards the liquidators and tried to prevent Lenin’s policy from being carried out. 
 The Menshevik editors, Martov and Dan, sabo-taged the work of the editorial board and at the same time openly defended the liquidators in Golos Sotsial-Demokrata . 
 Lenin’s uncompromising struggle against the liquidators led to the resig-nation of Martov and Dan in June 1911, and from December 1911 onwards Sotsial-Demokrat was edited by Lenin. 
 p. 
 77 The International Socialist Bureau —the executive body of the Second International established by decision of the Paris Congressin 1900. 
 Lenin became a member of the Bureau as the official repre-sentative of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party and he spoke at its Eleventh Session on November 7 (New Style), 1909. 
 On the meeting of the Bureau, see Lenin’s article “The Eleventh Session of the International Socialist Bureau” (see pp. 
 140-44 of this volume). 
 p. 
 78 The Winter Palace —the tsar’s residence in St. 
 Petersburg. 
 p. 
 79 Bobrikov , N. 
 I. 
 —tsarist Governor-General in Finland from 1898 to 1904; established the police-gendarmerie regime there. 
 p. 
 79The Taurida Palace was the building in St. 
 Petersburg in which the Duma sessions were held. 
 p. 
 81To Pupils of the Capri School was written by Lenin in October 1909 in reply to two letters of the workers who were studying at the school and who had dissociated themselves from the Bogdanov group. 
 The letters of the Leninist students were published together with Lenin’s article “A Shameful Fiasco” (see pp. 
 85-86 of this volume) as a separate reprint from the newspaper Proletary No. 
 50, November 28 (December 11), 1909 . 
 p. 
 82 50 51 52 53 54 55The “ Marxism ” of the Brentano , Sombart and Struve variety —a bourgeois-reformist “theory” that “recognises the ‘school of cap-italism’ but rejects the school of revolutionary class struggle”(Lenin ). 
 The representatives of this variety of bourgeois distortion of Marxism were: Lujo Brentano —a German bourgeois economist, an adherent of so-called “state socialism”; he tried to prove the possibility ofachieving social equality within the framework of capitalism bymeans of reforms and reconciling the interests of capitalists andworkers. 
 Werner Sombart —a German bourgeois economist, a falsifier of Marxism. 
 He tried to justify capitalism, depicting it as a harmoni-ous planned system. 
 Under cover of Marxist phraseology, Brentano, Sombart and their successors in fact defended capitalism and tried to subordinatethe working-class movement to the interests of the bourgeoisie. 
 The “theories” of Brentano and Sombart were, and still are, exten-sively used by enemies of Marxism. 
 P. 
 B. 
 Struve —a Russian bourgeois liberal, a legal Marxist in the nineties and later one of the leaders of the Cadet Party. 
 Afterthe Great October Revolution he was a whiteguard émigré, a bitterenemy of Soviet power. 
 p. 
 90 Lenin quotes the words of the Menshevik liquidator Dan, who at the Fifth (All-Russian 1908) Conference of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
,during the discussion of the question “The present moment and thetasks of the Party”, declared that the Bolsheviks “decided to pushin where they had had one licking already”. 
 p. 
 91 The quotation is from the pamphlet by the Russian Narodnik P. 
 N. 
 Tkachov, Tasks of Revolutionary Propaganda in Russia , April 1874, p. 
 16. 
 p. 
 92 The law of November 9 , 1906 —Stolypin’s agrarian law allowing the peasants to withdraw from the village communes and settle on farmsteads. 
 For a description and appraisal of Stolypin’s landreform see Lenin’s work “The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in the First Russian Revolution 1905-07” (see presentedition, Vol. 
 13, pp. 
 217-431). 
 p. 
 92 G-g (Georg)—the Menshevik liquidator V. 
 O. 
 Levitsky (V. 
 O. 
 Tsederbaum). 
 p. 
 99 Vorwärts —Central Organ of German Social-Democracy, was pub-lished from 1876 onwards, under the editorship of Wilhelm Lieb-knecht and others. 
 In its columns Frederick Engels waged a struggle against all manifestations of opportunism. 
 From the middle nineties, after the death of Engels, the paper systematically pub-lished writings by the opportunists dominant in German Social-Democracy and the Second International. 
 p. 
 99 56 57 58 59 60 61 62P. 
—the Menshevik Plekhanovite F. 
 I. 
 Tsederbaum (P. 
 N. 
 Dnev-nitsky). 
 p. 
 100 For the article “‘ Golos Sotsial-Demokrata ’ and Cherevanin ” Lenin used his remarks on Cherevanin’s book The Contemporary Situation and the Possible Future , and especially the “summary of important remarks” written by him on the cover at the end of this book. 
 p. 
 103 This document is the beginning of an article written by Lenin in Paris at the end of November (beginning of December) 1909. 
 The last portion of the article has not been preserved. 
 The article was intended for Proletary No. 
 50, but was not published in it. 
 p. 
 107 Eduard Bernstein —leader of the extreme opportunist wing of German Social-Democracy and the Second International, a theore-tician of revisionism and reformism. 
 p. 
 108 The Letter of an “Old Iskrist and Old Bolshevik ” quoted by Lenin was published over the signature “Tr” in the newspaper Proletary No. 
 50 of November 28 (December 11), 1909 (“Letters from St. 
 Petersburg. 
 Letter III”). 
 p. 
 109 Zubatov , S. 
 V. 
 —colonel of gendarmerie and chief of the Moscow Secret Police, who carried out a policy known as “police socialism”. 
 In 1901-03, on his initiative legal workers’ organisations were set up in order to divert the workers from the political struggle against the autocracy. 
 Zubatov’s activity in setting up legal workers’ or-ganisations was supported by V. 
 K. 
 Plehve, Minister of the Inte-rior. 
 Zubatov tried to direct the working-class movement towards the achievement of purely economic demands and to make the workers think that the government was ready to meet their de-mands. 
 The first Zubatov organisation was set up in Moscow in May 1901 under the name “Society for the Mutual Assistance of Workers in Mechanical Industry”. 
 Zubatov organisations were set up also in Minsk, Odessa, Vilna, Kiev and other cities. 
 The reactionary character of Zubatovism was unmasked by the revolutionary Social-Democrats, who made use of legal workers’ organisations to draw wide sections of the working class into the struggle against the autocracy. 
 Owing to the upsurge of the revolu-tionary movement in 1903, the tsarist government was compelled to liquidate the Zubatov organisations. 
 p. 
 111 This refers to Stolypin’s agrarian policy, which aimed at establish-ing strong kulak farms as a bulwark of tsarism in the countryside. 
 On November 9 (22), 1906, Stolypin issued a law allowing peasants to withdraw from the village communes and settle on farmsteads; it proposed that the peasant should take his land holding into his personal possession and leave the village commune. 
 The peasant could sell his allotment, which was previously forbidden. 
 Stoly-pin’s land law benefited the kulak top section in the countryside and finally ruined the village poor. 
 p. 
 117 63 64 65 66 67 68V. 
 Ilyin —a pseudonym of V. 
 I. 
 Lenin. 
 p. 
 118 This refers to A. 
 S. 
 Martynov’s attacks in the organ of the liquida-tors, Golos Sotsial-Demokrata , on the book by V. 
 I. 
 Lenin (V. 
 Ilyin) The Development of Capitalism in Russia . 
 p. 
 118 Lenin is referring to an incident at the sitting of the Third Duma on November 20 (December 3), 1909, during the discussion of the Bill on inviolability of the person. 
 The Bill was, in the words of the Duma Left deputies, “a legitimisation of all forms of tyranny that have existed or are in existence in Russia”. 
 The out-and-out Black-Hundred speech of Markov (the Second) on November 20 (December 3) in defence of the Bill evoked indignation even from the Cadets, who walked out of the Duma chamber as a sign of pro-test. 
 The debate on the Bill in the Duma meeting of November 20 (December 3) particularly exposed the Black-Hundred character of the Third Duma. 
 p. 
 120 Prior to the appearance of this article, Lenin delivered a public lecture in Liége on October 16 (29), 1909, “The Ideology of the Counter-revolutionary Bourgeoisie”. 
 On November 13 (26), 1909, Lenin delivered a lecture on the same subject in Paris: “The Ideolo-gy of the Counter-revolutionary Liberalism (The Success of Vekhi and Its Social Significance)”. 
 The plan of the Paris lecture is set out in a poster preserved in the archives of the Institute of Marxism-Leninism, Central Committee of the C. 
P. 
S. 
U. 
 It is divided into the following parts: “I. 
 The philosophy against which Vekhi fights and the Duma speeches of the Cadet Karaulov. 
 II. 
 Belinsky and Chernyshevsky annihilated by Vekhi . 
 III. 
 Why do the liberals hate the ‘intellectualist’ Russian revolution and its French ‘suf-ficiently prolonged’ model? IV. 
 Vekhi and the Lefts in Russia. 
 Cadets and Octobrists. 
 The ‘sacred cause’ of the Russian bourgeoi-sie. 
 V. 
 What did the democratic revolution in Russia gain by losing its liberal-bourgeois ‘allies’? VI. 
 Vekhi and Milyukov’s speeches at the election meetings in St. 
 Petersburg. 
 How Milyukov criti-cised the illegal revolutionary newspaper at these meetings. 
” p. 
 123 Moskovskiye Vedomosti (Moscow Recorder )—a daily newspaper founded in 1756; beginning with the 1860s, it expressed the views of the most reactionary monarchist elements among the landlords and clergy; from 1905 onwards, it was one of the chief organs of the Black Hundreds. 
 It was closed down soon after the October Revolution of 1917. 
 p. 
 125 Pobedonostsev , K. 
 P. 
 —a reactionary statesman of tsarist Russia, Procurator-General of the Synod. 
 He was virtually head of the government and chief inspirer of unbridled feudalistic reaction during the rule of Alexander III and he continued to play a promi-nent part under Nicholas II as well. 
 p. 
 127 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76The “ four-point electoral system ”—designation of the democratic electoral system, which includes four demands: universal, equal, direct suffrage and secret ballot. 
 p. 
 128 Novoye Vremya (New Times )—a daily newspaper published in St. 
 Petersburg from 1868 to October 1917. 
 Moderately liberal at the outset, it became after 1876 the organ of reactionary circles of the nobility and the bureaucracy. 
 The paper was hostile not only to the revolutionary, but even to the liberal-bourgeois movement. 
 After 1905 it became an organ of the Black Hundreds. 
 Lenin called Novoye Vremya the acme of venality in the press. 
 p. 
 129 Anthony , Bishop of Volhynia —an extreme reactionary. 
 p. 
 129 The words “Enrich yourselves, gentlemen, and you will become electors” are ascribed to Guizot, head of the French Government during the years of the July monarchy (1830-48). 
 p. 
 129 This refers to the resolution of the Fifth (London) Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 “On the Attitude to Non-proletarian Parties “ (see The C. 
P. 
 S. 
U. 
 in Resolutions and Decisions of Congresses , Confer-ences and Plenary Meetings of the Central Committee , 7th Russian ed. 
, Part 1, 1953, pp. 
 164-65). 
 p. 
 132 Moskovsky Yezhenedelnik (Moscow Weekly )—a weekly magazine, organ of the bourgeois-landlord counter-revolutionary “Party of Peaceful Renovation”, published in Moscow from 1906 to 1910. 
 p. 
 136 The Vperyod group—an anti-Party group of otzovists, ultimatu-mists, god-builders and empirio-monists (adherents of the reaction-ary idealist philosophy of Mach and Avenarius), organised in December 1909 on the initiative of A. 
 Bogdanov and G. 
 Alexinsky. 
 Its press organ bore this name. 
 In 1912 the Vperyodists, together with the Menshevik liquidators, united against the Bolsheviks in a general anti-Party bloc (the August bloc) organised by Trotsky. 
 Since it did not have the support of the workers, the group virtually broke up as early as in 1913. 
 Its final and formal disinte-gration occurred in 1917 after the February Revolution. 
 p. 
 145 The Plenary Session of the Central Committee of the R. 
 S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 known as the “Unity” plenum, was held January 2-23 (January 15-February 5), 1910 in Paris. 
 The plenum was convened in spite of Lenin with the assistance of Trotsky’s hidden allies: Zinoviev Kamenev and Rykov. 
 Present at it, in addition to the Bolsheviks, were representatives of all factions and factional groupings, as well as representatives of national Social-Democratic organisa-tions. 
 The conciliators, hidden Trotskyists, countered Lenin’s plan of a rapprochement with the pro-Party Mensheviks (Plekhano-vites) for combating liquidationism by demanding the dissolution of all factions and the union of the Bolsheviks with the liquidators 77 78 79 80 81 82and Trotskyists. 
 The conciliators got the upper hand at the plenum and Lenin was among the minority. 
 Only on Lenin’s insistent demand did the plenum adopt a decision condemning liquidation-ism and otzovism. 
 In spite of Lenin, the plenum adopted decisions to close down the Bolshevik organ Proletary and to dissolve the Bolshevik Centre. 
 Lenin succeeded in securing the inclusion of a condition in the plenum’s decision that the factional centres of the Golosists and Vperyodists should be abolished simultaneously with the dissolution of the Bolshevik Centre. 
 The plenum adopted a decision to give financial support to Trotsky’s Viennese Pravda , which Trotsky’s agents, Zinoviev and Kamenev, were trying to have made the organ of the Central Committee. 
 Despite Lenin’s protest, Menshevik liquidators were elected to the central bodies. 
 For Lenin’s fight at the plenum against the liquidators, Trots-kyists and conciliators, see his “Notes of a Publicist” (pp. 
 195-259 of this volume). 
 p. 
 148 The article “ Golos (Voice ) of the Liquidators Against the Party” was written by Lenin as an editorial for No. 
 12 of the newspaper Sotsial-Demokrat . 
 The article was issued as a separate print in the second half of March and afterwards published in the newspaper Sotsial-Demokrat . 
 p. 
 156 Diskussionny Listok (Discussion Bulletin )—a supplement to Sotsial-Demokrat , the Central Organ of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 It was published in Paris by a decision of the January (1910) plenum of the Central Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 from March 6 (19), 1910 to April 29 (May 12), 1911; three numbers were issued. 
 p. 
 156 Grigory —G. 
 Y. 
 Zinoviev. 
 p. 
 158 Innokenty —I. 
 F. 
 Dubrovinsky. 
 p. 
 158 The Letter of the Central Committee Bureau Abroad of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 “To All Comrades Abroad” was published as a separate leaflet on March 3 (16), 1910. 
 The Central Committee Bureau Abroad (C. 
C. 
B. 
A. 
) was set up by the plenum of the Central Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 in August 1908 as the general representative body of the Party abroad, subordinate and accountable to the Russian Bureau of the Central Committee. 
 Shortly after the January plenum, a liquida-tionist majority developed among the members of the C. 
C. 
B. 
A. 
, and the C. 
C. 
B. 
A. 
 became a centre for mobilising anti-Party forces. 
 The liquidationist tactics of the C. 
C. 
B. 
A. 
 compelled the Leninist Bolsheviks to recall their representative from it in May 1911. 
 A little later the representatives of the Polish and Lettish Social-Democrats were recalled. 
 In January 1912 the C. 
C. 
B. 
A. 
 dissolved itself. 
 p. 
 161 The reference is to the “Open Letter” advocating liquidationist views, signed by the Mensheviks: Avgustovsky—S. 
 O. 
 Tse-derbaum-Yezhov; Anton—M. 
 S. 
 Makadzyub; Vadim—V. 
 K. 
 Ikov; 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90V. 
 Petrova—L. 
 N. 
 Radchenko; Georgy—B. 
 S. 
 Tseitlin-Batusky; Georg—V. 
 O. 
 Tsederbaum-Levitsky; Yevg. 
 Ha-az—V. 
 A. 
 Gutov-sky-Mayevsky; Kramolnikov—G. 
 I. 
 Prigorny; D. 
 Koltsov—B. 
 A. 
 Ginsburg; Nat. 
 Mikhailova—R. 
 S. 
 Galbershtadt; Roman— K. 
 M. 
 Yermolayev; Romul—M. 
 L. 
 Kheisin; Solomonov—S. 
 I. 
 Por-tugeis; Cherevanin—F. 
 A. 
 Lipkin; Yuri—P. 
 A. 
 Bronshtein; Y. 
P-y—Y. 
 A. 
 Piletsky. 
 p. 
 161 Mikhail —the Menshevik liquidator I. 
 A. 
 Isuv. 
 p. 
 162 “One of the C. 
C. 
 members operating in Russia ”—V. 
 P. 
 Nogin. 
 p. 
 162 Trepov , D. 
 F. 
 —Moscow Chief of Police in 1896-1905, Governor General of St. 
 Petersburg from January 1905 and later Ministerof the Interior. 
 He was the actual organiser of the suppression of the Revolution of 1905-07 and the organiser of mass shootings and executions of revolutionary workers and peasants. 
 p. 
 166 See the Introduction by F. 
 Engels to the English edition of his pamphlet Socialism : Utopian and Scientific . 
 p. 
 167 N. 
 G. 
 Chernyshevsky. 
 The Prologue , Part I. 
 p. 
 168 See the resolution “The Present Moment and the Tasks of the Party” adopted by the Fifth (All-Russian 1908) Conference of theR. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 ( The C. 
P. 
 S. 
U. 
 in Resolutions and Decisions of Con-gresses , Conferences and Plenary Meetings of the Central Committee , 7th Russian ed. 
, Part 1, 1953, pp. 
 195-97). 
 p. 
 174 The Council of State—one of the supreme state bodies in pre-revo-lutionary Russia. 
 It was set up in 1810 according to the plan ofM. 
 M. 
 Speransky as a legislative consultative institution, themembers of which were appointed and endorsed by the tsar. 
 By the law of February 20 (March 5), 1906, the Council of State was reorganised and given the right to confirm or reject Bills after theirdiscussion in the Duma. 
 However, the right to alter fundamentallaws and to promulgate a number of particularly important lawsremained a prerogative of the tsar. 
 From 1906 half of the members of the Council of State consisted of elected representatives of the nobility, clergy and big bourgeoi-sie, and half of the councillors were appointed by the tsar. 
 In conse-quence, the Council of State was an ultra-reactionary body, whichrejected even moderate Bills adopted by the Duma. 
 p. 
 178 Young Turks —the political organisation of the Turkish bourgeoi-sie, founded in 1894. 
 It sought to limit the absolute power of the Sultan and to convert the feudal empire into a bourgeois constitu-tional-monarchical state. 
 In 1908 it headed the revolution whichmade Turkey a constitutional monarchy and became the governing 91 92 93 94 95 97 98 99 100party. 
 It declared itself dissolved after Turkey’s military defeat in the First World War (in the autumn of 1918). 
 p. 
 179 The Second Paris Group for Assistance to the R. 
 S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 w a s formed in November 1908. 
 It was an offshoot of the general Paris group that included the Mensheviks and was a union of the Bol-sheviks alone, including members of the Bolshevik Centre, headedby Lenin. 
 The resolution of the Second Paris (Bolshevik) Groupfor Assistance to the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 was adopted at a meeting onMarch 17 (30), 1910, and was printed as a separate leaflet. 
 p. 
 187. 
 Nasha Zarya (Our Dawn )—a legal monthly journal of the Menshe-vik liquidators published in St. 
 Petersburg from 1910 to 1914. 
 It served as a rallying centre for the liquidators in Russia. 
 p. 
 192 A Necessary Supplement to G. 
 V. 
 Plekhanov ’s “Dnevnik ”—a Men-shevik liquidationist leaflet issued by the editors of Golos Sotsial-Demokrata in April 1910, directed against G. 
 V. 
 Plekhanov. 
 p. 
 192 See Marx and Engels, Selected Correspondence , Moscow, 1955, pp. 
 352-61. 
 p. 
 208 Vozrozhdeniye (Regeneration )—a Menshevik liquidationist magazine legally published in Moscow from December 1908 to July 1910; its place was taken by the magazines Zhizn (Life ) in 1910, and Dyelo Zhizni (Cause of Life ) in 1911. 
 p. 
 217 The Second Vperyodist —V. 
 L. 
 Shantser (Marat). 
 p. 
 225 T. 
—L. 
 Tyszka. 
 p. 
 228 I. 
—I. 
 F. 
 Dubrovinsky. 
 p. 
 228 Sozialistische Monatshefte (Socialist Monthly )—the principal organ of the opportunists in German Social-Democracy and one ofthe organs of international opportunism. 
 It was published inBerlin from 1897 to 1933. 
 The magazine criticised the resolution against revisionism, “On Party Tactics”, which was adopted at the (Congress of the GermanSocial-Democratic Party in Dresden (September 1903). 
 Subsequent-ly, this resolution was reproduced almost in its entirety at the International Socialist Congress in Amsterdam (August 1904)in the resolution on “International Rules of Party Tactics”. 
 p. 
 229 The author of “Letter from the Caucasus ”, K. 
 St. 
—J. 
 V. 
 Stalin. 
 His “Letter from the Caucasus” against the Tiflis liquidators was written as early as December 1909 for Sotsial-Demokrat . 
 The Mensheviks on the editorial board refused to print the letter in the Central Organ of the Party; it was published only on May 25(June 7), 1910 in Diskussionny Listok No. 
 2, together with a reply96 101 102 103 104 105 106to it by the leader of the Caucasian Mensheviks—An (N. 
 Jorda-nia). 
 p. 
 230 This refers to the resolution of the Fifth (London) Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, “On the Attitude to Non-proletarian Parties” (see The C. 
P. 
 S. 
U. 
 in Resolutions and Decisions of Congresses , Confer-ences and Plenary Meetings of the Central Committee , 7th Russian ed. 
, Part 1, 1953, pp. 
 164-65). 
 p. 
 234 Bezgolovtsi (Headless) ironically applied by Lenin to the Bez-zaglavtsi —a semi-Cadet group (S. 
 N. 
 Prokopovich, Y. 
 D. 
 Kuskova, V. 
 Y. 
 Bogucharsky, and others) which published a weekly journalBez Zaglaviya (Without a Title ) in St. 
 Petersburg (1906). 
 Avowed adherents of “critical socialism”—supporters of the revisionistwing of West-European Social-Democracy (Bernstein and oth-ers), the Bezzaglavtsi were opposed to the proletariat pursuing an independent class policy. 
 Lenin called them “pro-Menshevik Cadets” or “pro-Cadet Mensheviks”. 
 p. 
 234 Popular Socialists (Enesy )—a petty-bourgeois party formed in 1906 by splitting off from the Right wing of the Socialist-Revolu-tionaries. 
 It put forward moderate democratic demands within the framework of a constitutional monarchy. 
 The Enesy rejected the proposal for socialisation of the land contained in the Socialist-Revolutionary programme, and admitted alienation of the land-lords’ land on the basis of compensation. 
 Lenin called the Enesy“petty-bourgeois opportunists”, “social-Cadets”, and “Socialist-Revolutionary Mensheviks”. 
 The leaders of the Enesy were: A. 
 V. 
 Peshekhonov, V. 
 A. 
 Myakotin, N. 
 F. 
 Annensky, and others. 
 p. 
 234 Nashi Pomoi (Our Garbage ) was Lenin’s ironical name for the liqui-dationist journal Nasha Zarya (Our Dawn ). 
 The Congress of Literary Hangers-on —the Second All-Russian Congress of Writers, held in St. 
 Petersburg on April 21-28 (May 4-11), 1910, with the participation of representatives of Nasha Zarya and the M enshevik Sovremenny Mir (Contemporary World ). 
 At the very first demand of the police, the Congress without anyresistance cancelled discussion of a resolution on freedom of thepress. 
 In speaking of the Posse-ists, Lenin is referring to the collabo-ration of the liquidators in the liberal-bourgeois magazine Soyuz Potrebitelei (Consumers ’ Association ), which was led by V. 
 A. 
 Posse. 
 p. 
 236 I. 
—the Menshevik liquidator B. 
 I. 
 Gorev-Goldman. 
 p. 
 239 Azefism —from the name of Azef, a leader of the Socialist-Revolu-tionary Party, who turned out to be an agent provocateur of thetsarist secret police. 
 p. 
 246 107 108 109 110 111 112 113 114115 116 117This refers to F. 
 Engels’s article “Der 4. 
 Mai in London” ( Arbeiter-Zeitung , Wien, Nr. 
 21, vom 23. 
5. 
1890); see also the letters of En-gels to Sorge of November 29, 1886, and May 11, 1889 (Marx andEngels, Selected Correspondence , Moscow, 1955, pp. 
 469-73). 
 p. 
 256 Zihna ( Struggle )—a newspaper, the Central Organ of the Lettish Social-Democrats, founded in March 1904. 
 It was issued at consid-erable intervals in Riga, Brussels and Petrograd; from 1919 it wasthe organ of the Communist Party of Latvia. 
 p. 
 260 This refers to the works of V. 
 Y. 
 Varzar, Statistics of Strikes at Factories During 1905 and Statistics of Strikes at Factories During the Three Years 1906-08 , published in St. 
 Petersburg by the Min-istry of Trade and Industry, 1908 and 1910. 
 p. 
 260 The International Socialist Congress in Copenhagen was held from August 28 to September 3 (New Style), 1910. 
 The R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
was represented at the Congress by Lenin, Plekhanov, Luna-charsky, and others. 
 Several commissions were set up by theCongress for preliminary discussion and drafting of resolutions onparticular questions. 
 Lenin worked in the Co-operative Commis-sion. 
 His draft resolution on the co-operatives was made the basis of the draft resolution moved in the Co-operative Commission bythe R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 delegation. 
 On the work of the Co-operative Com-mission and the text of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 delegation’s draft resolu-tion on the co-operatives see Lenin’s article “The Question ofCo-operative Societies at the International Socialist Congress in Copenhagen” (see pp. 
 275-83 of this volume). 
 p. 
 265 Sazhin —the Vperyodist I. 
 A. 
 Sanzhur. 
 p. 
 268 “Tkach I-n ”—the Social-Democrat I. 
 V. 
 Sysoyev, an otzovist-ultimatumist. 
 p. 
 269 “Rabochy Ar ”—the Vperyodist F. 
 I. 
 Kalinin. 
 p. 
 270 Voinov —a pseudonym of A. 
 V. 
 Lunacharsky. 
 p. 
 272 Domov —M. 
 N. 
 Pokrovsky. 
 p. 
 273 Lenin quotes A. 
 Bebel’s words in a report on “Attacks on the Funda-mental Views and Tactics of the Party” at the German Social-Democratic Congress in Hanover (October 9-14 [New Style], 1899). 
 p. 
 280 The International Congress in Stuttgart —the Seventh Interna-tional Socialist Congress, held August 18-24 (New Style), 1907. 
Lenin took part in the Congress as a delegate of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
(see present edition, Vol. 
 13, pp. 
 75-93). 
 p. 
 281 118 119 120 121 122 123 124 125 126 127The protest at the publication in Vorwärts of Trotsky’s article slandering the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 was written during the session of the International Socialist Congress in Copenhagen. 
 p. 
 285 Tovarishch (The Comrade )—a bourgeois daily newspaper published in St. 
 Petersburg from 1906 until 1908 with the close participation of S. 
 N. 
 Prokopovich and Y. 
 D. 
 Kuskova. 
 Though formally not the organ of any particular party, it was in fact the mouthpiece of the Left Constitutional-Democrats. 
 It also published contribu-tions from Mensheviks. 
 p. 
 285 Le Peuple (People )—a daily newspaper, the Central Organ of the Belgian (reformist) Labour Party, published from 1884 in Brussels. 
 p. 
 285 Rabochaya Gazeta (Workers ’ Gazette )—a popular newspaper, the organ of the Bolsheviks, published in Paris from October 30 (No-vember 12), 1910 to July 30 (August 12), 1912; nine issues appeared. 
 Pro-Party Mensheviks also contributed to the newspaper. 
 Its founder and leader was Lenin, who published more than 10 articles in it. 
 The Prague Conference of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 (January 1912) noted that Rabochaya Gazeta resolutely and consistently defended the Party and the Party principle and made it the official organ of the Central Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 (Bolsheviks). 
 p. 
 289 This refers to the resolution written by Lenin and adopted by the conference of the enlarged editorial board of Proletary in June 1909: “Otzovism and Ultimatumism” (see present edition, Vol. 
 15, pp. 
 442-46). 
 p. 
 294 Lenin quotes F. 
 Engels’s article “Socialism in Germany” (Marx/ Engels/Lenin, Zur Deutschen Geschichte , Band II, 2. 
 Halbband, Berlin, 1954, S. 
 1140-1141). 
 p. 
 311 The Polish Kolo —a group of Polish deputies in the Duma, united by the demand for Polish autonomy. 
 In the First and Second Du-mas, the leading part in this group was played by the Narodovtsi— Polish Black Hundreds. 
 On all the main questions of Duma tactics the Polish Kolo supported the Octobrists and the Rights. 
 p. 
 314 Russkiye Vedomosti (Russian Recorder )—a daily newspaper pub-lished in Moscow from 1863 onwards by a group of Moscow Univer-sity liberal professors and Zemstvo leaders. 
 It voiced the interests of the liberal landlords and bourgeoisie. 
 In 1905 it became the or-gan of the Right wing of the Constitutional-Democrats. 
 After the October Revolution it was closed down. 
 p. 
 320 Golos Moskvy (Voice of Moscow )—a daily newspaper, the organ of the Octobrists, the counter-revolutionary party of the big industrial bourgeoisie and big landlords. 
 It was published in Moscow from December 1906 to June 1915. 
 p. 
 321 “M Coupon ”—a metaphorical name of capital or capitalists in the literature of the eighties and nineties of the last century. 
 It 128 129 130 131was first used by Gleb Uspensky in his sketches “Grievous Sins” (Russkaya Mysl , 1888, Book XII). 
 p. 
 325 The school in Bologna (Italy)—the second anti-Party school of the Vperyod group (end of 1910 to beginning of 1911). 
 It was a continuation of the Capri school—the factional centre of the otzo-vists and ultimatumists. 
 p. 
 328 The article “ L. 
 N. 
 Tolstoy and the Modern Labour Movement ” was published in the newspaper Nash Put . 
 Nash Put (Our Path )—a semi-legal Bolshevik newspaper or-ganised with the participation of the Central Trade Union Bureau as a continuation of Vestnik Truda (Labour Herald ) (1909); it was published in Moscow from May 30 (June 12) 1910 to January 9 (22), 1911 under the editorship of I. 
 I. 
 Skvortsov-Stepanov; 8 issues appeared. 
 The newspaper ceased to be issued after the arrest of the main group of its contributors, who were betrayed by the provocators Malinovsky and Tanin. 
 p. 
 330 This refers to the telegram sent to Astapovo by the Social-Demo-cratic deputies of the Third Duma to V. 
 G. 
 Chertkov, a close friend and disciple of L. 
 N. 
 Tolstoy: “The Social-Democratic group in the Duma, expressing the feelings of the Russian and the whole international proletariat, deeply mourns the loss of the brilliant artist, the irreconcilable and unconquered fighter against official clericalism, the enemy of tyranny and enslavement, who loudly raised his voice against the death penalty, the friend of the perse-cuted. 
” p. 
 330 The article “ Differences in the European Labour Movement ” was published in No. 
 1 of the newspaper Zvezda (The Star), in the section entitled “Letters from Abroad”. 
 Zvezda —a Bolshevik legal newspaper, the predecessor of Prav-da; it was issued in St. 
 Petersburg from December 16 (29), 1910 to April 22 (May 5), 1912 (at first as a weekly, from January 1912 twice a week, and from March three times a week). 
 On Febru-ary 26 (March 10), 1912, there appeared simultaneously with Zvezda the first issue of Nevskaya Zvezda , which became the continuation of Zvezda after the latter had been closed down. 
 The last, 27th, issue of Nevskaya Zvezda was published on October 5 (18), 1912. 
 Contributors to Zvezda were: N. 
 N. 
 Baturin, K. 
 S. 
 Yeremeyev, V. 
 M. 
 Molotov (Skryabin), M. 
 S. 
 Olminskv, N. 
 G. 
 Poletayev, J. 
 V. 
 Stalin, and also A. 
 M. 
 Gorky. 
 Until the autumn of 1911, pro-Party Mensheviks (Plekhanovites) participated in Zvezda . 
 The ideological leadership of the newspaper was carried out (from abroad) by Lenin, who published in it and in Nevskaya Zvezda about 50 articles. 
 The legal newspaper Zvezda directed by Lenin was a militant Bolshevik organ which upheld the programme of the illegal Party. 
 Zvezda established permanent close ties with the workers and devoted an extensive section to workers’ correspondence. 
 The 132 133 134 135 136circulation of individual issues reached 50,000-60,000. 
 The newspa-per suffered continual persecution by the government; out of 96issues of Zvezda and Nevskaya Zvezda , 39 were confiscated and 10 were subjected to fines. 
 Zvezda prepared the way for the publica-tion of the Bolshevik daily newspaper Pravda and was closed down on the day that Pravda appeared. 
 p. 
 347 The “ Young ” faction—a petty-bourgeois semi-anarchist group formed in the German Social-Democratic Party in 1890 and com-posed chiefly of undergraduate students and young writers (hencethe name). 
 It put forward a platform that rejected any Social-Democratic participation in parliament. 
 They were expelled from the Party by the Erfurt Congress in October 1891. 
 p. 
 351 Johann Most —German Social-Democrat. 
 In 1880, at the Baden Congress, he was expelled from the Party on account of his disor-ganising behaviour. 
 In the eighties he became an adherent ofanarchism (see Marx and Engels, Selected Correspondence , Moscow, 1955, pp. 
 375-76). 
 p. 
 351 This refers to the plan put forward by the Constitutional-Democrat-ic Party (Cadets) in 1906 for transferring to the peasants part of the landlords’ land for which compensation was to be paid to the landlords. 
 The “fair valuation” of which the Cadets spoke meantthat the peasants would have to pay for the land much more thanit was actually worth. 
 p. 
 360 This refers to the declaration of the Bolsheviks in the Central Committee Bureau Abroad on November 22 (December 5), 1910,demanding the immediate convocation of the Central Committee to decide the question of the return of the funds of the Bolshe-vik faction. 
 The declaration was signed by Lenin and other partic-ipants of the January plenary session of the Central Committeein 1910. 
 p. 
 365 The article “ Heroes of ‘Reservation ’” was published in the magazine Mysl (Thought ). 
 Mysl —a Bolshevik legal monthly of a philosophical and socio-economic nature published in Moscow from December 1910. 
 The magazine was founded by Lenin as a counter to the liquidationistjournals and for the struggle against them. 
 He edited the magazinefrom abroad. 
 Lenin wrote six articles for the first four issues ofMysl , including the large work “Strike Statistics in Russia”. 
 V. 
 V. 
 Vorovsky, M. 
 S. 
 Olminsky and I. 
 I. 
 Skvortsov-Stepanov were close collaborators in the magazine, to which pro-Party Men-sheviks (G. 
 V. 
 Plekhanov and others) also contributed. 
 The mag-azine was published until April 1911, five issues appeared. 
 Thelast, fifth, issue was confiscated. 
 p. 
 368 137 138 139 140 141 142 143The article “ The Historical Meaning of the Inner-Party Struggle in Russia ” was directed against the slanderous articles of Trotsky and Martov published in the magazine Neue Zeit , the organ of the German Social-Democrats. 
 Lenin intended to answer Trotsky and Martov in the same magazine, but the editors of Neue Zeit , Kautsky and Wurm, did not publish Lenin’s article. 
 It was not publisheduntil April 29 (May 12), 1911 in Diskussionny Listok No. 
 3. 
 p. 
 374 Marx/Engels/Lenin, Zur Deutschen Geschichte , Baud II, 1. 
 Halb-band, Berlin, 1954, S. 
 254. 
 p. 
 376 Lenin is referring to the “Tactical Resolution on the Agrarian Question” adopted by the Fourth (Unity) Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
(See The C. 
P. 
 S. 
U. 
 in Resolutions and Decisions of Congresses , Conferences and Plenary Meetings of the Central Committee , 7th Russian ed. 
, Part 1, 1953, pp. 
 124-25. 
) p. 
 377 This refers to Karl Marx’s article “The Berlin Counter-revolution” published on September 13, 1848, in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung . 
 This article was included in the third volume of Aus dem litera-rischen Nachlass von Karl Marx , Friedrich Engels und Ferdinand Lassalle (The Literary Legacy of Karl Marx , Frederick Engels and Ferdinand Lassalle ), which was prepared by F. 
 Mehring and published in Stuttgart, 1902, pp. 
 192-96. 
 In referring to “Meh-ring’s deserved ridicule” Lenin has in mind Mehring’s introduc-tion to this third volume, pp. 
 53-54. 
 p. 
 377 This refers to V. 
 Y. 
 Varzar’s book Statistics of Strikes at Factories During the Three Years 1906-08 , St. 
 Petersburg, 1910. 
 p. 
 381 Marx und Engels: Revolution und Konterrevolution in Deutschland . 
 See also Marx’s letter to Ludwig Kugelmann of April 17, 1871(Marx and Engels, Selected Correspondence , Moscow, 1955, pp. 
 319-20). 
 p. 
 383 In his article, “Strike Statistics in Russian”, Lenin used the official data collected by V. 
 Y. 
 Varzar. 
 Lenin set about analysing thestatistical data towards the end of September 1910 (see his roughnotebook on “Strike Statistics in Russia”, Lenin Miscellany XXV , pp. 
 129-55). 
 On the basis of the collected data, Lenin intended to write an outline of the history of the Russian revolution. 
 He expected the outline to form a book of about 300 pages, which hewanted to have translated afterwards into German. 
 The article“Strike Statistics in Russia” was, in Lenin’s words, “a first ap-144 145 146 147proach to the subject”, “the preliminary results of an attempt at making a more detailed analysis”. 
 Lenin reserved publication ofa full account of the results “for another occasion”, but he did notmanage to write a work of the size he intended. 
 p. 
 393 A. 
 V. 
 Pogozhev, Report on the Numbers and Composition of Work-ers in Russia. 
 Labour Statistics Data , St. 
 Petersburg, published by the Imperial Academy of Sciences, 1906. 
 p. 
 401 Lenin cites this same table in his article “The Historical Meaning of the Inner-Party Struggle in Russia” (see p. 
 381 of this volume)but there he includes mixed strikes among the political strikes, aswas done in the government statistics of 1905. 
 However, in his ar-ticle “Strike Statistics in Russia” Lenin corrects this inaccuracy of the official statistics, including mixed strikes among the economic strikes. 
 This explains the difference in the number of strikersin economic and political strikes for each quarter of 1905 shown inthe two tables, although their total number is the same in both. 
 p. 
 409 The article “ The Capitalist System of Modern Agriculture ” is the first part of a large work on capitalist agriculture in Germany whichLenin intended to write as a second instalment of his well-knownwork, New Data on the Laws of the Development of Capitalism in Agriculture. 
 Part I. 
 Capitalism and Agriculture in the United States of America . 
 The article “The Capitalist System of Modern Agriculture” is included for the first time in Lenin’s Collected Works . 
 It was published in 1932 in the magazine Bolshevik No. 
 9 and Lenin Miscellany XIX after the discovery of part of the manuscript. 
 The succeeding parts of the manuscript are still missing: the end ofChapter III—”Peasant Farms under Capitalism”, the beginning and end of Chapter IV—”Labour of Women and Children in Agri-culture”, Chapters V and VI—”Squandering of Labour in Small-Scale Production” and “The Capitalist Character of the Use ofMachinery in Modern Agriculture”. 
 The end of the article with the signature “ V. 
 Ilyin ”, as well as the end of Chapter I (“A General Picture of the Economic System of Modern Agriculture”) and the beginning of Chapter II (“The Real Nature of the Majority of Modern Agricultural ‘Farms’[Proletarian “Farms”]”), which were missing when the article waspublished in 1932, have now been found; hence Chapters I, IIand VII are now published in full for the first time. 
 p. 
 423 Kievskaya Mysl (Kiev Thought )—a daily bourgeois-democratic newspaper published in Kiev from 1906 to 1918. 
 Mensheviks wereamong its most active contributors. 
 Lenin is referring to the article by the liquidator N. 
 Valenti-nov, “Concerning the Recent German Census”, published in Kiev-skaya Mysl No. 
 308. 
 p. 
 427 Ekonomist Rossii (Russian Economist )—a weekly bourgeois journal devoted to economic and financial questions in Russia and abroad;it was published in St. 
 Petersburg from 1909 to 1912. 
 p. 
 428 Karl Marx, Capital , Vol. 
 III, Moscow, 1959, pp. 
 600-863. 
 p. 
 428 Karl Marx, Capital , Vol. 
 I, Moscow, 1959, pp. 
 640-48. 
 p. 
 435 Franz Bensing, Der Einfluss der landwirtschaftlichen Maschinen auf VoIks-und Privatwirtschaft (The Effect of Agricultural Machin-ery on the National Economy and Private Undertakings ), Breslau, 1897. 
 p. 
 442148 149 150 151 THE LIFE AND WORK OF V. 
 I. 
 LENIN Outstanding Dates (September 1909-December 1910 ) The first half of September September 5 (18 September, prior to 1 (14) September 11 (24) September 14 (27) September 19 (October 2) October, prior to 5 (18) October 3 (16) October 15 (28)1909 Lenin is on holiday with his family—N. 
 K. 
 Krupskaya, her mother and M. 
 I. 
 Ulyanova in Bonbon (France, department of Seine et Marne). 
 Lenin writes the article “The Faction of Sup-porters of Otzovism and God-building”. 
 Lenin’s articles “The Liquidators Exposed”, “The Election in St. 
 Petersburg” and the note of the editorial board “On the Open Letter of the Exec-utive Committee of the Moscow Regional Com-mittee” are published in the newspaper Proletary No. 
 47-48. 
 Lenin returns from Bonbon to Paris. 
 Lenin’s article “The Faction of Supporters of Otzovism and God-building” is published in the Supplement to No. 
 47-48 of Proletary . 
 Lenin’s article “Once More on Partyism and Non-partyism” is published in No. 
 9 of the newspaper Novy Dyen . 
 Lenin reads a paper in Paris on the (September) by-election in St. 
 Petersburg to the Third Duma. 
 In his letter to V. 
 A. 
 Karpinsky Lenin dwells on the transfer of the Party library from Geneva to Paris. 
 Lenin’s article “A Word to the Bolsheviks of St. 
 Petersburg” is published in No. 
 49 of Proletary . 
 Lenin reads a paper in Liége to members of Social-Democratic groups “The State of Affairs in the Party”. 
 October 16 (29) October 21-22 (November 3-4) October 23 (November 5) October 24 (November 6) October 26 (November 7) October 26 (November 8) Later than Octo-ber 26 (Novem-ber 8) October 31 (November 13) October November 1 (14)Lenin delivers a public lecture in Liége “The Ideology of the Counter-Revolutionary Bourgeoi-sie”. 
 Lenin participates in a meeting of the Sotsial-Demokrat editorial board. 
 When the editorial board refuses to publish his article “On Methods of Consolidating Our Party and Its Unity” as a leader, he moves a draft res-olution on the strengthening of the Party and its unity. 
 Lenin leaves Paris for Brussels to attend the Eleventh Session of the International Socialist Bureau. 
 Lenin informs the editorial board of Sotsial-Demokrat that he takes back his statement about resigning from the editorial board. 
 Lenin takes part in the International Conference of Socialist Journalists in Brussels. 
 Lenin speaks at a meeting of the Eleventh Session of the International Socialist Bureau in Brussels on the split in the Dutch Social-Democratic Labour Party. 
 Lenin takes part in a meeting of the Inter-parlia-mentary Commission of the International Socialist Bureau. 
 Lenin returns to Paris from Brussels. 
 Lenin’s article “The Tsar Against the Finnish People” is published as a leading article in No. 
 9 of Sotsial-Demokrat . 
 In a letter to a group of pupils of the Capri school Lenin informs them that he had received two letters “about the incipient split in the school” and welcomes the “clear demarcation” between some of the pupils and the Bogdanovites; he gives those who had broken away from the otzovists pertinent advice and instructions. 
 Lenin together with I. 
 F. 
 Dubrovinsky and other members of the Central Committee writes a state-November 3 (16) November 13 (26) November 21 (December 4) November 28 (December 11) End of Novem-ber Autumn December 3 (16) December 13 (26) Second half of Decemberto convene a plenary session of the C. 
C. 
 of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 in the near future. 
 Lenin talks with N. 
 Y. 
 Vilonov who had come to Paris after the split in the Capri school; in con-nection with this conversation he writes a letter to A. 
 M. 
 Gorky. 
 Lenin delivers a public lecture in Paris “The Ideology of the Counter-Revolutionary Liberalism (The Success of Vekhi and Its Social Significance)”. 
 Lenin makes a report on the Eleventh Session of the International Socialist Bureau at an ordinary meeting of the Second Paris Group for Assistance to the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
; he is elected a member of the committee of the group. 
 Lenin’s articles: “Some Sources of the Present Ideological Discord”, “Methods of the Liquidators and Party Tasks of the Bolsheviks”, “ Golos Sotsial-Demokrata and Cherevanin”, and “The Bourgeois Press Fable About the Expulsion of Gorky”, are published in No. 
 50 of the newspaper Proletary . 
 Lenin’s article “A Shameful Fiasco” is published as a separate reprint from No. 
 50 of Proletary . 
 Lenin delivers lectures in Paris to five comrades expelled from the Capri school on the subjects: “The Present Moment and Our Tasks” and “Stoly-pin’s Agrarian Policy”. 
 Lenin writes the article “Ideological Decay and Disunity Among Russian Social-Democrats”. 
 Lenin writes “Explanatory Note on the Draft of the Main Grounds of the Bill on the Eight-hour Working Day” for the Social-Democratic group of the Third Duma. 
 Lenin writes a letter in reply to I. 
 I. 
 Skvortsov-Stepanov on the question of the “Prussian” or “American” paths of capitalist agrarian develop-ment in Russia. 
 Lenin’s article “Concerning Vekhi ” is published in No. 
 15 of Novy Dyen . 
 Lenin delivers lectures “The Present Moment” and “Stolypin’s Agrarian Policy” to a second group of students of the Capri school who had arrived December 2 (January 6,1910) End of Decem-ber (first half ofJanuary 1910) January 2-23 (January 15-February 5) End of January (beginning ofFebruary) February 13 (26) March 6 (19) March 7 (20) March 14 (27)Lenin’s articles “The Last Word of Russian Lib-eralism” and “The Eleventh Session of the Inter-national Socialist Bureau” are published in No. 
10 of Sotsial-Demokrat . 
 Lenin writes a note on “The Vperyod Group”. 
 Lenin works in the Sorbonne library (Paris) on the literature relating to questions of philosophyand natural science. 
 1910 Lenin takes part in the work of the plenum of the C. 
C. 
 of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 in Paris; he moves a draft resolution “The State of Affairs in the Party”condemning liquidationism and otzovism. 
 Leninis elected by the plenum on to the editorial boardof the Central Organ, Sotsial-Demokrat , and as a representative of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 in the Interna-tional Socialist Bureau. 
 Lenin speaks at a meeting of the editorial board of the Central Organ against the publication in Sotsial-Demokrat of Y. 
 O. 
 Martov’s liquidationist article “On the Right Path”. 
 Lenin’s article “Towards Unity” containing an appraisal of the decisions of the January plenarysession of the C. 
C. 
 of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 is publishedin No. 
 11 of Sotsial-Demokrat . 
 The first part of Lenin’s work “Notes of a Publi-cist, I. 
 The ‘Platform’ of the Adherents and De-fenders of Otzovism”, is published in No. 
 1 ofDiskussionny Listok. 
 At a meeting in Paris of the Second (Bolshevik) Group for Assistance to the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, during a discussion of a report on the plenary session ofthe Central Committee, Lenin speaks in favour ofthe uniting with the pro-Party Mensheviks (Ple-khanovites). 
 Lenin writes a letter to N. 
 Y. 
 Vilonov in Davos (Switzerland) on union of the Bolsheviks with thepro-Party Mensheviks (Plekhanovites) for combat-ing the liquidators. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR March 16 (29) March 23 (April 5) Earlier than March 27(April 9) March 28 (April 10) March 29 (April 11) Earlier than April 26(May 9) April 26 (May 9) May 25 (June 7) June 15 (28) June 18-30 (July 1-13)In a letter to G. 
 V. 
 Plekhanov Lenin proposes that he should meet him for talks on the stateof affairs in the Party. 
 Lenin sends a statement to the C. 
C. 
 Bureau Abroad of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 on the conflicts in the editorialboard of the Central Organ. 
 Lenin’s articles “ Golos (Voice ) of the Liquidators Against the Party” (Reply to Golos Sotsial-Demokrata ) and “What to Fight For?” are published in No. 
 12 of Sotsial-Demokrat. 
 At a closed meeting of the Second (Bolshevik) Group for Assistance to the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 in Paris,Lenin moves a resolution for the expulsion fromthe Party of three Mensheviks who had refused to join the Russian collegium of the C. 
C. 
 Lenin’s resolution is accepted. 
 Lenin signs a letter to the Chief Board of the Polish Social-Democratic Party; this letter con-demns the wavering displayed by representatives of that party in the struggle against the liquidators in the C. 
C. 
 Bureau Abroad. 
 Lenin writes a letter to A. 
 M. 
 Gorky on Party unity with an appraisal of the work of the Januaryplenum of the C. 
C. 
 of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Lenin writes a statement to the C. 
C. 
 of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 on the situation in the editorial boardof the Central Organ in connection with the behav-iour of the liquidationist section of the boardand insists that the liquidators should be replaced by Menshevik members of the Party. 
 Lenin’s articles “The Campaign Against Finland”, “They Are Nervous About the Army”, “PartyUnity Abroad”, and “One of the Obstacles toParty Unity” are published in No. 
 13 of Sotsial-Demokrat . 
 The second part of Lenin’s work “Notes of a Publicist, II. 
 The ‘Unity Crisis’ in our Party”is published in No. 
 2 of Diskussionny Listok . 
 Lenin leaves Paris for Capri to visit Maxim Gorky. 
 Lenin stays with M. 
 Gorky on Capri. 
 July 1 (14) July 9 or 10-August 10 (July 22 or 23-August 23) July Before August 13 (26) August 13 (26) August 15-21 (August 28-September 3) Between August 15 and 21(August 28 and September 3) August 16 (29) August 16-19 (August 29-September 1) August 20 (September 2)Lenin leaves Capri. 
 Lenin is on holiday with N. 
 K. 
 Krupskaya and her mother in the little seaside town of Pornic (France) on the Brittany coast. 
 Lenin’s article “The Jubilee Number of Zihna ” is published in No. 
 100 of the newspaper Zihna (Strug-gle), the organ of the Social-Democrats of Latvia. 
 Lenin meets G. 
 V. 
 Plekhanov in Paris and converses with him. 
 Lenin arrives in Copenhagen for the Eighth Con-gress of the Second International and takes part in a meeting of the International Socialist Bureau. 
 Lenin takes part in the work of the Copenhagen Congress of the Second International. 
 Lenin convenes a meeting of the Lefts in the Second International in order to organise andunite the revolutionary elements in the interna-tional working-class movement. 
 Lenin has a meeting with G. 
 V. 
 Plekhanov, N. 
 G. 
 Poletayev and I. 
 P. 
 Pokrovsky on the ques-tion of the foundation of Rabochaya Gazeta a n d Zvezda. 
 Lenin takes part in a meeting of representatives of national sections of the Copenhagen Congress, the agenda of which contains the items: 1) Checking of credentials, 2) Appointment of commissions. 
 Lenin takes part in the work of the co-operative commission of the Congress, he drafts a resolutionon co-operative societies and puts forward amend-ments to the resolution of the co-operative commis-sion of the Congress. 
 Lenin informs the International Socialist Bureau that, by a decision of the January plenum of theC. 
C. 
 of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, 1910, G. 
 V. 
 Plekhanov as well as V. 
 I. 
 Lenin represents the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 in the International Socialist Bureau. 
 Lenin jointly with G. 
 V. 
 Plekhanov and A. 
 Var-August 30 (September 12) August 30-September 12 (September 12-26) September 2 (15) September 13 or 14 (26 or 27) September 16 (28) September 21 (October 4) September 24 (October 7) September 25 (October 8)sky sends a letter to the Executive Committee of the German Social-Democratic Party protestingagainst the publication in Vorwärts of a slanderous article by Trotsky. 
 Lenin’s article “The Vperyod Faction” is pub-lished in No. 
 15-16 of Sotsial-Demokrat . 
 Lenin writes the article “The Otzovist-Ultimatumist Strike-breakers” (this article has not been found). 
 Lenin is in Stockholm where he had come to meet his mother, M. 
 A. 
 Ulyanova, and his sister,M. 
 I. 
 Ulyanova; he delivers lectures at meetingsof Social-Democratic groups “The InternationalSocialist Congress in Copenhagen” and “The Stateof Affairs in the Party ”. 
 Lenin writes out a subscription card for the loan of books on Danish agriculture from a library inCopenhagen. 
 Lenin in Copenhagen reads a paper on the Inter-national Socialist Congress. 
 Lenin returns to Paris. 
In a letter to N. 
 A. 
 Semashko, the representative of the Bolsheviks in the C. 
C. 
 Bureau Abroad of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, Lenin demands the urgent summoning of a meeting of the Bolsheviks todecide the question of the publication of Rabochaya Gazeta. 
 Lenin writes a letter to Julian Marchlewski on the latter’s proposed article in Neue Zeit against Y. 
 O. 
 Martov and gives a number of directivesfor the article. 
 Lenin’s articles “The Question of Co-operative Societies at the International Socialist Congress in Copenhagen” and “How Certain Social-Demo-crats Inform the International About the State ofAffairs in the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
” are published in No. 
 17of Sotsial-Demokrat . 
 Lenin works on the article “The Historical Meaning of the Inner-Party Struggle in Russia”, which he proposes to publish in Neue Zeit . 
 The article was published in No. 
 3 of Diskussionny Listok , April 29 (May 12), 1911. 
 November End of Septem-ber-November Prior to October 15 (28) Prior to October 30 (November 12) October 30 (November 12) November 1 (14) November 16 (29) November 20 (December 3) November 22 (December 5)Lenin begins working on strike statistics in Russia 1905-08. 
 Lenin conducts negotiations with V. 
 V. 
 Vorovsky and I. 
 I. 
 Skvortsov-Stepanov on organising the publication in Moscow of the legal Bolshevik magazine Mysl . 
 Lenin studies strike statistics in Russia for the peri-od 1905-08. 
 He works on the articles “The Histor-ical Meaning of the Inner-Party Struggle in Russia” (published in Diskussionny Listok No. 
 3, 1911) and “Strike Statistics in Russia” (published in the first and second issues of the journal Mysl in December 1910 -January 1911). 
 Lenin speaks at a meeting of Bolsheviks in Paris on the question of founding, together with the Plekhanovites, Rabochaya Gazeta . 
 Lenin writes the article “Announcement on the Publication of Rabochaya Gazeta ”. 
 Lenin’s article “The Lessons of the Revolution” is published as a leading article in No. 
 1 of Rabo-chaya Gazeta . 
 Lenin sends No. 
 1 of Rabochaya Gazeta to A. 
 M. 
 Gorky in Capri and informs him of the prepara-tions for publishing jointly with Plekhanov the legal magazine Mysl . 
 Lenin’s articles “Two Worlds”, “The Demonstra-tion on the Death of Muromtsev”, “Is This the Turn of the Tide?” and “L. 
 N. 
 Tolstoy” are pub-lished in No. 
 18 of Sotsial-Demokrat . 
 Lenin in a letter “To the Comrades Studying at the School in Bologna” refuses to read lectures in Bologna and invites the students to come to courses in Paris. 
 In a letter to the C. 
C. 
 R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Bureau Abroad Lenin suggests the immediate remittance of 1,000 rubles for the publication of the newspaper Zvezda . 
 Lenin and other Bolsheviks submit a statement to the C. 
C. 
 Bureau Abroad demanding the imme-diate convocation of a plenary meeting of the Central Committee. 
 Later than November 22 (December 5) November 28 (December 11) December 16 (29) December 18 (3I) DecemberOn behalf of Rabochaya Gazeta Lenin writes “An Open Letter to All Pro-Party Social-Democrats” describing the inner-Party situation. 
 Lenin’s article “L. 
 N. 
 Tolstoy and the Modern Labour Movement” is published in No. 
 7 of the newspaper Nash Put . 
 Lenin’s article “Differences in the European Labour Movement” is published in No. 
 1 of the newspaper Zvezda . 
 Lenin’s articles “Tolstoy and the Proletarian Struggle”, “The Beginning of Demonstrations”, “What Is Happening in the Countryside?” and “Ivan Vasilyevich Babushkin (An Obituary)” are published in No. 
 2 of Rabochaya Gazeta . 
 No. 
 1 of the magazine Mysl is issued in Moscow containing Lenin’s articles “Heroes of ‘Reserva-tion’” and “Strike Statistics in Russia” (Chapter 1). 
 Lenin writes the article “The Capitalist System of Modern Agriculture”. 
 B. 
 n. 
 leHnH coЧnHeHnr TOM 16 На английскот языке Printed in the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics