L E N I N COLLECTED WORKS /FL0071/FL0072 A IN ACCORDANCE WITH A DECISION OF THE NINTH CONGRESS OF THE R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
) AND THE SECOND CONGRESS OF SOVIETS OF THE U. 
S. 
S. 
R. 
 B. 
 n. 
 l d H n H С О Ч И Н E Н И Я И з д a н u е ч е m в е p m o e ГОСУДАРСТВ ЕНН ОЕ ИЗ ДАТ ЕЛЬ СТВО ПОЛИТИЧЕ СКОЙ ЛИ ТЕРАТУ РЫ M О С К В А V. 
 I. 
 L E N I N cOLLEcTED WORKS VOLUME /FL0071/FL0072 !ugust 191f –December 191g PROGRESS PUBLISHERS MOSCOW TRANSLATED THE RUSSIAN EDITED BY JULIUS KATZER First printing 1964 Second printing 1974 l 10102–0 37 ÇÜà èÇõÄÉå 014(01)–74 From Marx to Mao M L © Digital Reprints 2011 www. 
marx 2mao. 
com 13 15 15 15 20 25 3542 43 45 50 50 53 5557 59 59 61 63 6466 67 6871 74 80 92CONTENTS Preface ........................ THE TASKS OF REVOLUTIONARY SOCIAL-DEMOCRACY IN THE EUROPEAN WAR ................... 
. 
 The Russian Social-Democrats on the European War .... 
 Resolution of a Group of Social-Democrats ....... 
. 
 THE EUROPEAN WAR AND INTERNATIONAL SOCIALISM .... 
 THE WAR AND RUSSIAN SOCIAL-DEMOCRACY ....... 
. 
 THE POSITION AND TASKS OF THE SOCIALIST INTERNATIONAL LETTER TO VORWÄRTS AND WIENER ARBEITER-ZEITUNG ... KARL ( A Brief Biographical Sketch with an Exposition of Marxism )...................... 
. 
 Preface ...................... 
. 
 The Marxist Doctrine ................ 
. 
 Philosophical Materialism ............. 
. 
 Dialectics ..................... The Materialist Conception of History ......... The Class Struggle ................ 
. 
 Marx’s Economic Doctrine ............... Value ...................... 
. 
 Surplus Value ................... 
 Accumulation of Capital ............... Historical Tendency of Capitalist Accumulation .... 
. 
 Average Rate of Profit ............... Theory of Ground Rent ............... Evolution of Capitalism in Agriculture ......... Socialism ..................... Tactics of the Class Struggle of the Proletariat .... 
. 
 Bibliography ..................... A GERMAN VOICE ON THE WAR ............. 
. 
Page DEAD CHAUVINISM AND LIVING SOCIALISM ( How the Interna-tional Can Be Restored )................ 
 ON THE NATIONAL PRIDE OF THE GREAT RUSSIANS ...... WHAT NEXT? ( On the Tasks Confronting the Workers Parties with Regard to Opportunism and Social-Chauvinism )....... 
 THE KIND OF “UNITY” LARIN PROCLAIMED AT THE SWEDISH CONGRESS ...................... 
. 
 THE RUSSIAN BRAND OF SÜDEKUM ............ TO THE EDITORS OF NASHE SLOVO ............ HOW THE POLICE AND THE REACTIONARIES PROTECT THE UNITY OF GERMAN SOCIAL -DEMOCRACY ............. 
. 
 THE LONDON CONFERENCE ................ 
 UNDER A FALSE FLAG .................. I........................ II........................ III ........................ THE CONFERENCE OF THE R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 GROUPS ABROAD .... 
. 
 The Conference’s Resolutions ............. 
. 
 On the Character of the War ............. 
 The “Defence of the Fatherland” Slogan ......... The Slogans of the Revolutionary Social-Democrats .... 
. 
 Opportunism and the Collapse of the Second International . 
. 
 The Third International ................ 
 Pacifism and the Peace Slogan ............ The Defeat of the Tsarist Monarchy .......... 
 The Attitude Towards Other Parties and Groups ...... LETTER THE CENTRAL COMMITTEE OF THE R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 TO THE EDITORS OF NASHE SLOVO ............. 
 WHAT HAS BEEN REVEALED BY THE TRIAL OF THE RUSSIAN SOCIAL -DEMOCRATIC LABOUR DUMA GROUP ......... ON THE LONDON CONFERENCE . 
 ............. 
. 
 THE SLOGAN OF CIVIL WAR ILLUSTRATED .......... 
. 
 THE SOCIAL -CHAUVINISTS’ SOPHISMS ............ THE QUESTION OF THE UNITY OF INTERNATIONALISTS .... 
. 
 BOURGEOIS PHILANTHROPISTS AND REVOLUTIONARY SOCIAL -DEMOCRACY ...................... 
 THE COLLAPSE OF PLATONIC INTERNATIONALISM ....... 
 ON THE STRUGGLE AGAINST SOCIAL -CHAUVINISM ....... 
94 102 107115 118125 129 132 135 138 145 150 158 158 159 159 160161 162 162163 163 165171 178181183 188 192 194 199 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR THE COLLAPSE OF THE SECOND INTERNATIONAL ....... 
 I........................ II........................ III........................ IV........................ V........................ VI........................ VII........................ VIII ........................ IX........................ BRITISH PACIFISM AND THE BRITISH DISLIKE OF THEORY ... HOW SERVILITY TO REACTION IS BLENDED WITH PLAYING AT DEMOCRACY ...................... 
 THE MAIN GERMAN OPPORTUNIST WORK ON THE WAR .... 
 THE DEFEAT OF ONE’S OWN GOVERNMENT IN THE IMPERIALIST WAR ......................... 
 THE STATE OF AFFAIRS IN RUSSIAN SOCIAL-DEMOCRACY .... 
 THE “PEACE” SLOGAN APPRAISED ............. 
 THE QUESTION OF PEACE ................ 
. 
 SOCIALISM AND WAR ( The Attitude of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Towards the War )...................... 
. 
 Preface to the First (Foreign ) Edition .......... 
 Preface to the Second Edition ............. 
 Chapter I . 
The Principles of Socialism and the War of 1914-15 The Attitude of Socialists Towards Wars ....... 
. 
 The Historical Types of Wars in Modern Times ...... The Difference Between Wars of Aggression and of Defence The War of Today Is an Imperialist War ....... 
. 
 A War Between the Biggest Slave-holders for the Maintenance and Consolidation of Slavery ............. 
 “War Is the Continuation of Politics by Other” (i . 
e. 
: Violent) “Means” ..................... The Case of Belgium ................ 
. 
 What Russia Is Fighting For ............. 
 What Social-Chauvinism Is ............. 
. 
 The Basle Manifesto ................ 
. 
 False References to Marx and Engels .......... 
 The Collapse of the Second International ....... 
. 
 Social-Chauvinism Is the Acme of Opportunism ...... Unity with the Opportunists Means an Alliance Between the Workers and Their “Own” National Bourgeoisie, and Splittingthe International Revolutionary Working Class .... 
. 
205 208 212 217 223 227 233 241 251 256 260 266 270 275 281 287 290 295 297 298 299299 299300 301 302 304 305 306 306307 308 309309 311 “Kautskyism” ................... 
. 
 The Marxists’ Slogan Is a Slogan of Revolutionary Social-Democracy ................... 
. 
 The Example Set by the Fraternisation in the Trenches . 
. 
 The Importance of an Underground Organisation .... 
. 
 On the Defeat of One’s “Own” Government in the Impe-rialist War ................... 
. 
 Pacifism and the Peace Slogan ............ The Right of Nations to Self-Determination ....... 
 Chapter II . 
Classes and Parties in Russia ......... The Bourgeoisie and the War ............. 
 The Working Class and the War .......... 
. 
 The Russian Social-Democratic Labour Group in the Duma, and the War ................... 
 Chapter III . 
The Restoration of the International ...... The Method of the Social-Chauvinists and of the “Centre” . 
 The State of Affairs Among the Opposition ....... 
 The Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party and the Third International ................ 
. 
 Chapter IV . 
The History of the Split, and the Present State of Social-Democracy in Russia ............... The Economists and the Old Iskra (1894-1903) ...... Menshevism and Bolshevism (1903-1908) ......... Marxism and Liquidationism (1908-1914) ......... Marxism and Social-Chauvinism (1914-1915) ....... 
. 
 The Present State of Affairs in the Ranks of the Russian Social-Democrats .................. Our Party’s Tasks .................. ON THE SLOGAN FOR A UNITED STATES OF EUROPE .... 
. 
 ON THE SLOGAN FOR THE UNITED STATES OF EUROPE. 
 Editorial Comment by Sotsial-Demokrat on the Manifesto on War Issued by the Central Committee of the R . 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 ....... 
 THE DRAFT RESOLUTION PROPOSED BY THE LEFT WING AT ZIMMERWALD ..................... THE VOICE OF AN HONEST FRENCH SOCIALIST ....... 
. 
 IMPERIALISM AND SOCIALISM IN ITALY ( Note )....... 
. 
 APPEAL ON THE WAR .................. WE ARE THANKFUL FOR SUCH FRANKNESS ......... TO THE INTERNATIONAL SOCIALIST COMMITTEE (I . 
S. 
C. 
).... 
 THE DEFEAT OF RUSSIA AND THE REVOLUTIONARY CRISIS ...311 313 313 314 315 315 316 317 317 319 320 323 323 325 329 331 331 332 333 334 335 338 339 344 345 349 357367 370 372378 THE FIRST STEP ................... 
. 
 REVOLUTIONARY ISTS AT THE INTERNATIONAL SOCIALIST CONFERENCE, SEPTEMBER 5-8, 1915 ............ KAUTSKY, AXELROD, AND MARTOV—TRUE INTERNATIONALISTS SEVERAL THESES. 
 Proposed by the Editors ......... THE REVOLUTIONARY PROLETARIAT AND THE RIGHT OF NATIONS TO SELF -DETERMINATION ............. 
 ON THE TWO LINES IN THE REVOLUTION .......... 
 AT THE UTTERMOST LIMIT ................ 
 LETTER TO THE SECRETARY OF THE SOCIALIST PROPAGANDALEAGUE...................... 
. 
 SOCIAL-CHAUVINIST POLICY BEHIND A COVER OF INTERNA -TIONALIST PHRASES ................... 
 OPPORTUNISM, AND THE COLLAPSE OF THE SECOND INTER -NATIONAL ...................... 
. 
 Notes ......................... 
 The Life and Work of V. 
 I. 
 Lenin . 
 Outstanding Dates .... 
 ILLUSTRATIONS First page of Lenin’s manuscript “Karl Marx”. 
 July-November 1914 ........................ First page of Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 40, March 29, 1915, in which Lenin’s articles “What Has Been Revealed by the Trial ofthe Russian Social-Democratic Labour Duma Group” and “On the London Conference” were published ............ First page of Lenin’s manuscript “The Revolutionary Prole-tariat and the Right of Nations to Self-Determination”. 
 1915(in German) ...................... 
 First page of Lenin’s letter to the Secretary of the Socialist Propaganda League. 
 November 1915 ............383 389 394 401 407 415 421 423429438 455 485 169 405 42546 -47 PREFACE Volume 21 contains Lenin’s works of the period between August 1914 and December 1915. 
 In these writings, Leninraised the banner of struggle against the imperialist war and international social-chauvinism, and laid the founda-tions of the Bolshevik Party’s theory and tactics on questionsof war, peace and revolution. 
 A group of these works, viz. 
, “The Tasks of Revolutionary Social-Democracy in the European War”, “The EuropeanWar and International Socialism”, “The War and Russian Social-Democracy”, “The Defeat of One’s Own Government in the Imperialist War”, “Socialism and War”, deal, in themain, with an appraisal of the war, and provide a definitionof the tasks confronting the proletarian party and the worldworking-class movement. 
 A considerable part of the volume consists of works that expose international social-chauvinism and centrism, and reveal the causes that brought about the collapse of theSecond International. 
 Among these works are: “The Collapseof the Second International”, “On the Struggle Against Chau-vinism”, “The Position and Tasks of the Socialist Inter-national”, and “Revolutionary Marxists at the International Socialist Conference, September 5-8, 1915”. 
 A number of the works in this volume are directed against social-chauvinism in Russia, viz. 
: “The Russian Brand ofSüdekum”, “Under a False Flag”, “The State of Affairs inRussian Social-Democracy”, “The Defeat of Russia and theRevolutionary Crisis”, and “On the Two Lines in the Revolution”. 
 In the article “On the Slogan of a United States of Europe”, which was written in August 1915, Lenin formulated his masterly conclusion on the possibility of victory for socialism, initially in several countries, or even in a single country. 
 Also in this volume is the work entitled “Karl Marx”, which gives a concise yet exhaustive characterisation of theMarxist doctrine. 
 Four hitherto unpublished works have been included in this volume. 
 In the articles “To the International Socialist Committee, I. 
S. 
C. 
” and “Letter to Vorwärts and Wiener Arbeiter-Zeitung ” Lenin exposes the imperialist nature of World War I and the betrayal of the working class’sinterests by the leaders of the Second International. 
 Thefollowing works: “The Kind of ‘Unity’ Larin Proclaimed atthe Swedish Congress” and “Letter from the Central Com-mittee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 to the Editors of Nashe Slovo ” are directed against liquidationism and social-chauvinism inRussia. 
 THE TASKS OF REVOLUTIONARY SOCIAL -DEMOCRACY IN THE EUROPEAN WAR1 THE RUSSIAN SOCIAL -DEMOCRATS ON THE EUROPEAN WAR Reports have reached us from most reliable sources, re-garding a conference recently held by leaders of the RussianSocial-Democratic Labour Party, on the question of the European war. 
 The conference was not of a wholly official nature, since the Central Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 hasas yet been unable to gather, as a result of the numerousarrests and unprecedented persecution by the tsarist govern-ment. 
 We do, however, have precise information that theconference gave expression to views held by the most influential circles of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 The conference adopted the following resolution, whose full text we are quoting below as a document: RESOLUTION OF A GROUP OF SOCIAL -DEMOCRATS 1. 
 The European and world war has the clearly defined character of a bourgeois, imperialist and dynastic war. 
A struggle for markets and for freedom to loot foreign coun-tries, a striving to suppress the revolutionary movement ofthe proletariat and democracy in the individual countries, a desire to deceive, disunite, and slaughter the proletarians of all countries by setting the wage slaves of one nation against those of another so as to benefit the bourgeoisie— these are the only real content and significance of the war. 
 2. 
 The conduct of the leaders of the German Social-Demo-cratic Party, the strongest and the most influential in theSecond International (1889-1914), a party which has votedfor war credits and repeated the bourgeois-chauvinist phrasesof the Prussian Junkers and the bourgeoisie, is sheer betrayal of socialism. 
 Under no circumstances can the con-duct of the leaders of the German Social-Democratic Partybe condoned, even if we assume that the party was abso-lutely weak and had temporarily to bow to the will of thebourgeois majority of the nation. 
 This party has in factadopted a national-liberal policy. 
 3. 
 The conduct of the Belgian and French Social-Demo-cratic party leaders, who have betrayed socialism by enteringbourgeois governments, 2 is just as reprehensible. 
 4. 
 The betrayal of socialism by most leaders of the Second International (1889-1914) signifies the ideologicaland political bankruptcy of the International. 
 This collapse has been mainly caused by the actual prevalence in it of petty-bourgeois opportunism, the bourgeois nature andthe danger of which have long been indicated by the finestrepresentatives of the revolutionary proletariat of allcountries. 
 The opportunists had long been preparing towreck the Second International by denying the socialist revolution and substituting bourgeois reformism in its stead, by rejecting the class struggle with its inevitable con-version at certain moments into civil war, and by preachingclass collaboration; by preaching bourgeois chauvinismunder the guise of patriotism and the defence of thefatherland, and ignoring or rejecting the fundamental truth of socialism, long ago set forth in the Communist Manifesto , that the workingmen have no country; by confining themselves, in the struggle against militarism,to a sentimental philistine point of view, instead ofrecognising the need for a revolutionary war by theproletarians of all countries, against the bourgeoisie of all countries; by making a fetish of the necessary utilisation of bourgeois parliamentarianism and bour-geois legality, and forgetting that illegal forms of organ-isation and agitation are imperative at times of crises. 
 One of the organs of international opportunism, Soziali-stische Monatshefte ,3 which has long taken a national-liberal stand, is very properly celebrating its victory overEuropean socialism. 
 The so-called Centre of the Germanand other Social-Democratic parties has in actual fact faint-heartedly capitulated to the opportunists. 
 It must be thetask of the future International resolutely and irrevocably to rid itself of this bourgeois trend in socialism. 
 5. 
 With reference to the bourgeois and chauvinist sophisms being used by the bourgeois parties and the governmentsof the two chief rival nations of the Continent—the Germanand the French—to fool the masses most effectively, andbeing copied by both the overt and covert socialist oppor-tunists, who are slavishly following in the wake of the bourgeoisie, one must particularly note and brand thefollowing: When the German bourgeois refer to the defence of the fatherland and to the struggle against tsarism, and insist onthe freedom of cultural and national development, they are lying, because it has always been the policy of Prussian Junkerdom, headed by Wilhelm II, and the big bourgeoisieof Germany, to defend the tsarist monarchy; whatever theoutcome of the war, they are sure to try to bolster it. 
 Theyare lying because, in actual fact, the Austrian bourgeoisiehave launched a robber campaign against Serbia, and the German bourgeoisie are oppressing Danes, Poles, and French-men (in Alsace-Lorraine); they are waging a war of aggressionagainst Belgium and France so as to loot the richer andfreer countries; they have organised an offensive at amoment which seemed best for the use of the latest improve-ments in military matériel, and on the eve of the intro-duction of the so-called big military programme in Russia. 
 Similarly, when the French bourgeois refer to the defence of the fatherland, etc. 
, they are lying, because in actualfact they are defending countries that are backward incapitalist technology and are developing more slowly, and because they spend thousands of millions to hire Russian tsarism’s Black-Hundred 4 gangs for a war of aggression, i. 
e. 
, the looting of Austrian and German lands. 
 Neither of the two belligerent groups of nations is second to the other in cruelty and atrocities in warfare. 
 6. 
 It is the first and foremost task of Russian Social-Democrats to wage a ruthless and all-out struggle againstGreat-Russian and tsarist-monarchist chauvinism, andagainst the sophisms used by the Russian liberals, Cadets, 5 a section of the Narodniks, and other bourgeois parties, indefence of that chauvinism. 
 From the viewpoint of the working class and the toiling masses of all the peoples of Russia, the defeat of the tsarist monarchy and its army,which oppress Poland, the Ukraine, and many other peoplesof Russia, and foment hatred among the peoples so as toincrease Great-Russian oppression of the other nationalities,and consolidate the reactionary and barbarous government of the tsar’s monarchy, would be the lesser evil by far. 
 7. 
 The following must now be the slogans of Social-Democracy: First, all-embracing propaganda, involving the army and the theatre of hostilities as well, for the socialist revo-lution and the need to use weapons, not against their broth-ers, the wage slaves in other countries, but against the reac-tionary and bourgeois governments and parties of allcountries; the urgent necessity of organising illegal nucleiand groups in the armies of all nations, to conduct suchpropaganda in all languages; a merciless struggle againstthe chauvinism and “patriotism” of the philistines and bour-geoisie of all countries without exception. 
 In the struggle against the leaders of the present International, who havebetrayed socialism, it is imperative to appeal to the revo-lutionary consciousness of the working masses, who bearthe entire burden of the war and are in most cases hostileto opportunism and chauvinism. 
 Secondly, as an immediate slogan, propaganda for republics in (Germany, Poland, Russia, and other countries,and for the transforming of all the separate states ofEurope into a republican United States of Europe. 
 6 Thirdly and particularly, a struggle against the tsarist monarchy and Great-Russian, Pan-Slavist chauvinism, and advocacy of a revolution in Russia, as well as of the libera-tion of and self-determination for nationalities oppressedby Russia, coupled with the immediate slogans of a demo-cratic republic, the confiscation of the landed estates, and an eight-hour working day. 
 A group of Social-Democrats , members of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party Written not later than August 24 (September 6), 1914 The introduction The Russian Social-Democrats on the European War is published for the first time The theses (resolution) were The introduction is published first published in full in 1929 according to the manuscript; in the second and third editions the theses (resolution) of the works according to a copy made by of V. 
 I. 
 Lenin, Volume 18 N. 
 K. 
 Krupskaya THE EUROPEA N WAR AND INTERNATIONA L SOCIALISM To the socialist it is not the horrors of war that are the hardest to endure—we are always for “santa guerra di tutti gli oppressi per la conquista delle loro patrie! ”*—but the horrors of the treachery shown by the leaders of present-day socialism, the horrors of the collapse of the present-day International. 
 Is it not treachery to Social-Democracy when we see the German socialists’ amazing change of front (after Germany’s declaration of war); the false phrases about a war of liber-ation against tsarism; forgetfulness of German imperialism, forgetfulness of the rape of Serbia; the bourgeois interests involved in the war against Britain, etc. 
, etc. 
? Chauvinist patriots vote for the Budget! Have the socialists of France and Belgium not shown the same kind of treachery? They are excellent at exposing German imperialism, but, unfortunately they are amaz-ingly purblind with regard to British, French, and particu-larly the barbarous Russian imperialism. 
 They fail to see the disgraceful fact that, for decades on end, the French bourgeoisie have been paying out thousands of millions for the hire of the Black-Hundred gangs of Russian tsarism, and that the latter has been crushing the non-Russian majority in our country, robbing Poland, oppressing the Great-Russian workers and peasants, and so on. 
 of the bitter truth so courageously and straightforwardly told by Avanti ! to Südeku m,8 the truth that paper *“a holy war of all the oppressed, for the conquest of their own fatherland!”— Ed. 
7At such a time, the socialist feels refreshed when he reads told the German socialists, namely, that they are imperi-alists , i. 
e. 
, chauvinists. 
 One feels even more refreshed on reading the article by Zibordi ( Avanti! , Sept. 
 2) exposing not only the German and the Austrian brands of chauvinism(which is to the advantage of the Italian bourgeoisie), but also the French , an article which shows that this war is a war of the bourgeoisie of all lands! Avanti! ’s stand and the Zibordi article—[as well as the resolution of the group of revolutionary Social-Democrats (at a recent conference in a Scandinavian country) *]—shows us what is right and what is wrong in the usualphrase about the collapse of the International. 
 This phraseis reiterated with malicious relish by the bourgeois and theopportunists ( riformisti di destra **), and with bitterness by socialists ( Volksrecht9 in Zurich, and Bremer Bürger-Zeitung10). 
 There is a great deal of truth in the phrase! The downfall of the leaders and of most of the parties in the present-day International is a fact. 
 (Compare Vorwärts ,11 Wiener Arbeiter-Zeitung12 and Hamburger Echo13 versus l’Humanité ,14 and the appeals of the Belgian and the French socialists versus the “reply” of the German Vorstand . 
15) The masses have not yet spoken out! However, Zibordi is a thousand times right in saying that it is not a matter of “ dottrina è sbagliata ”, or of the “rimedio ” of socialism being “ errato ”, but “ semplicemente non erano in dose bastante ”, “gli altri socialisti non sono ‘abbastanza socialisti ’”. 
*** It is not socialism that has collapsed, in the shape of the present-day European International, but an insufficient socialism, i. 
e. 
, opportunism and reformism . 
 It is this “tendency”—which exists everywhere , in all countries, and has found such vivid expression in Bissolati and Co. 
 in Italy—that has collapsed, for it has for years been teaching forgetfulness of the class struggle, etc. 
, etc. 
—from the resolution . 
16 *See pp. 
 15-19 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 **the reformists of the Right. 
— Ed. 
 *** ...it is not a matter of “theory being wrong”, or of the “remedy” of socialism being “wrong” but “simply of its not being available in sufficient doses” and of “certain socialists not being ‘sufficiently socialist’”. 
— Ed. 
 Zibordi is right when he sees the European socialists’ main guilt in “ cercano nobilitare con postumi motivi la loro incapacità a prevenire , la loro necessità di partecipare al macello ”, in the fact that they “ preferisce fingere di fare per amore ciò ch’è [European socialism] * costretto a fare per forza ”, that the socialists “solidarizzarono ciascuno con la propria nazione , col Governo borghese della propria nazione ... in una misura da formare una delusione per noi [also in all socialists who are not opportunists] e un compia-cimento per tutti i non socialisti d ’Italia ”** (and not of Italy alone, but of all countries; cf. 
, for instance, withRussian liberalism). 
 Even given the total incapacità and impotence of the European socialists, the behaviour of their leaders reveals treachery and baseness: the workers have been driven into the slaughter, while their leaders vote in favour and join governments ! Even with their total impotence, they should have voted against , should not have joined their governments and uttered chauvinistic infamies; should not have shown solidarity with their “nation”, and should not have defended their “own” bourgeoisie, they should have unmasked its vileness. 
 Everywhere there is the bourgeoisie and the imperial-ists, everywhere the ignoble preparations for carnage; ifRussian tsarism is particularly infamous and barbarous (andmore reactionary than all the rest), then German imperialism too is monarchist: its aims are feudal and dynastic, and its gross bourgeoisie are less free than the French. 
 TheRussian Social-Democrats were right in saying that to them the defeat of tsarism was the lesser evil, for their immediate enemy was, first and foremost, Great-Russian *Interpolations in square brackets (within passages quoted by Lenin) have been introduced by Lenin, unless otherwise indicat-ed. 
— Ed. 
 **...their attempts to backdate their justification, with plausible excuses, both of their inability to prevent the carnage and their need to take part in the latter”, ... they “prefer to create the semblance of doing voluntarily [European socialism] what they areforced to do of necessity”, that the socialists have “ lined up with their own particular nation, with the latter’s bourgeois government ... in a measure capable of engendering disappointment in us [also in allsocialists who are not opportunists] and delight all non-socialists in Italy”. 
— Ed. 
 chauvinism, but that in each country the socialists (who are not opportunists) ought to see their main enemy in their “own” (“home-made”) chauvinism. 
 Is it true, however, that the “ incapacità ” is so very abso-lute? Is that so? Fucilare ?* Heldentod ** and a miserable death? All this in vantaggio di un altra patria? *** Not always!! The initiative was possible and even obligatory. 
 Illegal propaganda and civil war would be more honest , and obligatory for socialists ( this is what the Russian socialists are calling for). 
 For Instance, they take comfort in the illusion that the war will end and things will settle down. 
 ... But no! Forthe collapse of the present-day (1889-1914) Internationalnot to turn into the collapse of socialism, for the masses not to turn away, and to prevent the domination of anar-chism and syndicalism (just as shamefully [as] in France),the truth must be looked in the face. 
 Whoever wins,Europe is threatened by the growth of chauvinism, by “revenge-seeking ”. 
 etc. 
 Militarism, whether German or Great-Russian, fosters counter-chauvinism and the like. 
 It is our duty to draw the conclusion of the complete collapse of the opportunism, the reformism, so impressivelyproclaimed in Italy (and so decisively rejected by theItalian comrades 17 and **** N. 
 B. 
 insert : the contemptuous and scornful attitude of Die Neue Zeit18 towards the Italian socialists and Avanti! : petty concessions to opportunism! “The golden mean. 
” The so-called “Centre” =lackeys of the opportunists. 
 Written in late August-September 1914 First published on August 1, Published according to 1929 , in Pravda No. 
 174 the manuscript *Shoot down?— Ed. 
 **A hero’s death. 
— Ed. 
 *** For the sake of another country?— Ed. 
 **** The manuscript breaks off here. 
 The next two sentences are marginal notes . 
—Ed. 
 THE WAR AND RUSSIAN SOCIAL -DEMOCRACY Written prior to September 28 (October 11), 1914 Published on November 1, 1914 Published according to in Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 33 the newspaper text, checked against the manuscript THE WAR AND RUSSIAN SOCIAL -DEMOCRACY Written prior to September 28 (October 11), 1914 Published on November 1, 1914 Published according to in Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 33 the newspaper text, checked against the manuscript The European war, which the governments and the bour-geois parties of all countries have been preparing for decades,has broken out. 
 The growth of armaments, the extremeintensification of the struggle for markets in the latest—theimperialist—stage of capitalist development in the advanced countries, and the dynastic interests of the more backward East-European monarchies were inevitably bound to bringabout this war, and have done so. 
 Seizure of territory andsubjugation of other nations, the ruining of competing nationsand the plunder of their wealth, distracting the attention ofthe working masses from the internal political crises in Russia, Germany, Britain and other countries, disuniting and nationalist stultification of the workers, and the exter-mination of their vanguard so as to weaken the revolutionarymovement of the proletariat—these comprise the sole actualcontent, importance and significance of the present war. 
 It is primarily on Social-Democracy that the duty rests of revealing the true meaning of the war, and of ruthlessly exposing the falsehood, sophistry and “patriotic” phrase-mongering spread by the ruling classes, the landowners andthe bourgeoisie, in defence of the war. 
 One group of belligerent nations is headed by the German bourgeoisie. 
 It is hoodwinking the working class and the toiling masses by asserting that this is a war in defence of the fatherland, freedom and civilisation, for the liberation ofthe peoples oppressed by tsarism, and for the destruction ofreactionary tsarism. 
 In actual fact, however, this bourgeoi-sie, which servilely grovels to the Prussian Junkers, headedby Wilhelm II, has always been a most faithful ally of tsarism, and an enemy of the revolutionary movement of Russia’s workers and peasants. 
 In fact, whatever theoutcome of the war, this bourgeoisie will together with the Junkers, exert every effort to support the tsarist monarchy against a revolution in Russia. 
 In fact, the German bourgeoisie has launched a robber campaign against Serbia, with the object of subjugatingher and throttling the national revolution of the SouthernSlavs, at the same time sending the bulk of its militaryforces against the freer countries, Belgium and France, soas to plunder richer competitors. 
 In fact, the German bour-geoisie, which has been spreading the fable that it is waging a war of defence, chose the moment it thought most favourablefor war, making use of its latest improvements in militarymatériel and forestalling the rearmament already plannedand decided upon by Russia and France. 
 The other group of belligerent nations is headed by the British and the French bourgeoisie, who are hoodwinking the working class and the toiling masses by asserting thatthey are waging a war for the defence of their countries,for freedom and civilisation and against German militarismand despotism. 
 In actual fact, this bourgeoisie has longbeen spending thousands of millions to hire the troops of Russian tsarism, the most reactionary and barbarous monarchy in Europe, and prepare them for an attack onGermany. 
 In fact, the struggle of the British and the French bour-geoisie is aimed at the seizure of the German colonies, andthe ruining of a rival nation, whose economic development has been more rapid. 
 In pursuit of this noble aim, the “advanced” “democratic” nations are helping the savagetsarist regime to still more throttle Poland, the Ukraine,etc. 
, and more thoroughly crush the revolution in Russia. 
 Neither group of belligerents is inferior to the other in spoiliation, atrocities and the boundless brutality of war; however, to hoodwink the proletariat and distract its attention from the only genuine war of liberation, namely, a civilwar against the bourgeoisie both of its “own” and of “foreign”countries—to achieve so lofty an aim—the bourgeoisieof each country is trying, with the help of false phrasesabout patriotism, to extol the significance of its “own” national war, asserting that it is out to defeat the enemy, not for plunder and the seizure of territory, but for the“liberation” of all other peoples except its own. 
 But the harder the governments and the bourgeoisie of all countries try to disunite the workers and pit them against one another, and the more savagely they enforce, for this lofty aim, martial law and the military censorship (measureswhich even now, in wartime, are applied against the “inter-nal” foe more harshly than against the external), the morepressingly is it the duty of the class-conscious proletariatto defend its class solidarity, its internationalism, and its socialist convictions against the unbridled chauvinism of the “patriotic” bourgeois cliques in all countries. 
 If class-conscious workers were to give up this aim, this wouldmean renunciation of their aspirations for freedom anddemocracy, to say nothing of their socialist aspirations. 
 It is with a feeling of the most bitter disappointment that we have to record that the socialist parties of the leading European countries have failed to discharge this duty, thebehaviour of these parties’ leaders, particularly in Germany,bordering on downright betrayal of the cause of socialism. 
At this time of supreme and historic importance, most of theleaders of the present Socialist International, the Second (1889-1914), are trying to substitute nationalism for social-ism. 
 As a result of their behaviour, the workers’ parties ofthese countries did not oppose the governments’ criminalconduct, but called upon the working class to identify its position with that of the imperialist governments. 
 Theleaders of the International committed an act of treachery against socialism by voting for war credits, by reiterating the chauvinist (“patriotic”) slogans of the bourgeoisie oftheir “own” countries, by justifying and defending the war,by joining the bourgeois governments of the belligerentcountries, and so on and so forth. 
 The most influential social-ist leaders and the most influential organs of the socialist press of present-day Europe hold views that are chauvinist, bourgeois and liberal, and in no way socialist. 
 The respon-sibility for thus disgracing socialism falls primarily onthe German Social-Democrats, who were the strongestand most influential party in the Second International. 
 Butneither can one justify the French socialists, who have accept-ed ministerial posts in the government of that very bour-geoisie which betrayed its country and allied itself withBismarck so as to crush the Commune. 
 The German and the Austrian Social-Democrats are at-tempting to justify their support for the war by arguing that they are thereby fighting against Russian tsarism. 
 We Russian Social-Democrats declare that we consider suchjustification sheer sophistry. 
 In our country the revolution-ary movement against tsarism has again assumed tremen-dous proportions during the past few years. 
 This movementhas always been headed by the working class of Russia. 
 The political strikes of the last few years, which have in-volved millions of workers, have had as their slogan the over-throw of tsarism and the establishment of a democratic repub-lic. 
 During his visit to Nicholas II on the very eve ofthe war, Poincaré, President of the French Republic, couldsee for himself, in the streets of St. 
 Petersburg, barricades put up by Russian workers. 
 The Russian proletariat has not flinched from any sacrifice to rid humanity of the disgraceof the tsarist monarchy. 
 We must, however, say that if there isanything that, under certain conditions, can delay thedownfall of tsarism, anything that can help tsarism in itsstruggle against the whole of Russia’s democracy, then that is the present war, which has placed the purses of the Brit-ish, the French and the Russian bourgeois at the disposal oftsarism, to further the latter’s reactionary aims. 
 If there isanything that can hinder the revolutionary struggle of theRussia’s working class against tsarism, then that is thebehaviour of the German and the Austrian Social-Democratic leaders, which the chauvinist press of Russia is continually holding up to us as an example. 
 Even assuming that German Social-Democracy was so weak that it was compelled to refrain from all revolutionaryaction, it should not have joined the chauvinist camp, ortaken steps which gave the Italian socialists reason to say that the German Social-Democratic leaders were dishonour-ing the banner of the proletarian International. 
 Our Party, the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party, has made, and will continue to make great sacrifices inconnection with the war. 
 The whole of our working-classlegal press has been suppressed. 
 Most working-class asso-ciations have been disbanded, and a large number of our comrades have been arrested and exiled. 
 Yet our parliamen-tary representatives—the Russian Social-Democratic Labour group in the Duma—considered it their imperative socialist duty not to vote for the war credits, and even to walk out of the Duma, so as to express their protest the more energetically; they considered it their duty to brand the European govern-ments’ policy as imperialist. 
 Though the tsar’s governmenthas increased its tyranny tenfold, the Social-Democraticworkers of Russia are already publishing their first illegalmanifestos against the war, thus doing their duty to de-mocracy and to the International. 
 While the collapse of the Second International has given rise to a sense of burning shame in revolutionary Social-Democrats—as represented by the minority of GermanSocial-Democrats and the finest Social-Democrats in theneutral countries; while socialists in both Britain and France have been speaking up against the chauvinism of most Social-Democratic parties; while the opportunists, as represented,for instance, by the German Sozialistische Monatshefte , which have long held a national-liberal stand, are with goodreason celebrating their victory over European socialism—the worst possible service is being rendered to the proletar-iat by those who vacillate between opportunism and revo-lutionary Social-Democracy (like the “Centre” in the GermanSocial-Democratic Party), by those who are trying to hush upthe collapse of the Second International or to disguise it withdiplomatic phrases. 
 On the contrary, this collapse must be frankly recognised and its causes understood, so as to make it possible to build up a new and more lasting socialist unity of the workers ofall countries. 
 The opportunists have wrecked the decisions of the Stutt-gart, Copenhagen and Basle congresses, 19 which made it bind-ing on socialists of all countries to combat chauvinism in all and any conditions, made it binding on socialists to reply to any war begun by the bourgeoisie and governments,with intensified propaganda of civil war and social revolu-tion. 
 The collapse of the Second International is thecollapse of opportunism, which developed from the features ofa now bygone (and so-called “peaceful”) period of history, and in recent years has some practically to dominate the International. 
 The opportunist have long been preparingthe ground for this collapse by denying the socialist revolution and substituting bourgeois reformism in its stead; by rejecting the class struggle with its inevi-table conversion at certain moments into civil war, and by preaching class collaboration; by preaching bourgeoischauvinism under the guise of patriotism and the defence ofthe fatherland, and ignoring or rejecting the fundamentaltruth of socialism, long ago set forth in the Communist Manifesto , that the workingmen have no country; by confining themselves, in the struggle against milita-rism, to a sentimental, philistine point of view, instead ofrecognising the need for a revolutionary war by the proletari-ans of all countries, against the bourgeoisie of all countries;by making a fetish of the necessary utilisation of bourgeoisparliamentarianism and bourgeois legality, and forgetting that illegal forms of organisation and propaganda are im-perative at times of crises. 
 The natural “appendage” toopportunism—one that is just as bourgeois and hostile tothe proletarian, i. 
e. 
, the Marxist, point of view—namely,the anarcho-syndicalist trend, has been marked by a no lessshamefully smug reiteration of the slogans of chauvinism, during the present crisis. 
 The aims of socialism at the present time cannot be fulfilled, and real international unity of the workers cannotbe achieved, without a decisive break with opportunism, andwithout explaining its inevitable fiasco to the masses. 
 It must be the primary task of Social-Democrats in every country to combat that country’s chauvinism. 
 In Russia this chauvinism has overcome the bourgeois liberals (the“Constitutional-Democrats”), and part of the Narodniks—down to the Socialist-Revolutionaries 20 and the “Right” Social-Democrats. 
 (In particular, the chauvinist utterancesof E. 
 Smirnov, P. 
 Maslov and G. 
 Plekhanov, for example, should be branded; they have been taken up and widely used by the bourgeois “patriotic” press. 
) In the present situation, it is impossible to determine, from the standpoint of the international proletariat, thedefeat of which of the two groups of belligerent nationswould be the lesser evil for socialism. 
 But to us Russian Social-Democrats there cannot be the slightest doubt that, from the standpoint of the working class and of the toilingmasses of all the nations of Russia, the defeat of the tsarist monarchy, the most reactionary and barbarous of govern-ments, which is oppressing the largest number of nations and the greatest mass of the population of Europe and Asia, would be the lesser evil. 
 The formation of a republican United States of Europe should be the immediate political slogan of Europe’s Social-Democrats. 
 In contrast with the bourgeoisie, which is readyto “promise” anything in order to draw the proletariat into the mainstream of chauvinism, the Social-Democrats will explain that this slogan is absolutely false and meaninglesswithout the revolutionary overthrow of the German, theAustrian and the Russian monarchies. 
 Since Russia is most backward and has not yet completed its bourgeois revolution, it still remains the task of Social-Democrats in that country to achieve the three fundamental conditions for consistent democratic reform, viz. 
, a demo-cratic republic (with complete equality and self-determina-tion for all nations), confiscation of the landed estates, andan eight-hour working day. 
 But in all the advanced countriesthe war has placed on the order of the day the slogan of socialist revolution, a slogan that is the more urgent, the more heavily the burden of war presses upon the shouldersof the proletariat, and the more active its future role mustbecome in the re-creation of Europe, after the horrors ofthe present “patriotic” barbarism in conditions of the tremen-dous technological progress of large-scale capitalism. 
 The bourgeoisie’s use of wartime laws to gag the proletariat makes it imperative for the latter to create illegal forms ofagitation and organisation. 
 Let the opportunists “preserve”the legal organisations at the price of treachery to theirconvictions—revolutionary Social-Democrats will utilisethe organisational experience and links of the working class so as to create illegal forms of struggle for socialism, forms appropriate to a period of crisis, and to unite the workers,not with the chauvinist bourgeoisie of their respective coun-tries, but with the workers of all countries. 
 The proletarianInternational has not gone under and will not go under. 
Notwithstanding all obstacles, the masses of the workers will create a new International. 
 Opportunism’s present triumph will be short-lived. 
 The greater the sacrifices imposed bythe war the clearer will it become to the mass of the workers that the opportunists have betrayed the workers’ cause and that the weapons must be turned against the government and the bourgeoisie of each country. 
 The conversion of the present imperialist war into a civil war is the only correct proletarian slogan, one that followsfrom the experience of the Commune, and outlined in theBasle resolution (1912); it has been dictated by all the con-ditions of an imperialist war between highly developed bourgeois countries. 
 However difficult that transformation may seem at any given moment, socialists will never relin-quish systematic, persistent and undeviating preparatorywork in this direction now that war has become a fact. 
 It is only along this path that the proletariat will be able to shake off its dependence on the chauvinist bourgeoisie, and, in one form or another and more or less rapidly, take decisive steps towards genuine freedom for the nations andtowards socialism. 
 Long live the international fraternity of the workers against the chauvinism and patriotism of the bourgeoisie ofall countries! Long live a proletarian International, freed from oppor-tunism! Central Committee of the Russian Social -Democratic Labour Party THE POSITION AND TASKS OF THE SOCIALIST INTERNATIONAL The gravest feature of the present crisis is that the majority of official representatives of European socialismhave succumbed to bourgeois nationalism, to chauvinism. 
 Itis with good reason that the bourgeois press of all countrieswrites of them now with derision, now with condescendingpraise. 
 To anyone who wants to remain a socialist there can be no more important duty than to reveal the causes of this crisis in socialism and analyse the tasks of the In-ternational. 
 There are such that are afraid to admit that the crisis or, to put it more accurately, the collapse of the SecondInternational is the collapse of opportunism. 
 Reference is made to the unanimity, for instance, among French socialists, and to the fact that the old groups insocialism have supposedly changed their stands in the ques-tion of the war. 
 Such references, however, are ground-less. 
 Advocacy of class collaboration; abandonment of the idea of socialist revolution and revolutionary methods of struggle; adaptation to bourgeois nationalism; losingsight of the fact that the borderlines of nationality and coun-try are historically transient; making a fetish of bourgeoislegality; renunciation of the class viewpoint and the classstruggle, for fear of repelling the “broad masses of the popu-lation” (meaning the petty bourgeoisie)—such, doubtlessly, are the ideological foundations of opportunism. 
 And it isfrom such soil that the present chauvinist and patriotic frame of mind of most Second International leaders has developed. 
 Observers representing the most various points of view have long noted that the opportunists are in fact prevalent in the Second International’s leadership. 
 The warhas merely brought out, rapidly and saliently, the truemeasure of this prevalence. 
 There is nothing surprising inthe extraordinary acuteness of the crisis having led to aseries of reshufflings within the old groups. 
 On the whole, however, such changes have affected only individuals. 
 The trends within socialism have remained the same. 
 Complete unanimity does not exist among French social-ists. 
 Even Vaillant, who, with Guesde, Plekhanov, Hervé andothers, is following a chauvinist line, has had to admit thathe has received a number of letters of protest from French socialists, who say that the war is imperialist in character and that the French bourgeoisie is to blame for its outbreakno less than the bourgeoisie of any other country. 
 Norshould it be overlooked that these voices of protest are beingsmothered, not only by triumphant opportunism, but alsoby the military censorship. 
 With the British, the Hyndman group (the British Social-Democrats—the British Socialist Party 21) has completely sunk into chauvinism, as have also most of the semi-liberal leaders of the trade unions. 
 Resis-tance to chauvinism has come from MacDonald and KeirHardie of the opportunist Independent Labour Party. 
 22 This, of course, is an exception to the rule. 
 However, cer-tain revolutionary Social-Democrats who have long been in opposition to Hyndman have now left the British SocialistParty. 
 With the Germans the situation is clear: the oppor-tunists have won; they are jubilant, and feel quite in theirelement. 
 Headed by Kautsky, the “Centre” has succumbedto opportunism and is defending it with the most hypocriti-cal, vulgar and smug sophistry. 
 Protests have come from the revolutionary Social-Democrats—Mehring, Pannekoek, KarlLiebknecht, and a number of unidentified voices in Germanyand German-speaking Switzerland. 
 In Italy, the line-up isclear too: the extreme opportunists, Bissolati and Co. 
 standfor “fatherland”, for Guesde-Vaillant-Plekhanov-Hervé. 
 The revolutionary Social-Democrats (the Socialist Party), with Avanti! at their head, are combating chauvinism and are exposing the bourgeois and selfish nature of the calls for war. 
 They have the support of the vast majority of progres-sive workers. 
23 In Russia, the extreme opportunists of the liquidators’ camp24 have already raised their voices, in public lectures and the press, in defence of chauvinism. 
P. 
 Maslov and Y. 
 Smirnov are defending tsarism on the pre-text that the fatherland must be defended. 
 (Germany, yousee, is threatening to impose trade agreements on “us” atswordpoint, whereas tsarism, we are expected to believe, has not been using the sword, the knout and the gallows to stifle the economic, political and national life of nine-tenthsof Russia’s population!) They justify socialists participatingin reactionary bourgeois governments, and their approvalof war credits today and more armaments tomorrow! Ple-khanov has slid into nationalism, and is endeavouring to mask his Russian chauvinism with a Francophile attitude, and so has Alexinsky. 
 To judge from the Paris Golos , 25 Martov is behaving with more decency than the rest of this crowd, andhas come out in opposition to both German and French chau-vinism, to Vorwärts , Mr. 
 Hyndman and Maslov, but is afraid to come out resolutely against international opportunism as a whole, and against the German Social-Democratic Cen-trist group, its most “influential” champion. 
 The attempts topresent volunteer service in the army as performance ofa socialist duty (see the Paris declaration of a group ofRussian volunteers consisting of Social-Democrats andSocialist-Revolutionaries, and also a declaration by Polish Social-Democrats, Leder, and others) have had the backing of Plekhanov alone. 
 These attempts have been condemnedby the majority of our Paris Party group. 
 26 The leading article in this issue * will inform readers of our Party Central Committee’s stand. 
 To preclude any misunderstanding, thefollowing facts relating to the history of our Party’s views and their formulation must be stated here. 
 After overcoming tremendous difficulties in re-establishing organisationalcontacts broken by the war, a group of Party members firstdrew up “theses” and on September 6-8 (New Style) had themcirculated among the comrades. 
 Then they were sent to twodelegates to the Italo-Swiss Conference in Lugano (Septem-ber 27), through Swiss Social-Democrats. 
 It was only in *See pp. 
 25-34 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 mid-October that it became possible to re-establish contacts and formulate the viewpoint of the Party’s Central Commit-tee. 
 The leading article in this issue represents the final wording of the “theses”. 
 Such, briefly, is the present state of affairs in the European and the Russian Social-Democratic movement. 
 The collapseof the International is a fact. 
 It has been proved conclusivelyby the polemic, in the press, between the French and German socialists, and acknowledged, not only by the Left Social-Democrats (Mehring and Bremer Bürger Zeitung ), but by moderate Swiss papers ( Volksrecht ). 
 Kautsky’s attempts to cover up this collapse are a cowardly subterfuge. 
 Thecollapse of the International is clearly the collapse ofopportunism, which is now captive to the bourgeoisie. 
 The bourgeoisie’s stand is clear. 
 It is no less clear that the opportunists are simply echoing bourgeois arguments. 
 Inaddition to what has been said in the leading article, we needonly mention the insulting statements in Die Neue Zeit , suggesting that internationalism consists in the workers ofone country shooting down the workers of another country, allegedly in defence of the fatherland! The question of the fatherland—we shall reply to the opportunists—cannot be posed without due consideration ofthe concrete historical nature of the present war. 
 This isan imperialist war, i. 
e. 
, it is being waged at a time of thehighest development of capitalism, a time of its approaching end. 
 The working class must first “constitute itself within the nation”, the Communist Manifesto declares, empha-sising the limits and conditions of our recognition of national-ity and fatherland as essential forms of the bourgeoissystem, and, consequently, of the bourgeois fatherland. 
 Theopportunists distort that truth by extending to the period of the end of capitalism that which was true of the period of its rise. 
 With reference to the former period and to the tasksof the proletariat in its struggle to destroy, not feudalism butcapitalism, the Communist Manifesto gives a clear and precise formula: “The workingmen have no country. 
” One can wellunderstand why the opportunists are so afraid to accept this socialist proposition, afraid even, in most cases, openly to reckon with it. 
 The socialist movement cannot triumphwithin the old framework of the fatherland. 
 It creates new /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR and superior forms of human society, in which the legitimate needs and progressive aspirations of the working masses of each nationality will, for the first time, be met through international unity, provided existing national partitionsare removed. 
 To the present-day bourgeoisie’s attempts todivide and disunite them by means of hypocritical appealsfor the “defence of the fatherland” the class-conscious work-ers will reply with ever new and persevering efforts to unite the workers of various nations in the struggle to overthrow the rule of the bourgeoisie of all nations. 
 The bourgeoisie is duping the masses by disguising imperialist rapine with the old ideology of a “national war”. 
This deceit is being shown up by the proletariat, whichhas brought forward its slogan of turning the imperialist war into a civil war. 
 This was the slogan of the Stuttgart and Basle resolutions, which had in mind, not war in general,but precisely the present war and spoke, not of “defence ofthe fatherland”, but of “hastening the downfall of capital-ism”, of utilising the war-created crisis for this purpose, andof the example provided by the Paris Commune. 
 The latter was an instance of a war of nations being turned into a civil war. 
 Of course, such a conversion is no easy matter and cannot be accomplished at the whim of one party or another. 
That conversion, however, is inherent in the objectiveconditions of capitalism in general, and of the period of the end of capitalism in particular. 
 It is in that direction, and that direction alone, that socialists must conduct theiractivities. 
 It is not their business to vote for war credits orto encourage chauvinism in their “own” country (and alliedcountries), but primarily to strive against the chauvinismof their “own” bourgeoisie, without confining themselves to legal forms of struggle when the crisis has matured and the bourgeoisie has itself taken away the legality it has creat-ed. 
 Such is the line of action that leads to civil war, and will bring about civil war at one moment or another of theEuropean conflagration. 
 War is no chance happening, no “sin” as is thought by Christian priests (who are no whit behind the opportunists in preaching patriotism, humanity and peace), but an inevi-table stage of capitalism, just as legitimate a form of the capitalist way of life as peace is. 
 Present-day war is a peo-ple’s war. 
 What follows from this truth is not that we must swim with the “popular” current of chauvinism, but that the class contradictions dividing the nations continue toexist in wartime and manifest themselves in conditions ofwar. 
 Refusal to serve with the forces, anti-war strikes, etc. 
,are sheer nonsense, the miserable and cowardly dream ofan unarmed struggle against the armed bourgeoisie, vain yearning for the destruction of capitalism without a desperate civil war or a series of wars. 
 It is the duty of everysocialist to conduct propaganda of the class struggle, in thearmy as well; work directed towards turning a war of thenations into civil war is the only socialist activity in theera of an imperialist armed conflict of the bourgeoisie of all nations. 
 Down with mawkishly sanctimonious and fatuous appeals for “peace at any price”! Let us raise high the bannerof civil war! Imperialism sets at hazard the fate of Europeanculture: this war will soon be followed by others, unlessthere are a series of successful revolutions. 
 The story aboutthis being the “last war” is a hollow and dangerous fabri-cation, a piece of philistine “mythology” (as Golos aptly puts it). 
 The proletarian banner of civil war will rally together,not only hundreds of thousands of class-conscious workersbut millions of semi-proletarians and petty bourgeois, nowdeceived by chauvinism, but whom the horrors of war willnot only intimidate and depress, but also enlighten, teach, arouse, organise, steel and prepare for the war against the bourgeoisie of their “own” country and “foreign” countries. 
And this will take place, if not today, then tomorrow, ifnot during the war, then after it, if not in this war then in thenext one. 
 The Second International is dead, overcome by opportun-ism. 
 Down with opportunism, and long live the Third International, purged not only of “turncoats” (as Golos wishes), but of opportunism as well. 
 The Second International did its share of useful prepar-atory work in preliminarily organising the proletarianmasses during the long, “peaceful” period of the most brutal capitalist slavery and most rapid capitalist progress in the last third of the nineteenth and the beginning of thetwentieth centuries. 
 To the Third International falls the task of organising the proletarian forces for a revolutionary onslaught against the capitalist governments, for civil war against the bourgeoisie of all countries for the capture of political power, for the triumph of socialism! Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 33 Published according to November 1, 1914 the text in Sotsial-Demokrat , checked against the manuscript LETTER TO VORWÄRTS AND WIENER ARBEITER-ZEITUNG Dear Comrades: Some days ago, Vorwärts published a brief item regarding the paper I read in Zurich, on the subject of war and social-ism, and conveying an entirely false impression of that paper. 
 The impression is created that I limited myself toa polemic against tsarism. 
 In actual fact, however, as onewho is convinced that it is the duty of the socialists ofevery country to wage an unrelenting struggle against thechauvinism and patriotism of their own country (and not only of the enemy), I vehemently attacked tsarism, and, in that connection, I spoke of freedom for the Ukraine. 
However, the sense of my argument may be utterly distortedif no mention is made of what I said of opportunism and thecollapse of the Second International, and against the standtaken by the Social-Democrats of Germany and Austria. 
 Nine-tenths of my paper, whose reading lasted two hours, dealt with that criticism. 
 I would be grateful for publication, in Vorwärts , of the omissions I have named (or...). 
 27 With Social-Democratic greetings Written between October 29 and November 8 (November 11) and 21), 1914 First published in 1930 Published according to in Lenin Miscellany IV the manuscript Translated from the German KAR L 28 A BRIEF BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH WITH AN EXPOSITION OF ISM Written in July-November 1914 First published in 1915 , Published according to in the Granat Encyclopaedia , the manuscript, Seventh Edition, Vol. 
 28, checked against the text over the signature of V. 
 Ilyin of the pamphlet of 1918 PREFACE This article on Karl Marx, which now appears in a separate printing, was written in 1913 (as far as I can remem-ber) for the Granat Encyclopaedia . 
 A fairly detailed biblio-graphy of literature on Marx, mostly foreign, was appended to the article. 
 This has been omitted in the present edition. 
The editors of the Encyclopaedia , for their part, have, for censorship reasons, deleted the end of the article on Marx,namely, the section dealing with his revolutionary tactics. 
Unfortunately, I am unable to reproduce that end, because the draft has remained among my papers somewhere in Cracow or in Switzerland. 
 I only remember that in the concludingpart of the article I quoted, among other things, the passagefrom Marx’s letter to Engels of April 16, 1856, in which hewrote: “The whole thing in Germany will depend on thepossibility of backing the proletarian revolution by some second edition of the Peasant War. 
 Then the affair will be splendid. 
” That is what our Mensheviks, who have now sunkto utter betrayal of socialism and to desertion to the bour-geoisie, have failed to understand since 1905. 
 N. 
 Lenin Moscow, May 14, 1918 Published in 1918 Published according to in the pamphlet: the manuscript N. 
 Lenin, Karl Marx , Priboi Publishers, Moscow Marx , Karl , was born on May 5, 1818 (New Style), in the city of Trier (Rhenish Prussia). 
 His father was a lawyer, aJew, who in 1824 adopted Protestantism. 
 The family waswell-to-do, cultured, but not revolutionary. 
 After graduatingfrom a Gymnasium in Trier, Marx entered the university, first at Bonn and later in Berlin, where he read law, major-ing in history and philosophy. 
 He concluded his universitycourse in 1841, submitting a doctoral thesis on the philoso-phy of Epicurus. 
 At the time Marx was a Hegelian ideal-ist in his views. 
 In Berlin, he belonged to the circle of “LeftHegelians” (Bruno Bauer and others) who sought to draw atheistic and revolutionary conclusions from Hegel’s phi-losophy. 
 After graduating, Marx moved to Bonn, hoping to become a professor. 
 However, the reactionary policy of the govern-ment, which deprived Ludwig Feuerbach of his chair in1832, refused to allow him to return to the university in 1836, and in 1841 forbade young Professor Bruno Bauer to lecture at Bonn, made Marx abandon the idea of an academiccareer. 
 Left Hegelian views were making rapid headwayin Germany at the time. 
 Ludwig Feuerbach began to criticisetheology, particularly after 1836, and turn to materialism,which in 1841 gained the ascendancy in his philosophy ( The Essence of Christianity ). 
 The year 1843 saw the appearance of his Principles of the Philosophy of the Future . 
 “One must oneself have experienced the liberating effect” of these books,Engels subsequently wrote of these works of Feuerbach. 
 “We[i. 
e. 
, the Left Hegelians, including Marx] all became atonce Feuerbachians. 
” At that time, some radical bourgeois in the Rhineland, who were in touch with the Left Hegelians, founded, in Cologne, an opposition paper called Rheinische Zeitung (the first issue appeared on January 1, 1842). 
 Marx First page of Lenin’s manuscript, “Karl Marx”First page of Lenin’s manuscript, “Karl Marx” and Bruno Bauer were invited to be the chief contributors, and in October 1842 Marx became editor-in-chief and moved from Bonn to Cologne. 
 The newspaper’s revolutionary-demo-cratic trend became more and more pronounced under Marx’seditorship, and the government first imposed double andtriple censorship on the paper, and then on January 1, 1843,decided to suppress it. 
 Marx had to resign the editorshipbefore that date, but his resignation did not save the paper, which suspended publication in March 1843. 
 Of the major articles Marx contributed to Rheinische Zeitung , Engels notes, in addition to those indicated below (seeBibliography ), an article on the condition of peasant vine-growers in the Moselle Valley. 
 Marx’s journalistic activitiesconvinced him that he was insufficiently acquainted with political economy, and he zealously set out to study it. 
 In 1843, Marx married, at Kreuznach, Jenny von West-phalen, a childhood friend he had become engaged to whilestill a student. 
 His wife came of a reactionary family ofthe Prussian nobility, her elder brother being Prussia’sMinister of Interior during a most reactionary period— 1850-58. 
 In the autumn of 1843, Marx went to Paris in order to publish a radical journal abroad, together with Arnold Ruge(1802-1880; Left Hegelian; in prison in 1825-30; a politicalexile following 1848, and a Bismarckian after 1866-70). 
Only one issue of this journal, Deutsch-Französische Jahr-bücher , appeared; publication was discontinued owing to the difficulty of secretly distributing it in Germany, and to disagreement with Ruge. 
 Marx’s articles in this journalshowed that he was already a revolutionary, who advocated“merciless criticism of everything existing”, and in par-ticular the “criticism by weapon ”, 29 and appealed to the masses and to the proletariat . 
 In September 1844 Frederick Engels came to Paris for a few days, and from that time on became Marx’s closestfriend. 
 They both took a most active part in the then seeth-ing life of the revolutionary groups in Paris (of particularimportance at the time was Proudhon’s doctrine, whichMarx pulled to pieces in his Poverty of Philosophy , 1847); waging a vigorous struggle against the various doctrines of petty-bourgeois socialism, they worked out the theory andtactics of revolutionary proletarian socialism , or communism (Marxism). 
 See Marx’s works of this period, 1844-48, in the Bibliography . 
 At the insistent request of the Prussian Government, Marx was banished from Paris in 1845, as a dangerous revolutionary. 
 He went to Brussels. 
 In the springof 1847 Marx and Engels joined a secret propaganda societycalled the Communist League; they took a prominent partin the League’s Second Congress (London, November 1847),at whose request they drew up the celebrated Communist Manifesto which appeared in February 1848. 
 With the clarity and brilliance of genius, this work outlines anew world-conception, consistent materialism, which alsoembraces the realm of social life; dialectics, as the mostcomprehensive and profound doctrine of development; thetheory of the class struggle and of the world-historic revolu-tionary role of the proletariat—the creator of a new, communist society. 
 On the outbreak of the Revolution of February 1848, Marx was banished from Belgium. 
 He returned to Paris,whence, after the March Revolution, he went to Cologne,Germany, where Neue Rheinische Zeitung was published from June 1, 1848 to May 19, 1849, with Marx as editor-in-chief. 
 The new theory was splendidly confirmed by thecourse of the revolutionary events of 1848-49, just as ithas been subsequently confirmed by all proletarian anddemocratic movements in all countries of the world. 
 Thevictorious counter-revolutionaries first instigated court proceedings against Marx (he was acquitted on February 9, 1849), and then banished him from Germany (May 16,1849). 
 First Marx went to Paris, was again banished afterthe demonstration of June 13, 1849, and then went to Lon-don, where he lived till his death. 
 His life as a political exile was a very hard one, as the correspondence between Marx and Engels (published in 1913) clearly reveals. 
 Poverty weighed heavily on Marx andhis family; had it not been for Engels’s constant and self-less financial aid, Marx would not only have been unableto complete Capital but would have inevitably been crushed by want. 
 Moreover, the prevailing doctrines and trends of petty-bourgeois socialism, and of non-proletarian socialism in general, forced Marx to wage a continuous and mercilessstruggle and sometimes to repel the most savage and mon-strous personal attacks ( Herr Vogt ). 
 Marx, who stood aloof from circles of political exiles, developed his materialist theory in a number of historical works (see Bibliography ), devoting himself mainly to a study of political economy. 
Marx revolutionised this science (see “The Marxist Doc-trine”, below) in his Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy (1859) and Capital (Vol. 
 I, 1867). 
 The revival of the democratic movements in the late fifties and in the sixties recalled Marx to practical activity. 
 In 1864 (September 28) the International Workingmen’s Asso-ciation—the celebrated First International—was founded inLondon. 
 Marx was the heart and soul of this organisation,and author of its first Address and of a host of resolutions,declarations and manifestos. 
 In uniting the labour movement of various countries, striving to channel into joint activity the various forms of non-proletarian, pre-Marxist socialism(Mazzini, Proudhon, Bakunin, liberal trade-unionism inBritain, Lassallean vacillations to the right in Germany,etc. 
), and in combating the theories of all these sects andschools, Marx hammered out a uniform tactic for the prole-tarian struggle of the working class in the various countries. 
 Following the downfall of the Paris Commune (1871)—ofwhich Marx gave such a profound, clear-cut, brilliant,effective and revolutionary analysis ( The Civil War in France , 1871)—and the Bakuninist-caused cleavage in the Inter-national, the latter organisation could no longer exist in Europe. 
 After the Hague Congress of the International (1872), Marx had the General Council of the Internationaltransferred to New York. 
 The First International had playedits historical part, and now made way for a period of a fargreater development of the labour movement in all countriesin the world, a period in which the movement grew in scope , and mass socialist working-class parties in individual national states were formed. 
 Marx’s health was undermined by his strenuous work in the International and his still more strenuous theoreticaloccupations. 
 He continued work on the refashioning ofpolitical economy and on the completion of Capital , for which he collected a mass of new material and studied a number of languages (Russian, for instance). 
 However, ill-health prevented him from completing Capital . 
 His wife died on December 2, 1881, and on March 14, 1883, Marx passed away peacefully in his armchair. 
 He lies buried next to his wife at Highgate Cemetery in London. 
 Of Marx’s children some died in childhood in London, whenthe family were living in destitute circumstances. 
 Threedaughters married English and French socialists: EleanorAveling, Laura Lafargue and Jenny Longuet. 
 The latter’sson is a member of the French Socialist Party. 
 THE IST DOCTRINE Marxism is the system of Marx’s views and teachings. 
 Marx was the genius who continued and consummated the three main ideological currents of the nineteenth century, as represented by the three most advanced countries of man-kind: classical German philosophy, classical English politi-cal economy, and French socialism combined with Frenchrevolutionary doctrines in general. 
 Acknowledged even byhis opponents, the remarkable consistency and integrity of Marx’s views, whose totality constitutes modern material-ism and modern scientific socialism, as the theory and pro-gramme of the working-class movement in all the civilisedcountries of the world, make it incumbent on us to presenta brief outline of his world-conception in general, prior togiving an exposition of the principal content of Marxism, namely, Marx’s economic doctrine. 
 PHILOSOPHICAL MATERIALISM Beginning with the years 1844-45, when his views took shape, Marx was a materialist and especially a follower of Ludwig Feuerbach, whose weak points he subsequently sawonly in his materialism being insufficiently consistent andcomprehensive. 
 To Marx Feuerbach’s historic and “epoch-making” significance lay in his having resolutely brokenwith Hegel’s idealism and in his proclamation of material-ism, which already “in the eighteenth century, particularly French materialism, was not only a struggle against theexisting political institutions and against ... religion and theology, but also ... against all metaphysics” (in the sense of “drunken speculation” as distinct from “sober philosophy”). 
 (The Holy Family , in Literarischer Nachlass . 
) “To Hegel...” wrote Marx, “the process of thinking, which, under the nameof ‘the Idea’, he even transforms into an independentsubject, is the demiurgos (the creator, the maker) of the realworld .... 
 W ith me, on the contrary, the ideal is nothing else than the material world reflected by the human mind, and translated into forms of thought” ( Capital , Vol. 
 I, After-word to the Second Edition). 
 In full conformity with thismaterialist philosophy of Marx’s, and expounding it, Fred-erick Engels wrote in Anti-Dühring (read by Marx in the manuscript): “The unity of the world does not consist inits being.... 
 The real unity of the world consists in its ma-teriality, and this is proved ... by a long and wearisome development of philosophy and natural science .... 
” “Motion is the mode of existence of matter. 
 Never anywhere has therebeen matter without motion, or motion without matter, norcan there be .... 
 But if the ... question is raised: what thought and consciousness really are, and where they come from; it becomes apparent that they are products of the human brain and that man himself is a product of Nature, which has devel-oped in and along with its environment; hence it is self-evident that the products of the human brain, being in thelast analysis also products of Nature, do not contradict therest of Nature’s interconnections but are in correspondence with them.... 
 “Hegel was an idealist, that is to say, the thoughts within his mind were to him not the more or less abstract images[Abbilder , reflections; Engels sometimes speaks of “im-prints”] of real things and processes, but, on the contrary,things and their development were to him only the images, made real, of the ‘Idea’ existing somewhere or other be-fore the world existed. 
” In his Ludwig Feuerbach —which expounded his own and Marx’s views on Feuerbach’s phi-losophy, and was sent to the printers after he had re-read anold manuscript Marx and himself had written in 1844-45on Hegel, Feuerbach and the materialist conception of history—Engels wrote: “The great basic question of all philosophy, especially of more recent philosophy, is therelation of thinking and being ... spirit to Nature ... which is primary, spirit or Nature .... 
 The answers which the phi-losophers gave to this question split them into two great camps. 
 Those who asserted the primacy of spirit to Nature and, therefore, in the last instance, assumed world creationin some form or other ... comprised the camp of idealism. 
The others, who regarded Nature as primary, belonged tothe various schools of materialism. 
” Any other use of theconcepts of (philosophical) idealism and materialism leads only to confusion. 
 Marx decidedly rejected, not only ideal-ism, which is always linked in one way or another withreligion, but also the views—especially widespread in ourday—of Hume and Kant, agnosticism, criticism, and posi-tivism in their various forms; he considered that philosophya “reactionary” concession to idealism, and at best a “shame-faced way of surreptitiously accepting materialism, while denying it before the world”. 
 On this question, see, besidesthe works by Engels and Marx mentioned above, a letterMarx wrote to Engels on December 12, 1868, in which,referring to an utterance by the naturalist Thomas Huxleywhich was “more materialistic” than usual, and to his recog-nition that “as long as we actually observe and think, we cannot possibly get away from materialism”, Marxreproached Huxley for leaving a “loop-hole” for agnosti-cism, for Humism. 
 It is particularly important tonote Marx’s view on the relation between freedom andnecessity: “Freedom is the appreciation of necessity. 
 ‘Neces-sity is blind only insofar as it is not understood’” (Engels in Anti-Dühring ). 
 This means recognition of the rule of objective laws in Nature and of the dialectical transforma-tion of necessity into freedom (in the same manner as thetransformation of the uncognised but cognisable “thing-in-itself” into the “thing-for-us”, of the “essence of things” into “phenomena”). 
 Marx and Engels considered that the “old” materialism, including that of Feuerbach (and stillmore the “vulgar” materialism of Büchner, Vogt and Moles-chott), contained the following major shortcomings: (1) thismaterialism was “predominantly mechanical”, failing totake account of the latest developments in chemistry and biology (today it would be necessary to add: and in the electrical theory of matter); (2) the old materialism was non-historical and non-dialectical (metaphysical, in the meaning of anti-dialectical), and did not adhere consistently and comprehensively to the standpoint of development; (3) it regarded the “human essence” in the abstract, not as the “complex of all” (concretely and historically determined)“social relations”, and therefore merely “interpreted” theworld, whereas it was-a question of “changing” it, i. 
e. 
, itdid not understand the importance of “revolutionary prac-tical activity”. 
 DIALECTICS As the most comprehensive and profound doctrine of devel-opment, and the richest in content, Hegelian dialectics wasconsidered by Marx and Engels the greatest achievement of classical German philosophy. 
 They thought that any other formulation of the principle of development, of evolution,was one-sided and poor in content, and could only distortand mutilate the actual course of development (which oftenproceeds by leaps, and via catastrophes and revolutions) in Nature and in society. 
 “Marx and I were pretty well the only people to rescue conscious dialectics [from the destruc-tion of idealism, including Hegelianism] and apply it inthe materialist conception of Nature .... 
 Nature is the proof of dialectics, and it must be said for modern natural sciencethat it has furnished extremely rich [this was written be-fore the discovery of radium, electrons, the transmutation of elements, etc. 
!] and daily increasing materials for this test, and has thus proved that in the last analysis Nature’sprocess is dialectical and not metaphysical. 
 “The great basic thought,” Engels writes, “that the world is not to be comprehended as a complex of ready-madethings, but as a complex of processes, in which the things apparently stable no less than their mind images in our heads, the concepts, go through an uninterrupted change ofcoming into being and passing away ... this great funda-metal thought has, especially since the time of Hegel, sothoroughly permeated ordinary consciousness that in thisgenerality it is now scarcely ever contradicted. 
 But to acknowledge this fundamental thought in words and to apply it in reality in detail to each domain of investigation are twodifferent things .... 
 For dialectical philosophy nothing is final, absolute, sacred. 
 It reveals the transitory character of everything and in everything; nothing can endure before it except the uninterrupted process of becoming and of passing away, of endless ascendency from the lower to thehigher. 
 And dialectical philosophy itself is nothing morethan the mere reflection of this process in the thinkingbrain. 
” Thus, according to Marx, dialectics is “the scienceof the general laws of motion, both of the external world and of human thought”. 
 This revolutionary aspect of Hegel’s philosophy was adopted and developed by Marx. 
 Dialectical materialism“does not need any philosophy standing above the othersciences”. 
 From previous philosophy there remains “thescience of thought and its laws—formal logic and dialectics”. 
 Dialectics, as understood by Marx, and also in conformity with Hegel, includes what is now called the theory of knowl-edge, or epistemology, which, too, must regard its subjectmatter historically, studying and generalising the originand development of knowledge, the transition from non-knowledge to knowledge. 
 In our times the idea of development, of evolution, has almost completely penetrated social consciousness, only inother ways, and not through Hegelian philosophy. 
 Still, thisidea, as formulated by Marx and Engels on the basis of He-gel’s philosophy, is far more comprehensive and far richerin content than the current idea of evolution is. 
 A develop-ment that repeats, as it were, stages that have already been passed, but repeats them in a different way, on a higherbasis (“the negation of negation”), a development, so to speak,that proceeds in spirals, not in a straight line; a developmentby leaps, catastrophes, and revolutions; “breaks in conti-nuity”; the transformation of quantity into quality; inner impulses towards development, imparted by the contradic-tion and conflict of the various forces and tendencies actingon a given body, or within a given phenomenon, or withina given society; the interdependence and the closest andindissoluble connection between all aspects of any phenome-non (history constantly revealing ever new aspects), a con-nection that provides a uniform, and universal process of motion, one that follows definite laws—these are some ofthe features of dialectics as a doctrine of development that is richer than the conventional one. 
 (Cf. 
 Marx’s letter to Engels of January 8, 1868, in which he ridicules Stein’s “wooden trichotomies”, which it would be absurd to confuse with materialist dialectics. 
) THE MATERIALIST CONCEPTION OF HISTORY A realisation of the inconsistency, incompleteness, and one-sidedness of the old materialism convinced Marx of the necessity of “bringing the science of society ... intoharmony with the materialist foundation, and of reconstruct-ing it thereupon”. 
 Since materialism in general explainsconsciousness as the outcome of being, and not conversely,then materialism as applied to the social life of mankind has to explain social consciousness as the outcome of social being. 
 “Technology,” Marx writes ( Capital , Vol. 
 I), “dis-closes man’s mode of dealing with Nature, the immediateprocess of production by which he sustains his life, andthereby also lays bare the mode of formation of his socialrelations, and of the mental conceptions that flow from them. 
” In the preface to his Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy , Marx gives an integral formulation of the funda-mental principles of materialism as applied to humansociety and its history, in the following words: “In the social production of their life, men enter into definite relations that are indispensable and independent of their will, relations of production which correspond to a definite stage of development of their material productiveforces. 
 “The sum total of these relations of production consti-tutes the economic structure of society, the real foundation,on which rises a regal and political superstructure and to which correspond definite forms of social consciousness. 
 The mode of production of material life conditions the socialpolitical and intellectual life process in general. 
 It is notthe consciousness of men that determines their being, but,on the contrary, their social being that determines theirconsciousness. 
 At a certain stage of their development, the material productive forces of society come in conflict with the existing relations of production, or—what is but a legalexpression for the same thing—with the property relations within which they have been at work hitherto. 
 From forms of development of the productive forces these relations turn into their fetters. 
 Then begins an epoch of social revolution. 
 With the change of the economic foundation the entireimmense superstructure is more or less rapidly transformed. 
In considering such transformations a distinction shouldalways be made between the material transformation of theeconomic conditions of production, which can be determined with the precision of natural science, and the legal, political, religious, aesthetic or philosophic—in short, ideologicalforms in which men become conscious of this conflict andfight it out. 
 “Just as our opinion of an individual is not based on what he thinks of himself, so we cannot judge of such a period of transformation by its own consciousness; on the contrary, this consciousness must be explained rather from thecontradictions of material life, from the existing conflictbetween the social productive forces and the relations ofproduction .... 
 In broad outlines Asiatic, ancient, feudal, and modern bourgeois modes of production can be designated as progressive epochs in the economic formation of society” (cf. 
 Marx’s brief formulation in a letter to Engels datedJuly 7, 1866 “Our theory that the organisation of labour isdetermined by the means of production”). 
 The discovery of the materialist conception of history, or more correctly, the consistent continuation and extension of materialism into the domain of social phenomena, removed the two chief shortcomings in earlier historical theories. 
In the first place, the latter at best examined only the ideo-logical motives in the historical activities of human beingswithout investigating the origins of those motives, orascertaining the objective laws governing the development of the system of social relations, or seeing the roots of these relations in the degree of development reached bymaterial production; in the second place, the earlier theoriesdid not embrace the activities of the masses of the population whereas historical materialism made it possible for the firsttime to study with scientific accuracy the social conditions of the life of the masses, and the changes in those conditions. 
 At best , pre-Marxist “sociology” and historiography brought forth an accumulation of raw facts, collected at random, and a description of individual aspects of the historical process. 
 By examining the totality of opposing tendencies, by reducing them to precisely definable conditions of life and production of the various classes of society, by discarding subjectivism and arbitrariness in the choice of a particular “dominant”idea or in its interpretation, and by revealing that, withoutexception, all ideas and all the various tendencies stem from the condition of the material forces of production, Marxism indicated the way to an all-embracing and comprehensive study of the process of the rise, development, and declineof socio-economic systems. 
 People make their own history,but what determines the motives of people, of the mass ofpeople, i. 
e. 
, what gives rise to the clash of conflicting ideasand strivings? What is the sum total of all these clashes in the mass of human societies? What are the objective condi-tions of production of material life that form the basis of allof man’s historical activity? What is the law of developmentof these conditions? To all these Marx drew attentionand indicated the way to a scientific study of history as asingle process which, with all its immense variety and contradictoriness, is governed by definite laws. 
 THE CLASS STRUGGLE It is common knowledge that, in any given society, the strivings of some of its members conflict with the strivings of others, that social life is full of contradictions, and that history reveals a struggle between nations and societies, aswell as within nations and societies, and, besides, an alter-nation of periods of revolution and reaction, peace and war,stagnation and rapid progress or decline. 
 Marxism has providedthe guidance, i. 
e. 
, the theory of the class struggle, for the discovery of the laws governing this seeming maze and chaos. 
 It is only a study of the sum of the strivings of all the mem-bers of a given society or group of societies that can lead toa scientific definition of the result of those strivings. 
 Nowthe conflicting strivings stem from the difference in theposition and mode of life of the classes into which each society is divided. 
 “The history of all hitherto existing society is the history of class struggles,” Marx wrote in the Communist Manifesto (with the exception of the history of the primitive community, Engels added subsequently). 
 “Freeman and slave, patrician and plebeian, lord and serf, guild-master and jour-neyman, in a word, oppressor and oppressed, stood in con-stant opposition to one another, carried on an uninterrupted,now hidden, now open fight, a fight that each time ended,either in a revolutionary reconstitution of society at large,or in the common ruin of the contending classes .... 
 The modern bourgeois society that has sprouted from the ruins of feudal society has not done away with class antagonisms. 
 It has but established new classes, new conditions of oppres-sion, new forms of struggle in place of the old ones. 
 Ourepoch, the epoch of the bourgeoisie, possesses, however, thisdistinctive feature: it has simplified the class antagonisms. 
Society as a whole is more and more splitting up into two great hostile camps, into two great classes directly facing each other: Bourgeoisie and Proletariat. 
” Ever since theGreat French Revolution, European history has, in a num-ber of countries, tellingly revealed what actually lies at thebottom of events—the struggle of classes. 
 The Restorationperiod in France already produced a number of historians (Thierry, Guizot, Mignet, and Thiers) who, in summing up what was taking place, were obliged to admit that the classstruggle was the key to all French history. 
 The modernperiod—that of the complete victory of the bourgeoisie, repre-sentative institutions, extensive (if not universal) suffrage, acheap daily press, that is widely circulated among the masses, etc. 
, a period of powerful and ever-expanding unions of workers and unions of employers, etc. 
—has shown even morestrikingly (though sometimes in a very one-sided, “peaceful”,and “constitutional” form) the class struggle as the main-spring of events. 
 The following passage from Marx’s Commu-nist Manifesto will show us what Marx demanded of social science as regards an objective analysis of the position of each class in modern society, with reference to an analysisof each class’s conditions of development: “Of all the classesthat stand face to face with the bourgeoisie today, theproletariat alone is a really revolutionary class. 
 The otherclasses decay and finally disappear in the face of Modern Industry; the proletariat is its special and essential product. 
 The lower middle class, the small manufacturer, the shop-keeper, the artisan, the peasant, all these fight against the bourgeoisie, to save from extinction their existence as frac-tions of the middle class. 
 They are therefore not revolution-ary, but conservative. 
 Nay more, they are reactionary, for they try to roll back the wheel of history. 
 If by chance theyare revolutionary, they are so only in view of their impendingtransfer into the proletariat; they thus defend not theirpresent, but their future interests; they desert their ownstandpoint to place themselves at that of the proletariat. 
” In a number of historical works (see Bibliography ), Marx gave brilliant and profound examples of materialisthistoriography, of an analysis of the position of each indi-vidual class, and sometimes of various groups or strata withina class, showing plainly why and how “every class struggleis a political struggle”. 
 The above-quoted passage is an illustration of what a complex network of social relations and transitional stages from one class to another, from the past to the future, was analysed by Marx so as to determine theresultant of historical development. 
 Marx’s economic doctrine is the most profound, compre-hensive and detailed confirmation and application of his theory. 
 ’S ECONOMIC DOCTRINE “It is the ultimate aim of this work to lay bare the eco-nomic law of motion of modern society”, i. 
e. 
, capitalist, bourgeois society, says Marx in the preface to Capital . 
 An investigation into the relations of production in a given,historically defined society, in their inception, development,and decline—such is the content of Marx’s economic doctrine. 
In capitalist society the production of commodities is pre-dominant, and Marx’s analysis therefore begins with an analysis of commodity. 
 VALUE A commodity is, in the first place, a thing that satisfies a human want; in the second place, it is a thing that can be exchanged for another thing. 
 The utility of a thing makes it a use-value . 
 Exchange-value (or simply, value) is first of all the ratio, the proportion, in which a certain number of use-values of one kind can be exchanged for a certain number of use-values of another kind. 
 Daily experience shows us that millions upon millions of such exchanges are constantly equating with one another every kind of use-value, even themost diverse and incomparable. 
 Now, what is there incommon between these various things, things constantlyequated with one another in a definite system of socialrelations? Their common feature is that they are products of labour . 
 In exchanging products, people equate the most diverse kinds of labour. 
 The production of commoditiesis a system of social relations in which individual producerscreate diverse products (the social division of labour),and in which all these products are equated to one anotherin the process of exchange. 
 Consequently, what is common to all commodities is not the concrete labour of a definite branch of production, not labour of one particular kind butabstract human labour—human labour in general. 
 All the labour power of a given society, as represented in the sumtotal of the values of all commodities, is one and the samehuman labour power. 
 Thousands upon thousands of millions of acts of exchange prove this. 
 Consequently, each particular commodity represents only a certain share of the socially necessary labour time. 
 The magnitude of value is determined by the amount of socially necessary labour, or by the labourtime that is socially necessary for the production of a givencommodity, of a given use-value. 
 “Whenever, by an exchange, we equate as values our different products, by that very act, we also equate, as human labour, the different kinds oflabour expended upon them. 
 We are not aware of this,nevertheless we do it. 
” As one of the earlier economists said,value is a relation between two persons; only he should haveadded: a relation concealed beneath a material wrapping. 
 We can understand what value is only when we consider it from the standpoint of the system of social relations ofproduction in a particular historical type of society, more-over, of relations that manifest themselves in the mass phe-nomenon of exchange, a phenomenon which repeats itselfthousands upon thousands of times. 
 “As values, all com-modities are only definite masses of congealed labour time. 
” After making a detailed analysis of the twofold characterof the labour incorporated in commodities, Marx goes on to analyse the form of value and money . 
 Here, Marx’s main task is to study the origin of the money form of value, to study the historical process of the development of exchange, beginning with individual and incidental acts of exchange(the “elementary or accidental form of value”, in which agiven quantity of one commodity is exchanged for a givenquantity of another), passing on to the universal form ofvalue, in which a number of different commodities are exchanged for one and the same particular commodity, and ending with the money form of value, when gold becomes thatparticular commodity, the universal equivalent. 
 As thehighest product of the development of exchange and com-modity production, money masks, conceals, the social char-acter of all individual labour, the social link between indi-vidual producers united by the market. 
 Marx analyses the various functions of money in very great detail; it is impor-tant to note here in particular (as in the opening chapters ofCapital in general) that what seems to be an abstract and at times purely deductive mode of exposition deals in realitywith a gigantic collection of factual material on the history of the development of exchange and commodity production. 
 “If we consider money, its existence implies a definitestage in the exchange of commodities. 
 The particular func-tions of money which it performs, either as the mere equiva-lent of commodities, or as means of circulation, or meansof payment, as hoard or as universal money, point, accord-ing to the extent and relative preponderance of the one function or the other, to very different stages in the processof social production” ( Capital , Vol. 
 I). 
 SURPLUS VALUE At a certain stage in the development of commodity pro-duction money becomes transformed into capital. 
 Theformula of commodity circulation was C—M—C (commod-ity—money—commodity), i. 
e. 
, the sale of one commodityfor the purpose of buying another. 
 The general formula of capital, on the contrary, is M—C—M, i. 
e. 
, purchase for the purpose of selling (at a profit). 
 The increase over the orig-inal value of the money that is put into circulation is called by Marx surplus value. 
 The fact of this “growth” of money in capitalist circulation is common knowledge. 
 Indeed, it is this “growth” which transforms money into capital , as a special and historically determined social relation ofproduction. 
 Surplus value cannot arise out of commoditycirculation, for the latter knows only the exchange of equiva-lents; neither can it arise out of price increases, for themutual losses and gains of buyers and sellers would equalise one another, whereas what we have here is not an individual phenomenon but a mass, average and social phenomenon. 
To obtain surplus value, the owner of money “must ... find ...in the market a commodity, whose use-value possesses thepeculiar property of being a source of value”—a commoditywhose process of consumption is at the same time a process of the creation of value. 
 Such a commodity exists—human labour power. 
 Its consumption is labour, and labour createsvalue. 
 The owner of money buys labour power at its value,which, like the value of every other commodity, is deter-mined by the socially necessary labour time requisite for itsproduction (i. 
e. 
, the cost of maintaining the worker and his family). 
 Having bought labour power, the owner of money is entitled to use it, that is, to set it to work for a wholeday—twelve hours, let us say. 
 Yet, in the course of sixhours (“necessary” labour time) the worker creates productsufficient to cover the cost of his own maintenance; in thecourse of the next six hours (“surplus” labour time), he creates “surplus” product, or surplus value, for which the capitalist does not pay. 
 Therefore, from the standpoint ofthe process of production, two parts must be distinguishedin capital: constant capital, which is expended on meansof production (machinery, tools, raw materials, etc. 
),whose value, without any change, is transferred (imme-diately or part by part) to the finished product; secondly, variable capital, which is expended on labour power. 
 Thevalue of this latter capital is not invariable, but grows inthe labour process, creating surplus value. 
 Therefore, toexpress the degree of capital’s exploitation of labour powersurplus value must be compared, not with the entire capital but only with the variable capital. 
 Thus, in the example just given, the rate of surplus value, as Marx calls this ratio,will be 6 : 6, i. 
e. 
, 100 per cent. 
 There were two historical prerequisites for capital to arise: first, the accumulation of certain sums of money in the hands of individuals under conditions of a relatively high level of development of commodity production ingeneral; secondly, the existence of a worker who is “free” ina double sense: free of all constraint or restriction on the saleof his labour power, and freed from the land and all means ofproduction in general, a free and unattached labourer, a “proletarian”, who cannot subsist except by selling his la-bour power. 
 There are two main ways of increasing surplus value: lengthening the working day (“absolute surplus value”), andreducing the necessary working day (“relative surplus value”). 
In analysing the former, Marx gives a most impressive picture of the struggle of the working class for a shorter working day and of interference by the state authority to lengthenthe working day (from the fourteenth century to the seven-teenth) and to reduce it (factory legislation in the nineteenthcentury). 
 Since the appearance of Capital , the history of the working-class movement in all civilised countries of the world has provided a wealth of new facts amplifying this picture. 
 Analysing the production of relative surplus value, Marx investigates the three fundamental historical stages in cap-italism’s increase of the productivity of labour: (1) simpleco-operation; (2) the division of labour, and manufacture; (3) machinery and large-scale industry. 
 How profoundly Marx has here revealed the basic and typical features of capitalistdevelopment is shown incidentally by the fact that investiga-tions into the handicraft industries of Russia furnish abundantmaterial illustrating the first two of the mentioned stages. 
The revolutionising effect of large-scale machine industry, as described by Marx in 1867, has revealed itself in a number of “new” countries (Russia, Japan, etc. 
), in the course of thehalf-century that has since elapsed. 
 To continue. 
 New and important in the highest degree is Marx’s analysis of the accumulation of capital , i. 
e. 
, the transformation of a part of surplus value into capital, and its use, not for satisfying the personal needs or whims of the capitalist, but for new production. 
 Marx revealed the errormade by all earlier classical political economists (beginning with Adam Smith), who assumed that the entire surplus value which is transformed into capital goes to form variable capital. 
 In actual fact, it is divided into means of production and variable capital. 
 Of tremendous importance to the proc-ess of development of capitalism and its transformation intosocialism is the more rapid growth of the constant capitalshare (of the total capital) as compared with the variablecapital share. 
 By speeding up the supplanting of workers by machinery and by creating wealth at one extreme and poverty at theother, the accumulation of capital also gives rise to what iscalled the “reserve army of labour”, to the “relative surplus”of workers, or “capitalist overpopulation”, which assumesthe most diverse forms and enables capital to expand pro-duction extremely rapidly. 
 In conjunction with credit facilities and the accumulation of capital in the form ofmeans of production, this incidentally is the key to anunderstanding of the crises of overproduction which occur periodically in capitalist countries—at first at an averageof every ten years, and later at more lengthy and less definite intervals. 
 From the accumulation of capital under capitalism we should distinguish what is known as primitiveaccumulation: the forcible divorcement of the workerfrom the means of production, the driving of the peasantsoff the land, the stealing of communal lands, the system ofcolonies and national debts, protective tariffs, and the like. 
 “Primitive accumulation” creates the “free” proletarian at one extreme, and the owner of money, the capitalist, at theother. 
 The “ historical tendency of capitalist accumulation ” is described by Marx in the following celebrated words: “Theexpropriation of the immediate producers is accomplished with merciless vandalism, and under the stimulus of passions the most infamous, the most sordid, the pettiest, the mostmeanly odious. 
 Self-earned private property [of the peasantand handicraftsman], that is based, so to say, on the fusingtogether of the isolated, independent labouring-individualwith the conditions of his labour, is supplanted by capital-istic private property, which rests on exploitation of the nominally free labour of others .... 
 That which is now to be expropriated is no longer the labourer working for himself, but the capitalist exploiting many labourers. 
 This expropria-tion is accomplished by the action of the immanent laws of capitalistic production itself, by the centralisation of capital. 
 One capitalist always kills many. 
 Hand in hand with thiscentralisation, or this expropriation of many capitalistsby few, develop, on an ever extending scale, the co-operativeform of the labour process, the conscious technicalapplication of science, the methodical cultivation of the soil, the transformation of the instruments of labour into instruments of labour only usable in common, the economis-ing of all means of production, by their use as the means ofproduction of combined, socialised labour, the entanglementof all peoples in the net of the world market, and with this,the international character of the capitalistic regime. 
 Along with the constantly diminishing number of the magnates of capital, who usurp and monopolise all advantages of thisprocess of transformation, grows the mass of misery, oppres-sion, slavery, degradation, exploitation; but with this toogrows the revolt of the working class, a class always increasingin numbers, and disciplined, united, organised by the very mechanism of the process of capitalist production itself. 
 The monopoly of capital becomes a fetter upon the mode ofproduction, which has sprung up and flourished along with,and under, it. 
 Centralisation of the means of production andsocialisation of labour at last reach a point where they be-come incompatible with their capitalist integument. 
 This integument is burst asunder. 
 The knell of capitalist private property sounds. 
 The expropriators are expropriated”(Capital , Vol. 
 I). 
 Also new and important in the highest degree is the analysis Marx gives, in Volume Two of Capital , of the reproduc-tion of aggregate social capital. 
 Here, too, Marx deals, not with an individual phenomenon but with a mass phenomenon; not with a fractional part of the economy of society, but withthat economy as a whole. 
 Correcting the aforementioned errorof the classical economists, Marx divides the whole of socialproduction into two big sections: (I) production of the meansof production, and (II) production of articles of consumption, and examines in detail, with numerical examples, the circu-lation of the aggregate social capital—both when reproducedin its former dimensions and in the case of accumulation. 
 Volume Three of Capital solves the problem of how the average rate of profit is formed on the basis of the law of value. 
 The immense stride forward made by economic science in the person of Marx consists in his having conducted ananalysis, from the standpoint of mass economic phenomena,of the social economy as a whole, not from the standpoint ofindividual cases or of the external and superficial aspects ofcompetition, to which vulgar political economy and the modern “theory of marginal utility” frequently restrict themselves. 
 Marx first analyses the origin of surplus value,and then goes on to consider its division into profit, inter-est, and ground rent. 
 Profit is the ratio between surplusvalue and the total capital invested in an undertaking. 
Capital with a “high organic composition” (i. 
e. 
, with a preponderance of constant capital over variable capital in excess of the social average) yields a rate of profit below theaverage; capital with a “low organic composition” yieldsa rate of profit above the average. 
 Competition among capi-talists, and their freedom to transfer their capital from onebranch to another, will in both cases reduce the rate of profit to the average. 
 The sum total of the values of all the commodities in a given society coincides with the sum totalof the prices of the commodities, but, in individual under-takings and branches of production, as a result of competi-tion, commodities are sold, not at their values but at theprices of production (or production prices), which are equal to the capital expended plus the average profit. 
 In this way, the well-known and indisputable fact of the divergence between prices and values and of the equalisationof profits is fully explained by Marx on the basis of the lawof value, since the sum total of values of all commoditiescoincides with the sum total of prices. 
 However, the equating of (social) value to (individual) prices does not take place simply and directly, but in a very complex way. 
 It is quitenatural that in a society of separate producers of commodities,who are united only by the market, a conformity to law canbe only an average, social, mass manifestation, with indi-vidual deviations in either direction mutually compensating one another. 
 A rise in the productivity of labour implies a more rapid growth of constant capital as compared with variable capital. 
 Inasmuch as surplus value is a function of variable capital alone, it is obvious that the rate of profit (the ratio of surplus value to the whole capital, not to its variable part alone) tends to fall. 
 Marx makes a detailed analysisof this tendency and of a number of circumstances thatconceal or counteract it. 
 Without pausing to deal with theextremely interesting sections of Volume Three of Capital devoted to usurer’s capital, commercial capital and money capital, we must pass on to the most important section—the theory of ground rent . 
 Since the area of land is limited and, in capitalist countries, the land is all held by individualprivate owners, the price of production of agricultural prod-ucts is determined by the cost of production, not on soil ofaverage quality but on the worst soil; not under average con-ditions but under the worst conditions of delivery of produce to the market. 
 The difference between this price and theprice of production on better soil (or in better conditions)constitutes differential rent. 
 Analysing this in detail, and showing how it arises out of the difference in fertility ofdifferent plots of land, and out of the difference in the amount of capital invested in land, Marx fully reveals (see also Theories of Surplus Value , in which the criticism of Rodbertus is most noteworthy) the error of Ricardo, whoconsidered that differential rent is derived only when thereis a successive transition from better land to worse. 
 On thecontrary, there may be inverse transitions, land may pass from one category into others (owing to advances in agri-cultural techniques, the growth of towns, and so on), and thenotorious “law of diminishing returns”, which charges Naturewith the defects, limitations and contradictions of capitalism,is profoundly erroneous. 
 Further, the equalisation ofprofit in all branches of industry and the national economy in general presupposes complete freedom of competition and the free flow of capital from one branch to another. 
 However,the private ownership of land creates monopoly, which hindersthat free flow. 
 Because of that monopoly, the products ofagriculture, where a lower organic composition of capitalobtains, and consequently an individually higher rate of profit, do not enter into the quite free process of the equali-sation of the rate of profit. 
 As a monopolist, the landownercan keep the price above the average, and this monopoly price gives rise to absolute rent. 
 Differential rent cannot be done away with under capitalism, but absolute rent can— for instance, by the nationalisation of the land, by making it state property. 
 That would undermine the monopoly ofprivate landowners, and would mean the more consistentand full operation of freedom of competition in agriculture. 
That is why, as Marx points out, bourgeois radicals haveagain and again in the course of history advanced this progressive bourgeois demand for nationalisation of the land, a demand which, however, frightens most of the bourgeoisie,because it would too closely affect another monopoly, onethat is particularly important and “sensitive” today—themonopoly of the means of production in general. 
 (A remark-ably popular, concise, and clear exposition of his theory of the average rate of profit on capital and of absolute ground rent is given by Marx himself in a letter to Engels, datedAugust 2, 1862. 
 See Briefwechsel , Vol. 
 3, pp. 
 77-81; also the letter of August 9, 1862, ibid. 
, pp. 
 86-87. 
) With reference to the history of ground rent it is also important to note Marx’s analysis showing how labour rent (the peasant creates surplus product by working on the lord’s land) is transformed into rent paid in produce or in kind(the peasant creates surplus product on his own land andhands it over to the landlord because of “non-economicconstraint”), then into money-rent (rent in kind, which isconverted into money—the obrok * of old Russia—as a result of the development of commodity production), and finally into capitalist rent, when the peasant is replaced bythe agricultural entrepreneur , who cultivates the soil with the help of hired labour. 
 In connection with this analysisof the “genesis of capitalistic ground rent”, note should betaken of a number of profound ideas (of particular importance to backward countries like Russia) expressed by Marx re-garding the evolution of capitalism in agriculture. 
 “Thetransformation of rent in kind into money-rent is furthermorenot only inevitably accompanied, but even anticipated,by the formation of a class of propertyless day-labourers,who hire themselves out for money. 
 During their genesis, when this new class appears but sporadically, the custom *Quit-rent. 
— Ed. 
 necessarily develops among the more prosperous peasants, subject to rent payments, of exploiting agricultural wage-labourers for their own account, much as in feudal times, when the more well-to-do peasant serfs themselves alsoheld serfs. 
 In this way, they gradually acquire the possi-bility of accumulating a certain amount of wealth and them-selves becoming transformed into future capitalists. 
 The oldself-employed possessors of land themselves thus give rise to a nursery school for capitalist tenants, whose development is conditioned by the general development of capitalistproduction beyond the bounds of the countryside” ( Capital , Vol. 
 III, p. 
 332). 
 “The expropriation and eviction of a partof the agricultural population not only set free for industrialcapital, the labourers, their means of subsistence, and material for labour; it also created the home market” ( Capi-tal, Vol. 
 I, p. 
 778). 
 In their turn, the impoverishment and ruin of the rural population play a part in the creation, forcapital, of a reserve army of labour. 
 In every capitalistcountry “part of the agricultural population is thereforeconstantly on the point of passing over into an urban or manufacturing [i. 
e. 
, non-agricultural] proletariat .... 
 This source of relative surplus population is thus constantlyflowing.... 
 The agricultural labourer is therefore reduced tothe minimum of wages, and always stands with one footalready in the swamp of pauperism” ( Capital , Vol. 
 I, p. 
 668). 
 The peasant’s private ownership of the land he tills is the foundation of small-scale production and the condition for its prospering and achieving the classical form. 
 But such small-scale production is compatible only with a narrow andprimitive framework of production and society. 
 Under capi-talism the “exploitation of the peasants differs only in formfrom the exploitation of the industrial proletariat. 
 The exploiter is the same: capital. 
 The individual capitalists exploit the individual peasants through mortgages and usury;the capitalist class exploits the peasant class through thestate taxes” ( The Class Struggles in France ). 
 “The small hold-ing of the peasant is now only the pretext that allows thecapitalist to draw profits, interest and rent from the soil, while leaving it to the tiller of the soil himself to see how he can extract his wages” ( The Eighteenth Brumaire ). 
 As a rule the peasant cedes to capitalist society, i. 
e. 
, to the capitalist class, even a part of the wages, sinking “to the level of the Irish tenant farmer—all under the pretence of being a private proprietor” ( The Class Struggles in France ). 
 What is “one of the reasons why grain prices are lower incountries with predominant small-peasant land proprietor-ship than in countries with a capitalist mode of production”?(Capital , Vol. 
 III, p. 
 340. 
) It is that the peasant hands over gratis to society (i. 
e. 
, the capitalist class) a part of his surplus product. 
 “This lower price [of grain and other agricultural produce] is consequently a result of the producers’ povertyand by no means of their labour productivity” ( Capital , Vol. 
 III, p. 
 340). 
 Under capitalism the small-holdingsystem, which is the normal form of small-scale production,degenerates, collapses, and perishes. 
 “Proprietorship of land parcels, by its very nature, excludes the development of social productive forces of labour, social forms of labour,social concentration of capital, large-scale cattle raising,and the progressive application of science. 
 Usury and ataxation system must impoverish it everywhere. 
 The ex-penditure of capital in the price of the land withdraws this capital from cultivation. 
 An infinite fragmentation of means of production, and isolation of the producers themselves. 
”(Co-operative societies, i. 
e. 
, associations of small peasants,while playing an extremely progressive bourgeois role, onlyweaken this tendency, without eliminating it; nor mustit be forgotten that these co-operative societies do much for the well-to-do peasants, and very little—next to nothing— for the mass of poor peasants; then the associations themselvesbecome exploiters of hired labour. 
) “Monstrous wasteof human energy. 
 Progressive deterioration of conditionsof production and increased prices of means of production—an inevitable law of proprietorship of parcels. 
” In agricul-ture, as in industry, capitalism transforms the process of production only at the price of the “martyrdom of the pro-ducer”. 
 “The dispersion of the rural labourers over largerareas breaks their power of resistance, while concentrationincreases that of the town operatives. 
 In modern agriculture,as in the urban industries, the increased productiveness and quantity of the labour set in motion are bought at the cost of laying waste and consuming by disease labour poweritself. 
 Moreover, all progress in capitalistic agriculture is a progress in the art, not only of robbing the labourer, but of robbing the soil .... 
 Capitalist production, therefore, develops technology, and the combining together of various processes into a social whole, only by sapping the originalsources of all wealth—the soil and the labourer” ( Capital , Vol. 
 I, end of Chapter 13). 
 SOCIALISM From the foregoing it is evident that Marx deduces the inevitability of the transformation of capitalist society intosocialist society wholly and exclusively from the economiclaw of the development of contemporary society. 
 The so-cialisation of labour, which is advancing ever more rapidly in thousands of forms and has manifested itself very strikingly, during the half-century since the death of Marx,in the growth of large-scale production, capitalist cartels,syndicates and trusts, as well as in the gigantic increase inthe dimensions and power of finance capital, provides theprincipal material foundation for the inevitable advent of socialism. 
 The intellectual and moral motive force and the physical executor of this transformation is the proletariat,which has been trained by capitalism itself. 
 Theproletariat’s struggle against the bourgeoisie, which findsexpression in a variety of forms ever richer in content,inevitably becomes a political struggle directed towards the conquest of political power by the proletariat (“the dicta-torship of the proletariat”). 
 The socialisation of productioncannot but lead to the means of production becoming theproperty of society, to the “expropriation of the expropria-tors”. 
 A tremendous rise in labour productivity, a shorterworking day, and the replacement of the remnants, the ruins, of small-scale, primitive and disunited production by collective and improved labour—such are the direct conse-quences of this transformation. 
 Capitalism breaks for alltime the ties between agriculture and industry, but at thesame time, through its highest development, it prepares newelements of those ties, a union between industry and agri-culture based on the conscious application of science and the concentration of collective labour, and on a redistribu-tion of the human population (thus putting an end both to rural backwardness, isolation and barbarism, and to the unnatural concentration of vast masses of people in big cities). 
 A new form of family, new conditions in the status of women and in the upbringing of the younger generationare prepared by the highest forms of present-day capitalism:the labour of women and children and the break-up of thepatriarchal family by capitalism inevitably assume the mostterrible, disastrous, and repulsive forms in modern society. 
 Nevertheless, “modern industry, by assigning as it does, an important part in the socially organised process ofproduction, outside the domestic sphere, to women, to youngpersons, and to children of both sexes, creates a neweconomic foundation for a higher form of the family and ofthe relations between the sexes. 
 It is, of course, just as absurd to hold the Teutonic-Christian form of the family to be absolute and final as it would be to apply that character tothe ancient Roman, the ancient Greek, or the Eastern formswhich, moreover, taken together form a series in historicdevelopment. 
 Moreover, it is obvious that the fact of thecollective working group being composed of individuals of both sexes and all ages, must necessarily, under suitable conditions, become a source of humane development;although in its spontaneously developed, brutal, capitalisticform, where the labourer exists for the process of production,and not the process of production for the labourer, that factis a pestiferous source of corruption and slavery” ( Capital , Vol. 
 I, end of Chap. 
 13). 
 The factory system contains “the germ of the education of the future, an education that will,in the case of every child over a given age, combine produc-tive labour with instruction and gymnastics, not only as oneof the methods of adding to the efficiency of social produc-tion, but as the only method of producing fully developed human beings” ( ibid . 
). 
 Marx’s socialism places the prob-lems of nationality and of the state on the same historicalfooting, not only in the sense of explaining the pastbut also in the sense of a bold forecast of the future and ofbold practical action for its achievement. 
 Nations are aninevitable product, an inevitable form, in the bourgeois epoch of social development. 
 The working class could not grow strong, become mature and take shape without “con-stituting itself within the nation”, without being “national” (“though not in the bourgeois sense of the word”). 
 The development of capitalism, however, breaks down national barriers more and more, does away with national seclusion, and substitutes class antagonisms for national antagonisms. 
It is, therefore, perfectly true of the developed capitalistcountries that “the workingmen have no country” and that“united action” by the workers, of the civilised countries atleast, “is one of the first conditions for the emancipation of the proletariat” ( Communist Manifesto ). 
 The state, which is organised coercion, inevitably came into being at a definitestage in the development of society, when the latter hadsplit into irreconcilable classes, and could not exist with-out an “authority” ostensibly standing above society, and toa certain degree separate from society. 
 Arising out of class contradictions, the state becomes “...the state of the most powerful, economically dominant class, which, through themedium of the state, becomes also the politically dominantclass, and thus acquires new means of holding down andexploiting the oppressed class. 
 Thus, the state of antiquitywas above all the state of the slave-owners for the purpose of holding down the slaves, as the feudal state was the organ of the nobility for holding down the peasant serfs and bonds-men, and the modern representative state is an instrumentof exploitation of wage labour by capital” (Engels, The Origin of the Family , Private Property and the State, a work in which the writer expounds his own views and Marx’s). 
 Even the democratic republic, the freest and most progres-sive form of the bourgeois state, does not eliminate this factin any way, but merely modifies its form (the links between thegovernment and the stock exchange, the corruption—directand indirect—of officialdom and the press, etc. 
). 
 By lead-ing to the abolition of classes, socialism will thereby lead to the abolition of the state as well. 
 “The first act,” Engels writes in Anti-Dühring , “by virtue of which the state really constitutes itself the representative of society as a whole—the taking possession of the means of production in the nameof society—is, at the same time, its last independent act asa state. 
 The state interference in social relations becomes superfluous in one sphere after another, and then ceases of itself. 
 The government of persons is replaced by theadministration of things and by the direction of the processes of production. 
 The state is not ‘abolished’, it withers away. 
” “The society that will organise production on the basis of a free and equal association of the producers will put the whole machinery of state where it will then belong: intothe Museum of Antiquities, by the side of the spinningwheel and the bronze axe” (Engels, The Origin of the Family , Private Property and the State). 
 Finally, as regards the attitude of Marx’s socialism towards the small peasantry, which will continue to exist in the period of the expropriation of the expropriators, wemust refer to a declaration made by Engels, which expressesMarx’s views: “...when we are in possession of state powerwe shall not even think of forcibly expropriating the smallpeasants (regardless of whether with or without compensa-tion), as we shall have to do in the case of the big landowners. 
 Our task relative to the small peasant consists, in the firstplace, in effecting a transition of his private enterpriseand private possession to co-operative ones, not forcibly butby dint of example and the proffer of social assistance forthis purpose. 
 And then of course we shall have ample means of showing to the small peasant prospective advantages that must be obvious to him even today” (Engels, The Peasant Question in France and Germany , * p. 
 17, published by Alexeyeva; there are errors in the Russian translation. 
Original in Die Neue Zeit ). 
 TACTICS OF THE CLASS STRUGGLE OF THE PROLETARIAT After examining, as early as 1844-45, one of the main shortcomings in the earlier materialism, namely, its inabilityto understand the conditions or appreciate the importance of practical revolutionary activity, Marx, along with his theoretical work, devoted unremitting attention, throughouthis lifetime, to the tactical problems of the proletariat’sclass struggle. 
 An immense amount of material bearing onthis is contained in all the works of Marx, particularly in the four volumes of his correspondence with Engels, published *See Marx and Engels, Selected Works , Moscow, 1958, Vol. 
 II, p. 
 433. 
 in 1913. 
 This material is still far from having been brought together, collected, examined and studied. 
 We shall therefore have to confine ourselves here to the most general and brief remarks, emphasising that Marx justly considered that, with-out this aspect, materialism is incomplete, one-sided, and lifeless. 
 The fundamental task of proletarian tactics wasdefined by Marx in strict conformity with all the postulates ofhis materialist-dialectical Weltanschauung . 
 Only an objective consideration of the sum total of the relations between absolutely all the classes in a given society, and conse-quently a consideration of the objective stage of developmentreached by that society and of the relations between it andother societies, can serve as a basis for the correct tactics ofan advanced class. 
 At the same time, all classes and all countries are regarded, not statically, but dynamically, i. 
e. 
, not in a state of immobility, but in motion (whose lawsare determined by the economic conditions of existence ofeach class). 
 Motion, in its turn, is regarded from the stand-point, not only of the past, but also of the future, and that notin the vulgar sense it is understood in by the “evolutionists”, who see only slow changes, but dialectically: “...in develop-ments of such magnitude twenty years are no more than aday,” Marx wrote to Engels, “though later on there may comedays in which twenty years are embodied” ( Briefwechsel , Vol. 
 3, p. 
 127). 
 30 At each stage of development, at each moment, proletarian tactics must take account of this objectively inevitable dialectics of human history, on the one hand, utilising the periods of political stagnation or of slug-gish, so-called “peaceful” development in order to developthe class-consciousness, strength and militancy of theadvanced class, and, on the other hand, directing all the workof this utilisation towards the “ultimate aim” of that class’s advance, towards creating in it the ability to find practical solutions for great tasks in the great days, in which twentyyears are embodied”. 
 Two of Marx’s arguments are of specialimportance in this connection: one of these is containedin The Poverty of Philosophy and concerns the economic struggle and economic organisations of the proletariat; the other is contained in the Communist Manifesto and concerns the political tasks of the proletariat. 
 The former runs asfollows: “Large-scale industry concentrates in one place a crowd of people unknown to one another. 
 Competition divides their interests. 
 But the maintenance of wages, this common interest which they have against their boss, unites them in a common thought of resistance—combinatio n.... 
 Combinations, at first isolated, constitute themselves into groups ... and in face of always united capital, the mainte-nance of the association becomes more necessary to them [i. 
e. 
, the workers] than that of wage s.... 
 In this struggle— a veritable civil war—all the elements necessary for a coming battle unite and develop. 
 Once it has reached this point, association takes on a political character. 
” Here we have the programme and tactics of the economic struggle and of the trade union movement for several decades to come, for all the lengthy period in which the proletariat will prepare its forces for the “coming battle”. 
 All this should be compared with numerous references by Marx and Engels to the example of the British labour movement, showing how industrial “prosperity” leads to attempts “to buy the proletariat” (Briefwechse l, Vol. 
 1, p. 
 136),31 to divert them from the struggle; how this prosperity in general “demoralises the workers” (Vol. 
 2, p. 
 218); how the British proletariat becomes “bourgeoisified”—“this most bourgeois of all nations is apparently aiming ultimately at the possession of a bourgeois aristocracy and a bourgeois proletariat alongside the bourgeoisie” (Vol. 
 2, p. 
 290)32; how its “revolutionary energy” oozes away (Vol. 
 3, p. 
 124); how it will be necessary to wait a more or less lengthy space of time before “the British workers will free themselves from their apparent bour-geois infection” (Vol. 
 3, p. 
 127); how the British labour movement “lacks the mettle of the Chartists” (1866; Vol. 
 3, p. 
 305)33; how the British workers’ leaders are becoming a type midway between “a radical bourgeois and a worker” (in reference to Holyoak, Vol. 
 4, p. 
 209); how, owing to Britain’s monopoly, and as long as that monopoly lasts, “the British workingman will not budge” (Vol. 
 4, p. 
 433) . 
34 The tactics of the economic struggle, in connection with the general course ( and outcome ) of the working-class movement, are considered here from a remarkably broad, comprehensive, dialectical, and genuinely revolutionary standpoint. 
 The Communist Manifesto advanced a fundamental Marxist principle on the tactics of the political struggle: “The Communists fight for the attainment of the immediate aims, for the enforcement of the momentary interests of the working class, but in the movement of the present, they also represent and take care of the future of that movement. 
”That was why, in 1848, Marx supported the party of the“agrarian revolution” in Poland, “that party which broughtabout the Cracow insurrection in 1846”. 
 In Germany, Marx,in 1848 and 1849, supported the extreme revolutionary democrats, and subsequently never retracted what he had then said about tactics. 
 He regarded the German bourgeoisie asan element which was “inclined from the very beginningto betray the people” (only an alliance with the peasantrycould have enabled the bourgeoisie to completely achieveits aims) “and compromise with the crowned representatives of the old society”. 
 Here is Marx’s summing-up of the German bourgeoisie’s class position in the period of the bour-geois-democratic revolution—an analysis which, incidentally,is a sample of a materialism that examines society inmotion, and, moreover, not only from the aspect of a motionthat is backward : “Without faith in itself, without faith in the people, grumbling at those above, trembling before those below ... intimidated by the world storm ... no energyin any respect, plagiarism in every respect ... withoutinitiative ... an execrable old man who saw himself doomed toguide and deflect the first youthful impulses of a robust peoplein his own senile interests .... 
” ( Neue Rheinische Zeitung , 1848; see Literarischer Nachlass , Vol. 
 3, p. 
 212. 
) 35 About twenty years later, Marx declared, in a letter to Engels(Briefwechsel , Vol. 
 3, p. 
 224), that the Revolution of 1848 had failed because the bourgeoisie had preferred peacewith slavery to the mere prospect of a fight for freedom. 
When the revolutionary period of 1848-49 ended, Marx opposed any attempt to play at revolution (his struggle against Schapper and Willich), and insisted on the abilityto work in the new phase, which in a quasi -“peaceful” way was preparing new revolutions. 
 The spirit in which Marxwanted this work to be conducted is to be seen in hisappraisal of the situation in Germany in 1856, the darkest period of reaction: “The whole thing in Germany will depend on the possibility of backing the proletarian revolution bysome second edition of the Peasant War” ( Briefwechsel , Vol. 
 2, p. 
 108). 
36 While the democratic (bourgeois) revolution in Germany was uncompleted, Marx focussed every attention, in the tactics of the socialist proletariat, on developing the democratic energy of the peasantry. 
 Heheld that Lassalle’s attitude was “objectively ... a betrayalof the whole workers’ movement to Prussia” (Vol. 
 3, p. 
 210),incidentally because Lassalle was tolerant of the Junkersand Prussian nationalism. 
 “In a predominantly agricultural country,”? Engels wrote in 1865, in exchanging views with Marx on their forthcoming joint declaration in the press,“...it is dastardly to make an exclusive attack on the bour-geoisie in the name of the industrial proletariat but never todevote a word to the patriarchal exploitation of the ruralproletariat under the lash of the great feudal aristocracy” (Vol. 
 3, p. 
 217). 
 37 From 1864 to 1870, when the period of the consummation of the bourgeois-democratic revolutionin Germany was coming to an end, a period in which thePrussian and Austrian exploiting classes were struggling tocomplete that revolution in one way or another from above , Marx not only rebuked Lassalle, who was coquetting with Bismarck, but also corrected Liebknecht, who had lapsed into “Austrophilism” and a defence of particularism; Marxdemanded revolutionary tactics which would combat withequal ruthlessness both Bismarck and the Austrophiles, tacticswhich would not be adapted to the “victor”—the PrussianJunker—but would immediately renew the revolutionary struggle against him also in the conditions created by the Prussian military victories ( Briefwechsel , Vol. 
 3, pp. 
 134, 136, 147, 179, 204, 210, 215, 418, 437, 440-41). 
 In thecelebrated Address of the International of September 9, 1870,Marx warned the French proletariat against an untimelyuprising, but when an uprising nevertheless took place (1871), Marx enthusiastically hailed the revolutionary initiative of the masses, who were “storming heaven” (Marx’s letterto Kugelmann). 
 From the standpoint of Marx’s dialecticalmaterialism, the defeat of revolutionary action in thatsituation, as in many others, was a lesser evil, in the generalcourse and outcome of the proletarian struggle, than the abandonment of a position already occupied, than surrender without battle. 
 Such a surrender would have demoralisedthe proletariat and weakened its militancy. 
 While fully appreciating the use of legal means of struggle during periods of political stagnation and the domination of bourgeois legality, Marx, in 1877 and 1878, following the passage of the Anti-Socialist Law,38 sharply condemned Most’s “revolu-tionary phrases”; no less sharply, if not more so, did heattack the opportunism that had for a time come over theofficial Social-Democratic Party, which did not at once dis-play resoluteness, firmness, revolutionary spirit and a readiness to resort to an illegal struggle in response to the Anti-Socialist Law ( Briefwechsel , Vol. 
 4, pp. 
 397, 404, 418, 422, 424; cf. 
 also letters to Sorge). 
 BIBLIOGRAPHY No complete collection of Marx’s works and letters has yet been published. 
 More works by Marx have beentranslated into Russian than into any other language. 
 The following list of Marx’s writings is arranged in chronolog-ical order. 
 In 1841 Marx wrote his thesis on Epicurus’sphilosophy. 
 (It was included in Literarischer Nachlass , of which more will be said later. 
) In this thesis, Marx stillfully adhered to the Hegelian idealist point of view. 
 In1842 Marx wrote articles for Rheinische Zeitung (Cologne), among them a criticism of the free-press debate in the Sixth Rhenish Diet, an article on the laws concerning the stealingof timber, another in defence of divorcing politics fromtheology, etc. 
 (partly included in Literarischer Nachlass ). 
 Here we see signs of Marx’s transition from idealism tomaterialism and from revolutionary democracy to commu-nism. 
 In 1844, under the editorship of Marx and Arnold Ruge, there appeared in Paris Deutsch-Französische Jahr-bücher , in which this transition was finally made. 
 Among Marx’s articles published in that magazine, the mostnoteworthy are A Criticism of the Hegelian Philosophy of Right (besides Literarischer Nachlass , also published as a separate pamphlet) and On the Jewish Question (likewise in Literarischer Nachlass ; issued as a pamphlet brought out by the Znaniye Publishers in their Cheap Library, No. 
 210). 
 In 1845, Marx and Engels jointly published, in Frankforton Main, a pamphlet entitled The Holy Family . 
 Against Bruno Bauer and Co . 
 (besides Literarischer Nachlass , there are two Russian editions as pamphlets: one published by Novy Golos in St. 
 Petersburg, 1906, the other by Ves tnik Znaniya , St. 
 Petersburg, 1907). 
 In the spring of 1845, Marx wrote his theses on Feuerbach (published as an appendix to Frederick Engels’s pamphlet entitled Ludwig Feuerbach (there is a Russian translation). 
 In 1845-47 Marx wrote a number of articles (most of which have not been collected, republished,or translated into Russian) in the papers Vorwärts , Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung (1847); Westphälisches Dampfboot (Biele-feld, 1845-48); Der Gesellschaftsspiegel (Elberfeld, 1846). 
 In 1847 Marx wrote his fundamental work against Proudhon, The Poverty of Philosophy , a reply to Proudhon’s work The Philosophy of Poverty . 
 The book was published in Brussels and Paris (there have been three publications inRussian by Novy Mir , one by G. 
 Lvovich, one by Alexeyeva, and one by Prosveshcheniye , all in 1905-06). 
 In 1848 the Speech on Free Trade was published in Brussels (Russian translation available), followed by the publication in Lon-don, in collaboration with Frederick Engels, of the celebratedManifesto of the Communist Party , which has been trans-lated into probably all the languages of Europe and into anumber of other languages (there are about eight Russianpublications referring to 1905 and 1906; by Molot , Kolokol , Alexeyeva, etc. 
, most of which were confiscated. 
 These appeared under various titles: The Communist Manifesto , On Communism , Social Classes and Communism , Capitalism and Communism , The Philosophy of History . 
 A complete and most accurate translation of this, as well as of other works byMarx, will be found in the editions of the Emancipation of Labour group, issued abroad 39). 
 From June 1, 1848, to May 19, 1849, Neue Rheinische Zeitung was published in Cologne with Marx as the actual editor-in-chief. 
 His numerousarticles for that paper, which to this very day remains thefinest and unsurpassed organ of the revolutionary prole-tariat, have not been collected and republished in full. 
 The most important of them were included in Literarischer Nach-lass. 
 Wage-Labour and Capital , published in that paper, has been repeatedly issued as a pamphlet (four Russian edi-tions, by Kozman, Molot ; Myagkov, and Lvovich, 1905 and 1906); also from the same paper The Liberals at the Helm (published by Znaniye Publishers in their Cheap Library, No. 
 272, St. 
 Petersburg, 1906). 
 In 1849 Marx published, in Cologne, Two Political Trials (two speeches in his own defence by Marx, who was acquitted by a jury when facing trial on the charge of having violated the press law and called for armed resistance to the government. 
 Russian translations are available in five publications brought out in 1905 and 1906 by Alexeyeva, Molot , Myagkov, Znaniye , and Novy Mir ). 
 In 1850 Marx published, in Hamburg, six issues of the magazineNeue Rheinische Zeitung . 
 The most important articles pub-lished therein were later included in Literarischer Nachlass . 
 Especially noteworthy are Marx’s articles, republished by Engels in 1895 in a pamphlet entitled Class Struggles in France , 1848-1850 (Russian translation, published by M. 
 Malykh, Library, No. 
 59-60; also in the Collection of His-torical Works , translated by Bazarov and Stepanov and pub-lished by Skirmunt, St. 
 Petersburg, 1906; also Thoughts and Views of the 20th Century , St. 
 Petersburg, 1912). 
 In 1852 a pamphlet by Marx was published in New York under the title of The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte (Russian translation in publications just mentioned). 
 In the sameyear a pamphlet was published in London under the titleof Enthüllungen über den Communistenprozess in Köln (Rus-sian translation entitled The Cologne Trial of the Commu-nards , Popular Science Library, No. 
 43, St. 
 Petersburg, 1906, Oct. 
 28). 
 From August 1851 until 1862, * Marx was a regular contributor to the New York Tribune , where many of his articles appeared unsigned, as editorials. 
Most outstanding among these is a series of articles, Revo-lution and Counter-Revolution in Germany , which were republished after the death of Marx and Engels in a German translation (a Russian translation is available in collectionstranslated by Bazarov and Stepanov, and then, in pamphletform, in five editions brought out in 1905-06 by Alexeyeva,Obshchestvennaya Polza , Novy Mir , Vseobshchaya Biblioteka and Molot ). 
 Some of Marx’s articles in the Tribune were later published in London as separate pamphlets, as, for instance, the one on Palmerston, published in 1856; Revela-tions of the Diplomatic History of the 18th Century (regard-ing the constant venal dependence on Russia of the British *Engels, in his article on Marx in the Handwörterbuch der Staats-wissenschaften , Band VI, S. 
 603, and Bernstein, in his article on Marx in the Eleventh Edition of the Encyclopaedia Britannica , 1911, errone-ously give the dates as 1853-60. 
 See Briefwechsel of Marx and Engels published in 1913. 
 Liberal Ministers), and others. 
 After Marx’s death, his daughter, Eleanor Aveling, published a number of his Tribune articles on the Oriental question, under the title of The Eastern Question , London, 1897. 
 Part has been trans-lated into Russian: War and Revolution , Issue I, Marx and Engels: Unpublished Articles (1852 , 1853 , 1854 ), Kharkov, 1919 ( Our Thought Library). 
 From the end of 1854, and during 1855, Marx contributed to the Neue Oder-Zeitung and in 1861-62 to the Viennese paper Presse . 
 These articles have not been collected, and only a few of them were reprintedin Die Neue Zeit , as were also Marx’s numerous letters. 
 The same is true about Marx’s articles from Das Volk (Lon-don, 1859) on the diplomatic history of the Italian Warof 1859. 
 In 1859 Marx’s Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy appeared in Berlin (Russian translations: Moscow, 1896, edited by Manuilov; St. 
 Petersburg, 1907,translated by Rumyantsev). 
 In 1860 a pamphlet by Marx,entitled Herr Vogt , appeared in London. 
 In 1864 the Address of the International Workingmen ’s Association , which was written by Marx, came out in Lon-don (Russian translation available). 
 Marx was the author of numerous manifestos, appeals and resolutions of theInternational’s General Council. 
 This material is far fromhaving been analysed or even collected. 
 The first approachto this work is Gustav Jaeckh’s book, Die Internationale (in the Russian translation: St. 
 Petersburg, 1906, Znaniye Publishers), which includes several of Marx’s letters and draft resolutions. 
 Among the documents of the Internationalthat Marx wrote was the Address of the General Council onthe Paris Commune. 
 The document appeared in 1871 inLondon, as a pamphlet entitled The Civil War in France (Russian translations: one edited by Lenin, Molot Publish-ers, and others). 
 Between 1862 and 1874 Marx corresponded with Kugelmann, a member of the International (two Rus-sian translations: one by A. 
 Goikhbarg, the other edited byLenin). 
 In 1867 Marx’s main work, Capital : A Critique of Political Economy , Vol. 
 1, appeared in Hamburg. 
 Volumes 2 and 3 were published by Engels in 1885 and 1894, after the death of Marx. 
 The Russian translations: Vol. 
 1, in five editions (two in a translation by Danielson, 1872 and 1898;two in a translation by E. 
 A. 
 Gurvich and L. 
 M. 
 Zak, edited by Struve; 1st ed. 
—1899, 2nd ed. 
—1905; another edited by Bazarov and Stepanov). 
 Volumes 2 and 3 appeared in a translation by Danielson (less satisfactory) and in another under the editorship of Bazarov and Stepanov (the better). 
In 1876 Marx took part in the writing of Engels’s Herrn Eugen Dührings Umwälzung der Wissenschaft (Anti-Dühring ); he went over the manuscript of the whole work and wrote anentire chapter dealing with the history of political economy. 
 The following works by Marx were published posthumously: Critique of the Gotha Programme (St. 
 Petersburg, 1906, and in German in Die Neue Zeit , 1890-91, No. 
 18); Value , Price and Profit (a lecture delivered on June 26, 1865; Die Neue Zeit , XVI, 1897-98-Russian translations, brought out by Molot , 1906, and Lvovich, 1905); Aus dem literarisch-en Nachlass von Karl Marx , Friedrich Engels und Ferdinand Lassalle , three volumes, Stuttgart, 1902 (Russian trans-lation, edited by Axelrod and others, 2 vols. 
, St. 
 Petersburg,1908: Vol. 
 1 also edited by E. 
 Gurvich, Moscow, 1907. 
 Las-salle’s letters to Marx, published separately, are includ-ed in Literarischer Nachlass ); Letters from K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Engels and Others to F. 
 A. 
 Sorge and Others (two editions in Russian; one edited by Axelrod, another published byDauge, with a preface by Lenin); Theorien über den Mehrwert , three volumes in four parts, Stuttgart, 1905-10, which isthe manuscript of the fourth volume of Capital and pub-lished by Kautsky (only the first volume translated into Russian; in three editions; St. 
 Petersburg, 1906, edited by Plekhanov; Kiev, 1906, edited by Zheleznov, and Kiev, 1907,edited by Tuchapsky). 
 In 1913 four big volumes of Marx-Engels Correspondence came out in Stuttgart, with 1,386 letters written between September 1844 and January 10,1883, and providing a mass of highly valuable material for a study of Marx’s biography and views. 
 In 1917, two volumes of Marx’s and Engels’s works appeared, containing theirarticles for 1852-62 (in German). 
 This list of Marx’s worksmust conclude with a note that many of Marx’s shorter ar-ticles and letters, published, for the most part, in Die Neue Zeit , Vorwärts , and other German-language Social-Demo-cratic periodicals, have not been enumerated. 
 The list of Russian translations of Marx is no doubt incomplete espe-cially with reference to pamphlets that appeared in 1905-06. 
 The literature on Marx and Marxism is very extensive. 
 We shall mention only what is most outstanding, and divide the authors into three main groups: Marxists who, in important matters, adhere to Marx’s point of view; bourgeois writers,in essence hostile to Marxism; and revisionists, who,while claiming to accept certain fundamentals of Marxism, infact replace it with bourgeois conceptions. 
 The Narodnikattitude towards Marx should be considered a peculiarly Russian variety of revisionism. 
 In his Ein Beitrag zur Biblio-graphie des Marxismus (Archiv für Sozialwissenschaft und Sozialpolitik , XX, 2. 
 Heft, * 1905, pp. 
 413-30), Werner Sombart gives some three hundred titles in a list that isfar from complete. 
 More can be found in the indexes toDie Neue Zeit , 1883-1907, et seq. 
, also in Josef Stammham-mer’s Bibliographie des Sozialismus und Kommunismus , Bd. 
 I-III, ** Jena (1893-1909). 
 For a detailed bibliography on Marxism see also Bibliographie der Sozialwissenschaften , Berlin. 
 Jahrgang 1, 1905, u. 
 ff. 
 *** See also N. 
 A. 
 Rubakin, Among Books (Vol. 
 2, 2nd ed. 
). 
 We mention here only the most important bibliographies. 
 On the subject of Marx’s biography, attention must be called first of all to Frederick Engels’s articles in Volkskalender ,**** published by Bracke in Brunswick in 1878 and in Handwörterbuch der Staatswis-senschaften , Bd. 
 6, S. 
 600-03 ***** ; W. 
 Liebknecht, Karl Marx zum Gedächtniss ,****** Nuremberg, 1896; Lafargue, Karl Marx . 
 Persönliche Erinnerungen ******* ; W. 
 Lieb-knecht, Karl Marx , 2nd ed. 
, St. 
 Petersburg, 1906; P. 
 Lafargue, My Recollections of Karl Marx , Odessa, 1905 (see original in Die Neue Zeit , IX, 1); Karl Marx : In Memoriam , St. 
 Peters-burg, 1908, 410 pages, a collection of articles by Y. 
 Nevzo-rov, N. 
 Rozhkov. 
 V. 
 Bazarov, Y. 
 Steklov, A. 
 Finn-Yeno-tayevsky, P. 
 Rumyantsev, K. 
 Renner, H. 
 Roland-Holst, *“A Contribution to the Bibliography of Marxism” pub-lished in Archive for Social Science and Social Politics , Vol. 
 20, Book 2. 
— Ed. 
 **Bibliography of Socialism and Communism , Vols. 
 1-3. 
— Ed. 
 ***Bibliography of the Social Sciences , Berlin, the first year of publication, 1905, and the following years. 
— Ed. 
 **** People ’s Calendar . 
—Ed. 
 ***** Dictionary of the Political Sciences , Vol. 
 6, pp. 
 600-03. 
— Ed. 
 ****** W. 
 Liebknecht, Karl Marx , Biographical Memoirs . 
—Ed. 
 ******* Paul Lafargue, Personal Recollections of Karl Marx . 
—Ed. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR V. 
 Ilyin, R. 
 Luxemburg, G. 
 Zinoviev, Y. 
 Kamenev, P. 
 Orlovsky, M. 
 Tagansky; Franz Mehring, Karl Marx . 
 The extensive biography of Marx written in English by the Ameri-can socialist, Spargo (John Spargo, Karl Marx , His Life and Work , London, 1911), is unsatisfactory. 
 For a general review of Marx’s activities, see Karl Kautsky, Die histor-ische Leistung von Karl Marx. 
 Zum 25. 
 Todestag des Meisters ,* Berlin, 1908. 
 The Russian translation is entitled Karl Marx and His Historical Importance , St. 
 Petersburg, 1908. 
 See also a popular pamphlet by Clara Zetkin, Karl Marx und sein Le-benswerk ** (1913). 
 Reminiscences of Marx: those by Annen-kov in Vestnik Yevropy , 1880, No. 
 4 (also in his Reminiscences , Vol. 
 3, A Remarkable Decade , St. 
 Petersburg, 1882), those by Karl Schurz in Russkoye Bogatstvo , 1906, No. 
 12: by M. 
 Ko-valevsky in Vestnik Yevropy , 1909, No . 
 6, et seqq. 
 On the question of Marxist philosophy and historical materialism the best exposition is given by G. 
 V. 
 Plekhanov,For Twenty Years , St. 
 Petersburg, 1909, 3rd ed. 
; From Defence to Attack , St. 
 Petersburg, 1910; Fundamental Problems of Marxism , St. 
 Petersburg, 1908; A Critique of Our Critics , St. 
 Petersburg, 1906; The Development of the Monist View of History , St. 
 Petersburg, 1908, and other works. 
 Antonio Labriola, On the Materialist View of History [in Rus-sian], St. 
 Petersburg, 1898; also his Historical Material-ism and Philosophy , St. 
 Petersburg, 1906, Franz Mehring, On Historical Materialism [in Russian] (two editions, by Prosveshcheniye and Molot ), St. 
 Petersburg, 1906, and The Lessing Legend [in Russian], St. 
 Petersburg, 1908 (Znaniye ); see also Charles Andler (non-Marxist), The Com-munist Manifesto. 
 History , Introduction , Comments [in Russian], St. 
 Petersburg, 1906. 
 See also Historical Ma-terialism , St. 
 Petersburg, 1908, a collection of articles by Engels, Kautsky, Lafargue, and many others; L. 
 Axelrod,Philosophical Sketches. 
 A Reply to Philosophic Critics of Historical Materialism , St. 
 Petersburg, 1906. 
 A special defence of Dietzgen’s unsuccessful deviations from Marxismis contained in E. 
 Untermann’s Die logischen Mängel des *Karl Kautsky, The Historical Contribution of Karl Marx. 
 On the Twenty-Fifth Anniversary of the Master ’s Death . 
—Ed. 
 **Clara Zetkin, Karl Marx and His Life Work . 
—Ed. 
 engeren Marxismus ,* Munich, 1910, 753 pages (an extensive but none too serious work). 
 Hugo Riekes’s Die philosophische Wurzel des Marxismus , in Zeitschrift für die gesamte Staats-wissenschaft , 62. 
 Jahrgang, 1906, 3. 
 Heft, S. 
 407-32, ** is an interesting piece of work by an opponent of the Marxistviews, showing their philosophical integrity from the view-point of materialism. 
 Benno Erdmann’s Die philosophischen Voraussetzungen der materialistischen Geschichtsauffassung , in Jahrbuch für Gesetzgebung , Verwaltung und Volkswirt-schaft (Schmollers Jahrbuch ), 1907, 3. 
 Heft, S. 
 1-56, *** is a very useful formulation of some of the basic principles ofMarx’s philosophical materialism, and a summary of argu-ments against it from the current viewpoint of Kantianism,and agnosticism in general. 
 Rudolph Stammler (a Kantian), Wirtschaft und Recht nach der materialistischen Geschichts-auffassung , **** 2nd ed. 
, Leipzig, 1906; Woltmann (also a Kan-tian), Historical Materialism (in a Russian translation. 
 1901); Vorländer (also a Kantian), Kant and Marx , [in Russian], St. 
 Petersburg, 1909. 
 See also the polemic between A. 
 Bogdanov,V. 
 Bazarov and others, on the one hand, and V. 
 Ilyin, ***** on the other (the views of the former being contained inAn Outline of the Philosophy of Marxism , St. 
 Petersburg, 1908; A. 
 Bogdanov, The Downfall of a Great Fetishism , Mos-cow, 1909, and elsewhere, and the views of the latter, inMaterialism and Empirio-Criticism , Moscow, 1909). 
 On the question of historical materialism and ethics: Karl Kautsky, Ethics and the Materialist Conception of History , St. 
 Peters-burg, 1906, and numerous other works by Kautsky; LouisBoudin, The Theoretical System of Karl Marx in the Light of Recent Criticism ; translated from the English under the editorship of V. 
 Zasulich, St. 
 Petersburg, 1908; Hermann *E. 
 Untermann , The Logical Defects of Narrow Marxism . 
—Ed. 
 **Hugo Riekes, “The Philosophical Roots of Marxism”, in the Journal of All Political Sciences , 62nd year of publication, 1906, Book 3, pp. 
 407-32. 
— Ed. 
 *** Benno Erdmann, “The Philosophic Assumptions of the Mate-rialist Conception of History” in the Yearbook for Legislation , Adminis-tration and National Economy (Schmoller ’s Yearbook ), 1907, Book 3, pp. 
 1 -56. 
— Ed. 
 **** Rudolph Stammler, Economy and Law According to the Materialist Conception of History . 
—Ed. 
 ***** V. 
 Ilyin—one of the literary pseudonyms of V. 
 I. 
 Lenin. 
— Ed. 
 Gorter, Der historische Materialismus ,* 1909. 
 Of works by opponents to Marxism, we would name Tugan-Baranovsky, The Theoretical Fundamentals of Marxism , St. 
 Petersburg, 1907; S. 
 Prokopovich, A Critique of Marx , St. 
 Petersburg, 1901; Hammacher, Das philosophisch-ökonomische System des Marxismus ,** Leipzig, 1910 (730 pages, collection of quota-tions); Werner Sombart, Socialism and the Social Move-ment in the Nineteenth Century [in Russian], St. 
 Petersburg; Max Adler (a Kantian), Kausalität und Teleologie , Vienna, 1909, in Marx-Studien , also Marx als Denker *** by the same author. 
 The book of an Hegelian idealist, Giovanni Gentile, La filosofia di Marx ,**** Pisa, 1899, is noteworthy. 
 The author deals with some important aspects of Marx’s materialist dia-lectics which usually escape the attention of the Kantians, Positivists, etc. 
 Likewise: Lévy, Feuerbach , a work about one of the main philosophical predecessors of Marx. 
 A use-ful collection of quotations from a number of Marx’s worksis contained in Chernyshev’s Notebook of a Marxist , St. 
 Petersburg ( Dyelo ), 1908. 
 On Marx’s economic doctrine, the following books are outstanding: Karl Kautsky, The Economic Doctrines of Karl Marx (numerous editions in Russian), The Agrarian Question , The Erfurt Programme , and numerous pamphlets. 
 Cf. 
 also: Eduard Bernstein, The Economic Doctrine of Marx . 
 The Third Volume of Capital (Russian translation, 1905); Gabriel Deville, Capital (an exposition of the first volume of Capital , Russian trans-lation, 1907). 
 A representative of so-called revisionismamong Marxists, as regards the agrarian question, is EduardDavid, Socialism and Agriculture (Russian translation, St. 
 Petersburg, 1902). 
 For a critique of revisionism see V. 
 Ilyin,The Agrarian Question , Part I, St. 
 Petersburg, 1908. 
 See also the following books by V. 
 Ilyin: The Development of Capitalism in Russia , second edition, St. 
 Petersburg, 1908; Economic Essays and Articles , St. 
 Petersburg, 1899; New Data on the Laws of Development of Capitalism in Agriculture , *Hermann Gorter, Historical Materialism . 
—Ed. 
 **Hammacher, The Philosophic-Economic System of Marx-ism. 
—Ed. 
 *** Max Adler, Causality and Teleology and Marx as a Thinker . 
—Ed. 
 **** Giovanni Gentile, The Philosophy of Marx . 
—Ed. 
 Book 1, 1917. 
 An application of Marx’s views, with some deviations, to the latest data concerning agrarian relations in France can be found in Compère-Morel, La question agraire et le socialisme en France ,* Paris, 1912. 
 455 pages. 
 For the further development of Marx’s economic views as applied torecent phenomena in economic life see Hilferding’s Finance Capital [in Russian], St. 
 Petersburg, 1911 (outstanding inaccuracies in the author’s views on the theory of value have been corrected by Kautsky in “Gold, Papier und Ware”,— “Gold, Paper Money and Commodities”—in Die Neue Zeit , XXX, 1, 1912, pp. 
 837 and 886); and V. 
 Ilyin’s Imperialism , the Highest Stage of Capitalism , 1917. 
 Pyotr Maslov in his Agrarian Question (two volumes) and The Theory of Eco-nomic Development , St. 
 Petersburg, 1910, deviates from Marxism on important points. 
 A criticism of some of Maslov’s deviations may be found in Kautsky’s “ Malthusianism and Socialism ” in Die Neue Zeit , XXIX, 1, 1911. 
 A criticism of the economic doctrine of Marx, from the point of view of the so-called marginal utility theory thatis widespread among bourgeois professors, is contained in the following works: Böhm-Bawerk, Zum Abschluss des Marx-schen Systems ** (Berlin, 1896, in Staatswiss. 
 Arbeiten , Festgabe für K. 
 Knies ), Russian translation, St. 
 Petersburg, 1897, The Theory of Marx and Its Criticism , and also his Kapital und Kapitalzins , 2nd ed. 
, two volumes, Innsbruck, 1900-02 (Russian translation, Capital and Profits , St. 
 Petersburg, 1909). 
 See also: Riekes, Wert und Tauschwert (1899) ***; von Bortkiewicz, Wertrechnung und Preisrech-nung im Marxschen System (Archiv für Sozialwissenschaft , 1906-07) **** ; Leo von Buch, Über die Elemente der politi-schen Ökonomie . 
 I. 
 Th. 
 Die Intensität d. 
 Arbeit, Wert u. 
 Preis ***** (published also in Russian). 
 For an analysis of Böhm-Bawerk’s critique from a Marxist point of view see *Compère-Morel, Agrarian Question and Socialism in France . 
—Ed. 
 **Böhm-Bawerk, Karl Marx and the Close of His System . 
—Ed. 
 *** Riekes, Value and Exchange Value (1899). 
— Ed. 
 **** Von Bortkiewicz, Calculation of Value and Calculation of Price in the Marxian System (Archive for Social Science , 1906-07). 
—Ed. 
 ***** Leo von Buch, On the Elements of Political Economy . 
 Intensity of Labour , Value and Price . 
—Ed. 
 Hilferding’s Böhm-Bawerks Marx-Kritik * (Marx-Studien , I. 
 Band, Vienna, 1904), and in shorter articles published in Die Neue Zeit . 
 On the question of the two main currents in the inter-pretation and development of Marxism—the “revisionist”and the radical (“orthodox”)—see Eduard Bernstein’s Voraus-setzungen des Sozialismus und die Aufgaben der Sozial-demokratie (German original, Stuttgart, 1899; Russian trans-lations: Historical Materialism , St. 
 Petersburg, 1901, and Social Problems , Moscow, 1901); see also his From the His-tory and Theory of Socialism , St. 
 Petersburg, 1902. 
 A reply to Bernstein is contained in Karl Kautsky’s Bernstein und das sozialdemokratische Programm (German original, Stutt-gart, 1899; Russian translation in four editions; 1905-06) For French Marxist literature see Jules Guesde’s Quatre ans de lutte des classes , En garde! and Questions d ’hier et d ’au-ourd ’hui (Paris, 1911) **; Paul Lafargue, Le déterminisme éco-nomique de K. 
 Marx (Paris, 1909) ***; Anton Pannekoek, Zwei Tendenzen in der Arbeiterbewegung . 
**** On the question of the Marxist theory of the accumula-tion of capital there is a new work by Rosa Luxemburg. 
 Die Akkumulation des Kapitals (Berlin, 1913), ***** and an analysis of her incorrect interpretation of Marx’s theory byOtto Bauer, Die Akkumulation des Kapitals (Die Neue Zeit , XXXI, 1, 1913, S. 
 831 und 862). 
 ****** See also Eckstein in Vorwärts and Pannekoek in Bremer Bürger-Zeitung for 1913. 
 Of the older Russian literature on Marxism the following should be noted: B. 
 Chicherin, “The German Socialists”, inBezobrazov’s Collection of Political Science , St. 
 Petersburg, 1888, and The History of Political Doctrines , Part 5, Moscow, 1902, 156 pages; a reply to the above by Zieber, “The GermanEconomists Through Mr. 
 Chicherin’s Glasses”, in his Collected *Hilferding, Böhm-Bawerk ’s Criticism of Marx . 
—Ed. 
 **Jules Guesde, Four Years of Class Struggle , On Guard! Questions of Today , Paris, 1911. 
— Ed. 
 *** Paul Lafargue, Economic D eterminism. 
 The Historical Method of Karl Marx , Paris, 1909. 
— Ed. 
 **** Anton Pannekoek, Two Tendencies in the Labour Move-ment . 
—Ed. 
 ***** Rosa Luxemburg, The Accumulation of Capital , Berlin, 1913. 
— Ed. 
 ****** Otto Bauer. 
 The Accumulation of Capital (Die Neue Zeit , XXI. 
 1, 1913, pp. 
 831 and 862). 
— Ed. 
 Works , Vol. 
 II, St. 
 Petersburg, 1900; L Slonimsky, The Economic Doctrine of Karl Marx , St. 
 Petersburg, 1898; N. 
 Zieber, David Ricardo and Karl Marx in Their Socio-economic Investigations , St. 
 Petersburg, 1885, and his Col-lected Works , in two volumes, St. 
 Petersburg, 1900. 
 Also J. 
 Kaufmann’s (J. 
 K—n) review of Capital in Vestnik Yev-ropy for 1872, No. 
 5—an article marked by the fact that, in his addendum to the second edition of Capital , Marx quoted J. 
 K—n’s arguments, recognising them as a correct exposi-tion of his dialectical-materialist method. 
 The Russian Narodniks on Marxism: N. 
 K. 
 Mikhailovsky— in Russkoye Bogatstvo , 1894, No. 
 10, and 1895, Nos. 
 1 and 2; also reprinted in his Collected Works —remarks on P. 
 Struve’s Critical Notes (St. 
 Petersburg, 1894). 
 Mikhailovsky’s views were analysed from a Marxist point of view by K. 
 Tulin (V. 
 Ilyin) in his Data Characterising Our Economic Develop-ment (St. 
 Petersburg, 1895, destroyed by the censor), later reprinted in V. 
 Ilyin’s For Twelve Years , St. 
 Petersburg, 1908. 
 Other Narodnik works: V. 
 V. 
, Our Lines of Policy , St. 
 Peters-burg, 1892, and From the Seventies to the Twentieth Century , St. 
 Petersburg, 1907; Nikolai—on, Outline of Our Post-Reform Social Economy , St. 
 Petersburg, 1893; V. 
 Chernov, Marxism and the Agrarian Problem , St. 
 Petersburg, 1906, and Philosophical and Sociological Sketches , St. 
 Petersburg, 1907. 
 Besides the Narodniks, the following may also be men-tioned: N. 
 Kareyev, Old and New Sketches on Historical Mate-rialism , St. 
 Petersburg, 1896, 2nd edition in 1913 under the title A Critique of Economic Materialism ; Masaryk, Philosophical and Sociological Foundations of Marxism [in Russian], Moscow, 1900; Croce, Historical Materialism and Marxian Economy [in Russian], St. 
 Petersburg, 1902. 
 For a correct appraisal of Marx’s views, an acquaintance is essential with the works of Frederick Engels, his closest fellow-thinker and collaborator. 
 It is impossible to under-stand Marxism and to propound it fully without takinginto account all the works of Engels. 
 For a critique of Marx from the point of view of anarchism, see V. 
 Cherkezov, The Doctrines of Marxism , two parts, St. 
 Petersburg, 1905, V. 
 Tucker, In Lieu of a Book [in Rus-sian], Moscow, 1907; Sorel (a syndicalist), Social Studies of Modern Economy , Moscow, 1908. 
 A GERMAN VOICE ON THE WAR “In a single night the aspect of the world has changed .... 
 Everyone puts the blame on his neighbour, everyone claims to be on the defen-sive, to act only in a state of urgent defence. 
 Everyone, don’t you see, is defending only his most sacred values, the hearth, the fatherland .... 
 National vainglory and national aggressiveness triumph .... 
 E ven the great international working class obeys national orders, workers arekilling one another on the battlefields .... 
 Our civilisation has proved bankrupt .... 
 W riters of European fame are not ashamed to come forth as ragingly blind chauvinists .... 
 We had too much faith in the possibil-ity of imperialist madness being curbed by the fear of economic ruin .... 
 We are going through an undisguised imperialist struggle for masteryof the world. 
 There is no trace anywhere of a struggle for great ideas,except perhaps the overthrow of the Russian Minotaur ... the tsar andhis grand dukes who have delivered to the hangmen the noblest men oftheir country .... 
 But do we not see how noble France, the bearer of ideals of liberty, has become the ally of the hangman tsar? How honest Germany ... is breaking its word and is strangling unhappy neutralBelgium? ... How will it all end? If poverty becomes too great, if despairgains the upper hand, if brother recognises his brother in the uniformof an enemy, then perhaps something very unexpected may still come,arms may perhaps be turned against those who are urging people into the war and nations that have been made to hate one another may perhaps forget that hatred, and suddenly unite. 
 We do not want to beprophets, but should the European war bring us one step closer to aEuropean social republic, then this war, after all, will not have beenas senseless as it seems at present. 
” Whose voice is this? Perhaps one coming from a German Social-Democrat? Far from it! Headed by Kautsky, the German Social-Democrats have become “wretched counter-revolutionary windbags”,40 as Marx called those Social-Democrats who, after the publication of the Anti-Socialist Law, behaved “inaccord with the circumstances”, in the manner of Haase,Kautsky, Südekum and Co. 
 today. 
 No, our quotation is from a magazine of petty-bourgeois Christian democrats published by a group of kind-hearted little churchmen in Zurich ( Neue Wege , Blätter für religiöse Arbeit ,* September, 1914). 
 That is the limit of humilia-tion we have come to: God-fearing philistines go as far asto say that it would not be bad to turn weapons againstthose who “are urging people into the war”, while “author-itative” Social-Democrats like Kautsky “scientifically” defend the most despicable chauvinism, or, like Plekhanov, declare the propaganda of civil war against the bourgeoisiea harmful “utopia”! Indeed, if such “Social-Democrats” wish to be in the majority and to form the official “International” ( =an alliance for international justification of national chauvin-ism), then is it not better to give up the name of “Social-Democrats”, which has been besmirched and degraded bythem, and return to the old Marxist name of Communists?Kautsky once threatened to do that when the opportunistBernsteinians 41 seemed to be close to conquering the Ger-man party officially. 
 What was an idle threat from his lips will perhaps become action to others. 
 Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 34, Published according to December 5, 1914 the text in Sotsial-Demokrat *New Ways , Pages for Religious Work . 
—Ed. 
 DEAD CHAUVINISM AND LIVING SOCIALISM HOW THE INTERNATIONAL CAN BE RESTORED For decades, German Social-Democracy was a model to the Social-Democrats of Russia, even somewhat more than to the Social-Democrats of the whole world. 
 It is therefore clear that there can be no intelligent, i. 
e. 
, critical, atti-tude towards the now prevalent social-patriotism or “social-ist” chauvinism, without a most precise definition of one’sattitude towards German Social-Democracy. 
 What wasit in the past? What is it today? What will it be in the future? A reply to the first of these questions may be found in Der Weg zur Macht , a pamphlet written by K. 
 Kautsky in 1909 and translated into many European languages. 
 Contain-ing a most complete exposition of the tasks of our timesit was most advantageous to the German Social-Democrats (in the sense of the promise they held out), and moreover came from the pen of the most eminent writer of the SecondInternational. 
 We shall recall the pamphlet in some detail-this will be the more useful now since those forgotten idealsare so often barefacedly cast aside. 
 Social-Democracy is a “revolutionary party” (as stated in the opening sentence of the pamphlet), not only in the sense that a steam engine is revolutionary, but “also inanother sense”. 
 It wants conquest of political power by theproletariat, the dictatorship of the proletariat. 
 Heapingridicule on “doubters of the revolution”, Kautsky writes:“In any important movement and uprising we must, of cour-se, reckon with the possibility of defeat. 
 Prior to the struggle only a fool can consider himself quite certain of victory. 
”However, to refuse to consider the possibility of victory would be “a direct betrayal of our cause”. 
 A revolution in connection with a war, he says, is possible both during and after a war. 
 It is impossible to determine at which particular moment the sharpening of class antagonisms willlead to revolution, but, the author continues, “I can quitedefinitely assert that a revolution that war brings in itswake, will break out either during or immediately after thewar”; nothing is more vulgar, we read further, than the theory of “the peaceful growing into socialism”. 
 “Nothing is more erroneous,” he continues, “than the opinion that acognition of economic necessity means a weakening of thewill.... 
 The will, as a desire for struggle,” he says, “is determined, first, by the price of the struggle, secondly, bya sense of power, and thirdly, by actual power. 
” When an attempt was made, incidentally by Vorwärts , to interpret Engels’s famous preface to The Class Struggles in France i n the meaning of opportunism, Engels became indignant, andcalled shameful any assumption that he was a “peaceful wor-shipper of legality at any price”. 
 42 “We have every reason to believe,” Kautsky goes on to say, “that we are entering upon a period of struggle for state power. 
” That struggle may last for decades; that is something we do not know,but “it will in all probability bring about, in the nearfuture, a considerable strengthening of the proletariat, ifnot its dictatorship, in Western Europe”. 
 The revolutionaryelements are growing, Kautsky declares: out of ten million voters in Germany in 1895, there were six million prole-tarians and three and a half million people interested inprivate property; in 1907 the latter grew by 0. 
03 million, andthe former by 1. 
6 million! “The rate of the advance becomesvery rapid as soon as a time of revolutionary ferment comes. 
”Class antagonisms are not blunted but, on the contrary, grow acute; prices rise, and imperialist rivalry and mili-tarism are rampant. 
 “A new era of revolution” is drawingnear. 
 The monstrous growth of taxes would “long ago haveled to war as the only alternative to revolution ... had notthat very alternative of revolution stood closer after awar than after a period of armed peace...”. 
 “A world war is ominously imminent,” Kautsky continues, “and war means also revolution. 
” In 1891 Engels had reason to fear a prema-ture revolution in Germany; since then, however, “the situation has greatly changed”. 
 The proletariat “can no longer speak of a premature revolution” (Kautsky’s italics). 
 The petty bourgeoisie is downright unreliable and is ever more hostile to the proletariat, but in a time of crisis it is “capableof coming over to our side in masses”. 
 The main thing isthat Social-Democracy “should remain unshakable, con-sistent, and irreconcilable”. 
 We have undoubtedly entered arevolutionary period. 
 This is how Kautsky wrote in times long, long past, fully five years ago. 
 This is what German Social-Democracywas, or, more correctly, what it promised to be. 
 This wasthe kind of Social-Democracy that could and had to berespected. 
 See what the selfsame Kautsky writes today. 
 Here are the most important statements in his article “Social-Democ-racy in Wartime” ( Die Neue Zeit No. 
 1, October 2, 1914): “Our Party has far more rarely discussed the question of howto behave in wartime than how to prevent war .... 
 Never is government so strong, never are parties so weak, as atthe outbreak of war .... 
 Wartime is least of all favourable to peaceful discussion .... 
 Today the practical question is: victory or defeat for one’s own country. 
” Can there bean understanding among the parties of the belligerentcountries regarding anti-war action? “That kind of thinghas never been tested in practice. 
 We have always disputedthat possibility .... 
” The difference between the French and German socialists is “not one of principle” (as both defend their fatherlands) .... 
 “Social-Democrats of all coun-tries have an equal right or an equal obligation to take part inthe defence of the fatherland: no nation should blame theother for doing so .... 
” “Has the International turned bank-rupt?” “Has the Party rejected direct defence of its party principles in wartime?” (Mehring’s questions in the same issue. 
) “That is an erroneous conception .... 
 There are no grounds at all for such pessimism .... 
 The differences are not fundamental .... 
 Unity of principles remains .... 
 To dis-obey wartime laws would simply lead to suppression ofour press. 
” Obedience to these laws “implies rejection of defence of party principles just as little as similar behav-iour of our party press under that sword of Damocles—theAnti-Socialist Law. 
” We have purposely quoted from the original because it is hard to believe that such things could have been written. 
 It is hard to find in literature (except in that coming from downright renegades) such smug vulgarity, such shamefuldeparture from the truth, such unsavoury subterfuge to coverup the most patent renunciation both of socialism in generaland of precise international decisions unanimously adopted(as, for instance, in Stuttgart and particularly in Basle) precisely in view of the possibility of a European war just like the present! It would be disrespectful towards thereader were we to treat Kautsky’s arguments in earnest andtry to analyse them: if the European war differs in manyrespects from a simple “little” anti-Jewish pogrom, the“socialist” arguments in favour of participation in such a war fully resemble the “democratic” arguments in favour of participation in an anti -Jewish pogrom. 
 One does not ana-lyse arguments in favour of a pogrom; one only points themout so as to put their authors to shame in the sight of allclass-conscious workers. 
 But how could it have come to pass, the reader will ask, that the leading authority in the Second International, a writer who once defended the views quoted at the beginningof this article, has sunk to something that is worse thanbeing a renegade? That will not be understood, we answer,only by those who, perhaps unconsciously, consider thatnothing out of the ordinary has happened, and that it is not difficult to “forgive and forget”, etc. 
, i. 
e. 
, by those who regard the matter from the renegade’s point of view. 
Those, however, who have earnestly and sincerely professedsocialist convictions and have held the views set forth inthe beginning of this article will not be surprised to learnthat “ Vorwärts is dead” (Martov’s expression in the Paris Golos ) and that Kautsky is “dead”. 
 The political bank-ruptcy of individuals is not a rarity at turning points inhistory. 
 Despite the tremendous services he has rendered,Kautsky has never been among those who, at great crises,immediately take a militant Marxist stand (recall his vacil-lations on the issue of Millerandism 43). 
 It is such times that we are passing through. 
 “You shoot first, Messieurs the Bourgeoisie!”44 Engels wrote in 1891, advocating, most correctly, the use of bourgeois legality by us, revolutionaries, in the period of so-called peaceful constitutional development. 
 Engels’s idea was crystal clear: we class-conscious workers, he said, will be the next to shoot; it is to our advantage to exchange ballots for bullets (to goover to civil war) at the moment the bourgeoisie itself hasbroken the legal foundation it has laid down. 
 In 1909 Kaut-sky voiced the undisputed opinion held by all revolutionarySocial-Democrats when he said that revolution in Europe cannot now be premature and that war means revolution. 
 “Peaceful” decades, however, have not passed without leaving their mark. 
 They have of necessity given rise toopportunism in all countries, and made it prevalent amongparliamentarian, trade union, journalistic and other “lead-ers”. 
 There is no country in Europe where, in one form or another, a long and stubborn struggle has not been con-ducted against opportunism, the latter being supported ina host of ways by the entire bourgeoisie, which is strivingto corrupt and weaken the revolutionary proletariat. 
 Fif-teen years ago, at the outset of the Bernstein controversy,the selfsame Kautsky wrote that should opportunism turn from a sentiment into a trend, a split would be imminent. 
 In Russia, the old Iskra , 45 which created the Social-Demo-cratic Party of the working class, declared, in an articlewhich appeared in its second issue early in 1901, under thetitle of “On the Threshold of the Twentieth Century”, thatthe revolutionary class of the twentieth century, like the revolutionary class of the eighteenth century—the bourgeoi-sie, had its own Gironde and its own Mountain . 
 46 The European war is a tremendous historical crisis, the beginning of a new epoch. 
 Like any crisis, the war hasaggravated deep-seated antagonisms and brought them to thesurface, tearing asunder all veils of hypocrisy, rejecting all conventions and deflating all corrupt or rotting authori-ties. 
 (This, incidentally, is the salutary and progressiveeffect of all crises, which only the dull-witted adherentsof “peaceful evolution” fail to realise. 
) The Second Inter-national, which in its twenty-five or forty-five years ofexistence (according to whether the reckoning is from 1870 or 1889) was able to perform the highly important and useful work of expanding the influence of socialism and givingthe socialist forces preparatory, initial and elementary organisation, has played its historical role and has passed away, overcome, not so much by the von Klucks as by oppor-tunism. 
 Let the dead bury their dead. 
 Let the empty-headed busy-bodies (if not the intriguing lackeys of the chauvinistsand the opportunists) labour at the task of bringing togetherVandervelde and Sembat with Kautsky and Haase, asthough we had another Ivan Ivanovich, who has called IvanNikiforovich a “gander”, and has to be urged by his friends to make it up with his enemy. 
 47 An International does not mean sitting at the same table and having hypocritical andpettifogging resolutions written by people who think thatgenuine internationalism consists in German socialists justi-fying the German bourgeoisie’s call to shoot down Frenchworkers, and in French socialists justifying the French bourgeoisie’s call to shoot down German workers in the name of the “defence of the fatherland”! The Internationalconsists in the coming together (first ideologically, thenin due time organisationally as well) of people who, in thesegrave days, are capable of defending socialist international-ism in deed, i. 
e. 
, of mustering their forces and “being the next to shoot” at the governments and the ruling classes of their own respective “fatherlands”. 
 This is no easy task; it calls for much preparation and great sacrifices and willbe accompanied by reverses. 
 However, for the very reasonthat it is no easy task, it must be accomplished onlytogether with those who wish to perform it and are not afraid of a complete break with the chauvinists and with the defend-ers of social-chauvinism. 
 Such people as Pannekoek are doing more than anyone else for the sincere, not hypocritical restoration of asocialist, not a chauvinist, International. 
 In an articleentitled “The Collapse of the International”, Pannekoek said: “If the leaders get together in an attempt to patch up their differences, that will be of no significance at all. 
” Let us frankly state the facts; in any case the war will compel us to do so, if not tomorrow, then the day after. 
 Three currents exist in international socialism: (I) thechauvinists, who are consistently pursuing a policy of opportunism; (2) the consistent opponents of opportunism, who in all countries have already begun to make themselvesheard (the opportunists have routed most of them, but “defeated armies learn fast”), and are capable of conducting revolutionary work directed towards civil war; (3) confused and vacillating people, who at present are following in the wake of the opportunists and are causing the proletariat mostharm by their hypocritical attempts to justify opportunism,something that they do almost scientifically and using theMarxist ( sic!) method. 
 Some of those who are engulfed in the latter current can be saved and restored to socialism, but only through a policy of a most decisive break and split with the former current, with all those who are capable ofjustifying the war credits vote, “the defence of the father-land”, “submission to wartime laws”, a willingness to besatisfied with legal means only, and the rejection of civilwar. 
 Only those who pursue a policy like this are really building up a socialist International. 
 For our part, we, who have established links with the Russian Collegium ofthe Central Committee and with the leading elements of theworking-class movement in Petrograd, have exchangedopinions with them and become convinced that we are agreedon the main points, are in a position, as editors of the Central Organ, to declare in the name of our Party that only work conducted in this direction is Party work andSocial-Democratic work. 
 The idea of a split in the German Social-Democratic movement may seem alarming to many in its “unusualness”. 
The objective situation, however, goes to show that either the unusual will come to pass (after all, Adler and Kautsky did declare, at the last session of the International SocialistBureau 48 in July 1914, that they did not believe in miracles, and therefore did not believe in a European war!)or we shall witness the painful decomposition of what wasonce German Social-Democracy. 
 In conclusion, we would like to remind those who are too prone to “trust” the ( former ) German Social-Democrats that people who have been ouropponents on a number of issues have arrived at the idea ofsuch a split. 
 Thus Martov has written in Golos ; “Vorwärts is dead .... 
 A Social-Democracy which publicly renounces the class struggle would do better to recognise the facts as they are, temporarily disband its organisation, and close down its organs. 
” Thus Plekhanov is quoted by Golos as having said in a report: “I am very much against splits, but if principles are sacrificed for the integrity of the organisation, then better a split than false unity. 
” Plekhanov was referring to the German radicals: he sees a mote in the eye of the Germans, but not the beam in his own eye. 
 This isan individual feature in him; over the past ten years we haveall grown quite used to Plekhanov’s radicalism in theoryand opportunism in practice. 
 However, if even persons withsuch “oddities” begin to talk of a split among the Germans, it is a sign of the times. 
 Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 35, Published according to December 12, 1914 the text in Sotsial-Demokrat ON THE NATIONAL PRIDE OF THE GREAT RUSSIANS What a lot of talk, argument and vociferation there is nowadays about nationality and the fatherland! Liberal and radical cabinet ministers in Britain, a host of “forward-looking” journalists in France (who have proved in fullagreement with their reactionary colleagues), and a swarm ofofficial Cadet and progressive scribblers in Russia (includ-ing several Narodniks and “Marxists”)—all have effusivepraise for the liberty and independence of their respective countries, the grandeur of the principle of national indepen-dence. 
 Here one cannot tell where the venal eulogist of thebutcher Nicholas Romanov 49 or of the brutal oppressors of Negroes and Indians ends, and where the common philistine,who from sheer stupidity or spinelessness drifts withthe stream, begins. 
 Nor is that distinction important. 
 We see before us an extensive and very deep ideological trend, whose origins are closely interwoven with the interests of thelandowners and the capitalists of the dominant nations. 
Scores and hundreds of millions are being spent every yearfor the propaganda of ideas advantageous to those classes:it is a pretty big mill-race that takes its waters from all sources—from Menshikov, a chauvinist by conviction, to chauvinists for reason of opportunism or spinelessness suchas Plekhanov and Maslov, Rubanovich and Smirnov,Kropotkin and Burtsev. 
 Let us, Great-Russian Social-Democrats, also try to define our attitude to this ideological trend. 
 It would be unseemly for us, representatives of a dominant nation in the far east of Europe and a goodly part of Asia, to forgetthe immense significance of the national question—especially in a country which has been rightly called the “prison of the peoples”, and particularly at a time when, in the far east of Europe and in Asia, capitalism is awakening to life and self-consciousness a number of “new” nations, large andsmall; at a moment when the tsarist monarchy has calledup millions of Great Russians and non-Russians, so as to“solve” a number of national problems in accordance withthe interests of the Council of the United Nobility 50 a nd o f the Guchkovs, Krestovnikovs, Dolgorukovs, Kutlers and Rodichevs. 
 Is a sense of national pride alien to us, Great-Russian class-conscious proletarians? Certainly not! We love ourlanguage and our country, and we are doing our very utmostto raise her toiling masses (i. 
e. 
, nine-tenths of her popula-tion) to the level of a democratic and socialist consciousness. 
 To us it is most painful to see and feel the outrages, the oppres-sion and the humiliation our fair country suffers at the handsof the tsar’s butchers, the nobles and the capitalists. 
 We takepride in the resistance to these outrages put up from ourmidst, from the Great Russians; in that midst having produced Radishchev, 51 the Decembrists52 and the revolutionary com-moners of the seventies53; in the Great-Russian working class having created, in 1905, a mighty revolutionary partyof the masses; and in the Great-Russian peasantry havingbegun to turn towards democracy and set about overthrow-ing the clergy and the landed proprietors. 
 We remember that Chernyshevsky, the Great-Russian democrat, who dedicated his life to the cause of revolution,said half a century ago: “A wretched nation, a nation ofslaves, from top to bottom—all slaves. 
” 54 The overt and covert Great-Russian slaves (slaves with regard to thetsarist monarchy) do not like to recall these words. 
 Yet, in our opinion, these were words of genuine love for our coun-try, a love distressed by the absence of a revolutionary spiritin the masses of the Great-Russian people. 
 There wasnone of that spirit at the time. 
 There is little of it now, butit already exists. 
 We are full of national pride becausethe Great-Russian nation, too, has created a revolutionary class, because it, too, has proved capable of providing mankind with great models of the struggle for freedomand socialism, and not only with great pogroms, rows of gallows, dungeons, great famines and great servility to priests, tsars, landowners and capitalists. 
 We are full of a sense of national pride, and for that very reason we particularly hate our slavish past (when the landed nobility led the peasants into war to stifle the freedomof Hungary, Poland, Persia and China), and our slavishpresent, when these selfsame landed proprietors, aided bythe capitalists, are loading us into a war in order to throttle Poland and the Ukraine, crush the democratic movement in Persia and China, and strengthen the gang of Romanovs,Bobrinskys and Purishkeviches, who are a disgrace to ourGreat-Russian national dignity. 
 Nobody is to be blamedfor being born a slave; but a slave who not only eschews astriving for freedom but justifies and eulogises his slavery (e. 
g. 
, calls the throttling of Poland and the Ukraine, etc. 
, a “defence of the fatherland” of the Great Russians)—such aslave is a lickspittle and a boor, who arouses a legitimatefeeling of indignation, contempt, and loathing. 
 “No nation can be free if it oppresses other nations,” said Marx and Engels, the greatest representatives of consist-ent nineteenth century democracy, who became the teachers of the revolutionary proletariat. 
 And, full of a sense ofnational pride, we Great-Russian workers want, come whatmay, a free and independent, a democratic, republican andproud Great Russia, one that will base its relations with itsneighbours on the human principle of equality, and not on the feudalist principle of privilege, which is so degrading to a great nation. 
 Just because we want that, we say: it is impos-sible, in the twentieth century and in Europe (even in thefar east of Europe), to “defend the fatherland” otherwisethan by using every revolutionary means to combat themonarchy, the landowners and the capitalists of one’s own fatherland, i. 
e. 
, the worst enemies of our country. 
 We say that the Great Russians cannot “defend the fatherland” otherwisethan by desiring the defeat of tsarism in any war, this asthe lesser evil to nine-tenths of the inhabitants of GreatRussia. 
 For tsarism not only oppresses those nine-tenthseconomically and politically, but also demoralises, degrades, dishonours and prostitutes them by teaching them to oppress other nations and to cover up this shame withhypocritical and quasi-patriotic phrases. 
 The objection may be advanced that, besides tsarism and under its wing, another historical force has arisen and become strong, viz. 
, Great-Russian capitalism, which is car-rying on progressive work by economically centralising andwelding together vast regions. 
 This objection, however,does not excuse, but on the contrary still more condemns oursocialist-chauvinists, who should be called tsarist-Purishke-vich socialists 55 (just as Marx called the Lassalleans Royal-Prussian socialists). 
56 Let us even assume that history will decide in favour of Great-Russian dominant-nation capi-talism, and against the hundred and one small nations. 
 Thatis not impossible, for the entire history of capital is one ofviolence and plunder, blood and corruption. 
 We do not advo-cate preserving small nations at all costs; other conditions being equal , we are decidedly for centralisation and are opposed to the petty-bourgeois ideal of federal relationships. 
Even if our assumption were true, however, it is, firstly, notour business, or that of democrats (let alone of socialists), tohelp Romanov-Bobrinsky-Purishkevich throttle the Ukraine,etc. 
 In his own Junker fashion, Bismarck accomplished a progressive historical task, but he would be a fine “Marxist” indeed who, on such grounds, thought of justifying socialistsupport for Bismarck! Moreover, Bismarck promoted econom-ic development by bringing together the disunited Germans,who were being oppressed by other nations. 
 The economicprosperity and rapid development of Great Russia, however, require that the country be liberated from Great-Russian oppression of other nations—that is the difference that ouradmirers of the true-Russian would-be Bismarcks overlook. 
 Secondly, if history were to decide in favour of Great-Russian dominant-nation capitalism, it follows hence thatthe socialist role of the Great-Russian proletariat, as the principal driving force of the communist revolution engendered by capitalism, will be all the greater. 
 Theproletarian revolution calls for a prolonged education of theworkers in the spirit of the fullest national equality and brotherhood. 
 Consequently, the interests of the Great-Rus-sian proletariat require that the masses be systematically educated to champion—most resolutely, consistently, boldly and in a revolutionary manner—complete equality and theright to self-determination for all the nations oppressed by the Great Russians. 
 The interests of the Great Russians’ national pride (understood, not in the slavish sense) coin-cide with the socialist interests of the Great-Russian (and all other) proletarians. 
 Our model will always be Marx,who, after living in Britain for decades and becoming half-English, demanded freedom and national independence forIreland in the interests of the socialist movement of theBritish workers. 
 In the second hypothetical case we have considered, our home-grown socialist-chauvinists, Plekhanov, etc. 
, etc. 
, willprove traitors, not only to their own country—a free anddemocratic Great Russia, but also to the proletarian brother-hood of all the nations of Russia, i. 
e. 
, to the cause ofsocialism. 
 Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 35, Published according to December 12, 1914 the text in Sotsial-Demokrat WHAT NEXT? ON THE TASKS CONFRONTING THE WORKERS’ PARTIES WITH REGARD TO OPPORTUNISM AND SOCIAL -CHAUVINISM The tremendous crisis created within European socialism by the world war has (as is always the case in great crises) resulted first in enormous confusion; it then led to a seriesof new groupings taking shape among representatives ofvarious currents, shades and views in socialism; finally,it raised, with particular acuteness and insistence, thequestion of what changes in the foundations of socialist policy follow from the crisis and are demanded by it. 
 Between August and December 1914, the socialists of Russiaalso passed through these three “stages” in a markedfashion. 
 We all know that there was no little confusionat the beginning; the confusion was increased by thetsarist persecutions, by the behaviour of the “Europeans”, and by the war alarm. 
 In Paris and Switzerland, where there was the greatest number of political exiles, the greatestlinks with Russia, and the greatest degree of freedom, anew definite line of demarcation between the various atti-tudes towards problems raised by the war was being drawn,during September and October, at discussions, lectures, and in the press. 
 It can safely be said that there is not a single shade of opinion in any current (or group) of socialism (andnear-socialism) in Russia which has not found expressionand been analysed. 
 The general feeling is that the time hascome for precise and positive conclusions capable of servingas the basis of systematic and practical activity, propaganda, agitation, and organisation. 
 The situation is clear, all have expressed themselves. 
 Let us now see who is with whom , and whither the courses have been taken . 
 On November 23 (N. 
S. 
), on the day following the publica-tion in Petrograd of a government communiqué on the arrest of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour group in the Duma,57 an event took place at the congress of the Swedish Social-Democratic Party in Stockholm, which finally andirrevocably placed on the order of the day the two questionsjust emphasised. 
 58 Readers will find below a description of this event, namely, a full translation, from the official Swedish Social-Democratic report, of the speeches both of Belenin (representing the Central Committee) and of Larin(representing the Organising Committee), 59 and also the debate on the question raised by Branting. 
 For the first time since the outbreak of war, a representa-tive of our Party, of its Central Committee, and a repre-sentative of the liquidationist Organising Committee met at a congress of socialists of a neutral country. 
 What didtheir speeches differ in? Belenin took a most definite standregarding the grave, painful but momentous issues of thepresent-day socialist movement; quoting Sotsial-Demokrat ,60 the Party’s Central Organ, he came out with a resolute declaration of war against opportunism, branding the behav-iour of the German Social-Democratic leaders (and “manyothers”) as treachery . 
 Larin took no stand at all; he passed over the essence of the question in silence, confining himselfto those hackneyed, hollow and moth-eaten phrases thatalways win hand-claps from opportunists and social-chau-vinists in all countries. 
 But then, Belenin said nothing at all about our attitude towards the other Social-Democraticparties or groups in Russia, as though intimating: “Such isour stand; as for the others, we shall not express ourselves asyet, but shall wait and see which course they will take. 
” Larin, on the contrary, unfurled the banner of “unity”, shed a tear over the “bitter fruit of the split in Russia”, and depicted in gorgeous colours the “work of unification” carriedon by the Organising Committee, which, be said, had unitedPlekhanov, the Caucasians, the Bundists, the Poles, 61 and so forth . 
 Larin’s intentions will be dealt with elsewhere (see below: “The Kind of Unity Larin Proclaimed” *). 
 What interests us here is the fundamental question of unity. 
 *See pp. 
 115-17 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 We have before us two slogans. 
 One is: war against the opportunists and the social-chauvinists, who are traitors. 
 The other is: unity in Russia, in particular with Plekhanov (who, we shall state parenthetically, is behaving withus in exactly the same way as Südekum * with the Germans, Hyndman with the British, etc. 
). 
 Is it not obvious that,though he is afraid to call things by their proper names,Larin has in fact come out as advocate of the opportunists and social-chauvinists? Let us, however, consider in general and in the light of present-day events the meaning of the “unity” slogan. 
 Theproletariat’s unity is its greatest weapon in the struggle forthe socialist revolution. 
 From this indisputable truth itfollows just as indisputably that, when a proletarian party is joined by a considerable number of petty-bourgeois elements capable of hampering the struggle for the socialist revolution, unity with such elements is harmful andperilous to the cause of the proletariat. 
 Present-day eventshave shown that, on the one hand, the objective conditionsare ripe for an imperialist war (i. 
e. 
, a war reflecting the last and highest stage of capitalism), and, on the other hand, that decades of a so-called peaceful epoch have allowedan accumulation of petty-bourgeois and opportunist junk within the socialist parties of all the European countries. 
 Some fifteen years ago, during the celebrated “Bernsteiniad”in Germany—and even earlier in many other countries—the question of the opportunist and alien elements within the proletarian parties had become a burning issue. 
 There ishardly a single Marxist of note who has not recognised manytimes and on various occasions that the opportunists are infact a non-proletarian element hostile to the socialistrevolution. 
 The particularly rapid growth of this social element of late years is beyond doubt: it includes officials of the legal labour unions, parliamentarians and the otherintellectuals, who have got themselves easy and comfort-able posts in the legal mass movement, some sections ofthe better paid workers, office employees, etc. 
, etc. 
 The *Plekhanov’s pamphlet, On the War (Paris, 1914), which we have just received, confirms very convincingly the truth of the assertions made in the text. 
 We shall return to this pamphlet later on. 
 war has clearly proved that at a moment of crisis (and the imperialist era will undoubtedly be one of all kinds of crises) a sizable mass of opportunists, supported and often directly guided by the bourgeoisie (this is of particularimportance!), go over to the latter’s camp, betray socialism,damage the workers’ cause, and attempt to ruin it. 
 In everycrisis the bourgeoisie will always aid the opportunists,will always try to suppress the revolutionary section of the proletariat, stopping short of nothing and employing the most unlawful and savage military measures. 
 The opportun-ists are bourgeois enemies of the proletarian revolution, whoin peaceful times carry on their bourgeois work in secret,concealing themselves within the workers’ parties, while intimes of crisis they immediately prove to be open allies of the entire united bourgeoisie, from the conservative to the most radical and democratic part of the latter, from the freethinkers, to the religious and clerical sections. 
 Anyonewho has failed to understand this truth after the events we have gone through is hopelessly deceiving both himself andthe workers. 
 Individual desertions are inevitable under the present conditions, but their significance, it should be remembered, is determined by the existence of a section and current of petty-bourgeois opportunists. 
 Such social-chau-vinists, as Hyndman, Vandervelde, Guesde, Plekhanov andKautsky, would be of no significance whatever if their spine-less and banal speeches in defence of bourgeois patriotism were not taken up by the entire social strata of opportunists and by swarms of bourgeois papers and bourgeois politicians. 
 Typical of the socialist parties of the epoch of the Second International was one that tolerated in its midst anopportunism built up in decades of the “peaceful” period,an opportunism that kept itself secret, adapting itself to the revolutionary workers, borrowing their Marxist terminology, and evading any clear cleavage of principles. 
 This type hasoutlived itself. 
 If the war ends in 1915, will any thinkingsocialist be found willing to begin, in 1916, restoringthe workers’ parties together with the opportunists, knowing from experience that in any new crisis all of them to a man (plus many other spineless and muddle-headed people) will be for the bourgeoisie, who will of course find apretext to ban any talk of class hatred and the class struggle? In Italy, the party was the exception for the period of the Second International; the opportunists, headed by Bissolati, were expelled from the party. 
 In the present crisis, the results have proved excellent : people of various trends of opinion have not deceived the workers orblinded them with pearls of eloquence regarding “unity”;each of them followed his own road. 
 The opportunists (anddeserters from the workers’ party such as Mussolini) practised social-chauvinism, lauding (as Plekhanov did) “gallant Belgium”, thereby shielding the policies, not of a gallant,but of a bourgeois Italy, which would plunder the Ukraineand Galicia ... I mean, Albania, Tunisia, etc. 
, etc. 
 Mean-while, the socialists were waging against them a war against war, in preparation of a civil war. 
 We are not at all idealising the Italian Socialist Party and in no way guarantee that it will stand firm should Italy enter the war. 
 We are speakingnot of the future of that party, but only of the present. 
We are stating the indisputable fact that the workers in most European countries have been deceived by the fictitious unity of the opportunists and the revolutionaries, Italy being the happy exception, a country where no such deception exists at present. 
 What was a happy exception for theSecond International should and shall become the rule for the Third International. 
 While capitalism persists, the prole-tariat will always be a close neighbour to the petty bour-geoisie. 
 It is sometimes unwise to reject temporary alliances with the latter, but unity with them, unity with the oppor-tunists can be defended at present only by the enemies of the proletariat or by hoodwinked traditionalists of a bygone period. 
 Today, following 1914, unity of the proletarian struggle for the socialist revolution demands that the workers’ parties separate themselves completely from the parties of the opportunists. 
 What we understand by opportunism has beenclearly said in the Manifesto of the Central Committee(No. 
 33, “The War and Russian Social-Democracy” *). 
 But what do we see in Russia? Is it good or bad for the working-class movement of our country to have unity between people who, in one way or another and with more or *See pp. 
 25-34 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 less consistency, are combating chauvinism—of both the Purishkevich and the Cadet brand—and people who echo that chauvinism, like Maslov, Plekhanov and Smirnov? Is it good to have unity between people engaged in anti-waraction and such that declare that they will not oppose the war,like-the influential authors of “Document” (No. 
 34) 62? Only those who wish to turn a blind eye to things will find dif-ficulty in answering this question. 
 The objection may be made that Martov has polemised with Plekhanov in Golos and, together with a number of other friends and partisans of the Organising Committee, hasbattled against social-chauvinism. 
 We do not deny this, andhad words of praise for Martov in No. 
 33 of the Central Organ. 
We would be very glad if Martov were not “turned about” (see the article, “Martov Turns About”); we would very much like a decisive anti-chauvinist line to become the lineof the Organising Committee. 
 That, however, does not dependupon our wishes, or upon any one else ’s. 
 What are the objective facts? First, Larin, the Organising Committee’sofficial representative, is for some reason silent about Golos , while naming the social-chauvinist Plekhanov, and also Axelrod, who wrote an article (in Berner Tagwacht 63) so as not to say a single definite word there. 
 Moreover, Larin, apart from his official position, is more than geographically close to the influential central group of the liquidators inRussia. 
 Secondly, there is the European press. 
 In France and Germany, the papers are saying nothing about Golos , while speaking of Rubanovich, Plekhanov, and Chkheidze. 
 (In its issue of December 12, Hamburger Echo , one of the most jingoist organs of the jingoist “Social-Democratic” pressof Germany, called Chkheidze an adherent of Maslov andPlekhanov; this has also been hinted at by certain papers in Russia. 
 It is clear that all fellow-thinkers of the Südekums fully appreciate the ideological aid Plekhanov has given tothe Südekums. 
) In Russia, millions of copies of bourgeoispapers have brought the “people” tidings of Maslov-Plekha-nov-Smirnov—but no news of the trend represented by Golos . 
 Thirdly, the experience of the legal workers’ press of 1912-14 has definitely proved that the source of a certain degree of social strength and influence enjoyed by the liquida-tionist movement lies, not in the working class, but in that section of bourgeois-democratic intelligentsia, which has brought the central group of legalist writers to the fore. 
 The national-chauvinist temper of this section as a section is testified to by the entire press of Russia, as revealed in theletters of the Petrograd worker ( Sotsial-Demokrat Nos. 
 33 and 35) and in the “Document” (No. 
 34). 
 Considerablepersonal re-groupings within that section are quite possible,but it is absolutely improbable that, as a section, it should not be “patriotic” and opportunist. 
 Such are the objective facts. 
 Since we take them into account and are aware that it is to the advantage of all bour-geois parties that wish for influence over the workers, to havea Left wing for display (particularly when that wing isunofficial), we must declare the idea of unity with the Organising Committee an illusion detrimental to the workers’ cause. 
 The policy of the Organising Committee who, in far-away Sweden, on November 23, proclaimed their unity withPlekhanov and spoke words sweet to the hearts of all social-chauvinists, while in Paris and in Switzerland they did not bother to make their existence known either on September 13 (when Golos appeared) or on November 23 or to this day (December 23), strongly resembles political chicanery of theworst kind. 
 The hope that Otkliki , 64 scheduled to appear in Zurich, would be of an official Party nature has beendestroyed by a forthright statement in Berner Tagwacht (De-cember 12), to the effect that this paper will not be of such a nature. 
 (Incidentally, the editors of Golos declared in issue No. 
 52 that to continue at present the rift with the liqui-dators would be “nationalism” of the worst kind. 
 Thisphrase, which is devoid of grammatical meaning, has onlypolitical meaning that the editors of Golos prefer having unity with the social-chauvinists to drawing closer to those who are irreconcilably hostile to social-chauvinism. 
 Theeditors of Golos have made a bad choice. 
) To make the picture complete, it remains for us to add a few words about Mysl , 65 organ of the Socialist-Revolution-aries, which is published in Paris. 
 This paper also lauds “unity”, while it shields (cf. 
 Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 34) the social-chauvinism of Rubanovich, its party leader, defendsthe Franco-Belgian opportunists and ministerialists, says nothing of the patriotic motives of the speech by Kerensky, one of the extreme radicals among the Russian Trudoviks,66 and prints well-worn petty-bourgeois vulgarities on therevision of Marxism, in a Narodnik and opportunist spirit. 
What the resolution of the Russian Social-Democratic La-bour Party’s summer conference of 1913 67 said of the Socialist-Revolutionaries has been fully and particularlyproved by this behaviour of Mysl . 
 Some Russian socialists seem to think that international-ism consists in a readiness to welcome a resolution contain-ing an international vindication of social-chauvinism inall countries, such as is to be drawn up by Plekhanov andSüdekum, Kautsky and Hervé, Guesde and Hyndman, Van-dervelde and Bissolati, etc. 
 We permit ourselves the thought that internationalism consists only in an unequivocal inter-nationalist policy within one’s party. 
 A genuinely prole-tarian internationalist policy cannot be pursued, active oppo-sition to the war cannot be preached, and forces for suchaction cannot be mustered while we are in the company of theopportunists and the social-chauvinists. 
 To find refuge in silence, or to wave this truth aside which, though bitter, is necessary to the socialist, is detrimental and ruinous tothe working-class movement. 
 Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 36, Published according to January 9, 1915 the text in Sotsial-Demokrat THE KIN D OF “UNIT Y” LARIN PROCLAIMED AT THE SWEDIS H CONGRES S68 In the speech cited by us (No. 
 36), Larin could have been referring only to the well-known “July Third” bloc,69 i. 
e. 
, the alliance concluded in Brussels, on 3. 
7. 
1914, between the Organising Committee, Trotsky, Rosa Luxemburg,Alexinsky, Plekhanov, the Bundists, the Caucasians, theLithuanians, the Left wing, 70 the Polish opposition and so on. 
 Why did Larin confine himself to hints? Thatis strange, to say the least. 
 We are of the opinion that, ifthe O. 
C. 
 lives on, and likewise the alliance, it is bad to makea secret of this truth. 
 The Central Committee of our Party and the Central Com-mittee of the Lettish Social-Democrats did not join the alliance. 
 Our Central Committee advanced 14 precise con-ditions of unity, these being rejected by the Organising Committee and the “bloc”, who limited themselvesto a diplomatic and evasive resolution which, in fact , did not promise or signify any decisive turn in the previousliquidationist policy. 
 Here is the gist of our fourteen points: (1) The December 1908 and January 1910 resolutions on liquidationism shouldbe unambiguously confirmed, viz. 
, in a way that willrecognise as incompatible with Social-Democratic Partymembership statements against the underground, againstpublicity for the illegal press, for an “open” party (or a struggle for one), against revolutionary meetings, etc. 
 (in the way Nasha Zarya 71 and Nasha Rabochaya Gazeta72 have come out); (2) the same, with reference to statements against the slogan of a republic, etc. 
; (3) the same, with reference to statements against a bloc with non-S. 
D. 
 Left-wing party; (4) in each locality there must be a united S. 
D. 
 organisation, one that is not divided accordingto nationality; (5) “cultural-national autonomy” to be re-jected; (6) the workers are called upon to show “unityfrom below”; only one who belongs to an illegal organisa-tion can be a member of the party; in the legal press, only figures concerning workers’ group contributions since 1913 are to be used in order to ascertain a majority; (7) rival news-papers cannot be permitted in one and the same city; Nasha Rabochaya Gazeta should close down, and a discussion jour-nal to be founded; (8) the resolutions of the 1903 and the 1907congresses regarding the bourgeois character of the S. 
R. 
s are to be confirmed; agreements between part of the S. 
D. 
 Party and the S. 
R. 
s are impermissible; (9) groups abroad are to besubordinated to the Central Committee in Russia; (10)regarding work in the trade unions, the resolution of theLondon Central Committee (Jan. 
 1908) should be con-firmed; illegal nuclei are necessary; (11) statements against the Insurance Council 73 and other insurance institutions are indefeasible; as a competing publication, Strakho-vaniye Rabochikh74 should close down; (12) the Caucasian S. 
D. 
s should give special confirmation for points 5 and 4; (13)the Chkheidze group 75 should withdraw “cultural-national autonomy” and recognise the conditions enumerated above; (14) on matters pertaining to “slander” (Malinovsky, X, etc. 
), the Organising Committee and their friends shouldeither retract their accusations and slander, or else send arepresentative to the forthcoming congress of our Party,so as to vindicate all their accusations. 
 It will readily be seen that, without these conditions and with numerous verbal “promises” to renounce liquidationism (as took place at the 1910 Plenary Meeting), nothing willchange; “unity” would be a fiction and a recognition of“equality” for the liquidators. 
 The mighty crisis of socialism as a result of the world war has evoked a supreme effort in all groups of S. 
D. 
s and a striving to muster the forces of all who can draw together on the fundamental issues of the attitude towards thewar. 
 The “July Third” bloc, of which Larin was so boastful (while reluctant to call it by its own name), at once revealed its fictitiousness. 
 What is necessary is unflagging caution against fictitious “unity”, as long as there is an irreconcilable cleavage inpractice. 
 Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 37, Published according to February 1, 1915 the text in Sotsial-Demokrat THE RUSSIAN BRAND OF SÜDEKUM The word Südekum has come to be used in a generic sense to denote a type of smug and unscrupulous oppor-tunist and social-chauvinist. 
 It is a good sign that theSüdekums are held in general contempt. 
 There is, however, only one way for us to avoid falling into chauvinism our-selves in so doing: we must do everything we can to helpunmask the Russian Südekums. 
 By his pamphlet On the War , Plekhanov has definitely placed himself at the head of the latter. 
 His arguments area substitution of sophistry for dialectics all along the line. 
 He sophistically denounces German opportunism so as to shield French and Russian opportunism. 
 The result isnot a struggle against international opportunism, but sup-port for it. 
 He sophistically bemoans the fate of Belgium,while saying nothing about Galicia. 
 He sophistically confusesthe period of imperialism (i. 
e. 
, one in which, as all Marxists hold, the objective conditions are ripe for the collapse of capitalism, and there are masses of socialist proletarians)and the period of bourgeois-democratic national movementsin other words, he confuses a period in which the destructionof bourgeois fatherlands by an international revolution of theproletariat is imminent, and the period of their inception and consolidation. 
 He sophistically accuses the German bour-geoisie of having broken the peace, while remaining silentabout the lengthy and elaborate preparations for a waragainst Germany by the bourgeoisie of the “Triple Entente”. 
 76 He sophistically evades the Basle resolution. 
 He sophis-tically substitutes national-liberalism for social-democ-racy: the desirability of tsarism’s victory is ascribed to the interests of Russia’s economic progress, while the nation-alities in Russia, or tsarism’s stunting Russian economic growth, or the relatively far more rapid and successful growth of Germany’s productive forces, and so on and so forth, are all questions that are shied away from. 
 To ana-lyse all of Plekhanov’s sophisms would require a series ofarticles, and many of his ridiculous absurdities are hardlyworth going into. 
 We shall touch upon only one of hisalleged arguments. 
 In 1870 Engels wrote to Marx thatWilhelm Liebknecht was mistaken in making anti-Bismarck-ism his sole guiding principle. 
 77 Plekhanov was glad to have discovered the quotation: the same is true, he argues, with re-gard to anti-tsarism! Let us, however, try to replace sophistry(i. 
e. 
, the method of clutching at the outward similarity ofinstances, without considering the nexus between events)with dialectics (i. 
e. 
, the method of studying all the concrete circumstances of an event and of its development). 
 The unification of Germany was a necessity which Marx recog-nised as such both prior to and following 1848. 
 As earlyas 1859, Engels called forthright upon the German peopleto fight for unification. 
 78 When unification through revolution failed, Bismarck achieved it in a counter-revolu-tionary, Junker fashion. 
 Anti-Bismarckism became absurd as a sole principle, since the necessary unification was an accomplished fact. 
 But what about Russia? Did our bravePlekhanov formerly have the courage to declare thatRussia’s development demanded the conquest of Galicia,Constantinople, Armenia, Persia, etc. 
? Has he the courage to say so now? Has he considered that Germany had to pro-gress from the national disunity of the Germans (who hadbeen oppressed both by France and Russia in the firsttwo-thirds of the nineteenth century) to a unified nation,whereas in Russia the Great Russians have crushed ratherthan united a number of other nations? Without giving thought to such things, Plekhanov has simply masked his chauvinism by distorting the meaning of the Engels quo-tation of 1870 in the same fashion as Südekum has distortedan 1891 quotation from Engels to the effect that theGermans must wage a life-and-death struggle against theallied armies of France and Russia. 
 In a different kind of language and in quite different cir-cumstances, the selfsame chauvinism is defended by Nasha Zarya Nos. 
 7-8-9, wherein Mr. 
 Cherevanin predicts and evokes “the defeat of Germany”, asserting that “Europe [!!] has risen up” against that country; Mr. 
 A. 
 Potresov berates the German Social-Democrats for their “blunder”, which “is worse than any crime”, etc. 
, claiming that German militarismis guilty of “special, extraordinary sins”, and that it is“not the Pan-Slavic dreams of certain Russian circles whichhave been a menace to European peace”, etc. 
 When the legal press thus depicts Germany’s “extraor-dinary” guilt and advocates the necessity of her defeat is it not echoing Purishkevich and the social-chauvinists?The pressure of the tsar’s censors imposes silence about“extraordinary” sins a hundred times greater in number,committed by Russian militarism. 
 Is it not obvious that,in a situation such as this, people who do not wish to be chauvinist should at least refrain from speaking of Germany’s defeat and her extraordinary sins? Nasha Zarya is not merely pursuing the line of “non-resistance to war”; it is doing much more—bringing gristto the mill of Great-Russian, tsarist-Purishkevich chau-vinism by using “Social-Democratic” arguments for the preachment of Germany’s defeat, and shielding the Pan-Slavists. 
 It was none other than the Nasha Zarya writers who in 1912-14 conducted mass propaganda ofliquidationism among the workers. 
 Finally, there is Axelrod, whom Martov is trying so angrily and so unsuccessfully to cover up, defend and shield in exactly the same way as he has been doing for the Nasha Zarya writers. 
 With Axelrod’s consent, his views were set forth in Nos. 
 86 and 87 of Golos . 
 These views are social-chauvinist. 
 He used the following arguments to defend the French andBelgian socialists joining the bourgeois governments: (1) “To Marx, historical necessity, which is often inappropri-ately cited nowadays, did not mean a passive attitudetowards a concrete evil—in expectation of the socialist revo-lution. 
” What muddled reasoning! What has this got to dowith it all? Everything that takes place in history takesplace of necessity. 
 That is elementary. 
 The opponents of social-chauvinism have cited, not historical necessity but the imperialist nature of the war. 
 Axelrod pretends that he does not understand this, or the consequent appraisal of the “concrete evil”, viz. 
, bourgeois domination in all lands, and the timeliness of launching revolutionary action leading to a “social revolution”. 
 It is the social-chauvinists who are “passive” by denying this. 
 (2) It is impossible “toignore the question of who actually started” the war,‘~hereby imposing upon all attacked countries the necessityof defending their independence”. 
 On the same page,however, Axelrod admits that “of course the French impe-rialists were out to provoke a war in two or three years’ time”! During that period, he maintains, the proletariat would growstronger, thereby enhancing the chances of peace! We know,however, that during that period, opportunism, which isso dear to Axelrod’s heart, would grow stronger, therebyenhancing the chances of its even more shameful betrayal of socialism. 
 We know that, for decades , three robbers (the bourgeoisie and the governments of Britain, Russia andFrance) were arming to pillage Germany. 
 Is there anythingsurprising that two robbers began the attack before theother three got the new knives they had ordered? Is it not a sophism for phrases about “who started the war” to be used to gloss over the equal “guilt ” of the bourgeoisie of all countries, which was unanimously recognised withoutquestion by all socialists at Basle? (3) “To blame the Bel-gian socialists for defending their country” is “not Marxism,but cynicism”. 
 This was exactly how Marx termed Prou-dhon’s attitude towards the Polish uprising (of 1863). 
 79 Beginning with 1848, Marx constantly stressed the histor-ical progressiveness of the Polish uprising against tsarism. 
That was something no one dared deny. 
 The concrete con-ditions consisted in an unresolved national problem inthe east of Europe, i. 
e. 
, in a bourgeois-democratic, notimperialist, nature of the war against tsarism. 
 That is elementary. 
 If one’s attitude towards the socialist revolution is negative, scoffing or negligent (like that of the Axelrods),then one cannot help the Belgian “country” in the present and concrete war otherwise than by helping tsarism tothrottle the Ukraine. 
 That is a fact, which it is cynical for a Russian socialist to evade. 
 It is just as cynical to raise a clamour over Belgium while remaining silent aboutGalicia. 
 What ought the Belgian socialists to have done? Since they were unable to accomplish a social revolution together with the French, etc. 
, they had to submit to the majority of the nation at the time, and go to war. 
 But, while submit-ting to the will of the slave-owning class, they should haveplaced the responsibility on the latter, and not have voted forwar credits; they should have sent Vandervelde, not to engagein ministerial missions to the exploiters, but to organise (to-gether with the revolutionary Social-Democrats of all coun-tries) illegal revolutionary propaganda in favour of the“socialist revolution” and civil war; in the army too such workshould have been conducted (experience having shown thateven “fraternisation” between workingmen clad in uniformsis possible in the trenches of the fighting armies!). 
 Prattling about dialectics and Marxism while revealing inability to combine the temporary need to submit to the majority withrevolutionary work under all conditions means scoffing atthe workers and jeering at socialism. 
 “Citizens of Belgium!Our country has met with a great calamity brought aboutby the bourgeoisie of all countries, including Belgium. 
 You do not wish to overthrow that bourgeoisie? You do not believe in an appeal to the socialists of Germany? We are inthe minority; so I must submit to you and go to war, buteven then I shall call and prepare for civil war by theproletariat of all countries, because there is no other sal-vation for the peasants and workers of Belgium and other countries!” For a speech like this, a Belgian or French deputy would have been sent to prison, not given the postof minister, but he would have been a socialist, not a trai-tor; in the trenches, both the French and German working-men in military uniforms would have spoken of him astheir own leader, not as a traitor to the working class. 
 (4) “While fatherlands exist, while, as at present, the prole-tariat’s life and its movement are compressed into theframework of the fatherlands, and while the proletariatdoes not feel another and international soil under itsfeet, the question of patriotism and self-defence will con-tinue to exist for the working class. 
” Bourgeois father-lands will exist until they are destroyed by the international revolution of the proletariat. 
 The existence of conditionssuitable for a revolution was recognised even by Kautsky as early as 1909; just as it was unanimously recognised later by the Basle Congress, and is now proved by the fact of the deep sympathy on the part of the workers of all coun-tries for those who do not vote for war credits, and are notafraid of prison and the other sacrifices connected withany revolution, by virtue of “historical necessity”. 
 Axelrod’sphrase is nothing but a pretext to avoid revolutionary activity, merely a repetition of the arguments used by the chauvinist bourgeoisie. 
 (5) The same is true about his assertions that the conduct of the Germans was not treach-ery, and that their behaviour was dictated by “a keensentiment, the consciousness of an organic bond with thatpiece of land, the fatherland, on which the German proletari-ans live and work”. 
 In reality, the behaviour of the Germans, as well as that of Guesde and the rest, is undoubtedly treachery; to mask and to shield it is a disgrace. 
 In reality,it is the bourgeois fatherlands that mutilate, cripple,crush and destroy the “living bond” between the Germanworkers and the German land by creating a “bond” betweenthe slave and the slave-owner. 
 In reality, only the destruc-tion of the bourgeois fatherlands can give the workers of all countries a “bond with the land”, freedom of their ownlanguage, bread, and the benefits of civilisation. 
 Axelrodis simply an apologist for the bourgeoisie. 
 (6) To persuadethe workers to be “cautious in accusing of opportunism”such “tested Marxists as Guesde”, etc. 
, means to induce the workers to be servile towards their leaders. 
 We would advise the worker to learn from the example of Guesde’swhole life, with the exception of his patent betrayal of social-ism in 1914. 
 Private and other circumstances may be foundthat mitigate his guilt, but this is not a question of theguilt of individuals ; what we are interested in is the socialist significance of events . 
 (7) To refer to the “ formal ” permissibility of joining government on the ground thatthere exists some minute point somewhere in a resolution,mentioning “exceptionally important cases”, is tanta-mount to the most dishonest pettifogging, since this minorpoint was obviously intended to aid the international revolution of the proletariat, not to counteract it. 
 (8) Axelrod’s assertion that “the defeat of Russia, while unable to ham-per the organic development of the country, would help liquidate the old regime”, is true if taken by itself, but when it is used to justify the German chau-vinists, it is nothing but an attempt to curry favour with the Südekums. 
 Recognition of the usefulness of Russia’sdefeat, without openly accusing the German and AustrianSocial-Democrats of having betrayed socialism means in reality helping them justify themselves, wriggle out of a difficult situation, and deceive the workers. 
 Axelrod’s article is a double obeisance—one to the German social-chauvinists, the other to the French. 
 Taken together,these obeisances constitute typical “Russo-Bundist” social-chauvinism. 
 Let the readers now judge for themselves the consistency displayed by the Golos editors who, in publishing these most disgraceful arguments of Axelrod’s, have expressed their disagreement only with “some of his ideas” while in the edi-torial of No. 
 96 of their paper, they advocate a “sharp rupturewith the elements of active social-patriotism”. 
 Are the editorsof Golos so naïve or so inattentive that they do not see the truth? Do they not see that Axelrod’s reasonings are, from beginning to end , “elements of active [his writings being the writer’s activity] social-patriotism”? And what aboutthe Nasha Zarya writers: Messrs. 
 Cherevanin, A. 
 Potresov and Co. 
; are they not elements of active social-patriotism? Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 37, Published according to February 1, 1915 the text in Sotsial-Demokrat TO THE EDITORS OF NASHE SLOVO80 Berne, 9. 
2. 
1915 Dear Comrades: In your letter of February 6 you proposed to us a plan of struggle against “official social-patriotism”, in connectionwith the proposed London conference of socialists of the“allied countries” of the Triple Entente. 
 81 As you have, of course, seen from our newspaper Sotsial-Demokrat , we support that struggle in general, and are conducting it. 
 That is why we are very glad to have received your message, and accept with pleasure your proposal for a discussionof a plan of joint action. 
 The conference, which is said to have been planned for February 15 (we have not yet received a single documentregarding it), will perhaps be postponed until February 25 or later [judging from a letter from Huysmans, who wrote of the sitting of the Executive Commission for Feb-ruary 20 and of the plan for personal talks between members(the Secretary) of the Executive Commission and socialistsof France, Britain and Russia]. 
 The conference may possiblybe contemplated as one, not of official members of the International Socialist Bureau, but as private meetings between individual “prominent” socialists. 
 That is why the contraposition to “official social-patriot-ism” of a “clear, revolutionary and internationalist” pointof view, a contraposition which you write of and whichhas our full sympathy, should be prepared for all possible contingencies (both for a conference of the official represen-tatives of parties and for a private meeting in all its forms, bothfor February 15 and for any later date). 
 For our part and in view of the desire you have expressed, we propose the following draft declaration which contains such a contraposition (so that the declaration may be read and printed): “The undersigned representatives of the Social-Democratic organisations of Russia (Britain, etc. 
) proceed from theconviction: “that the present war is, on the part, not only of Germany and Austro-Hungary, but of Britain and France (acting in alliance with tsarism), an imperialist war, i. 
e. 
, a warof the epoch of the final stage in the development of capi-talism, an epoch in which bourgeois states, with theirnational boundaries, have outlived themselves; a war aimedexclusively at the grabbing of colonies, the plundering of rival countries, and the weakening of the proletarian movement by setting the proletarians of one country againstthose of another. 
 “Consequently it is the absolute duty of the socialists of all belligerent countries immediately and resolutely tocarry out the Basle resolution, viz. 
: “(1) the b reak-up of all national blocs and the Burgfrie-den * in all countries; “(2) a call to the workers of all the belligerent countries to wage an energetic class struggle, both economic andpolitical, against the bourgeoisie of their country, a bourgeoi-sie that is amassing unparalleled profits from war deliveries and makes use of the military authorities’ backing so as to gag the workers and intensify oppression of the latter; “(3) decisive condemnation of any voting for war credits; “(4) withdrawal from the bourgeois governments of Belgium and France, and recognition that entry intogovernments and voting for war credits are the same kind of treachery to the cause of socialism as is the entire behav-iour of the German and Austrian Social-Democrats; “(5) that the hand be stretched out to internationalist elements in German Social-Democracy that refuse to votefor war credits, and that an international committee beset up, together with them, for the conduct of agitation for the cessation of the war, not in the spirit of the paci-*class truce. 
— Ed. 
 fists, the Christians, and the petty-bourgeois democrats, but in inseparable connection with the propaganda and organisation of mass revolutionary action by the prole-tarians of each country, against the governments and thebourgeoisie of that country; “(6) support for any attempts by the socialists of the belligerent countries to bring about contacts and fraterni-sation in the fighting forces and the trenches, despite the bans imposed by the military authorities of Britain, Germany, etc. 
; “(7) a call to women socialists of the belligerent countries to intensify agitation in the direction indicated above; “(8) a call for support by the entire world proletariat of the struggle against tsarism, and for support for those Social-Democrats of Russia who have not only refused to vote for credits, but have shown disregard of the dangerof persecution and are conducting socialist work in thespirit of internationalist and revolutionary Social-Democracy. 
” * * * As for certain Social-Democratic men of letters in Russia who have come out in defence of the official social-patriot-ism (as, for instance, Plekhanov, Alexinsky, Maslov, andothers), the undersigned disclaim all responsibility for any action or statements by them, energetically protest against the latter, and declare that, according to all avail-able information, the Social-Democratic workers of Russiado not hold that point of view. 
 It goes without saying that Comrade Litvinov, our Central Committee’s official representative in the International Socialist Bureau (his address *: We are sending him your letter and a copy of our reply to you. 
 Please address himdirectly on all urgent matters), as he has been authorisedto use his own judgement in the matter of all particularamendments, special steps in negotiations, etc. 
; we canmerely state our complete solidarity with this comrade on all essential points. 
 *M. 
 M. 
 Litvinov’s address is not given in the MS. 
— Ed. 
 As for the Organising Committee and the Bund, who are both represented in the International Socialist Bureau, we have grounds for apprehension that they stand for “official social-patriotism” (in its Francophile or Germanophile form,or in any other that would reconcile these two tendencies). 
At any rate we would appreciate your kindness in sendingus both your reply (your amendments, your counter-draftof the resolution, etc. 
) and the reply of those organisations (the Organising Committee, the Bund, etc. 
) that you have already addressed or intend doing so. 
 With comradely greetings, My address is: * Lenin First published in 1931 Published according to in Lenin Miscellany XVII the manuscript *No address is given in the MS. 
— Ed. 
 HOW THE POLICE AND THE REACTIONARIES PROTECT THE UNITY OF GERMAN SOCIAL -DEMOCRACY In its issue of January 9, the German Social-Democratic Gothaer Volksblatt published an article entitled, “Police Protection for the Policy of the Social-Democratic Parliamen-tary Group”. 
 “The first two days of the operation of the censorship,” says the paper, which has been placed under the gratifyingguardianship of the military authorities, “show with full clarity that the central authorities are particularly anxious to gag the undesirable critics of the policy of theSocial-Democratic group within our own ranks. 
 The censorshipis designed to preserve ‘party peace’ within the ranks of theSocial-Democrats, in other words, to preserve a ‘united’,‘cemented’ and powerful German Social-Democratic Party. 
 Social-Democracy under governmental tutelage—such is the most important event in the internal policies of our‘great’ time, of the era of the rebirth of the Germannation. 
 “Several weeks have passed since the politicians who make up our Social-Democratic parliamentary group began an energetic propaganda campaign of their views. 
 They have come up against strong opposition in several verylarge party centres. 
 Their propaganda has put the workersin a frame of mind unfavourable rather than favourableto those who vote for war credits, which is why the militaryauthorities have sought to help the latter now by means of the censorship, now by abolishing freedom of assembly. 
 With us in Gotha, this help is coming from the militarycensor, in Hamburg, from the ban on meetings. 
” In quoting these words, the Swiss Social-Democratic paper, which is published in Berne, adds that a number of Social-Democratic papers in Germany have been placed under censorship, and continues with the comment: “Verysoon there will be nothing to disturb the unanimity of theGerman press. 
 If anybody attempts to affect it, the militarydictatorship will firmly and rapidly put an end to that,acting on information supplied directly or indirectly by ‘Social-Democrats’ that stand for party peace”. 
 The opportunist Social-Democratic papers do indeed, direct-ly or indirectly, pass on information about the radical press! Consequently, the facts go to show that we were perfect-ly right in writing in No. 
 36 of Sotsial-Demokrat : “The opportunists are bourgeois enemies of the proletarian revolu-tion .... 
 In times of crisis they immediately prove to be open allies of the entire united bourgeoisie. 
 ”* As a slogan of the Social-Democratic Party, unity today means unity withthe opportunists and submission to them (or to their blocwith the bourgeoisie). 
 This is a slogan which in actual fact aids the police and the reactionaries, and is disastrous to the labour movement. 
 We might, incidentally, mention the appearance of a splendid pamphlet by Borchardt (in German) entitled Vor und nach dem 4. 
 August 1914 , 82 with the sub-title, Hat die deutsche Sozialdemokratie abgedankt? Indeed, it has repudiated itself, says the author, revealing the glaring contrast between party declarations prior to August 4 and the policies of “August 4”. 
 We shall stop at no sacrifice inthe war against war, the Social-Democrats of Germany(and other countries) said prior to August 4, 1914, whereas,on September 28, 1914, Otto Braun, member of the CentralCommittee, made reference to the 20 millions of marks invested in legal papers, and their 11,000 employees. 
 The tens of thousands of leaders, officials and privilegedworkers, who have been demoralised by legalism, have disor-ganised the million-strong army of the Social-Democraticproletariat. 
 The lesson to be derived is as clear as clear can be: a decisive break with chauvinism and opportunism. 
 Yet, *See p . 
 110 of this volume . 
— Ed. 
 vapid Social-Revolutionary babblers (J. 
 Gardenin83 and Co. 
) have, in the vapid Paris Mysl , repudiated Marxism, in favour of petty-bourgeois ideas! Forgotten are the elementary truths provided by political economy, and theworld-wide development of capitalism, which produces onlyone revolutionary class—the proletariat. 
 Forgotten areChartism, June 1848, the Paris Commune, and Octoberand December, 1905. 
 The workers can advance towards their world-wide revolution only through a series of defeats and errors, failures and weaknesses, but they are advancingtowards it. 
 One must be blind not to see bourgeoisand petty-bourgeois influence on the proletariat as the mainand fundamental cause of the International’s disgrace andcollapse in 1914. 
 However, windbags like Gardenin and Co. 
 would apply a remedy to socialism by completely repudiating its only socio-historical foundation—the classstruggle of the proletariat—and by diluting Marxism withphilistine and intellectualist-Narodnik verbiage. 
 The callis not for strenuous work towards a rupture between theproletarian revolutionary movement and opportunism, but for unification of this movement with the opportunists of the Ropshin 84 and Chernov type, who were bomb-throw-ing liberals the day before yesterday, renegades in thetoga of liberals yesterday, and today delight in saccharinebourgeois phrases about the “labour” principle! The Gardeninsare no better than the Südekums and the Socialist-Revolutionaries no better than the liquidators. 
 This is why they all meet so lovingly in Sovremennik ,85 a journal that advocates a programme of a merger between theSocial-Democrats and the Socialist-Revolutionaries. 
 Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 39, Published according to March 3, 1915 the text in Sotsial-Demokrat THE LONDON CONFERENCE Below we quote, with abbreviations, a letter from the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 representative: “London, Feb. 
 14, 1915. 
 “It was only last night that I received from the secretary of the British section of the International the address ofthe Conference, this in reply to my letter, in which I in-formed him of my address, without asking for an invitation. 
I decided to go there so as to try to read the declara-tion. 
 Present were: from the Socialist-Revolutionaries, Rubanovich (from the social-chauvinists), Chernov and Bobrov from Mysl ; Maisky from the Organising Committee, he being delegated together with Martov, who failed to appear,as he had received no pass. 
 There were eleven delegatesfrom Britain (Keir Hardie as Chairman, MacDonald andothers); sixteen from France (Sembat, Vaillant and others); three from Belgium (Vandervelde and others). 
 “The Chairman opened the Conference by declaring that its aim was to exchange opinions, not to adopt resolutions. 
A French delegate proposed an amendment, asking whya resolution should not be passed registering the opinionof the majority . 
 This was accepted without discussion. 
 “The agenda: (1) the rights of nations—Belgium and Poland; (2) colonies; (3) guarantees of peace. 
 A CredentialsCommittee was elected (Rubanovich and others). 
 It wasdecided that one representative from each country shouldmake a brief report on the attitude to the war. 
 “I took the floor and protested against the failure to invite our Party’s official representative in the International Socialist Bureau [Comrade Maximovich, 86 who has for over a year been a member of the I. 
 S. 
 Bureau as representa-tive of our Party, and is permanently resident in London]. 
 The Chairman interrupted me, referring to the invitation of all ‘whose names are known’. 
 I once more protested against the failure to inform the genuine representatives. 
Then I referred to our Manifesto [see Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 33, “The War and Russian Social-Democracy” *], which shows our over-all attitude towards the war, and has beensent to the I. 
 S. 
 Bureau. 
 Prior to speaking of the conditions of peace, I said, it was necessary to establish the means by which we would endeavour to achieve peace; with thatend, the existence of a general revolutionary Social-Democratic basis should be ascertained, and also whether wewere conferring as chauvinists, as pacifists, or as Social-Democrats. 
 I was reading our declaration, but the Chair-man interrupted me, declaring that my standing as a dele-gate had not yet been established [!] and that they hadgathered, ‘not for criticism of various parties’ [!]. 
 I statedthat I would continue my speech after the report of theCredentials Committee. 
 [The text of the declaration wewere not allowed to read appears in the next issue. 
] “Brief statements on the general situation were made by Vaillant, Vandervelde, MacDonald, and Rubanovich. 
 Then,following the report of the Credentials Committee, Maiskywas asked to himself decide whether he could alone representthe Organising Committee, and I was ‘permitted’ toattend. 
 I thanked the Conference for their ‘courtesy’ and was about to continue reading out the declaration so as to ascertain whether I could remain. 
 The Chairman interruptedme, saying he would not allow me to present ‘conditions’to the Conference. 
 Then I asked for permission tosay why I would not take part in the Conference. 
 This was rejected. 
 I then asked for permission to state that the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 was not taking part in the Conference. 
 As for the reasons, I was leaving a written statement with theChairman. 
 I gathered my papers and left.... 
 “The Chairman was given a statement from the Chairman of the Central Committee of the Lettish Social-Democrats[Berzin] to the effect that he fully agreed with our declara-tion. 
” *See pp. 
 25-34 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 The delegates to the Conference were not allowed to give any information to the press. 
 This, of course, did not apply to Comrade Maximovich’s leaving the Conference, and the Labour Leader ,87 in which Keir Hardie collaborates, made some general comments on Maximovich’s having left theConference and on his point of view. 
 Owing to lack of space, we shall have to deal with the London Conference and its resolutions in our next issue. 
 We shall however note the utter uselessness of its resolu-tions, which merely cover up social-chauvinism. 
 The following is the set-up of the Russian representation: the Central Committee and the Lettish Social-Democratsare resolutely and clearly opposed to social-chauvinism. 
The liquidators’ Organising Committee either stay away or else get in the way. 
 As for the Socialist-Revolutionaries, the “party” (Rubanovich) is for social-chauvinism, while Mysl (Bobrov and Chernov) form the opposition, which we shallgive an appraisal of when we learn the kind of statementthey have made. 
 Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 39, Published according to March 3, 1915 the text in Sotsial-Demokrat UNDE R A FALS E FLA G88 Written not earlier than February 1915 First published in 1917 , Published according to in the first Collection the text in the Collection of the Priliv Publishers, Moscow Signed: N. 
 Konstantinov UNDER A FALSE FLAG88 Written not earlier than February 1915 First published in 1917 , Published according to in the first Collection the text in the Collection of the Priliv Publishers, Moscow Signed: N. 
 Konstantinov Issue No. 
 1 of Nashe Dyelo (Petrograd, January 1915)89 published a highly characteristic programmatic article by Mr. 
 A. 
 Potresov, entitled “At the Juncture of Two Epochs”. 
Like an earlier magazine article by the same author, thepresent article sets forth the ideas underlying an entire bour-geois trend of public thought in Russia—the liquidation-ist—regarding the important and burning problems of the times. 
 Strictly speaking, we have before us not articlesbut the manifesto of a definite trend, and anyone who readsthem carefully and gives thought to their content will seethat only fortuitous considerations, i. 
e. 
, such that havenothing in common with purely literary interests, have prevented the author’s ideas (and those of his friends, since the author does not stand alone) from being expressedin the more appropriate form of a declaration or credo. 
 Potresov’s main idea is that present-day democracy stands at the juncture of two epochs, the fundamental differencebetween the old epoch and the new consisting in a transition from national isolation to internationalism. 
 By present-day democracy, Potresov understands the kind that markedthe close of the nineteenth century and the beginning ofthe twentieth, as distinct from the old bourgeois democracythat marked the end of the eighteenth century and thefirst two-thirds of the nineteenth. 
 At first glance it may seem that the author’s idea is absolutely correct, that we have before us an opponent tothe national-liberal tendency predominant in present-daydemocracy, and that the author is an “internationalist”, nota national-liberal. 
 Indeed, this defence of internationalism, this reference to national narrow-mindedness and national exclusiveness as features of an outworn and bygone epoch—is it not abreakaway from the wave of national-liberalism, that bane of present-day democracy or, rather, of its official repre-sentatives? That, at first glance, is not only the possible but the almost inevitable impression. 
 Yet it would be a grosserror to think so. 
 The author is transporting his cargo undera false flag. 
 Consciously or otherwise—that does not matterin this instance—he has resorted to a stratagem by hoistingthe flag of “internationalism” so as the more securely to transport under this flag his contraband cargo of national-liberalism. 
 After all, Potresov is a most undeniable national-liberal. 
 The gist of his article (and of his programme,platform, and credo) is in the employment of this little—andif you wish even innocent—stratagem, in carryingopportunism under the flag of internationalism. 
 One must go into all the details of this manoeuvre, for the matter is of prime and tremendous importance. 
 Potresov’s use of afalse flag is the more dangerous since he not only cloakshimself with the principle of “internationalism” but alsoassumes the title of an adherent of “Marxist methodology”. 
In other words, Potresov pretends to be a true follower and exponent of Marxism, whereas in actual fact he substitutes national-liberalism for Marxism. 
 Potresov tries to “amend”Kautsky, accusing him of “playing the advocate”, i. 
e. 
,of defending liberalism now of one shade, now of another,that is to say, the liberalism of shades peculiar to variousnations. 
 Potresov is out to contrast national-liberalism (for it is absolutely indubitable and indisputable that Kautsky has become a national-liberal) with interna-tionalism and Marxism. 
 In reality, Potresov is contrastingparticoloured national-liberalism with national-liberalism of a single colour, whereas Marxism is hostile—and in the present historical situation, absolutely hostile—to any kind of national-liberalism. 
 We shall now go on to show that such is the case, and why. 
 I The highlight of Potresov’s misadventures, which led to his setting out under a national-liberal flag, can be best understood if the reader examines the following passagein his article: “With their characteristic temperament, they [Marx and his comrades] attacked the problem, no matter how difficult it was; they diagnosed the conflict, and attempted to determine the success of which side opened up broader vistas for possibilities desirable from their point of view;thus they laid down a certain basis on which to build theirtactics” (p. 
 73, our italics in excerpts). 
 “The success of which side is more desirable”—this is what has to be determined, and that from an interna-tional, not a national point of view. 
 This is the essenceof the Marxist methodology. 
 This is what Kautsky doesnot do, thus turning from a “judge” (a Marxist) into an“advocate” (a national-liberal). 
 Such is Potresov’s line ofargument. 
 Potresov himself is most deeply convinced that he is not “playing the advocate” when he defends the de-sirability of success for one side (namely, his own) andthat, conversely, he is guided by truly international con-siderations with regard to the egregious sins of the other side. 
 Potresov, Maslov, Plekhanov, etc. 
, who are all guided by truly international considerations, have reached the same conclusions as Potresov has. 
 This is a simple-mindedness that borders on—well, we shall not make undue haste, butshall first complete an analysis of the purely theoreticalquestion. 
 “The success of which side is more desirable” was estab-lished by Marx in the Italian war of 1859, for instance. 
 Potresov dwells on this particular instance, which, he says, “has a special interest for us because of certain of itsfeatures”. 
 We too, for our part, are willing to take theinstance chosen by Potresov. 
 In 1859 Napoleon III declared war on Austria, allegedly for the liberation of Italy, but in reality for his own dynastic aims. 
 “Behind the back of Napoleon III,” says Potresov, “could be discerned the figure of Gorchakov, who had just signed asecret agreement with the Emperor of the French. 
” Whatwe have here is a tangle of contradictions: on the one side,the most reactionary European monarchy, which has been oppressing Italy; on the other, the representatives of revo-lutionary Italy, including Garibaldi, fighting for her libera-tion, side by side with the ultra-reactionary Napoleon III, etc. 
 “Would it not have been simpler,” Potresov writes, “to step aside and to say that the two are equally bad? However, neither Engels, Marx, nor Lassalle were attracted by the ‘simplicity’ of such a solution, but started to searchthe problem [Potresov means to say, to study and explorethe problem], of the particular outcome of the conflictwhich might provide the greatest opportunities for a causedear to all three. 
” Lassalle notwithstanding, Marx and Engels came to the conclusion that Prussia must intervene. 
 Among theirconsiderations, as Potresov himself admits, was that “ofthe possibility, as a result of a conflict with the enemy coali-tion, of a national movement in Germany, which mightdevelop over the heads of its numerous rulers; there was also the consideration as to which Power in the Concert of Europe was the main evil: the reactionary Danubian monarchy,or other outstanding representatives of this Concert”. 
 “To us, it is not important who was right, Marx or Las-salle,” Potresov concludes; “what is important is that allwere agreed on the necessity of determining, from an inter-national point of view, the success of which side was more desirable. 
” This is the instance cited by Potresov, and the way our author pursues the argument. 
 If Marx was then able “toappraise international conflicts” (Potresov’s expression),notwithstanding the highly reactionary character of the governments of both belligerent sides, then Marxists too are at present obliged to make a similar appraisal, Potresov concludes. 
 This conclusion is either naïve childishness or crass sophistry, since it boils down to the following: since, in1859, Marx was working on the problem of the desirability of success for which particular bourgeoisie, we, over half a century later, must solve the problem in exactly the same way. 
 Potresov has failed to notice that, to Marx in 1859 (as well as in a number of later cases), the question of “thesuccess of which side is more desirable” meant asking “thesuccess of which bourgeoisie is more desirable”. 
 Potresov has failed to notice that Marx was working on the problem at a time when there existed indubitably progressive bourgeois movements, which moreover did not merely exist, but were in the forefront of the historical process in the leading states of Europe. 
 Today, it would be ridiculous even to imagine a progressive bourgeoisie, a progressive bourgeois movement, in, for instance, such key members of the “Concert” ofEurope, as Britain and Germany. 
 The old bourgeois“democracy” of these two key states has turned reactionary. 
Potresov has “forgotten” this, and has substituted the stand-point of the old (bourgeois) so-called democracy for that of present-day (non-bourgeois) democracy. 
 This shift to the standpoint of another class, and moreover of an old andoutmoded class, is sheer opportunism. 
 There cannot bethe least doubt that a shift like this cannot be justifiedby an analysis of the objective content of the historicalprocess in the old and the new epochs. 
 It is the bourgeoisie—for instance in Germany, and in Britain too, for that matter—that endeavours to effect thekind of substitution accomplished by Potresov, viz. 
, replacingof the imperialist epoch by that of bourgeois-progressive,national and democratic movements for liberation. 
 Potre-sov is uncritically following in the wake of the bourgeoi-sie. 
 This is the more unpardonable, since, in the instance he has selected, Potresov has himself been obliged torecognise and specify the considerations guiding Marx,Engels, and Lassalle in those bygone days. 
 * First of all, these were considerations on the national movement (in Germany and Italy)—on the latter’s develop-ment over the heads of the “representatives of medievalism”; secondly, these were considerations on the “main evil” of *Incidentally Potresov refuses to make up his mind as to whether Marx or Lassalle was right in appraising the conditions of the warof 1859. 
 We think that (Mehring notwithstanding) Marx was right,whereas Lassalle was then an opportunist, just as he was duringhis flirtation with Bismarck. 
 Lassalle was adapting himself to thevictory of Prussia and Bismarck, to the lack of sufficient strengthin the democratic national movements of Italy and Germany. 
 ThusLassalle deviated towards a national-liberal labour policy, whereasMarx encouraged and developed an independent, consistently demo-cratic policy hostile to national-liberal cowardice (Prussia’s inter-vention in 1859 against Napoleon would have stimulated thepopular movement in Germany). 
 Lassalle was casting glances, notdownwards but upwards, as he was fascinated by Bismarck. 
 Bis-marck’s “success” was no justification of Lassalle’s opportunism. 
 the reactionary monarchies (the Austrian, the Napoleonic, etc. 
) in the Concert of Europe. 
 These considerations are perfectly clear and indisput-able. 
 Marxists have never denied the progressiveness ofbourgeois national-liberation movements against feudaland absolutist forces. 
 Potresov cannot but know that nothing like this does or can exist in the major, i. 
e. 
, the leading rival states of today. 
 In those days there existed, both in Italy and in Germany, popular national-liberation movements with decades of struggle behind them. 
 In those days the Western bourgeoisie did not give financial support to cer-tain other states; on the contrary, those states were really “the main evil”. 
 Potresov cannot but know—as he admitsin the same article—that today none of the other states is or can be the “main evil”. 
 The bourgeoisie (in Germany, for instance, though not in that country alone) is, for selfish reasons, encouragingthe ideology of national movements, attempting to translatethat ideology into the epoch of imperialism, i. 
e. 
, an entirelydifferent epoch. 
 As usual, the opportunists are plodding along in the rear of the bourgeoisie, abandoning the stand-point of present-day democracy and shifting over to that of the old (bourgeois) democracy. 
 That is the chief shortcom-ing in all the articles, as well as in the entire positionand the entire line of Potresov and his liquidationistfellow-thinkers. 
 At the time of the old (bourgeois) democracy Marx and Engels were working on the problem of the desirability of success for which particular bourgeoisie; theywere concerned with a modestly liberal movement developinginto a tempestuously democratic one. 
 In the period ofpresent-day (non-bourgeois) democracy, Potresov is preaching bourgeois national-liberalism at a time when one cannot even imagine bourgeois progressive movements, whether modestly liberal or tempestuously democratic, in Britain,Germany, or France. 
 Marx and Engels were ahead of their epoch, that of bourgeois-national progressive movements; they wanted to give an impetus to such move-ments so that they might develop “over the heads” of the representatives of medievalism. 
 Like all social-chauvinists, Potresov is moving back-wards, away from his own period, that of present-day democ-racy, and skipping over to the outworn, dead, and therefore intrinsically false viewpoint of the old (bourgeois) democracy. 
 That is why Potresov’s following appeal to democracy reveals his muddled thinking and is highly reactionary: “Do not retreat, but advance, not towards individualism, but towards internationalist consciousness in all its integ-rity and all its vigour. 
 To advance means, in a certain sense, to go also back—back to Engels, Marx, and Lassalle, to their method of appraising international conflicts, and totheir finding it possible to utilise inter-state relations fordemocratic purposes. 
” Potresov drags present-day democracy backwards , not “in a certain sense” but in all senses; he drags it back to the slogans and the ideology of the old bourgeois democracy, to the dependence of the masses upon the bourgeoisie.... 
Marx’s method consists, first of all, in taking due accountof the objective content of a historical process at a given moment, in definite and concrete conditions; this in orderto realise, in the first place, the movement of which class is the mainspring of the progress possible in those concrete conditions. 
 In 1859, it was not imperialism that comprisedthe objective content of the historical process in continentalEurope, but national-bourgeois movements for liberation. 
The mainspring was the movement of the bourgeoisieagainst the feudal and absolutist forces. 
 Fifty-five years later, when the place of the old and reactionary feudal lords has been taken by the not unsimilar finance capitaltycoons of the decrepit bourgeoisie, the knowledgeablePotresov is out to appraise international conflicts from thestandpoint of the bourgeoisie , not of the new class . 
 * Potresov has not given proper thought to the significance of the truth he uttered in the above words. 
 Let us suppose that two countries are at war in the epoch ofbourgeois, national-liberation movements. 
 Which countryshould we wish success to from the standpoint of present-day *“Indeed,” Potresov writes, “it was during that period of seeming stagnation that tremendous molecular processes were taking placein every country; the international situation too was gradually changing, the policy of colonial acquisitions, of militant imperialism becoming its determining feature. 
 ” democracy? Obviously, to that country whose success will give a greater impetus to the bourgeoisie’s liberation movement, make its development more speedy, and undermine feudalism the more decisively. 
 Let us further suppose that the de-termining feature of the objective historical situation has changed, and that the place of capital striving for nationalliberation has been taken by international, reactionaryand imperialist finance capital. 
 The former country, let us say, possesses three-fourths of Africa, whereas the latter possesses one-fourth. 
 A repartition of Africa is the objec-tive content of their war. 
 To which side should we wishsuccess? It would be absurd to state the problem in itsprevious form, since we do not possess the old criteriaof appraisal: there is neither a bourgeois liberation move-ment running into decades, nor a long process of the decay of feudalism. 
 It is not the business of present-daydemocracy either to help the former country to assert its“right” to three-fourths of Africa, or to help the lattercountry (even if it is developing economically more rapidlythan the former) to take over those three-fourths. 
 Present-day democracy will remain true to itself only if it joins neither one nor the other imperialist bourgeoisie,only if it says that the two sides are equally bad, and ifit wishes the defeat of the imperialist bourgeoisie in everycountry. 
 Any other decision will, in reality, be national-liberal and have nothing in common with genuine internationalism. 
 The reader should not let himself be deceived by the pretentious terminology Potresov employs to concealhis switch over to the standpoint of the bourgeoisie. 
 When Potresov exclaims: “... not towards individualism, but towards internationalist consciousness in all its integrityand all its vigour”, his aim is to contrast his own point ofview with that of Kautsky. 
 He calls the latter’s view (andthat of others like him) “individualism”, because of Kaut-sky’s refusal to decide “the success of which side is more desirable”, and his justification of the workers’ national-liberalism in each “individual” country. 
 We, on the contrary,he, as it were, says, we—Potresov, Cherevanin, Maslov, Plekhanov, and others—appeal to “internationalist con-sciousness in all its integrity and all its vigour”, for we stand for national-liberalism of a definite shade, in no way from the standpoint of an individual state (or anindividual nation) but from a standpoint that is genuinelyinternationalist. 
 This line of reasoning would be ridiculousif it were not so—disgraceful. 
 Both Potresov and Co. 
 and Kautsky, who have betrayed the standpoint of the class which they are trying hard to represent, are following in the wake of the bourgeoisie. 
 II Potresov has entitled his article “At the Juncture of Two Epochs”. 
 We are undoubtedly living at the juncture of two epochs, and the historic events that are unfoldingbefore our eyes can be understood only if we analyse, inthe first place, the objective conditions of the transitionfrom one epoch to the other. 
 Here we have importanthistorical epochs; in each of them there are and will al-ways be individual and partial movements, now forward now backward; there are and will always be variousdeviations from the average type and mean tempo of themovement. 
 We cannot know how rapidly and how successfullythe various historical movements in a given epoch willdevelop, but we can and do know which class stands at the hub of one epoch or another, determining its main content, the main direction of its development, the main characteris-tics of the historical situation in that epoch, etc. 
 Only onthat basis, i. 
e. 
, by taking into account, in the first place,the fundamental distinctive features of the various “epochs”(and not single episodes in the history of individual coun-tries), can we correctly evolve our tactics; only a knowledge of the basic features of a given epoch can serve as thefoundation for an understanding of the specific features ofone country or another. 
 It is to this region that both Potresov’s and Kautsky’s main sophism, or their fundamental historical error, per-tains (Kautsky’s article was published in the same issue of Nashe Dyelo ), an error which has led both of them to national-liberal, not Marxist, conclusions. 
 The trouble is that the instance chosen by Potresov, which has presented a “special interest” to him, namely, the instance of the Italian campaign of 1859, as well as a number of similar historical instances quoted by Kautsky, “in no way pertain to those historical epochs”, “at the junc-ture” of which we are living. 
 Let us call the epoch weare entering (or have entered, and which is in its initialstage) the present-day (or third) epoch. 
 Let us call that which we have just emerged from the epoch of yesterday (or the second). 
 In that case we shall have to call the epochfrom which Potresov and Kautsky cite their instances, theday-before-yesterday (or first) epoch. 
 Both Potresov’s andKautsky’s revolting sophistry, the intolerable falsenessof their arguments, consist in their substituting for the conditions of the present-day (or third) epoch the conditions of the day-before-yesterday (or first) epoch. 
 I shall try to explain what I mean. 
The usual division into historical epochs, so often cited in Marxist literature and so many times repeated by Kautskyand adopted in Potresov’s article, is the following: (1) 1789-1871; (2) 1871-1914; (3) 1914—? Here, of course, as everywhere in Nature and society, the lines of divisionare conventional and variable, relative, not absolute. 
 Wetake the most outstanding and striking historical eventsonly approximately, as milestones in important historicalmovements. 
 The first epoch from the Great French Revolu-tion to the Franco-Prussian war is one of the rise of the bourgeoisie, of its triumph, of the bourgeoisie on theupgrade, an epoch of bourgeois-democratic movements ingeneral and of bourgeois-national movements in particular,an epoch of the rapid breakdown of the obsolete feudal-absolutist institutions. 
 The second epoch is that of the full domination and decline of the bourgeoisie, one of transition from its progressive character towards reactionaryand even ultra-reactionary finance capital. 
 This is an epoch inwhich a new class—present-day democracy—is preparing andslowly mustering its forces. 
 The third epoch, which has justset in, places the bourgeoisie in the same “position” as that in which the feudal lords found themselves during the first epoch. 
 This is the epoch of imperialism and imperialist upheavals, aswell as of upheavals stemming from the nature of imperialism. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR It was none other than Kautsky who, in a series of articles and in his pamphlet Der Weg zur Macht (which appeared in 1909), outlined with full clarity the basic features of the third epoch that has set in, and who notedthe fundamental differences between this epoch and thesecond (that of yesterday), and recognised the change inthe immediate tasks as well as in the conditions and formsof struggle of present-day democracy, a change stemming from the changed objective historical conditions. 
 Kautsky is now burning that which he worshipped yesterday; hischange of front is most incredible, most unbecoming andmost shameless. 
 In the above-mentioned pamphlet, hespoke forthrightly of symptoms of an approaching war, andspecifically of the kind of war that became a fact in 1914. 
 It would suffice simply to place side by side for comparison a number of passages from that pamphlet and from hispresent writings to show convincingly how Kautsky hasbetrayed his own convictions and solemn declarations. 
In this respect Kautsky is not an individual instance (oreven a German instance); he is a typical representative of the entire upper crust of present-day democracy, which, at a moment of crisis, has deserted to the side of the bour-geoisie. 
 All the historical instances quoted by Potresov and Kaut-sky belong to the first epoch. 
 The main objective contentof the historical wartime phenomena, not only of 1855, 1859, 1864, 1866, or 1870, but also of 1877 (the Russo-Turkish war) and 1896-1897 (the wars between Turkey andGreece and the Armenian disturbances) were bourgeois-national movements or “convulsions” in a, bourgeois societyridding itself of every kind of feudalism. 
 At that timethere could have been no possibility of really independent action by present-day democracy, action of the kind befitting the epoch of the over-maturity, and decay of thebourgeoisie, in a number of leading countries. 
 The bour-geoisie was then the chief class, which was on the upgradeas a result of its participation in those wars; it alone couldcome out with overwhelming force against the feudal-absolutist institutions. 
 Represented by various strata of propertied producers of commodities, this bourgeoisie was progressive in various degrees in the different countries, sometimes (like part of the Italian bourgeoisie in 1859) being even revolutionary. 
 The general feature of the epoch, however, was the progressiveness of the bourgeoisie, i. 
e. 
, its unresolved and uncompleted struggle against feudalism. 
It was perfectly natural for the elements of present-daydemocracy, and for Marx as their representative, to havebeen guided at the time by the unquestionable principleof support for the progressive bourgeoisie (i. 
e. 
, capable of waging a struggle) against feudalism, and for them to be dealing with the problem as to “the success of which side”,i. 
e. 
, of which bourgeoisie, was more desirable. 
 The popular movement in the principal countries affected by thewar was generally democratic at that time, i. 
e. 
, bourgeois-democratic in its economic and class content. 
 It is quite natural that no other question could have been posed at the time except the following: the success of which bour-geoisie, the success of which combination of forces, the failureof which reactionary forces (the feudal-absolutist forceswhich were hampering the rise of the bourgeoisie) promisedcontemporary democracy more “elbow room”. 
 As even Potresov has had to admit, Marx was guided, in his “appraisal” of international conflicts springing frombourgeois national and liberation movements, by consider-ations as to whose success was more capable of contribut-ing to the “development” (p. 
 74 of Potresov’s article) ofnational and, in general, popular democratic movements. 
 That means that, during military conflicts stemming from the bourgeoisie’s rise to power within the various nation-alities, Marx was, as in 1848, most of all concerned withextending the scope of the bourgeois-democratic movementand bringing it to a head through the participation ofbroader and more “plebeian” masses, the petty bourgeoisie in general, the peasantry in particular, and finally of the poor classes as a whole. 
 This concern of Marx for theextension of the movement’s social base and its developmentis the fundamental distinction between Marx’s consistentlydemocratic tactics and Lassalle’s inconsistent tactics, whichveered towards an alliance with the national-liberals. 
 The international conflicts in the third epoch have, in form , remained the same kind of international conflicts as those of the first epoch, but their social and class content has changed radically. 
 The objective historical situation has grown quite different. 
 The place of the struggle of a rising capital, striving towards national liberation from feudalism, has been takenby the struggle waged against the new forces by themost reactionary finance capital, the struggle of a force thathas exhausted and outlived itself and is heading downwardtowards decay. 
 The bourgeois-national state framework, which in the first epoch was the mainstay of the develop-ment of the productive forces of a humanity that was liberating itself from feudalism, has now, in the thirdepoch, become a hindrance to the further development of the productive forces. 
 From a rising and progressive classthe bourgeoisie has turned into a declining, decadent, and reactionary class. 
 It is quite another class that is now on the upgrade on a broad historical scale. 
 Potresov and Kautsky have abandoned the standpoint of that class; they have turned back, repeating the falsebourgeois assertion that today too the objective content of the historical process consists in the bourgeoisie’s progres-sive movement against feudalism. 
 In reality, there can now be no talk of present-day democracy following in the wake of the reactionary imperialist bourgeoisie, no matter of what “shade” the latter may be. 
 In the first epoch, the objective and historical task was to ascertain how, in its struggle against the chief represent-atives of a dying feudalism, the progressive bourgeoisie should “utilise” international conflicts so as to bring thegreatest possible advantage to the entire democratic bour-geoisie of the world. 
 In the first epoch, over half a centuryago, it was natural and inevitable that the bourgeoisie,enslaved by feudalism, should wish the defeat of its “own” feudal oppressor, all the more so that the principal and central feudal strongholds of all-European importance werenot so numerous at the time. 
 This is how Marx “appraised”the conflicts: he ascertained in which country, in a givenand concrete situation, the success of the bourgeois-liberationmovement was more important in undermining the all-European feudal stronghold. 
 At present, in the third epoch, no feudal fortresses of all-European significance remain. 
 Of course, it is the task of present-day democracy to “utilise” conflicts, but—despite Potresov and Kautsky—this international utilisation must be directed, not against individual national finance capital, but against international finance capital. 
 The utilisationshould not be effected by a class which was on the ascendantfifty or a hundred years ago. 
 At that time it was a questionof “international action” (Potresov’s expression) by themost advanced bourgeois democracy; today it is another class that is confronted by a similar task created by history and advanced by the objective state of affairs. 
 III The second epoch or, as Potresov puts it, “a span of forty-five years” (1870-1914), is characterised very incon-clusively by him. 
 The same incompleteness is the shortcom-ing in Trotsky’s characterisation of the same period, givenin his German work, although he does not agree withPotresov’s practical conclusions (this, of course, standing to the former’s credit). 
 Both writers hardly realise the reason for their standing so close to each other, in acertain sense. 
 Here is what Potresov writes of this epoch, which we have called the second, that of yesterday: “A detailed restriction of work and the struggle and an all-pervading gradualism—these signs of the times, which by some have been elevated to a principle, havebecome to others an ordinary fact in their lives, and, assuch, have become part of their mentality, a shade oftheir ideology” (p. 
 71). 
 “Its [this epoch’s] talent for a smoothand cautious advance had, as its reverse, firstly, a pro-nounced non-adaptability to any break in gradualness and to catastrophic phenomena of any kind and secondly, anexceptional isolation within the sphere of national action—the national milieu...” (p. 
 72). 
 “Neither revolution, norwar...” (p. 
 70). 
 “Democracy became the more effectivelynationalist, the longer the period of its ‘position warfare’ was protracted and the longer there lingered on the stage that spell of European history which ... knew of no inter-national conflicts in the heart of Europe, and consequently experienced no unrest extending beyond the boundaries of national state territories, and felt no keen interest on a general European or world scale” (75-76). 
 The chief shortcoming in this characterisation, as in Trotsky’s characterisation of the same epoch, is a reluctanceto discern and recognise the deep contradictions in moderndemocracy, which has developed on the foundation describedabove. 
 The impression is produced that the democracy con-temporary with the epoch under review remained a single whole, which, generally speaking, was pervaded with grad-ualism, turned nationalist, was by degrees weaned awayfrom breaks in gradualness and from catastrophes, and grewpetty and mildewed. 
 In reality this could not have happened, since, side by side with the aforesaid tendencies, other and reverse tendencies were undoubtedly operating: the day-by-day lifeof the working masses was undergoing an internationalisa-tion—the cities were attracting ever more inhabitants,and living conditions in the large cities of the whole worldwere being levelled out; capital was becoming interna-tionalised, and at the big factories townsmen and country-folk, both native and alien, were intermingling. 
 The classcontradictions were growing ever more acute; the employ-ers’ associations were exercising ever greater pressureon the workers’ unions; sharper and more bitter forms ofstruggle were arising, as, for instance, mass strikes; the cost of living was rising; the pressure of finance capital was becoming intolerable, etc. 
, etc. 
 In actual fact, events did not follow the pattern described by Potresov. 
 This we know definitely. 
 In the period underdiscussion, none, literally not one, of the leading capital-ist countries of Europe was spared by the struggle between the two mutually opposed currents within contemporary democracy. 
 In each of the big countries, this struggle attimes assumed most violent forms, including splits, thisdespite the general “peaceful”, “sluggish”, and somnolentcharacter of the epoch. 
 These contradictory currents haveaffected all the various fields of life and all problems of modern democracy without exception, such as the attitude towards the bourgeoisie, alliances with the liberals, thevoting for war credits, the attitude towards such matters as colonial policies, reforms, the character of economic struggle, the neutrality of the trade unions, etc. 
 “All-pervading gradualism” was in no way the predomi-nant sentiment in all contemporary democracy, as thewritings of Potresov and Trotsky imply. 
 No, this gradualismwas taking shape as a definite political trend, which atthe time often produced individual groups, and sometimeseven individual parties, of modern democracy in Europe. 
 That trend had its own leaders, its press organs, its policy, and its own particular—and specially organised—methodof influencing the masses of the population. 
 Moreover,this trend was more and more basing itself—and ulti-mately based itself solidly—on the interests of a definitesocial stratum within the democracy of the time. 
 “All-pervading gradualism” naturally attracted into the ranks of that democracy a number of petty-bourgeois fel-low-travellers; furthermore, the specifically petty-bourgeoisconditions, and consequently, a petty-bourgeois politicalorientation, became the rule with a definite stratum ofparliamentarians, journalists, and trade union officials; a kind of bureaucracy and aristocracy of the working class was arising in a manner more or less pronounced and clear-cut. 
 Take, for instance, the possession of colonies and the expansion of colonial possessions. 
 These were undoubtedfeatures of the period dealt with above, and with themajority of big states. 
 What did that mean in the economic sense? It meant a sum of super-profits and special privi-leges for the bourgeoisie. 
 It meant, moreover, the possi-bility of enjoying crumbs from this big cake for a smallminority of the petty bourgeois, as well as for the better-placed employees, officials of the labour movement, etc. 
The enjoyment of crumbs of advantage from the colonies, from privileges, by an insignificant minority of the working class in Britain, for instance, is an established fact,recognised and pointed out by Marx and Engels. 
 Formerlyconfined to Britain alone, this phenomenon became com-mon to all the great capitalist countries of Europe, as theircolonial possessions expanded, and in general as the imperialist period of capitalism grew and developed. 
 In a word, the “all-pervading gradualism” of the second epoch (the one of yesterday) has created, not only a certain “non-adaptability to any break in gradualness”, as Potresov thinks, not only certain “possibilist” tendencies, as Trotsky supposes, but an entire opportunist trend based on a definite social stratum within present-day democracy, andlinked with the bourgeoisie of its own national “shade” bynumerous ties of common economic, social, and politicalinterests—a trend directly, openly, consciously, and sys-tematically hostile to any idea of a “break in gradualness”. 
 A number of Trotsky’s tactical and organisational errors (to say nothing of Potresov’s) spring from his fear,or his reluctance, or inability to recognise the fact of the“maturity” achieved by the opportunist trend, and also itsintimate and unbreakable link with the national-liberals(or social-nationalists) of our times. 
 In practice, this failure to recognise this “maturity” and this unbreakable link leads, at least, to absolute confusion and helplessnessin the face of the predominant social-nationalist (ornational-liberal) evil. 
 The link between opportunism and social-nationalism is, generally speaking, denied by Potresov, by Martov, Axelrod, V. 
 Kosovsky (who has talked himself into defending the German democrats’ national-liberal vote for war credits)and by Trotsky. 
 Their main “argument” is that no full coincidence exists between yesterday’s division of democracy “along theline of opportunism” and today’s division “along the line of social-nationalism”. 
 This argument is, firstly, incorrect in point of fact, as we shall presently show; secondly, it isabsolutely one-sided, incomplete and untenable from thestandpoint of Marxist principles. 
 Persons and groups mayshift from one side to the other; that is not only possible,but even inevitable in any great social upheaval; how-ever, it does not at all affect the nature of a definite trend , or the ideological links between definite trends, or their class significance. 
 All these considerations might seem so generally known and indisputable that one feels almostembarrassed at having to lay such emphasis on them. 
 Yetthe above-mentioned writers have lost sight of these very considerations. 
 The fundamental class significance of opportunism—or, in other words, its social-economiccontent—lies in certain elements of present-day democracy having gone over (in fact, though perhaps unconsciously) to the bourgeoisie, on a number of individual issues. 
 Opportunism is tantamount to a liberal-labour policy. 
 Anyone who is fearful of the “factional” look of these words woulddo well to go to the trouble of studying the opinions ofMarx, Engels, and Kautsky (is the latter not an “authority”highly suitable to the opponents of “factionalism”?) on, letus say, British opportunism. 
 There cannot be the slightest doubt that such a study would lead to a recognition of the coincidence of fundamentals between opportunism and aliberal-labour policy. 
 The basic class significance of today’ssocial-nationalism is exactly the same. 
 The fundamentalidea of opportunism is an alliance or a drawing together(sometimes an agreement, bloc, or the like) between the bourgeoisie and its antipode. 
 The fundamental idea of social-nationalism is exactly the same. 
 The ideologicaland political affinity, connection, and even identity betweenopportunism and social-nationalism are beyond doubt. 
Naturally, we must take as our basis, not individuals orgroups, but a class analysis of the content of social trends , and an ideological and political examination of their essen-tial and main principles. 
 Approaching the same subject from a somewhat different angle, we shall ask: whence did social-nationalism appear? How did it grow and mature? What gave it significance and strength? He who has been unable to find answers to these questions has completely failed to understand what social-nationalism is, and is consequently quite incapable ofdrawing an “ideological line” between himself andsocial-nationalism, no matter how vehemently he mayassert that he is ready to do so. 
 There can be only one answer to this question: social-nationalism has developed from opportunism, and it was the latter that gave it strength. 
 How could social-nationalismhave appeared “all of a sudden”? In the same fashion as ababe appears “all of a sudden” if nine months have elapsedsince its conception. 
 Each of the numerous manifestationsof opportunism during the entire second (or yesterday) epoch in all the European countries was a rivulet, which now flowed “all of a sudden” into a big though very shallow(and, we might add parenthetically, muddy and dirty) river of social-nationalism. 
 Nine months after conception the babe must separate from its mother; many decades after opportunism was conceived, social-nationalism, its ripe fruit, will have to separate from present-day democracywithin a period that is more or less brief (as compared withdecades). 
 No matter how good people may scold, rage orvociferate over such ideas and words, this is inevitable,since it follows from the entire social development of present-day democracy and from the objective conditions in the third epoch. 
 But if division “along the line of opportunism” and division “along the line of social-nationalism” do not fullycoincide, does that not prove that no substantial linkexists between these two facts? It does not, in the first place, just as the fact that individual bourgeois at the end of the eighteenth century went over either to the side ofthe feudal lords or that of the people does not prove thatthere was “no link” between the growth of the bourgeoisieand the Great French Revolution of 1789. 
 Secondly, takenby and large, there is such a coincidence (and we are speak-ing only in a general sense and of movements as a whole). 
 Take, not one individual country but a number of them,let us say ten European countries: Germany, Britain , France , Belgium , Russia, Italy, Sweden, Switzerland, Holland, and Bulgaria. 
 Only the three countries given in italics may seemthe exceptions. 
 In the others, the trends of uncompro-mising antagonists to opportunism have given birth to trends hostile to social-nationalism. 
 Compare the well-known Monatshefte and its opponents in Germany, Nashe Dyelo and its opponents in Russia, the party of Bissolati and its opponents in Italy, the adherents of Greulich andGrimm in Switzerland, Branting and Höglund in Sweden, and Troelstra, Pannekoek and Gorter in Holland, and finally the Obshcho Dyelo adherents and the Tesnyaki in Bulgaria. 
 90 The general coincidence between the old and the new division is a fact; as for complete coincidences, they do notoccur even in the simplest of natural phenomena, anymore than there is complete coincidence between the Volga before the Kama joins it, and the Volga below that point; neither is there full similarity between a child and its par-ents. 
 Britain only seems the exception; in reality, there were two main currents in Britain prior to the war, these being identified with two dailies —which is the truest objective indication of the mass character of these currents— namely, the Daily Citizen ,91 the opportunists’ newspaper, and the Daily Herald ,92 the organ of the opponents of opportunism. 
 Both papers have been swamped by the waveof nationalism; yet, opposition has been expressed by underone-tenth of the former’s adherents and by some three-sevenths of the adherents of the latter. 
 The usual method of comparison, whereby only the British Socialist Partyis compared with the Independent Labour Party, iserroneous because it overlooks the existence of an actual bloc of the latter with the Fabians 93 and the Labour Party. 
 It follows, then, that only two out of the ten countries are exceptions, but even here the exceptions are not com-plete, since the trends have not changed places; only (forreasons so obvious that they need not be dwelt on) the wavehas swamped almost all the opponents of opportunism. 
 Thisundoubtedly proves the strength of the wave, but it doesnot in any way disprove coincidence between the old division and the new for all Europe. 
 We are told that division “along the line of opportunism” is outmoded, and that only one division is of significance,namely, that between the adherents of internationalismand the adherents of national self-sufficiency. 
 This opinionis fundamentally wrong. 
 The concept of “adherents of internationalism” is devoid of all content and meaning, if we do not concretely amplify it; any step towards such con-crete amplification, however, will be an enumeration offeatures of hostility to opportunism. 
 In practice, this willprove truer still. 
 An adherent of internationalism who isnot at the same time a most consistent and determined adversary of opportunism is a phantom, nothing more. 
 Per-haps certain individuals of this type will honestly considerthemselves “internationalists”. 
 However, people are judged,not by what they think of themselves but by their politi-cal behaviour. 
 The political behaviour of “internationalists”who are not consistent and determined adversaries of opportunism will always aid and abet the nationalist trend. 
 On the other hand, nationalists, too, call themselves“internationalists” (Kautsky, Lensch, Haenisch, Vandervelde, Hyndman, and others); not only do they call them-selves so, but they fully acknowledge an international rapprochement , an agreement, a union of persons sharing their views. 
 The opportunists are not against “internation-alism”; they are only in favour of international approvalfor and international agreement among the opportunists. 
. 
 ...................... 
. 
 . 
. 
 ...................... 
. 
 . 
 . 
 ...................... 
. 
 . 
 . 
 ...................... 
. 
 . 
 THE CONFERENC E OF THE R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 GROUP S ABROA D94 Held in Switzerland, a conference of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 groups whose members are resident abroad concluded its work several days ago. 
 Besides discussing purely foreignaffairs, which we shall try briefly to comment on in the nextissues of the Central Organ, the conference framed resolu-tions on the important and burning question of the war. 
 We are publishing these resolutions forthwith, in the hopethat they will prove of use to all Social-Democrats whoare earnestly seeking the way towards live work from thepresent-day welter of opinions which boil down to anacknowledgement of internationalism in word, and an urge to come to terms at any cost with social-chauvinism in deed. 
 We might add that, on the question of the “United Statesof Europe” slogan, the discussion was purely political, itbeing decided that the question be deferred pending adiscussion, in the press, of the economic aspect of the matter. 
 THE CONFERENCE’S RESOLUTIONS The conference, which stands on the basis of the Central Committee’s Manifesto, as published in No. 
 33, * lays down the following principles designed to bring system into propaganda: *See pp. 
 25-34 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 ON THE CHARACTER OF THE WAR The present war is imperialist in character. 
 This war is the outcome of conditions in an epoch in which capitalismhas reached the highest stage in its development; in whichthe greatest significance attaches, not only to the exportof commodities, but also to the export of capital; an epoch in which the cartelisation of production and the interna-tionalisation of economic life have assumed impressive pro-portions, colonial policies have brought about the almostcomplete partition of the globe, world capitalism’s produc-tive forces have outgrown the limited boundaries of nationaland state divisions, and the objective conditions are perfectly ripe for socialism to be achieved. 
 THE “DEFENCE OF THE FATHERLAND” SLOGAN The present war is, in substance, a struggle between Britain, France and Germany for the partition of colonies and for the plunder of rival countries; on the part of tsarism and the ruling classes of Russia, it is an attempt to seizePersia, Mongolia, Turkey in Asia, Constantinople, Galicia,etc. 
 The national element in the Austro-Serbian war is anentirely secondary consideration and does not affect thegeneral imperialist character of the war. 
 The entire economic and diplomatic history of the last few decades shows that both groups of belligerent nationswere systematically preparing the very kind of war such asthe present. 
 The question of which group dealt the firstmilitary blow or first declared war is immaterial in anydetermination of the tactics of socialists. 
 Both sides’ phrases on the defence of the fatherland, resistance to enemy inva-sion, a war of defence, etc. 
, are nothing but deception ofthe people. 
 At the bottom of genuinely national wars, such as took place especially between 1789 and 1871, was a long processof mass national movements, of a struggle against absolutism and feudalism, the overthrow of national oppression, and the formation of states on a national basis, as a prerequisiteof capitalist development. 
 The national ideology created by that epoch left a deep impress on the mass of the petty bourgeoisie and a section of the proletariat. 
 This is now being utilised in a totally different and imperialist epoch by the sophists of the bour-geoisie, and by the traitors to socialism who are following intheir wake, so as to split the workers, and divert them fromtheir class aims and from the revolutionary struggle againstthe bourgeoisie. 
 The words in the Communist Manifesto that “the working-men have no country” are today truer than ever before. 
Only the proletariat’s international struggle against thebourgeoisie can preserve what it has won, and open to theoppressed masses the road to a better future. 
 THE SLOGANS OF THE REVOLUTIONARY SOCIAL-DEMOCRATS “The conversion of the present imperialist war into a civil war is the only correct proletarian slogan, one thatfollows from the experience of the Commune, and outlinedin the Basle resolution (1912); it has been dictated by all the conditions of an imperialist war between highly developed bourgeois countries. 
” * Civil war, for which revolutionary Social-Democracy today calls, is an armed struggle of the proletariat againstthe bourgeoisie, for the expropriation of the capitalistclass in the advanced capitalist countries, and for a demo-cratic revolution in Russia (a democratic republic, an eight-hour working day, the confiscation of the landowners’estates), for a republic to be formed in the backward monarch-ist countries in general, etc. 
 The appalling misery of the masses, which has been created by the war, cannot fail to evoke revolutionary sentiments and movements. 
 The civil war slogan must serve to co-ordinate and direct such sentiments and movements. 
 The organisation of the working class has been badly damaged. 
 Nevertheless, a revolutionary crisis is maturing. 
After the war, the ruling classes of all countries will makea still greater effort to throw the proletariat’s emancipa-tion movement back for decades. 
 The task of the revolu-*See p. 
 34 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 tionary Social-Democrats—both in the event of a rapid revolutionary development and in that of a protracted crisis, will not consist in renouncing lengthy and day-by-day work, or in discarding any of the old methods of the classstruggle. 
 To direct both the parliamentary and the economicstruggle against opportunism, in the spirit of revolutionarystruggle of the masses—such will be the task. 
 The following should be indicated as the first steps to-wards converting the present imperialist war into a civil war: (1) an absolute refusal to vote for war credits, andresignation from bourgeois governments; (2) a complete breakwith the policy of a class truce ( bloc national , Burgfrieden ); (3) formation of an underground organisation whereverthe governments and the bourgeoisie abolish constitutional liberties by introducing martial law; (4) support for fraterni-sation between soldiers of the belligerent nations, in thetrenches and on battlefields in general; (5) support for everykind of revolutionary mass action by the proletariat ingeneral. 
 OPPORTUNISM AND THE COLLAPSE OF THE SECOND INTERNATIONAL The collapse of the Second International is the collapse of socialist opportunism. 
 The latter has grown as a productof the preceding “peaceful” period in the development of the labour movement. 
 That period taught the working class to utilise such important means of struggle as parliamentari-anism and all legal opportunities, create mass economic andpolitical organisations, a widespread labour press, etc. 
; on theother hand, the period engendered a tendency to repudiatethe class struggle and to preach a class truce, repudiate the socialist revolution, repudiate the very principle of illegal organisations, recognise bourgeois patriotism, etc. 
 Certainstrata of the working class (the bureaucracy of the labourmovement and the labour aristocracy, who get a fraction of theprofits from the exploitation of the colonies and from the privi-leged position of their “fatherlands” in the world market), as well as petty-bourgeois sympathisers within the socialist parties, have proved the social mainstay of these tendenciesand channels of bourgeois influence over the proletariat. 
 The baneful influence of opportunism has made itself felt most strongly in the policies of most of the official Social-Democratic parties of the Second International dur-ing the war. 
 Voting for war credits, participation in govern-ments, the policy of a class truce, the repudiation of anillegal organisation when legality has been rescinded—allthis is a violation of the International’s most important deci-sions, and a downright betrayal of socialism. 
 THE THIRD INTERNATIONAL The war-created crisis has exposed the real essence of opportunism as the bourgeoisie’s accomplice against the proletariat. 
 The so-called Social-Democratic “Centre”, headed by Kautsky, has in practice completely slid intoopportunism, behind a cover of exceedingly harmful andhypocritical phrases and a Marxism falsified to resembleimperialism. 
 Experience shows that in Germany, forinstance, a defence of the socialist standpoint has been possible only by resolute opposition to the will of the majority of the Party leadership. 
 It would be a harmfulillusion to hope that a genuinely socialist Internationalcan be restored without a full organisational severancefrom the opportunists. 
 The Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party must support all and every international and revolutionary mass action by the proletariat, and strive to bring together all anti-chauvinist elements in the International. 
 PACIFISM AND THE PEACE SLOGAN Pacifism, the preaching of peace in the abstract, is one of the means of duping the working class. 
 Under capitalism,particularly in its imperialist stage, wars are inevitable. 
On the other hand, however, Social-Democrats cannot over-look the positive significance of revolutionary wars, i. 
e. 
, notimperialist wars, but such as were fought, for instance, between 1789 and 1871, with the aim of doing away with national oppression, and creating national capitaliststates out of the feudal decentralised states, or such wars that may be waged to defend the conquests of the proletariat victorious in its struggle against the bourgeoisie. 
 At the present time, the propaganda of peace unaccompa-nied by a call for revolutionary mass action can only sowillusions and demoralise the proletariat, for it makes theproletariat believe that the bourgeoisie is humane, andturns it into a plaything in the hands of the secret diplomacyof the belligerent countries. 
 In particular, the idea of a so-called democratic peace being possible without a series of revolutions is profoundly erroneous. 
 THE DEFEAT OF THE TSARIST MONARCHY In each country, the struggle against a government that is waging an imperialist war should not falter at the possi-bility of that country’s defeat as a result of revolutionarypropaganda. 
 The defeat of the government’s army weakensthe government, promotes the liberation of the nationali-ties it oppresses, and facilitates civil war against the rulingclasses. 
 This holds particularly true in respect of Russia. 
 A victory for Russia will bring in its train a strengthening of reaction,both throughout the world and within the country, andwill be accompanied by the complete enslavement of thepeoples living in areas already seized. 
 In view of this, weconsider the defeat of Russia the lesser evil in all conditions. 
 THE ATTITUDE TOWARDS OTHER PARTIES AND GROUPS The war, which has engendered a spate of chauvinism, has revealed that the democratic (Narodnik) intelligentsia,the party of the Socialist-Revolutionaries (with complete instability of the oppositional trend, which is centred in Mysl ), and the main group of liquidators ( Nasha Zarya ) which is supported by Plekhanov, are all in the grip ofchauvinism. 
 In practice, the Organising Committee is alsoon the side of chauvinism, beginning with Larin and Martov’scamouflaged support of chauvinism and ending with Axel-rod’s defence of the principle of patriotism; so is the Bund, in which a Germanophile chauvinism prevails. 
 The Brusselsbloc (of July 3, 1914) has disintegrated, while the elements that are grouped around Nashe Slovo are vacillating between a Platonic sympathy with internationalism and a striving for unity, at any price, with Nasha Zarya and the Organising Committee. 
 The same vacillation is manifest in Chkheidze’sSocial-Democratic group. 
 The latter has, on the onehand, expelled the Plekhanovite, i. 
e. 
, the chauvinist,Mankov; on the other hand, it wishes to cover up, by allpossible means, the chauvinism of Plekhanov, Nasha Zarya , Axelrod, the Bund, etc. 
 It is the task of the Social-Democratic Labour Party in Russia to consolidate the proletarian unity created in1912-14, mainly by Pravda , 95 and to re-establish the Social-Democratic Party organisations of the working class, onthe basis of a decisive organisational break with the social-chauvinists. 
 Temporary agreements are possible only with those Social-Democrats who stand for a decisiveorganisational rupture with the Organising Committee,Nasha Zarya and the Bund. 
 Written not later than February 19 (March 4), 1915 Published on March 29, 1915 Published according to in Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 40 the text in Sotsial-Demokrat LETTER THE CENTRAL COMMITTEE OF THE R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 TO THE EDITORS OF NASHE SLOVO96 Dear Comrades: We fully agree with you that the rallying of all genuine Social-Democratic internationalists is one of the most press-ing tasks of the moment .... 
 Before replying to your practi-cal proposal, we consider it necessary to clarify with frank-ness certain preliminary questions, so as to know whether we are at one in the main issue. 
 You are quite right in feeling indignant about Alexinsky, Plekhanov and the likehaving come out in the foreign press, claiming that theirsis “the voice of the Russian proletariat or of influentialgroups therein”. 
 This must be fought against. 
 To carry on the struggle, the root of the evil has to be got at. 
 There cannot be the least doubt that there has not been, and there is not, any greater vice than the so-called system of repre-sentation of the notorious “trends” abroad. 
 In this we canhardly lay the blame on the foreigners. 
 Let us recall therecent past. 
 Were not Alexinsky and Plekhanov (and notthese two alone) given the opportunity, at the selfsame Brussels Conference (July 3, 1914), to depict themselves as “trends”? After this, can it be surprising that even nowforeigners take them for representatives of “trends”? Thisevil cannot be countered with the aid of some declaration oranother. 
 What is needed is a long struggle. 
 For that struggleto be successful, we must say to ourselves, once and for all, that we recognise only those organisations which for years have been linked up with the working masses, and have been empowered by recognised committees, etc. 
, and that we brand, as deception of the workers, a system under which a half-dozen intellectuals who have brought out two or three issues of a newspaper or journal declare themselves a “trend”, or lay claim to “equal rights” with the Party. 
 Does agreement exist between us on this, comrades?Then, about the internationalists. 
 In one of your recent editorials, you enumerated those organisations which, inyour opinion, hold an internationalist stand. 
 High on that list is—the Bund. 
 We would like to know what grounds you have to number the Bund among the internationalists. 
The resolution of its Central Committee does not contain asingle definite word on the major problems of socialism. 
It breathes a most unprincipled eclecticism. 
 The Bund’sorgan ( Information Bulletin 97) indubitably adheres to the standpoint of Germanophile chauvinism, or else gives a “synthesis” of French and German chauvinism. 
 It was withgood reason that an article by Kosovsky adorned the pagesof Die Neue Zeit , a journal which (we hope you agree with us on this) is now among the most disreputable of theso-called “socialist” press organs. 
 We stand heart and soul for unity among all internation-alists. 
 We would very much like their number to be greater. 
We must not, however, go in for self-deception; we cannotcount among the internationalists people and organisationswhose internationalism exists only on paper. 
 What should be understood by internationalism? Is it, for instance, possible to number among the internationalists those who stand for the International being restored on theprinciple of a mutual “amnesty”? As you know, Kautsky isthe leading representative of the “amnesty” theory. 
 VictorAdler has come out in the same vein. 
 We consider the adher-ents of an amnesty the most dangerous opponents of inter-nationalism. 
 Restored on the basis of an “amnesty”, the International would cheapen socialism. 
 All concessions andall agreements with Kautsky and Co. 
 are inexcusable. 
 Amost determined struggle against the “amnesty” theory is aconditio sine qua non of internationalism. 
 It is vain to speak of internationalism if there is no desire and no rea-diness to make a complete break with the defenders of an “amnesty”. 
 The question arises: does agreement on this funda-mental issue exist between us? A negative attitude towards the “amnesty” policy seems to have been hinted at in your newspaper. 
 You will, however, agree that before any practical steps can be made we are entitled to ask you to let us know in detail how you regard this issue. 
 Connected with this is the question of the attitude towards the Organising Committee. 
 In our very first letter toyou, * we considered it necessary to tell you quite frankly that there are serious grounds to doubt the internationalism of that body. 
 You have not made any attempt to dispel that opinion. 
 We again ask you: what facts do you possessto consider that the Organising Committee adheres to aninternationalist stand? It cannot be positively denied thatAxelrod’s stand, set forth on several occasions in print; ispatently chauvinist (almost Plekhanovite). 
 Axelrod is with-out doubt the Organising Committee’s leading representa-tive. 
 Further, consider the Organising Committee’s officialstatements. 
 Its report to the Copenhagen Conference 98 wa s couched in a vein that led to its being published by the mostextreme chauvinists in Germany. 
 Statements by the Organ-ising Committee’s “Secretariat Abroad” are much the same. 
 At best, they say nothing that is definite. 
 On the other hand, Larin—officially, on behalf of the Organising Committeeand not of some kind of secretariat abroad—has madestatements designed to defend chauvinism. 
 What is thereinternationalist about this? Is it not clear that theOrganising Committee adheres completely to the standpoint of a mutual “amnesty”? Furthermore, what guarantees are there that the Organ-ising Committee represents some force in Russia? Today,following the statement in Nasha Zarya , this question is most pertinent. 
 For years, the Nasha Zarya group conducted their line; they brought out a daily paper, and went in for mass agitation of their own brand. 
 But what about the Organising Committee? We all acknowledge that the issue will be settled, not by the alignment of forces in groups abroad—in Zurich, Paris,etc. 
—but by the influence enjoyed among the workers ofSt. 
 Petersburg and of all Russia. 
 This should be kept in view, whatever the steps we take. 
 *See pp. 
 125-28 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 Such are the considerations we have wanted to inform you of. 
 We shall be very glad to get a detailed and clear reply to all these questions. 
 Then we shall be able to think of what is to come next. 
 Written on March 10 (23), 1915 First published in 1931 , Published according to in Lenin Miscellany XVII a copy made by N. 
 K. 
 Krupskaya First page of Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 40, March 29, 1915, in which Lenin’s articles “What Has Been Revealed by the Trial of the Rus-sian Social-Democratic Labour Duma Group ” and “On the London Conference” were published Reduced First page of Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 40, March 29, 1915, in which Lenin’s articles “What Has Been Revealed by the Trial of the Rus-sian Social-Democratic Labour Duma Group” and “On the London Conference” were published Reduced WHA T HAS BEE N REVEALE D BY THE TRIAL OF THE RUSSIA N SOCIA L-DEMOCRATIC LABOU R DUM A GROU P99 The trial, by the tsar’s court, of five members of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
 Duma group and six other Social-Democrats seized on November 4, 1914 at a conference near Petrograd hasended. 
 They have all been sentenced to life exile inSiberia. 
 The censor has deleted from accounts of the trialpublished in the legal press all the passages that may beunpleasant to tsarism and the patriots. 
 The “internal ene-mies” have been rapidly dealt with and again nothing is to be seen or heard on the surface of public life except thesavage howling of a pack of bourgeois chauvinists, echoedby some handfuls of social-chauvinists. 
 What, then, has the trial of the Russian Social-Demo-cratic Labour group proved? First of all, it has shown that this advance contingent of revolutionary Social-Democracy in Russia failed to dis-play sufficient firmness at the trial. 
 It was the aim of theaccused to prevent the State Prosecutor from finding outthe names of the members of the Central Committee inRussia and of the Party’s representatives in its contacts with workers’ organisations. 
 That aim has been achieved. 
 To continue achieving that aim in the future, we museresort to a method long recommended officially by theParty, i. 
e. 
, refuse to give evidence. 
 However, to attempt toprove one’s solidarity with the social-patriot Mr. 
 Yordansky,as Rosenfeld did, or one’s disagreement with the Central Committee, is a wrong method, one that is inex-cusable from the standpoint of a revolutionary Social -Democrat. 
 We shall note that, according to a Dyen report (No. 
 40)100—there is no official or complete record of the trial— Comrade Petrovsky stated: “In the same period [November] I received the Central Committee resolution ... and besidesI was given resolutions adopted by workers in seven variousplaces concerning their attitude towards the war, reso-lutions coinciding with the Central Committee ’s attitude . 
” This declaration does Petrovsky credit. 
 The tide of chau-vinism was running high on all sides. 
 In Petrovsky’s diary there is an entry to the effect that even the radical-minded Chkheidze spoke with enthusiasm of a war for “liberty”. 
This chauvinism was resisted by the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
 groupdeputies when they were free, but it was also their duty,at the trial, to draw a line of distinction between themselves and chauvinism. 
 The Cadet Rech 101 had servilely “thanked” the tsar’s court for “dispelling the legend” that the Russian Social-Democratic deputies wanted the defeat of the tsar’s armies. 
Taking advantage of the fact that in Russia the Social-Demo-crats are tied hand and foot in their activities, the Cadets are pretending to take seriously the so-called “conflict” between the Party and the Duma group, and declare thatthe accused gave their evidence without the least compul-sion. 
 What innocent babes? They pretend ignorance of thethreat of a court-martial and the death sentence that hungover the deputies in the early stage of the trial. 
 The comrades should have refused to give evidence con-cerning the illegal organisation, and, in view of the historicimportance of the moment, they should have taken advan-tage of a public trial to openly set forth the Social-Demo-cratic views, which are hostile, not only to tsarism ingeneral, but also to social-chauvinism of all and every shade. 
 Let the government and bourgeois press wrathfully attack the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
 group; let the Social-Revolutionaries,liquidators and social-chauvinists (who must fight ussomehow, if they cannot fight us on the issue of principles!)with gleeful malice “discover” signs of weakness or of ficti-tious “disagreement with the Central Committee”. 
 The Party of the revolutionary proletariat is strong enough to openly criticise itself, and unequivocally call mistakesand weaknesses by their proper names. 
 The class-conscious workers of Russia have created a party and have placed in the forefront an advance contingent which, during a world war and the world-wide collapse of international oppor-tunism have revealed more than anyone else the ability toperform their duty as internationalist revolutionary Social-Democrats. 
 The road we have been travelling has beentested by the greatest of all crises, and has proved, over andover again, the only correct road. 
 We shall follow it still more firmly and resolutely; we shall throw out fresh advance contingents, and shall see to it that they not only carry outthe same work, but carry it through more correctly. 
 Secondly, the trial has revealed a picture without precedent in world socialism—that of revolutionary Social-Democracy making use of parliamentarianism. 
 More than any speeches, this example will appeal to the minds and hearts of the proletarian masses; more convincingly than anyarguments, it will refute the legalist opportunists andanarchist phrase-mongers. 
 The report on Muranov’s illegalwork and Petrovsky’s notes will long remain a model of that kind of work carried out by our deputies, which we have had diligently to conceal, and the meaning of which will give all class-conscious workers in Russia more and morefood for thought. 
 At a time when nearly all “socialist”(forgive the debasement of the word!) deputies in Europehave proved chauvinists and servants of chauvinists,when the famous “Europeanism” that once charmed our liberals and liquidators has proved an obtuse habitude of slavish legality, there was to be found in Russia a workers’party whose deputies excelled, not in high-flown speech,or being “received” in bourgeois, intellectualist salons, orin the business acumen of the “European” lawyer and par-liamentarian, but in ties with the working masses, in dedicated work among those masses, in carrying on modest, unpretentious, arduous, thankless and highly dangerousduties of illegal propagandists and organisers. 
 To climbhigher, towards the rank of a deputy or minister influentialin “society” such has been the actual meaning of “Euro-pean” (i. 
e. 
, servile) “socialist” parliamentarism. 
 To go into the midst of the masses, to help enlighten and unite the exploited and the oppressed—such is the slogan advancedby the examples set by Muranov and Petrovsky. 
 This slogan will acquire historic significance. 
 In no coun-try in the world will a single thinking worker agree to con-fine himself to the old legality of bourgeois parliamentarism, when that legality has been abolished with a stroke of thepen in all the advanced countries, and has led to merelya closer actual alliance between the opportunists and thebourgeoisie. 
 Whoever dreams of “unity” between revolution-ary Social-Democratic workers and the “European” So-cial-Democratic legalists of yesterday, and of today , has learned nothing and forgotten everything, and is in factan ally of the bourgeoisie and an enemy of the proletariat. 
Whoever has to this day failed to realise why the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
group broke away from the Social-Democratic group thatwas making its peace with legalism and opportunism can now learn a lessen from the activities of Muranov and Pe-trovsky as described in the report on the trial. 
 It was not only by these two deputies that this work was conducted, and only hopelessly naïve people can dream of a compati-bility between such work and a “friendly and tolerantattitude” towards Nasha Zarya or Severnaya Rabochaya Gazeta ,102 towards Sovremennik , the Organising Committee, or the Bund. 
 Do the government hope to intimidate the workers by sending the members of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
 group to Siberia? Theywill find themselves mistaken. 
 The workers will not be intimi-dated, but will the better understand their aims, those of a workers’ party as distinct from the liquidators and the social-chauvinists. 
 The workers will learn to elect to the Dumaonly men such as the members of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
 group,and for similar and ever more extensive work, such thatwill be conducted among the masses with still more secrecy . 
 Do the government intend to do away with “illegal par-liamentarianism” in Russia? They will merely consolidate the links between the proletariat exclusively with that kind of parliamentarism. 
 Thirdly, and most important, the court proceedings against the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
 group have, for the first time,produced open and objective material, disseminated all over Russia in millions of copies, concerning the most funda-mental, the most significant and most vital question ofthe attitude of the various classes in Russian society towards the war. 
 Have we not had enough of nauseating intellectualist jabber about the compatibility between “defence of the fatherland” and internationalism “in principle” (i. 
e. 
, purely verbal and hypocritical internationalism)? Has notthe time come to examine the facts that bear upon classes , i. 
e. 
, millions of living people, not some dozens of phrase-mongers? Over half a year has passed since the outbreak of war. 
 The press, both legal and illegal, and expressing all trends, has had its say; all the party groups in the Duma havedefined their stands—a highly insufficient index of our classgroupings, but the only objective one. 
 The trial of theR. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
 group and the press comment on it have summedup all this material. 
 The trial has shown that the finest representatives of the proletariat in Russia are not only hostile to chauvinism in general but, in particular, sharethe stand of our Central Organ. 
 The deputies were arrestedon November 4, 1914. 
 Consequently, they had beenconducting their work for over two months. 
 How and withwhom did they carry it on? Which currents in the working class did they reflect and express? The answer is found in the fact that the “theses” and Sotsial-Demokrat provided the material for the conference, and that, on several occa-sions, the Petrograd Committee of our Party issued leafletsof the same nature. 
 There was no other material at the con-ference. 
 The deputies had no intention of reporting to the conference on other currents in the working class, because no other currents existed. 
 Perhaps the members of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
 group were express-ing the opinion of a mere minority of, the workers? Wehave no grounds to suppose so, since, in the two and ahalf years, between the spring of 1912 and the autumn of 1914, four-fifths of the class-conscious workers of Russia rallied around Pravda , with which these deputies were working in complete ideological solidarity. 
 That is a fact. 
Had there been a more or less appreciable protest amongthe workers against the Central Committee’s stand, thatprotest would have surely found expression in the resolu-tions proposed. 
 Nothing of the kind emerged at the trial, though the latter, it might be said, did “reveal” much ofthe work done by the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
 group. 
 The corrections made in Petrovsky’s handwriting do not reveal even the slightest hint at any difference of opinion. 
 The facts show that, in the very first months after the outbreak of the war, the class-conscious vanguard of theworkers of Russia rallied, in deed , about the Central Com-mittee and the Central Organ. 
 However unpleasant thisfact may be to certain “groups”, it is undeniable. 
 Thanksto the trial, the words cited in the indictment: “The guns should be directed, not against our brothers, the wage slaves of other countries, but against the reactionary andbourgeois governments and parties of all countries”—thesewords will spread—and have already done so—all overRussia as a call for proletarian internationalism, for theproletarian revolution. 
 Thanks to the trial, the class slo-gan of the vanguard of the workers of Russia has reached the masses. 
 An epidemic of chauvinism among the bourgeoisie and a certain section of the petty bourgeoisie, vacillation inthe other section of the latter, and a working class callof this nature—such is the actual and objective picture of our political divisions. 
 It is to this actual situation, not to the pious wishes of intellectuals and founders ofgrouplets, that one must gear one’s “prospects”, hopes, andslogans. 
 The Pravdist papers and the “Muranov type” of work have brought about the unity of four-fifths of the class-conscious workers of Russia. 
 About forty thousand work-ers have been buying Pravda ; far more read it. 
 Even if war, prison, Siberia, and hard labour should destroy five or eventen times as many—this section of the workers cannot be annihilated. 
 It is alive. 
 It is imbued with the revolutionaryspirit, is anti-chauvinist. 
 It alone stands in the midst of the masses, with deep roots in the latter, as the champion of the internationalism of the toilers, the exploited, andthe oppressed. 
 It alone has held its ground in the general débâcle . 
 It alone is leading the semi-proletarian elements away from the social-chauvinism of the Cadets, the Trudo-viks, Plekhanov and Nasha Zarya , and towards socialism. 
 Its existence, its ideas, its work, and its call for the “brother-hood of wage slaves of other countries” have been revealedto the whole of Russia by the trial of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
 group. 
 It is with this section that we must work, and its unity must be defended against social-chauvinists. 
 That is the only road along which the working-class movement of Rus-sia can develop towards social revolution, and not towardsnational-liberalism of the “European” type. 
 Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 40, Published according to March 29, 1915 the text in Sotsial-Demokrat ON THE LONDON CONFERENCE The declaration by Comrade Maximovich, representative of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
’s Central Committee, which we arepublishing here, fully expresses our Party’s views on this Conference. 
 The French bourgeois press has excellently revealed its significance as an expedient or a stratagemof the Anglo-French bourgeoisie. 
 The roles have been dis-tributed as follows: Le Temps and L’Echo de Paris 103 have attacked the French socialists for their allegedly excessiveconcessions to internationalism. 
 These attacks have been merely a stratagem designed to pave the way for Premier Viviani’s well-known declaration in the Chamber, whichwas marked by an aggressive patriotism. 
 On the other hand,Journal des Débats 104 laid the cards on the table by stating that the whole point was in getting the British socialists,under Keir Hardie, who had hitherto been opposed to the war and to conscription, to vote, at the Conference, for the war to be prosecuted until victory is won over Ger-many. 
 This is tangible and important as the political out-come of the British and French socialists having been wonover to the side of the Anglo-French bourgeoisie. 
 As forthe phrases on internationalism, socialism, a referendum, etc. 
, these are merely phrases, idle words of no significance whatever. 
 No doubt, the clever reactionaries of the French bour-geoisie have blurted out the real truth. 
 The war is beingconducted by the Anglo-French bourgeoisie, plus their Rus-sian counterpart, with the aim of ravaging and plundering Germany, Austria and Turkey. 
 It stands in need of recruit-ing officers, as well as of socialist consent to fight on untilvictory over Germany is won. 
 The rest is idle and shameful phrase-mongering, which prostitutes such great words as socialism, internationalism, etc. 
 To follow the bourgeoisie and help it plunder other countries in deed, and to regale the masses with hypocritical recognition of “socialism andthe International” in word—such is opportunism’s cardinalsin and the main reason why the Second International hascollapsed. 
 The task confronting the opponents of social-chauvinism at the London Conference was therefore clear: in the name of clear-cut anti-chauvinist principles, they had to walkout from the Conference, without at the same time falling into Germanophilism, since, for no other motive but chau-vinism , the pro-Germans are decidedly opposed to the London Conference. 
 Comrade Maximovich accomplished that task when he spoke in definite terms of the treachery of the German socialists. 
 The Bundists and the adherents of the Organising Com-mittee are unable to grasp this simple and obvious fact. 
The former are Germanophiles, in the way Kosovsky is,who frankly justifies the German Social-Democrats’ vote for war credits (see Information Bulletin of the Bund No. 
 7, January 1915, p. 
 7, beginning of §5). 
 The editors of thebulletin made no mention of their disagreeing withKosovsky, although they did emphasise that they werein disagreement with Borisov, that champion of Russianpatriotism. 
 The Manifesto of the Bund’s Central Committee (ibid. 
, p. 
 3) does not contain a single explicit word against social chauvinism. 
 The Organising Committee’s supporters want a recon-ciliation between the Germanophile and the Francophilebrands of chauvinism as can be seen from Axelrod’sstatements ( Golos Nos. 
 86 and 87 and from the first issue of Izvestia of the Organising Committee’s secretariat abroad, 105 Feb. 
 22, 1915). 
 When the editors of Nashe Slovo proposed that we take joint action against “official social-chauvinism”,we replied outright that the Organising Committee and the Bund had themselves sided with official social-patriotism. 
In our reply we enclosed our draft declaration and referred to Comrade Maximovich’s decisive vote. 
 Why is Nashe Slovo trying to deceive itself and others in failing to mention this in its editorial of No. 
 32? Why is it silent about our declaration having also spoken of the German Social-Democrats’ treachery ? The Nashe Slovo declaration omitted this most important and fundamental point: neither we nor Comrade Maximovich adopted thatdeclaration, or could have done so. 
 That was why joint actionby the Organising Committee and ourselves did not result. 
 Why, then, is Nashe Slovo deceiving itself and others in asserting that a basis exists for unity of action? “Official social-patriotism” is the main evil in present-day socialism. 
 To combat that evil (and not to becomereconciled to it, or to declare a mutual international“amnesty” on this point), all forces must be prepared andmustered. 
 Kautsky and others have produced a clear-cutprogramme for an “amnesty” and a peace with social-chauvinism. 
 We have tried to give a clear-cut programme for the struggle against it: see, in particular, No. 
 33 of Sotsial -Demokrat , and the resolutions published therein. 
 It remains for us to express the wish that Nashe Slovo go over to something more definite than vacillation between“platonic sympathy with internationalism”, and peace with social-chauvinism. 
 Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 40, Published according to March 29, 1915 the text in Sotsial-Demokrat THE SLOGAN OF CIVIL WAR ILLUSTRATED On January 8 (New Style), Swiss papers received the following message from Berlin: “Of late the press hasrepeatedly carried reports of peaceable attempts made by men in the German and French trenches to enter into friend-ly relations. 
 According to Tägliche Rundschau , 106 an army order dated December 29 bans any fraternisation and anykind of intercourse with the enemy in the trenches. 
 Disre-gard of this order is punishable as high treason. 
” Thus, fraternisation and attempts to enter into friendly relations with the enemy are a fact. 
 The German military authorities are showing concern over the matter, whichmeans that they attach considerable importance to it. 
 TheBritish Labour Leader of January 7, 1915, published a series of quotations from the British bourgeois press on instancesof fraternisation between British and German soldiers, who arranged a “forty-eight-hour truce” at Christmas, met ami-cably in no-man’s land, and so on. 
 The British militaryauthorities issued a special order forbidding fraternisation. 
 And yet, with the utmost complacency and the comfort-able feeling that the military censorship will protect themagainst any denials, the socialist opportunists and their vindicators (or lackeys?) have assured the workers, through the press (as Kautsky has done), that no understanding on anti-war action by the socialists of the belligerent coun-tries is possible (the expression literally used by Kautskyin Die Neue Zeit )! Try to imagine Hyndman, Guesde, Vandervelde, Ple-khanov, Kautsky and the rest—instead of aiding the bourgeoi-sie (something they are now engaged in)—forming an inter-national committee to agitate for “fraternisation and attempts to establish friendly relations” between the socialists of the belligerent countries, both in the “trenches” and among the troops in general. 
 What would the results be several months from now, if today, only six months after the outbreak ofthe war and despite all the political bosses, leaders and lu-minaries who have betrayed socialism, opposition is mountingon all sides against those who have voted for war creditsand those who have accepted ministerial jobs, and the military authorities are threatening that “fraternisation” carries the death sentence? “There is only one practical issue—victory or defeat for one’s country,” Kautsky, lackey of the opportunists,has written, in concord with Guesde, Plekhanov and Co. 
Indeed, if one were to forget socialism and the class strug-gle, that would be the truth. 
 However, if one does not lose sight of socialism, that is untrue. 
 Then there is anotherpractical issue: should we perish as blind and helpless slaves, in a war between slave-holders, or should we fall in“attempts at fraternisation” between the slaves, with the aimof casting off slavery? Such, in reality , is the “practical” issue. 
 Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 40, Published according to March 29, 1915 the text in Sotsial-Demokrat THE SOCIAL -CHAUVINISTS ’ SOPHISMS Nashe Dyelo (No. 
 1, 1915), which is published in Petro-grad by the liquidators, is bringing out a translation ofInternationalism and War , a pamphlet by Kautsky. 
 At the same time, Mr. 
 A. 
 Potresov says he does not agree with Kautsky who, in his opinion, acts now like an “advocate” (i. 
e. 
, a pleader for German social-chauvinism, who deniesrecognition of the Franco-Russian brand of the species),now like a “judge” (i. 
e. 
, a Marxist who tries to apply theMarxist method without prejudice). 
 In actual fact, both Mr. 
 A. 
 Potresov and Kautsky have betrayed Marxism in the main issues, defending as they do national liberal-labour policies, by using obvious sophisms. 
Mr. 
 A. 
 Potresov is distracting his readers’ attention fromthe fundamentals, while arguing with Kautsky over details. 
According to Mr. 
 Potresov, the “solution” of the problem ofthe attitude of the British and the French “democracies” towards the war (the author is referring to working-class democracy) is “on the whole a good solution” (p. 
 69); thesedemocracies, he says, “have acted correctly”, although theirsolution has been, not so conscious as “in accord with anational solution, through a happy coincidence”. 
 The meaning of these words is clear. 
 Under Anglo-French cover, Mr. 
 A. 
 Potresov, is defending Russian chauvinism, and justifying the patriotic tactics used by the socialistsof the Triple Entente. 
 Mr. 
 Potresov argues against Kautsky,not in the way a Marxist should argue against a chauvinist,but like a Russian chauvinist against a German counter-part. 
 This is an old and threadbare method; it should, however, be noted that Mr. 
 A. 
 Potresov disguises and con-fuses in every possible way the clear and simple import ofhis words. 
 The points on which Mr. 
 A. 
 Potresov and Kautsky agree are the gist of the matter. 
 For instance they agree that: “the present-day proletariat’s internationalism is compatible with defence of country” (K. 
 Kautsky, p. 
 34 in the Germanedition of his pamphlet). 
 Mr. 
 A. 
 Potresov speaks of thespecial situation of a country “that has been subjectedto an attack”. 
 “The people fear nothing more than an enemyinvasion...”, Kautsky writes. 
 “If the inhabitants of a country see the cause of war, not in their own government, but in the evil designs of a neighbouring state—and whatgovernment does not attempt to inculcate such a view uponthe masses through the press, etc. 
!—then ... the unanimousdesire to defend the borders against the enemy flares up inthe entire population .... 
 The infuriated mob would kill those who would attempt to hamper the dispatch of armies to the borders” (K. 
 Kautsky, p. 
 33 in the article of 1911). 
 This is a would-be Marxist defence of the fundamental idea of all social-chauvinists. 
 As early as 1911, Kautsky saw very clearly that the government (and the bourgeoisie) would deceive “the people, the population, the mob” by placing the blame on the “evil designs” of another country. 
 The question arises whethersupport for such deception—whether by voting for warcredits or by speeches, articles, etc. 
—is compatible withinternationalism and socialism, or whether it is tantamountto a national liberal-labour policy! Kautsky is behaving like a most shameless “advocate”, like the worst kind of sophist, when he substitutes for this question another onenamely, whether it is reasonable for “individuals” to “ham-per the dispatch of armies”, in the teeth of the will of themajority of a people that have been deceived by their govern-ment. 
 That is not the point at issue. 
 That is not the gist of the matter. 
 Deceived petty bourgeois must be dissuaded, and the deception made clear to them. 
 It is sometimes necessaryto go with them to the battleground and be able to waituntil they have been sobered by the experience of war. 
Not this is under discussion but the question whetherit is permissible for socialists to participate in the bour-geoisie’s deception of the “people”. 
 Kautsky and Potresov justify such deception, though they know perfectly well thatthe guilt for the imperialist war of 1914 falls equally on the “evil designs” of the governments and the bourgeoisie of all the “Great” Powers—Britain and France, Germany and Russia. 
 This is clearly stated, for instance, in the Basle resolution of 1912. 
 There can be no doubt that the “people”, i. 
e. 
, the mass of petty bourgeois and part of the deceived workers, believein the bourgeois fable of the enemy’s “evil designs”. 
 Yet itis the duty of Social-Democrats to combat this deception, not support it. 
 Long before the war, all Social-Democrats in all countries said that any Great Power strives in fact to build up and extend its domination over the colonies,oppress small nations, etc. 
 This was reiterated at Basle. 
The war is being waged for the partitioning of colonies andfor the plunder of other lands; thieves have fallen out, and it is a brazen bourgeois lie to claim that, at this particu-lar moment, some thief is getting the worse of it; to doso is to present the thieves’ interests as those of the peopleor the fatherland. 
 We must speak the truth to the “people”, who are suffering from the war; that truth is that no defencecan be put up against sufferings of wartime unless the government and the bourgeoisie of every belligerent country are overthrown. 
 To defend Belgium by means of throttling Galicia or Hungary is no “defence of the fatherland”. 
 However, Marx himself, who condemned wars, as, for instance, in 1854-76, took sides with one of the belligerentswhen, despite the will of the socialists, war had become a fact. 
 That is the main contention and the chief trump card in Kautsky’s pamphlet. 
 It is also the stand of Mr. 
 Potresov,who by “internationalism” understands finding out the suc-cess of which side in the war is more desirable or less harmful from the standpoint of the interests of the proletariat, notin a particular country but the world over . 
 The war, he says, is being conducted by governments and the bourgeoisie, it is for the proletariat to decide which government’s victory presents the least danger to the workers of the world. 
 The sophistry of this reasoning consists in a bygone period of history being substituted for the present. 
 The followingwere the main features of the old wars referred to by Kautsky: (1) they dealt with the problems of bourgeois-democratic reforms and the overthrow of absolutism or foreign oppression;(2) the objective prerequisites for a socialist revolution had not yet matured, and prior to the war , no socialist could speak of utilising it to “hasten the downfall of capitalism”, as the Stuttgart (1907) and Basle (1912) resolutions do; (3) in the countries of neither of the belligerent groups were there any socialist parties of any strength or mass appeal,and tested in the struggle. 
 In short, it is not surprising that Marx and the Marx-ists confined themselves to determining which bourgeoisie’s victory would be more harmless to (or more favourable to) the world proletariat, at a time when one could not speakof a general proletarian movement against the governmentsand the bourgeoisie of all the belligerent countries. 
 Long before the war and for the first time in world history the socialists of all the countries now engaged in hostilities gathered together and declared that they would make use of the war “to hasten the downfall of capitalism” (the Stutt-gart resolution, 1907). 
 In other words, they recognised thatobjective conditions had matured for that “hastening of thedownfall”, i. 
e. 
, for a socialist revolution. 
 That is to say, theythreatened the governments with a revolution. 
 In Basle (1912) they said the same thing in still clearer terms, referring to the Commune and to October-December 1906, 107 i. 
e. 
, civil war. 
 When war broke out, the socialists who had threatened the governments with revolution and had called upon theproletariat to bring about that revolution began to refer to what had happened half a century before, and today are justifying socialist support for the governments and thebourgeoisie! The Marxist Gorter is absolutely right in com-paring, in his Dutch brochure, Imperialism , the World War and Social-Democracy (p. 
 84), “radicals” of the Kautsky type with the liberals of 1848, who were courageous in word and traitors in deed. 
 For decades, a conflict between revolutionary Social-Democratic and the opportunist elements was developingwithin European socialism. 
 The crisis has come to a head. 
The abscess has burst as a result of the war. 
 Most officialparties have yielded to the national liberal-labour politi-cians, who defend the privileges of their “own” bourgeoisie, and the latter ’s privilege to possess colonies, oppress small nations, etc. 
 Both Kautsky and Potresov defend and justify the national liberal-labour policy instead of exposing it to the proletariat. 
 That is the essence of the social-chauvinists’ sophisms. 
 Mr. 
 A. 
 Potresov has inadvertently let the cat out of the bag by his assertion that “the Stuttgart formula was unten-able in principle” (p. 
 79). 
 What of that? To the proletariat,open renegades are better than covert ones. 
 Carry on, Mr. 
A. 
 Potresov; to repudiate Stuttgart and Basle is the more honest course. 
 Kautsky, the diplomat, is more wily than Mr. 
 A. 
 Potre-sov; he does not repudiate Stuttgart and Basle. 
 He merely—“merely”!—quotes the Basle Manifesto, omitting all references to revolution! Can it be that the censor has been using hisblue pencil on both Potresov and Kautsky? Potresov and Kautsky seem ready to speak of revolution when that is permitted by the censor. 
 Let us hope that Potresov, Kautsky and their adherents will propose that the Stuttgart and the Basle resolutions bereplaced by something like the following: “Should warbreak out despite our efforts, we must decide, from the standpoint of the world proletariat, what is most to its advantage: that India be plundered by Britain or by Germa-ny; that the Negroes of Africa be taught the use of ‘fire-water’ and pillaged by the French or by the Germans; thatTurkey be oppressed by the Austro-Germans or by the Anglo-Franco-Russian alliance; that the Germans should throttle Belgium or the Russians, Galicia; that China be partitioned by the Japanese or by the Americans”, etc. 
 Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 41, Published according to May 1, 1915 the text in Sotsial-Demokrat THE QUESTION OF THE UNITY OF INTERNATIONALISTS The war has led to a grave crisis in the whole of interna-tional socialism. 
 Like any other crisis, the present crisis of socialism has revealed ever more clearly the inner contra-dictions lying deep within it; it has torn off many a falseand conventional mask, and has shown up in the sharpestlight what is outmoded and rotten in socialism, and whatits further growth and advance towards victory willdepend on. 
 Practically all Social-Democrats in Russia realise that the old divisions and groupings are, if not obsolescent, thenat least undergoing a transformation. 
 In the forefront isthe division on the main issue raised by the war, viz. 
, thedivision into “internationalists” and “social-patriots”. 
 Wehave taken these terms from the editorial in Nashe Slovo No. 
 42, and for the time being shall not deal with the ques-tion of whether they should be supplemented by contrastingrevolutionary Social-Democrats with national liberal-labourpoliticians. 
 It is not a matter of names, to be sure; the gist of the main present-day division has been correctly indicated in Nashe Slovo . 
 The internationalists, it says, are “united in their negative attitude towards social-patriotism as representedby Plekhanov”. 
 The editors call upon the “now disunitedgroups” “to come to an understanding and unite for at leasta single act—expressing the attitude of Russian Social-Democrats towards the present war and Russian social-patriotism”. 
 Besides this appeal through the press, the editors of Nashe Slovo have sent a letter to us and the Organising Committee, proposing that, with their participation, a con-ference be called to discuss the matter. 
 In our reply we spoke of the necessity “to clarify certain preliminary questions, so as to know whether we are at one in the main issue”. 
 Westressed two such preliminary questions: (1) no declarationwould help unmask the “social-patriots” (the editors namingPlekhanov, Alexinsky, and the well-known group of Petro-grad liquidationist writers who support the XYZ journal 108) who “falsify the will of the advanced proletariat of Russia” (the expression used by the editors of Nashe Slovo ); to unmask the social-patriots, a protracted struggle is necessary;(2) what grounds were there to count the OrganisingCommittee among the “internationalists”? On the other hand, the Organising Committee’s secretariat abroad sent us a copy of its reply to Nashe Slovo , which, in short, asserted that a “ preliminary ” selection of certain groups and the “exclusion of others” were out of the question;and that “invitations to the conference should be sent to therepresentatives abroad of all party centres and groupsthat attended ... the Brussels Conference of the International Socialist Bureau before the war” (letter of March 25, 1915). 
 Thus, the Organising Committee has declined on prin-ciple to confer with the internationalists alone, since it wishes also to confer with the social-patriots (the Plekha-nov and the Alexinsky trends are known to have been repre-sented at Brussels). 
 The same spirit marked the resolution of the Social-Democrats gathered in Nervi ( Nashe Slovo No. 
 53), which was adopted following Yonov’s report (and obvi-ously expressed the views of this representative of the mostradical and internationalist elements in the Bund). 
 This resolution, which is highly characteristic and valuable in helping us specify the “middle road” being sought by many socialists living abroad, expresses sympathy withNashe Slovo ’s “principles”, but at the same time expresses disagreement with Nashe Slovo ’s stand “which consists in creating organisational divisions, uniting internationalistsocialists alone, and defending the necessity of splits within socialist proletarian parties that have historically come into being”. 
 In the opinion of the gathering, Nashe Slovo ’s “one-sided handling” (of these questions) is “highly detrimental to clarification of problems connected with the restoration of the International”. 
 We have already pointed out that the views of Axelrod, the Organising Committee’s official representative, are so-cial-chauvinist. 
 Neither in the press nor in its correspondencehas Nashe Slovo made any reply to this. 
 We have pointed out that the Bund’s stand is the same, with a biastowards Germanophile chauvinism. 
 The Nervi resolution has born this out in a manner which, if indirect, is highly significant: it has declared that unification of internation-alists alone is harmful and schismatic. 
 The question has been presented with a clarity that is most praiseworthy. 
 Still clearer is the Organising Committee’s reply, which expresses, not an oblique attitude towards the issue, but one that is straightforward and formal. 
 We must confer, it says, not without the social-patriots, but with them . 
 We should be thankful to the Organising Committee for its letter to Nashe Slovo , confirming the correctness of our opinion of that body. 
 Does that mean that Nashe Slovo ’s entire idea of unit-ing the internationalists has been wrecked? No, it does not. 
 While there exist ideological solidarity and a sincere desireto combat social-patriotism, no failure of any conferencescan check unity among internationalists. 
 At the disposalof the editors of Nashe Slovo is the great instrument of a daily paper. 
 They can do something immeasurably more business-like and serious than calling conferences and issuing declarations; they can invite all groups, and themselves start: (I) to immediately evolve full, precise, unequivocaland perfectly clear definitions of the content of international-ism (it being a fact that Vandervelde, Kautsky, Plekhanov,Lensch, and Haenisch also call themselves internatiollal-ists!), of opportunism, the collapse of the Second Interna-tional, the tasks and the methods of combating social-patriotism, etc. 
; (2) to rally forces for a severe struggle forcertain principles, not only abroad, but mainly in Russia. 
 Indeed, can anyone deny that there is no other way to-wards the victory of internationalism over social-patriotism, and that there can be none? Half a century of Russian politi-cal emigration (and thirty years of Social-Democratic emigration)—have these not shown that all declarations, conferences, etc. 
, abroad are powerless, insignificant, and empty, unless they are supported by a lasting movement of some social stratum in Russia? Does not the present war also teach us that everything that is immature or decaying,everything that is conventional or diplomatic, will collapseat the first blow? During the eight months of war, all Social-Democratic centres, groups, currents, and shades of opinion have held conferences with all and sundry, and have come out with “declarations”, i. 
e. 
, made their opinions known to thepublic. 
 Today the task is different, and closer to action : more distrust of resonant declarations and spectacular conferences; more energy in evolving precise replies and advice towriters, propagandists, agitators, and all thinking workers, written in a way that cannot but be understood; more clarity and purposefulness in mustering the forces for a long-termeffort to give effect to such advice. 
 Much has been given to the editors of Nashe Slovo —after all, they are a daily paper!— and they will have much toanswer for if they fail to carry out even this “minimum programme”. 
 A final remark: in May 1910, exactly five years ago, we made mention, in our press abroad, of a highly outstandingpolitical fact, of “far greater significance” than the confer-ences and declarations of many very “powerful” Social-Demo-cratic centres, i. 
e. 
, the fact of the formation in Russia of a group of legalist writers working in the selfsame XYZ journal. 
 What has been shown by the facts during these five years, so eventful in the history of the labour movement in Russiaand the whole world? Have not the facts shown that inRussia we have a certain social nucleus to rally the elements of a national liberal-labour party (after the “European” pattern)? What are the conclusions forced on all Social-Democrats by the circumstance that, with the exception ofVoprosy Strakhovaniya ,109 we see, in Russia, the open expression only of this current, Nashe Dyelo , Strakhovaniye Rabochikh , Severny Golos ,”110 Maslov and Plekhanov? So we repeat: more distrust of resonant declarations, and more courage in facing grave political realities. 
 Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 41, Published according to May 1, 1915 the text in Sotsial-Demokrat /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR BOURGEOIS PHILANTHROPISTS AND REVOLUTIONARY SOCIAL -DEMOCRACY The Economist ,111 a journal that speaks for the British millionaires, is pursuing a very instructive line in relationto the war. 
 Representatives of advanced capital in the oldest and richest capitalist country, are shedding tears over the war and incessantly voicing a wish for peace. 
 ThoseSocial-Democrats who, together with the opportunists andKautsky, think that a socialist programme consists in thepropaganda of peace, will find proof of their error if theyread The Economist . 
 Their programme is not socialist, but bourgeois-pacifist. 
 Dreams of peace, without propaganda of revolutionary action, express only a horror of war, buthave nothing in common with socialism. 
 Moreover, The Economist stands for peace just because it is afraid of revolution. 
 For instance, its issue for February13, 1915, contains the following passage: “Philanthropists profess to hope that the peace settle-ment will bring with it a great international reduction ofarmies .... 
 But those who know the forces which really control the diplomacy of Europe see no Utopias. 
 The outlookis for bloody revolutions and fierce wars between labourand capital, or between the masses and the governing classes of Continental Europe.... 
” In the issue of March 27, 1915, we again find expression of a desire for a peace that will guarantee freedom of nation-alities, etc. 
, as promised by Sir Edward Grey. 
 If this hope isnot realised, the paper says, the war “will end in revolution-ary chaos, beginning no one can say where, and ending in no one can say what ”. 
 The British pacifist millionaires have a better under-standing of present-day politics than the opportunists, the followers of Kautsky and similar socialist whimperers after peace. 
 The bourgeois know, first, that phrases about a demo-cratic peace are an idle and foolish Utopia while the old “forces ... really control the diplomacy”, i. 
e. 
, untilthe class of capitalists has been expropriated. 
 Second-ly, the bourgeoisie have made a sober appraisal of the out-look, foreseeing “bloody revolutions” and “revolutionarychaos”. 
 To the bourgeoisie a socialist revolution always seems “revolutionary chaos”. 
 In the realistic politics of the capitalist countries, three kinds of peace sympathies can be seen: (1) The more enlightened millionaires wish an early peace because they are afraid of revolutions. 
 They have soberlyand correctly described any “democratic” peace (without annexations, but with limited armaments, etc. 
) as Utopian under capitalism. 
 This philistine Utopia is being advocated by the oppor-tunists, the adherents of Kautsky, and the like. 
 (2) The unenlightened masses of the people (the petty bourgeois, semi-proletarians, part of the workers, etc. 
) whose desire for peace is very vague, are thereby expressing a growing protest against the war and a growing but as yetvague revolutionary sentiment. 
 (3) The revolutionary Social-Democrats, the enlightened advance guard of the proletariat, are attentively studyingthe sentiments of the masses, utilising the latter’s growing striving for peace, not in order to bolster the vulgar utopias of a “democratic” peace under capitalism, not in order toencourage hopes being placed in the philanthropists, theauthorities, and the bourgeoisie, but to bring clarity intovague revolutionary sentiments, to enlighten the masseswith a thousand facts of pre-war politics; basing that work on the experience of the masses and on their sentiments, they are out to prove systematically, steadfastly and unswerving-ly the need for mass revolutionary action against the bour-geoisie and the governments of their respective countriesas the only road towards democracy and socialism. 
 Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 41, Published according to May 1, 1915 the text in Sotsial-Demokrat THE COLLAPSE OF PLATONIC INTERNATIONALISM We have already pointed out (see Sotsial -Demokrat No. 
 41) * that Nashe Slovo should at least come out with a definite platform if it wishes its internationalism to be taken seri-ously. 
 As though in reply to us, No. 
 85 of Nashe Slovo (May 9) published the resolution passed at a meeting of its Paris staff and contributors. 
 “Two members of the editorialstaff,” we are informed, “while in agreement with the generalcontent of the resolution, declared they would submit adissenting opinion on the organisational methods of theParty’s internal policy in Russia. 
” This resolution is a most noteworthy document of political bewilderment and ineptness. 
 The word internationalism is reiterated time and again “complete ideological divorcement from all the varieties ofsocialist nationalism” is announced, and the Stuttgart andBasle resolutions are quoted. 
 The intentions are of the best,no doubt, but—it is all a mere phrase, since it is impossible and unnecessary to have a really “complete” divorcement from “all” extant varieties of social-nationalism, just as it isimpossible and unnecessary to have a complete list of all thevarieties of capitalist exploitation in order to become anenemy of capitalism. 
 But it is necessary and possible to havean unmistakable line of cleavage with the main varieties for instance, with that of Plekhanov, Potresov ( Nashe Dyelo ), the Bund, Axelrod, and Kautsky. 
 The resolution promises too much, but gives nothing; it threatens a com-plete cleavage with all varieties, but is afraid to mention byname at least the most significant of them. 
 In the British Parliament it is considered a discourtesy to call a man by his name, the practice being to speak only *See pp. 
 188-91 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 of the respective “Noble Lord” or of the “Honourable Mem-ber” for whatever constituency he may represent. 
 What excellent Anglomaniacs, what highly refined diplomats these Nashe Slovo people are! They evade the gist of the issue so gracefully, and are so polite when they provide theirreaders with formulas that serve to conceal their thoughts. 
They avow “friendship” (“Guizot in the flesh”, as one of Tur-genev’s characters puts it 112) for all organisations “inas-much as they apply ... the principles of revolutionaryinternationalism”, but manifest “friendship” for those whodo not apply those principles. 
 The “ideological divorcement” the Nashe Slovo people proclaim the more solemnly, the less willing and able theyare to carry it out, must consist in explaining the origin of social-nationalism, the source of its strength, and the means to combat it. 
 The social-nationalists do not call them-selves, and do not admit to being, social-nationalists. 
 Theyare bending, and are compelled to bend, every effort to hidebehind a pseudonym, to throw dust in the eyes of the workingmasses, to cover up the traces of their links with opportunism, to conceal their betrayal, i. 
e. 
, their having gone over in fact to the side of the bourgeoisie, and their alliance with thegovernments and the General Staffs. 
 Grounding themselveson this alliance, and in control of all the important posi-tions, the social-nationalists are, more than anybody else,clamouring for “unity” between the Social-Democratic par-ties and levelling the accusation of splitting tendencies, against all those who are opposed to opportunism. 
 Con-sider, for instance, the latest official circular released by theExecutive ( Vorstand ) of the German Social-Democratic Party and directed against journals that stand for genuine internationalism— Lichtstrahlen 113 and Die Internationale114. 
 These journals did not have to avow either “friendship”for the revolutionaries or “complete ideological divorcementfrom all varieties of social-nationalism”. 
 They just beganwith the divorcement, and did that in such a way thatindeed “ all varieties” of opportunists have raised a savage outcry, thus proving how squarely the arrows have hit the mark. 
 But what about Nashe Slovo ? It is rising up against social-nationalism, while still on bended knees before it, since it has failed to unmask the most dangerous defenders of this bourgeois current (such as Kaut-sky); it has not declared war against opportunism, but on the contrary, has kept silent about it; it has not taken or indicated any real steps towards liberating socialism from itsdisgraceful patriotic fetters. 
 By stating that neither unitynor a break with those who joined the bourgeoisie is impera-tive, Nashe Slovo has in fact surrendered to the opportun-ists, while at the same time making a fine gesture, which can be interpreted as meaning either that it is threatening the opportunists with its dreadful ire, or that it is wavinga hand to them. 
 Were the really deft opportunists, who havea fine appreciation of a blend of Left phrases and moderatepractice, compelled to make reply to the Nashe Slovo resolu-tion, they would most probably say something similar to the statement made by the two staff members, namely, that they are in agreement with the “general content” (becausethey are certainly not social-nationalists, Oh, no!); as forthe “organisational methods of the Party’s internal policy”they will, in due course, submit, a “dissenting opinion”. 
They run with the hare and hunt with the hounds. 
 When it had to deal with Russia, however, Nashe Slovo ’s subtle diplomacy proved abortive. 
 “Party unification in the conditions of the previous period proved impossible in Russia,” says the resolution, whichshould be understood as meaning that unification of theworking-class party with a group of legalist liquidators proved impossible. 
 This is oblique recognition of the collapse of the Brussels bloc, which was formed to save the liquidators. 
Why is Nashe Slovo afraid openly to recognise this collapse? Why is it afraid openly to make the causes of this collapseclear to the workers? Is it not because the bloc’s collapse hasproved the actual falseness of the policy pursued by all its members? Is it not because Nashe Slovo wishes to preserve “friendship” with two (at least two) “varieties” of social-nation-alism, namely, with the Bundists and the Organising Committee(Axelrod) both of whom have made press statements abouttheir plans and their hopes to resurrect the Brussels bloc? “The new conditions ... are cutting the ground from under the feet of the old groups.... 
” Is not the reverse true? Far from eliminating liquida-tionism, the new conditions have not even shaken its basic nucleus ( Nasha Zarya ), notwithstanding all personal vacillations and changes of front. 
 They have deepened and aggravated differences with that nucleus, since, besides being liquidationist, it has also turned social-nationalist!Nashe Slovo evades the question of liquidationism, which it finds so unpleasant; the old is being undermined by the new,it asserts, but it is silent about the new ground , the social-nationalist, under the feet of the old ... liquidationism! What ridiculous shiftiness! We shall say nothing about Nasha Zarya because it is no more, and nothing about Nashe Dyelo , probably because Potresov, Cherevanin, Maslov and Co. 
may be regarded in the political sense, as babes in arms. 
 It is not only Potresov and Co. 
, but themselves as well that the Nashe Slovo editors would regard as babes in arms. 
 Listen to this: “Faced by the fact that the factional and inter-factional groupings created in the past serve, even at the present tran-sitional moment, as the only [!] centres for the organisa-tional unification, however imperfect, of the advancedworkers, Nashe Slovo is of the opinion that the interests of its main activities in uniting the internationalists exclude both organisational submission of the paper, directly orindirectly, to any one of the old party groupings, and arti-ficial unification of its fellow-thinkers into a separate grouppolitically opposed to the old groupings. 
” What does this mean? How is it to be taken? Inasmuch as the new conditions are undermining the old groupings, they recognise the latter as the only genuine ones! Inasmuch as the new conditions demand a new grouping, not on liqui-dationist principles, but on internationalism, they reject as“artificial” any unification of internationalists. 
 This is thevery acme of political impotence! After two hundred days of propaganda of internationalism, Nashe Slovo has acknowledged its complete political bank-ruptcy. 
 It wants neither “submission” to the old groupings(why so fear-stricken a word as “submission”? Why not“adhesion”, “support”, “solidarity with”?), nor the creationof new ones. 
 We shall go on living in the old way, it says, in liquidationist groupings; we shall “submit” to them, while using Nashe Slovo as a blatant signboard, or regarding it as a promenade through the leafy gardens of internationalist phraseology. 
 The Nashe Slovo writers will do the writing, while Nashe Slovo readers will do the reading. 
115 For two hundred days these people were talking of uniting the internationalists, only to arrive at conclusion that theycould unite nobody, not even themselves, the editors and staffof Nashe Slovo , and to proclaim that unification “artificial”. 
 What a fillip for Potresov, the Bundists, and Axelrod! Andwhat adroit deception of the workers! On the surface, reso-nant internationalist phrases from a truly non-factional Nashe Slovo that has thrown off the old and outworn groupings; in fact, however, the old groupings are the “only” pointsof unity. 
 Nashe Slovo ’s ideological and political bankruptcy which it now admits, is no accident, but the inevitable result of vain attempts to shrug off, in word, the actual alignment of forces. 
 In the working-class movement of Russia thisalignment expresses itself in the struggle of the liquida-tionist and social-patriotic trend ( Nashe Dyelo ) against the Marxist Social-Democratic Labour Party, which has beenrestored by the January 1912 Conference, 116 strengthened by the elections, in the worker curia, to the Fourth Duma, consolidated by the Pravdist papers of 1912-14, and repre-sented by the Russian Social-Democratic Labour group inthe Duma. 
 This Party has continued its struggle against the bourgeois trend of liquidationism by combating the no lessbourgeois trend of social-patriotism. 
 The correctness of the line of this Party, our Party, has been borne out by the vast and historic experience of the European war, and by the exigu-ous and slender experience of the latest, the one thousandand first non-factional attempt at unification on the part ofNashe Slovo : this attempt has suffered a fiasco, thereby con-firming the resolution of the Berne Conference ( Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 40) concerning “platonic” internationalists. 
 * Genuine internationalists will wish neither to remain in the old liquidationist groupings (concealing this from theworkers) nor to stand outside of the groupings. 
 They willcome to our Party. 
 Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 42, Published according to May 21, 1915 the text in Sotsial-Demokrat *See pp. 
 163-64 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 ON THE STRUGGLE AGAINST SOCIAL-CHAUVINISM The most interesting and most recent material for this topical problem has been provided by the InternationalConference of Socialist Women, which adjourned recently in Berne. 
 117 The readers will find below an account of the Conference and the texts of two resolutions—the one adoptedand the one rejected. 
 In the present article we would liketo discuss only one aspect of the question. 
 Representatives of the women’s organisations attached to the Organising Committee; women members of Troelstra’s party in Holland; women from the Swiss organisations that are hostile to Berner Tagwacht for its allegedly exces-sive Leftist leanings; the French representative, who is un-willing to disagree on any important point with the officialparty, which is known to adhere to the social-chauvinistpoint of view; the women of Britain, who are hostile to the idea of a clear line of division between pacifism and revolu-tionary proletarian tactics—all these agreed with the “Left”German Social-Democrat women on one resolution. 
 Therepresentatives of women’s organisations connected withour Party’s Central Committee disagreed with them, pre-ferring to remain in isolation for the time being rather than join a bloc of this kind. 
 What is the gist of this disagreement? What principles and general political significance are involved in thisconflict? At first glance, the middle-of-the-road resolution, which has united the opportunists and part of the Left wing looksvery fitting and correct in principle. 
 The war has beendeclared an imperialist one, the “defence of the fatherland”idea has been condemned, the workers have been called upon to hold mass demonstrations, etc. 
, etc. 
 It might seem that our resolution was different only in the use of several sharper expressions such as “betrayal”, “opportunism” “withdrawal from bourgeois governments”, etc. 
 It is undoubtedly from this standpoint that criticism will be levelled against the withdrawal of the representa-tives of the women’s organisations connected with ourParty’s Central Committee. 
 However, if we give the matter more attention, without confining ourselves to a purely “formal” recognition of onetruth or another, we will realise that such criticism is quitegroundless. 
 Two world-outlooks, two appraisals of the war and the tasks of the International, two tactics of the proletarian parties clashed at the Conference. 
 One view holds that there has been no collapse of the International; no deep and grave obstaclesto a return from chauvinism to socialism; no strong “internalenemy” in the shape of opportunism; no direct and obviousbetrayal of socialism by opportunism. 
 The conclusionto be drawn might be worded as follows: let us condemn nobody; let us “amnesty” those who have violated the Stuttgart and the Basle resolutions; let us merely advisethat the course followed should be more to the left and thatthe masses be called upon to hold demonstrations. 
 The other view is diametrically opposed to the former on each of the points enumerated above. 
 Nothing is more harm-ful or more disastrous to the proletarian cause than a contin-uation of inner-Party diplomacy towards the opportunists and social-chauvinists. 
 The majority resolution provedacceptable to the opportunist delegates and to the adherentsof the present-day official parties just because it is imbuedwith the spirit of diplomacy. 
 Such diplomacy is being used to throw dust in the eyes of the working masses, which at present are led by the official social-patriots. 
 An absolutely erroneous and harmful idea is being inculcated upon theworking masses, the idea that the present-day Social-Democratic parties, with their present Executives, are capable of changing their course from an erroneous to a correct one. 
 That is not the case. 
 It is a most egregious and pernicious illusion. 
 The present-day Social-Democratic parties and their Executives are incapable of seriously changing their course. 
 In practice everything will remain as before; the “Left” wishes expressed in the majority resolution will remain innocent wishes; an unerring political instinct promptedthis in the adherents of Troelstra’s party and of the presentExecutive of the French party, when they voted for sucha resolution. 
 It is only when it is most actively supportedby the present Executives of the Social-Democratic parties that an appeal for mass demonstrations can acquire a serious and practical significance. 
 Can one expect such support? Obviously not. 
 It is common knowledge that such an appeal will meet, not with support,but with stubborn (and mostly covert ) resistance from the Executives. 
 If the workers were told this in a straightforward way, they would know the truth ; they would know that to give effect to “Left” wishes, a radical change is necessary in the line of the Social-Democratic parties; a most stubbornstruggle is necessary against the opportunists with their“Centrist” friends. 
 As it is, the workers have been lulled by “Left” wishes, while the Conference refused to call by name, loudly and clearly, the evil which must be combated ifthose wishes are to be realised. 
 The diplomatic leaders, who are at present conducting a chauvinist policy within the Social-Democratic parties, willmake excellent use of the weakness, the indecision and the insufficient clarity of the majority resolution. 
 Astute par-liamentarians that they are, they will distribute the rolesamong themselves: some of them will say that the “serious”arguments of Kautsky and Co. 
 were not appreciated oranalysed, and that therefore they must be discussed in awider gathering; others will say, “Were we not right when we said that no deep-seated differences existed, if the women adherents of the Troelstra and Guesde-Sembat parties wereable to agree with the Left-wing German women?” The Women’s Conference should not have aided Scheide-mann, Haase, Kautsky, Vandervelde, Hyndman, Guesde,Sembat, Plekhanov and others to blunt the vigilance of the working masses. 
 On the contrary, it should have tried to rouse them and declared a decisive war against opportunism. 
Only in that case would the result have been, not a hope that the “leaders” named above would “reform”, but a mustering of forces for an arduous and bitter struggle. 
 Consider the way the opportunists and the “Centrists” violated the Stuttgart and Basle resolutions. 
 That is thecrux of the matter. 
 Try to visualise, clearly and without diplomacy, what has actually taken place. 
 Foreseeing war, the International convenes and unani-mously decides, should war break out, to work “ to hasten the downfall of capitalism ”; to work in the spirit of the Commune , of October and December 1905 (the exact words of the Basle resolution!); to work in a spirit that will con-sider it a “ crime ” if “the workers of one country shoot at the workers of another country”. 
 A line of action in an internationalist, proletarian, and revolutionary spirit is indicated here with perfect clarity, a clarity that cannot be improved within the limits of legality. 
 Then war broke out—the very kind of war and exactly along the lines foreseen at Basle. 
 The official parties actedin an absolutely contrary spirit: not like internationalistsbut like nationalists; not in a proletarian but in a bourgeois way; not in a revolutionary direction but in the direction of ultra-opportunism. 
 If we say to the workers that thiswas downright treachery to the socialist cause, we there-by reject all evasions and subterfuges, all sophisms à la Kautsky and Axelrod. 
 We clearly indicate the extent andthe power of the evil; we clearly call for a struggle against that evil, not for conciliation with it. 
 What about the majority resolution? It does not contain a word of censure for the traitors, or a single word aboutopportunism, but merely a simple repetition of the ideas ex-pressed in the Basle resolution! One might think that nothingserious has happened, that an accidental and minor error has been made which calls merely for a repetition of the old decision, or that a disagreement has arisen which is incon-sequent and not of principle, and can be papered over ! This is downright mockery of the International’s deci-sions, mockery of the workers. 
 As a matter of fact, thesocial-chauvinists wish nothing else but a simple repetition of the old decisions, if only nothing changes in practice. 
 This is, in fact, a tacit and hypocritically disguised amnesty for the social-chauvinist adherents of most of the present parties. 
 We know that there are many who would follow this path and confine themselves to several Left phrases. 
 However, their road is not for us. 
 We have followed a different road, and will go on following it; we want to help theworking-class movement and the actual construction of a working class party, in the spirit of irreconcilabilitytowards opportunism and social-chauvinism. 
 Part of the German women delegates seem to have been afraid of a very clear resolution, for reasons relating only to the tempo of the development of the struggle against chauvinism within a single party, namely, their own. 
Such reasoning was obviously out of place and erroneous,since the international resolution did not and could notdeal with either the speed or the concrete conditions of the struggle against social-chauvinism within the individual countries; in this respect, the autonomy of the various par-ties is beyond dispute. 
 The proclamation was needed, froman international tribune, of an irrevocable break withsocial-chauvinism in the entire direction and character ofSocial-Democratic work. 
 Instead of that, the majority resolution once more reiterated the old error, that of the Second International, which diplomatically veiled oppor-tunism and the gap between word and deed. 
 We repeat:this is a road we shall not take. 
 Supplement to Sotsial-Demokrat Published according to No. 
 42, June 1, 1915 the text of the Supplement THE COLLAPSE OF THE SECOND INTERNATIONAL Written in the second half of May and the first half of June 1915 Published in 1915 in the Published according to journal Kommunist No. 
 1-2 the text in the journal Signed: N. 
 Lenin THE COLLAPSE OF THE SECOND INTERNATIONAL Written in the second half of May and the first half of June 1915 Published in 1915 in the Published according to journal Kommunist No. 
 1-2 the text in the journal Signed: N. 
 Lenin The collapse of the International is sometimes taken to mean simply the formal aspect of the matter, namely, theinterruption in international communication between thesocialist parties of the belligerent countries, the impossi-bility of converting either an international conference or the International Socialist Bureau, etc. 
 This is the point of view held by certain socialists in the small neutral countries,probably even by the majority of the official parties in thosecountries, and also by the opportunists and their defenders. 
With a frankness that deserves profound gratitude, this posi-tion was defended in the Russian press by Mr. 
 V. 
 Kosovsky, in No. 
 8 of the Bund’s Information Bulletin , whose editors said nothing to indicate that they disagreed with the author. 
Let us hope that Mr. 
 Kosovsky’s defence of nationalism, inwhich he went so far as to justify the German Social-Democratswho voted for war credits, will help many a worker atlast to realise the bourgeois-nationalist-character of the Bund. 
 To the class-conscious workers, socialism is a serious conviction, not a convenient screen to conceal petty-bourgeoisconciliatory and nationalist-oppositional strivings. 
 By thecollapse of the International they understand the disgracefultreachery to their convictions which was displayed by most of the official Social-Democratic parties, treachery to the most solemn declarations in their speeches at the Stuttgartand Basle international congresses, and in the resolutions ofthese congresses, etc. 
 Only those can fail to see this treacherywho do not wish to do so or do not find it to their advantage to see it. 
 If we would formulate the question in a scientific fashion, i. 
e. 
, from the standpoint of class relations in modern society, we will have to state that most of the Social-Democratic parties, and at their head the German Party first and foremost—the biggest and most influential party in the Second International—have taken sides with their General Staffs, their governments, and their bourgeoisie, against the proletariat. 
 This is an event of historic importance,one that calls for a most comprehensive analysis. 
 It haslong been conceded that, for all the horror and misery theyentail, wars bring at least the following more or less impor-tant benefit—they ruthlessly reveal, unmask and destroy much that is corrupt, outworn and dead in human insti-tutions. 
 The European war of 1914-15 is doubtlessly begin-ning to do some good by revealing to the advanced class ofthe civilised countries what a foul and festering abscess hasdeveloped within its parties, and what an unbearably putridstench comes from some source. 
 I Is it a fact that the principal socialist parties of Europe have forsaken all their convictions and tasks? This, of course, is something that is readily discussed neither by the trai-tors nor those who are fully aware—or surmise—that theywill have to be friendly and tolerant towards them. 
 Howeverunpleasant that may be to various “authorities” in theSecond International or to their fellow-thinkers among theRussian Social-Democrats, we must face the facts and call things by their right names; we must tell the workers the truth. 
 Do any facts exist that show how the socialist parties regarded their tasks and their tactics before the presentwar and in anticipation of it? They undoubtedly do. 
 Therewas the resolution adopted at the Basle International Socialist Congress of 1912, which we are reprinting together with the resolution adopted at the Chemnitz Congress of the Ger-man Social-Democratic Party held in the same year, 118 as a reminder of socialism’s forgotten ideals. 
 This resolution,which summarises the vast anti-war propagandist and agita-tional literature in all countries, is a most complete and pre-cise, a most solemn and formal exposition of socialist views on war and tactics towards war. 
 One cannot but qualify astreachery the fact that none of the authorities of yesterday’s International and of today’s social-chauvinism—neither Hyndman and Guesde, nor Kautsky and Plekhanov—dare remind their readers of that resolution. 
 They are either silent about it, or (like Kautsky) quote excerpts of secondary im-portance and evade everything that is really of significance. 
On the one hand, the most “Left ” and arch-revolutionary resolutions, and on the other, the most shameless forgetful-ness or renunciation of these resolutions—this is one of the most striking manifestations of the International’s col-lapse, and at the same time a most convincing proof thatat present only those whose rare simplicity borders ona cunning desire to perpetuate the former hypocrisy can be-lieve that socialism can be “rectified” and “its line straight-ened out” by means of resolutions alone. 
 Only yesterday, one might say, when, before the war, Hyndman turned towards a defence of imperialism, all“respectable” socialists considered him an unbalanced crank,of whom nobody spoke otherwise than in a tone of disdain. 
Today the most prominent Social-Democratic leaders of allcountries have sunk entirely to Hyndman’s position, differing from one another only in shades of opinion and in temperament. 
 We are quite unable to find some more or lesssuitable parliamentary expression in appraising or characteris-ing the civic courage of such persons as, for instance, theNashe Slovo authors, who write of “Mr. 
” Hyndman with con-tempt, while speaking—or saying nothing—of “Comrade” Kautsky with deference (or obsequiousness?). 
 Can such an attitude be reconciled with a respect for socialism, and forone’s convictions in general? If you are convinced that Hynd-man’s chauvinism is false and destructive, does it not followthat you should direct your criticism and attacks againstKautsky, the more influential and more dangerous defender of such views? In perhaps greater detail than anywhere else, Guesde’s views have recently been expressed by the Guesdist CharlesDumas, in a pamphlet entitled The Peace That We Desire . 
 This “Chef du Cabinet de Jules Guesde”, as he styles himselfon the title-page of the pamphlet, naturally “quotes” the former patriotic declarations of the socialists (David, the German social-chauvinist, does the same in his latest pamphleton defence of the fatherland), but he fails to refer to the Basle Manifesto! Plekhanov, who utters chauvinist banali-ties with an extraordinarily smug air, is likewise silent on the Manifesto. 
 Kautsky behaves just like Plekhanov: in quoting from the Basle Manifesto, he omits all the revolution-ary passages (i. 
e. 
, all the vital content!), probably on thepretext of the censorship regulations .... 
 The police and the military authorities, whose censorship regulations forbidany mention of the class struggle or revolution, have rendered timely aid to the traitors to socialism! Perhaps the Basle Manifesto is just an empty appeal, which is devoid of any definite content, either historicalor tactical, with a direct bearing on the concrete war oftoday? The reverse is true. 
 The Basle resolution has less idle declamation and more definite content than other resolutions have. 
 The Basle resolution speaks of the very same war that has now broken out, of the imperialist conflicts that have flared up in 1914-15. 
 The conflicts between Austria andSerbia over the Balkans, between Austria and Italy overAlbania, etc. 
, between Britain and Germany over markets and colonies in general, between Russia and Turkey, etc. 
, over Armenia and Constantinople—all this is what the Basleresolution speaks of in anticipation of the present war. 
 Itfollows from that resolution that the present war between “the Great Powers of Europe” “ cannot be justified on the slight-est pretext of being in the least in the interests of the people ”. 
 And if Plekhanov and Kautsky—to take two of the most typical and authoritative socialists, who are well known tous, one of whom writes in Russian while the other is trans-lated into Russian by the liquidators are now (with the aidof Axelrod) seeking all sorts of “popular justifications” forthe war (or, rather, vulgar ones taken from the bourgeois gutter press) if, with a learned mien and with a stock of false quotations from Marx, they refer to “precedents”, to thewars of 1813 and 1870 (Plekhanov), or of 1854-71, 1876-77,1897 (Kautsky), then, in truth, only those without a shadowof socialist conviction, without a shred of socialist con-science, can take such arguments in earnest, can fail to call them otherwise than unparalleled Jesuitism, hypocrisy and the prostitution of socialism! Let the Executive ( Vorstand ) of the German Party anathematise Mehring and Rosa Luxem-burg’s new magazine ( Die Internationale ) for its honest criticism of Kautsky; let Vandervelde, Plekhanov, Hyndman and Co. 
 treat their opponents in the same manner, with the aid of the police of the Allied Powers. 
 We shall reply by sim-ply reprinting the Basle Manifesto, which will show thatthe leaders have chosen a course that can only be calledtreachery. 
 The Basle resolution does not speak of a national or a people’s war—examples of which have occurred in Europe, wars that were even typical of the period of 1789-1871—or ofa revolutionary war, which Social-Democrats have neverrenounced, but of the present war, which is the outcome of “capitalist imperialism” and “dynastic interests”, the out-come of “the policy of conquest” pursued by both groups of belligerent powers—the Austro-German and the Anglo-Franco-Russian. 
 Plekhanov, Kautsky and Co. 
 are flagrantlydeceiving the workers by repeating the selfish lie of thebourgeoisie of all countries, which is striving with all itsmight to depict this imperialist and predatory war for colo-nies as a people’s war, a war of defence (for any side); when they seek to justify this war by citing historical examples of non-imperialist wars. 
 The question as to the imperialist, predatory and anti-proletarian character of the present war has long outgrownthe purely theoretical stage. 
 All the main features of impe-rialism have been theoretically assessed, as a struggle being waged by the senile and moribund bourgeoisie for the parti-tion of the world and the enslavement of “small” nations;these conclusions have been repeated thousands of times inthe vast socialist press in all countries; in his pamphlet The Impending War ( 1911!), for example, the Frenchman Delaisi, a representative of one of our “Allied” nations, has explained in simple terms the predatory character of the present war, with reference to the French bourgeoisie as well. 
 But that isfar from all. 
 At Basle, representatives of the proletarianparties of all countries gave unanimous and formal expressionto their unshakable conviction that a war of an imperialistcharacter was impending, and drew tactical conclusions therefrom. 
 For this reason, among others, we must flatly re-ject, as sophistry, all references to an inadequate discussionon the difference between national and international tactics (see Axelrod’s latest interview in Nashe Slovo Nos. 
 87 and 90), etc. 
, etc. 
 This is sophistry, because a comprehensive scientific analysis of imperialism is one thing—that analysis is only under way and, in essence, is as infinite as science it-self. 
 The principles of socialist tactics against capitalistimperialism, which have been set forth in millions of copiesof Social-Democratic newspapers and in the decision of theInternational, are a quite different thing. 
 Socialist parties are not debating clubs, but organisations of the fighting pro-letariat; when a number of battalions have gone over to theenemy, they must be named and branded as traitors; we mustnot allow ourselves to be taken in by hypocritical assertionsthat “not everybody understands imperialism in the sameway”, or that the chauvinist Kautsky and the chauvinist Cunow can write volumes about it, or that the question has not been “adequately discussed”, etc. 
, etc. 
 Capitalism willnever be completely and exhaustively studied in all the mani-festations of its predatory nature, and in all the most minuteramifications of its historical development and nationalfeatures. 
 Scholars (and especially the pedants) will never stop arguing over-details. 
 It would be ridiculous to give up the socialist struggle against capitalism and to desistfrom opposing, on such grounds, those who have betrayedthat struggle. 
 But what else are Kautsky, Cunow, Axelrodand their like inviting us to do? Now, when war has broken out, no one has even attempted to examine the Basle resolution and prove that it is erroneous. 
 II But perhaps sincere socialists supported the Basle resolu-tion in the anticipation that war would create a revolution-ary situation, the events rebutting them, as revolutionhas proved impossible? It is by means of sophistry like this that Cunow (in a pamphlet Collapse of the Party? and a series of articles) has tried to justify his desertion to the camp of the bour-geoisie. 
 The writings of nearly all the other social-chauvin-ists, headed by Kautsky, hint at similar “arguments”. 
Hopes for a revolution have proved illusory, and it is not the business of a Marxist to fight for illusions, Cunow argues. 
 This Struvist,119 however, does not say a word about “illu-sions” that were shared by all signatories to the Basle Mani-festo. 
 Like a most upright man, he would put the blame onthe extreme Leftists, such as Pannekoek and Radek! Let us consider the substance of the argument that the authors of the Basle Manifesto sincerely expected the ad-vent of a revolution, but were rebutted by the events. 
 The Basle Manifesto says: (1) that war will create an economic and political crisis; (2) that the workers will regard their par-ticipation in war as a crime, and as criminal any “shootingeach other down for the profit of the capitalists, for the sakeof dynastic honour and of diplomatic secret treaties”, andthat war evokes “indignation and revolt” in the workers; (3) that it is the duty of socialists to take advantage of this crisis and of the workers’ temper so as to “rouse the peopleand hasten the downfall of capitalism”; (4) that all “govern-ments” without exception can start a war only at “theirown peril”; (5) that governments ‘”are afraid of a proletarianrevolution”; (6) that governments “should remember” the Paris Commune (i. 
e. 
, civil war), the 1905 Revolution in Russia, etc. 
 All these are perfectly clear ideas; they do notguarantee that revolution will take place, but lay stress on a precise characterisation of facts and trends . 
 Whoever declares, with regard to these ideas and arguments, that theanticipated revolution has proved illusory, is displaying not a Marxist but a Struvist and police-renegade attitude towards revolution. 
 To the Marxist it is indisputable that a revolution is im-possible without a revolutionary situation; furthermore,it is not every revolutionary situation that leads to revolu-tion. 
 What, generally speaking, are the symptoms of a revo-lutionary situation? We shall certainly not be mistaken if we indicate the following three major symptoms: (1) when itis impossible for the ruling classes to maintain their rulewithout any change; when there is a crisis, in oneform or another, among the “upper classes”, a crisis in thepolicy of the ruling class, leading to a fissure through which the discontent and indignation of the oppressed classes burst forth. 
 For a revolution to take place, it is usually insuffi-cient for “the lower classes not to want” to live in the old way; it is also necessary that “the upper classes should be unable” to live in the old way; (2) when the suffering and want of the oppressed classes have grown more acute than usual; (3) when, as a consequence of the above causes, thereis a considerable increase in the activity of the masses, whouncomplainingly allow themselves to be robbed in “peacetime”, but, in turbulent times, are drawn both by all thecircumstances of the crisis and by the “upper classes ” themselves into independent historical action. 
 Without these objective changes, which are independent of the will, not only of individual groups and parties but even ofindividual classes, a revolution, as a general rule, is im-possible. 
 The totality of all these objective changes is calleda revolutionary situation. 
 Such a situation existed in 1905 in Russia, and in all revolutionary periods in the West; it also existed in Germany in the sixties of the lastcentury, and in Russia in 1859-61 and 1879-80, although norevolution occurred in these instances. 
 Why was that? Itwas because it is not every revolutionary situation that givesrise to a revolution; revolution arises only out of a situa-tion in which the above-mentioned objective changes are accompanied by a subjective change, namely, the abilityof the revolutionary class to take revolutionary mass action strong enough to break (or dislocate) the old government, which never, not even in a period of crisis, “falls”, if it isnot toppled over. 
 Such are the Marxist views on revolution, views that have been developed many, many times, have been acceptedas indisputable by all Marxists, and for us, Russians, werecorroborated in a particularly striking fashion by the expe-rience of 1905. 
 What, then, did the Basle Manifesto assumein this respect in 1912, and what took place in 1914-15? It assumed that a revolutionary situation, which it briefly described as “an economic and political crisis”, would arise. 
Has such a situation arisen? Undoubtedly, it has. 
 The social-chauvinist Lensch, who defends chauvinism more candidly,publicly and honestly than the hypocrites Cunow, Kautsky,Plekhanov and Co. 
 do, has gone so far as to say: “What we are passing through is a kind of revolution ” (p. 
 6 of his pam-phlet, German Social-Democracy and the War , Berlin, 1915). 
 A political crisis exists; no government is sure of the morrow, not one is secure against the danger of financial collapse, loss of territory, expulsion from its country (in the way the Belgian Government was expelled). 
 All governments are sleeping on a volcano; all are themselves calling for the masses to display initiative and heroism. 
 The entire politicalregime of Europe has been shaken, and hardly anybody willdeny that we have entered (and are entering ever deeper—Iwrite this on the day of Italy’s declaration of war) a period of immense political upheavals. 
 When, two months after the declaration of war, Kautsky wrote (October 2, 1914, inDie Neue Zeit ) that “never is government so strong, never are parties so weak as at the outbreak of a war”, this was asample of the falsification of historical science which Kaut-sky has perpetrated to please the Südekums and other oppor-tunists. 
 In the first place, never do governments stand in such need of agreement with all the parties of the rulingclasses, or of the “peaceful” submission of the oppressedclasses to that rule, as in the time of war. 
 Secondly, eventhough “at the beginning of a war”, and especially in a coun-try that expects a speedy victory, the government seems all-powerful, nobody in the world has ever linked expectations of a revolutionary situation exclusively with the “beginning”of a war, and still less has anybody ever identified the “seeming ” with the actual . 
 It was generally known, seen and admitted that a European war would be more severe than any war in the past. 
 This is being borne out in ever greater measure by the experience of the war. 
 The conflagration is spreading; the political foun-dations of Europe are being shaken more and more; the suffer-ings of the masses are appalling, the efforts of governments,the bourgeoisie and the opportunists to hush up these suffer-ings proving ever more futile. 
 The war profits being obtained by certain groups of capitalists are monstrously high, and contradictions are growing extremely acute. 
 The smoulderingindignation of the masses, the vague yearning of so-ciety’s downtrodden and ignorant strata for a kindly (“demo-cratic”) peace, the beginning of discontent among the“lower classes”—all these are facts. 
 The longer the war drags on and the more acute it becomes, the more the governments themselves foster—and must foster—the activity of themasses, whom they call upon to make extraordinary effort and self-sacrifice. 
 The experience of the war, like the experience of any crisis in history, of any great calamity and any sudden turn in human life, stuns and breaks some people, but enlight-ens and tempers others . 
 Taken by and large, and considering the history of the world as a whole, the number and strengthof the second kind of people have—with the exception ofindividual cases of the decline and fall of one state oranother—proved greater than those of the former kind. 
 Far from “immediately” ending all these sufferings and all this enhancement of contradictions, the conclusion ofpeace will, in many respects, make those sufferings morekeenly and immediately felt by the most backward massesof the population. 
 In a word, a revolutionary situation obtains in most of the advanced countries and the Great Powers of Europe. 
 In this respect, the prediction of the Basle Manifesto has beenfully confirmed. 
 To deny this truth, directly or indirectly, or to ignore it, as Cunow, Plekhanov, Kautsky and Co. 
 havedone, means telling a big lie, deceiving the working class,and serving the bourgeoisie. 
 In Sotsial-Demokrat (Nos. 
 34, 40 and 41) * we cited facts which prove that those who fear revolution—petty-bourgeois Christian parsons, the GeneralStaffs and millionaires’ newspapers—are compelled to admitthat symptoms of a revolutionary situation exist in Europe. 
 Will this situation last long; how much more acute will it become? Will it lead to revolution? This is something we do not know, and nobody can know. 
 The answer can be pro-vided only by the experience gained during the development of revolutionary sentiment and the transition to revolution-ary action by the advanced class, the proletariat. 
 Therecan be no talk in this connection about “illusions” or theirrepudiation, since no socialist has ever guaranteed that this war (and not the next one), that today’s revolutionary situa-tion (and not tomorrow’s) will produce a revolution. 
 What weare discussing is the indisputable and fundamental duty ofall socialists—that of revealing to the masses the existenceof a revolutionary situation, explaining its scope anddepth, arousing the proletariat’s revolutionary consciousness and revolutionary determination, helping it to go over *See pp. 
 92-93, 181-82 and 192-93 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 to revolutionary action, and forming, for that purpose, organisations suited to the revolutionary situation. 
 No influential or responsible socialist has ever dared to feel doubt that this is the duty of the socialist parties. 
Without spreading or harbouring the least “illusions”, theBasle Manifesto spoke specifically of this duty of the social-ists—to rouse and to stir up the people (and not to lull themwith chauvinism, as Plekhanov, Axelrod and Kautsky have done), to take advantage of the crisis so as to hasten the downfall of capitalism, and to be guided by the examples of the Commune and of October-December 1905. 
 The pres-ent parties’ failure to perform that duty meant theirtreachery, political death, renunciation of their own roleand desertion to the side of the bourgeoisie. 
 III But how could it have happened that the most prominent representatives and leaders of the Second International havebetrayed socialism? We shall deal with this question in detail later, after we have examined the attempts being made to give this treachery “theoretical” justification. 
 We shalltry to characterise the principal theories of social-chauvin-ism, of which Plekhanov (who in the main reiterates the argu-ments of the Anglo-French chauvinists, Hyndman and hisnew adherents) and Kautsky (who advances much more “subtle” arguments) with their semblance of far greater theoretical profundity may be regarded as representatives. 
 Perhaps the most primitive of these is the “who-started-it?” theory, which may be worded as follows: we have beenattacked and are defending ourselves; the interests of theproletariat demand that the violators of the peace in Europe should be properly dealt with. 
 This is merely a rehash of the declarations made by all governments and of the outcriesof the bourgeois and the gutter press all over the world. 
Plekhanov embellishes even this threadbare piece of vulgar-ity with his inevitable Jesuitical reference to “dialectics”:to be able to assess the concrete situation, he says, we must first of all find out who started it and punish him; all other problems will have to wait until another situation arises. 
(See Plekhanov’s pamphlet, The War , Paris, 1914, and Axel-rod’s repetition of its arguments, in ( Golos Nos. 
 86 and 87. 
) Plekhanov has set a new record in the noble sport of sub-stituting sophistry for dialectics. 
 The sophist grabs at one of many “arguments”; it was Hegel who long ago veryproperly observed that “arguments” can be found to prove any-thing in the world. 
 Dialectics calls for a many-sided investi-gation into a given social phenomenon in its development,and for the external and the seeming to be reduced to the fundamental motive forces, to the development of the produc-tive forces and to the class struggle. 
 Plekhanov has pluckedout a quotation from the German Social-Democratic press:the Germans themselves, before the war, admitted that Austriaand Germany had “started it”, he says, and there you are. 
He does not mention the fact that the Russian socialists repeatedly exposed the tsarist plans of conquest of Galicia, Armenia, etc. 
 He does not make the slightest attempt tostudy the economic and diplomatic history of at least the pastthree decades, which history proves conclusively that the con-quest of colonies, the looting of foreign countries, the ousting andruining of the more successful rivals have been the backbone of the politics of both groups of the now belligerent powers. 
 * *Very instructive is The War of Steel and Gold (London 1914, a book dated March 1914!) by the British pacifist Brailsford, whois not averse to posing as a socialist. 
 The author clearly realises thatnational problems are now in the background, and have been solved (p. 
 35), that this is not the issue of the day, that “the typical ques-tion of modern diplomacy” (p. 
 36) is the Baghdad railway, thecontracts for rails for it, the Moroccan mines, and the like. 
 The authorcorrectly considers as one of the “most instructive incidents in therecent history of European diplomacy” the fact that French patriotsand British imperialists fought against Caillaux’s attempts (in 1911 and 1913) to come to terms with Germany on the basis of an agree-ment on the division of spheres of colonial influence and the quota-tion of German securities on the Paris Bourse. 
 The British and the French bourgeoisie frustrated such an agreement (pp. 
 38-40). 
 The aim of imperialism is the export of capital to the weaker countries(p. 
 74). 
 In Britain, the profits from such capital totalled between £90,000,000 and £100,000,000 in 1899 (Giffen), and £140,000,000 in 1909 (Paish); we would add that, in a recent speech, Lloyd Georgecalculated it at £200,000,000, which is almost 2,000 million rubles. 
Unsavoury machinations and bribing of high-ranking Turks, andcushy jobs in India and Egypt for the younger sons of the Britisharistocracy, such are the main features (pp. 
 85-87). 
 An insignificant minority gains from armaments and wars, he says, but that minority With reference to wars, the main thesis of dialectics, which has been so shamelessly distorted by Plekhanov to please the bourgeoisie, is that “ war is simply the continuation of politics by other [i. 
e. 
, violent] means ”. 
 Such is the formula of Clausewitz, * one of the greatest writers on the history of war, whose thinking was stimulated by Hegel. 
 And it wasalways the standpoint of Marx and Engels, who regardedany war as the continuation of the politics of the powers con-cerned—and the various classes within these countries—in a definite period. 
 Plekhanov’s crude chauvinism is based on exactly the same theoretical stand as the more subtle and saccharo-con-ciliatory chauvinism of Kautsky, who uses the followingarguments when he gives his blessing to the desertion of the socialists of all countries to the side of their “own” capitalists: It is the right and duty of everyone to defend his fatherland; true internationalism consists in this right being recognised for the social-ists of all nations, including those who are at war with my nation .... 
 (See Die Neue Zeit , October 2, 1914, and other works by the same author. 
) of peace there is a disunited population (p. 
 93). 
 A pacifist who today talks about peace and disarmament tomorrow proves to be a memberof a party wholly dependent on the war contractors (p. 
 161). 
 If theTriple Entente wins, it will grab Morocco and partition Persia; ifthe Triple Alliance wins, it will take over Tripoli, strengthen itshold on Bosnia and subordinate Turkey (p. 
 167). 
 In March 1906, London and Paris provided Russia with thousands of millions, and helped tsarism crush the movement for freedom (pp. 
 225-28); todayBritain is helping Russia to throttle Persia (p. 
 229). 
 Russia insti-gated the Balkan War (p. 
 230). 
 There is nothing novel about this, is there? All this is common knowledge and has been reiterated a thousand times in Social-Democratic newspapers all over the world. 
 On the eve of the war, a British bourgeois sees all this as clearly as can be. 
 Against the back-ground of these simple and universally known facts, what drivellingnonsense, what smug hypocrisy, what glib lies are the theories advancedby Plekhanov and Potresov concerning Germany’s guilt, or Kaut-sky’s theory concerning the “prospects” of disarmament and a lasting peace under capitalism! *Karl von Clausewitz, Vom Kriege , Werke, I. 
 Bd. 
, S. 
 28. 
 Cf. 
 III. 
 Bd. 
, S. 
 139-40: “All know that wars are caused only by the politicalrelations of governments and of nations; but ordinarily one picturesthe situation as if, with the beginning of the war, these relationscease and a totally new situation is created, which follows its own laws. 
 We assert, on the contrary, that war is nothing but the continu-This matchless reasoning is such an unutterable travesty of socialism that the best answer to it would be to strike a medal with the portraits of Wilhelm II and Nicholas II on one side and of Plekhanov and Kautsky on the other. 
 Trueinternationalism, we are told, means that we must justifyGerman workers firing at French workers, and French work-ers firing at German workers, in the name of “defenceof the fatherland”! However, closer examination of the theoretical premises in Kautsky’s reasoning will reveal the selfsame idea thatClausewitz ridiculed about eighty years ago, viz. 
, that whenwar breaks out, all historically created political relationsbetween nations and classes cease and that a totally newsituation arises! There are “simply” those that attack and those that are defending themselves, “simply” the warding off of the “enemies of the fatherland”! The oppression of anumber of nations which comprise over half the populationof the globe, by the dominant imperialist nations; therivalry between the bourgeoisie of these countries for a shareof the loot; the desire of the capitalists to split and suppress the working-class movement—all these have suddenly disap-peared from the pen of Plekhanov and Kautsky, althoughthey themselves were describing these very “politics” fordecades before the war. 
 In this connection, false references to Marx and Engels are the crowning argument of these two chieftains of social-chauvinism; Plekhanov recalls Prussia’s national war of 1813 and Germany’s national war of 1870, while Kautskyargues, with a most learned air, that Marx examined the question of whose success (i. 
e. 
, the success of which bour-geoisie) was more desirable in the wars of 1854-55, 1859 and 1870-71, and that the Marxists did likewise in the wars of 1876-77 and 1897. 
 In all times the sophists have been in the habit of citing instances that refer to situations that are dis-similar in principle. 
 The wars of the past, to which they make references, were a “continuation of the politics” of the bourgeoisie’s national movements of many years’ standing, movements against an alien yoke and against absolutism (Turkish or Russian). 
 At that time the only question was: the success of which bourgeoisie was to be preferred; for wars of this type, the Marxists could rouse the peoples in advance , fostering national hatred, as Marx did in 1848 and later, when he called for a war against Russia, and as Engels in 1859 fostered German national hatred of their oppressors— Napoleon III and Russian tsarism. 
 * Comparing the “continuation of the politics” of combating feudalism and absolutism—the politics of the bourgeoisiein its struggle for liberty—with the “continuation of thepolitics” of a decrepit, i. 
e. 
, imperialist, bourgeoisie, i. 
e. 
, of a bourgeoisie which has plundered the entire world, a reactionary bourgeoisie which, in alliance with feudal land-lords, attempts to crush the proletariat, means comparingchalk and cheese. 
 It is like comparing the “representativesof the bourgeoisie”, Robespierre, Garibaldi and Zhelyabov,with such “representatives of the bourgeoisie” as Millerand, Salandra and Guchkov. 
 One cannot be a Marxist without feeling the deepest respect for the great bourgeois revolution-aries who had an historic right to speak for their respectivebourgeois “fatherlands”, and, in the struggle against feudal-ism, led tens of millions of people in the new nations towardsa civilised life. 
 Neither can one be a Marxist without feeling contempt for the sophistry of Plekhanov and Kautsky, who speak of the “defence of the fatherland” with regard to thethrottling of Belgium by the German imperialists, or withregard to the pact between the imperialists of Britain,France, Russia and Italy on the plundering of Austria andTurkey. 
 There is another “Marxist” theory of social-chauvinism, which runs as follows: socialism is based on the rapid devel-opment of capitalism; the development of capitalism in my *Mr. 
 Gardenin in Zhizn120 labels as “revolutionary chauvin-ism”—but chauvinism—Marx’s stand in 1848 for revolutionary war against the European nations which in fact had shown themselvesto be counter-revolutionary, viz. 
, “the Slavs and the Russians inparticular”. 
 This reproof of Marx reveals once again the opportunism(or—properly speaking and —the inconsequence) of this “Left” So-cialist-Revolutionary. 
 We Marxists have always stood, and still stand, for a revolutionary war against counter-revolutionary nations. 
 For instance, if socialism is victorious in America or in Europe in 1920, and Japan and China, let us say, then move their Bismarcks against us—if only diplomatically at first—we certainly would bein favour of an offensive revolutionary war against them. 
 It seems strange to you, Mr. 
 Gardenin? But then you are a revolutionary of the Ropshin type! country, and consequently the advent of socialism there will be speeded up by her victory; my country’s defeat will re-tard her economic development and consequently the advent of socialism. 
 In Russia this Struvist theory has been devel-oped by Plekhanov, and among the Germans by Lensch andothers. 
 Kautsky argues against this crude theory—againstLensch, who defends it overtly, and against Gunow, who de-fends it covertly; his sole purpose, however, is to reconcile the social-chauvinists of all countries on the basis of a more subtle and more Jesuitical chauvinist theory. 
 We need not dwell on this crude theory. 
 Struve’s Critical Notes appeared in 1894, and during the past twenty years Russian Social-Democrats have become thoroughly familiarwith this habit of the enlightened Russian bourgeois of ad-vancing their ideas and advocating their desires under the cloak of a “Marxism” purged of revolutionary content. 
 Struvism is not merely a Russian, but, as recent events clearly prove,an international striving on the part of the bourgeois theore-ticians to kill Marxism with “kindness”, to crush it in theirembraces, kill it with a feigned acceptance of “all” the “truly scientific” aspects and elements of Marxism except its “agita-tional”, “demagogic”, “Blanquist-utopian” aspect. 
 In otherwords, they take from Marxism all that is acceptable to theliberal bourgeoisie, including the struggle for reforms, the class struggle (without the proletarian dictatorship), the“general” recognition of “socialist ideals” and the substitu-tion of a “new order” for capitalism; they cast aside “only” the living soul of Marxism, “only” its revolutionary content. 
 Marxism is the theory of the proletarian movement for emancipation. 
 It is clear, therefore, that the class-conscious workers must pay the utmost attention to any substitution of Struvism for Marxism. 
 The motive forces in this process are varied and manifold. 
 We shall indicate only the three main forces: (1) the development of science is providing more and more material that proves that Marx was right. 
 This makes it necessary to fight against him hypocritically— not to oppose the principles of Marxism openly, but to pre-tend to accept Marxism, while emasculating it by sophistry and turning it into a holy “icon” that is harmless to the bourgeoisie. 
 (2) The development of opportunism among the Social-Democratic parties fosters such a re-fashioning of Marxism, and adjusts it for a justification of all kinds of concessions to opportunism. 
 (3) The epoch of imperialism is one in which the world is divided among the “great” privileged nations that oppress all other nations. 
 Morsels ofthe loot obtained as a result of these privileges and this oppres-sion undoubtedly fall to the share of certain sections of thepetty bourgeoisie and to the working-class aristocracy andbureaucracy. 
 These strata, which form an insignificant mi-nority of the proletariat and of the toiling masses, gravitate towards “Struvism”, because it provides them with a justi-fication of their alliance with their “own” national bourgeoi-sie, against the oppressed masses of all nations. 
 We shall have occasion to deal with this later, in connection withthe causes of the collapse of the International. 
 IV The most subtle theory of social-chauvinism; one that has been most skilfully touched up to look scientific and international, is the theory of “ultra-imperialism” advanced by Kautsky. 
 Here is the clearest, most precise and mostrecent exposition of this theory in the words of the authorhimself: “The subsiding of the Protectionist movement in Britain, the lower-ing of tariffs in America; the trend towards disarmament; the rapiddecline in the export of capital from France and Germany in the yearsimmediately preceding the war; finally, the growing internationalinterweaving between the various cliques of finance capital—all this has caused me to consider whether the present imperialist policy cannot be supplanted by a new, ultra-imperialist policy, which willintroduce the joint exploitation of the world by internationally unitedfinance capital in place of the mutual rivalries of national finance capi-tal. 
 Such a new phase of capitalism is at any rate conceivable. 
 Can itbe achieved? Sufficient premises are still lacking to enable us to answer this question...” ( Die Neue Zeit No. 
 5, April 30, 1915, p. 
 144). 
 “The course and the outcome of the present war may prove decisive in this respect. 
 It may entirely crush the weak beginnings of ultra-impe-rialism by fanning to the highest degree national hatred also amongthe finance capitalists, by intensifying the armaments race, and bymaking a second world war inevitable. 
 Under such conditions, the thing I foresaw and formulated in my pamphlet, The Road to Power , would come true in horrifying dimensions; class antagonisms wouldbecome sharper and sharper and with it would come the moral decay [literally: “going out of business, Abwirtschaftung ”, bankruptcy] of capitalism.... 
 [It must be noted that by this pretentious word Kautsky means simply the “hatred” which the “strata intermediary between theproletariat and finance capital”, namely, “the intelligentsia, the petty bourgeois, even small capitalists”, feel towards capitalism. 
] But the war may end otherwise. 
 It may lead to the strengthening of the weakbeginnings of ultra-imperialism .... 
 Its lessons [note this!] may hasten developments for which we would have to wait a long time underpeace conditions. 
 If it does lead to this, to an agreement between na-tions, disarmament and a lasting peace, then the worst of the causes that led to the growing moral decay of capitalism before the war may disappear. 
” The new phase will, of course, bring the proletariat “newmisfortunes”, “perhaps even worse”, but “for a time ”, “ultra-imperi-alism” “could create an era of new hopes and expectations within theframework of capitalism” (p. 
 145). 
 How is a justification of social-chauvinism deduced from this “theory ”? In a way rather strange for a “theoretician”, namely as follows: The Left-wing Social-Democrats in Germany say that imperialism and the wars it engenders are not accidental,but an inevitable product of capitalism, which has brought about the domination of finance capital. 
 It is therefore necessary to go over to the revolutionary mass struggle,as the period of comparatively peaceful development hasended. 
 The “Right”-wing Social-Democrats brazenly declare:since imperialism is “necessary”, we too must be imperialists. 
Kautsky, in the role of the “Centre”, tries to reconcile these two views. 
 “The extreme Lefts,” he writes in his pamphlet, The National State, the Imperialist State and the League of States (Nuremberg, 1915), wish to “contrapose” socialism to inevitable imperialism, i. 
e. 
, “not onlythe propaganda for socialism that we have been carrying on for half a century in contraposition to all forms of capitalist domination, but the immediate achievement of socialism. 
 This seems very radical, butit can only serve to drive into the camp of imperialism anyone who does not believe in the immediate practical achievement of socialism” (p. 
 17, italics ours). 
 When he speaks of the immediate achievement of socialism, Kautsky is resorting to a subterfuge, for he takes ad-vantage of the fact that in Germany, especially under themilitary censorship, revolutionary action cannot be spokenof. 
 Kautsky is well aware that the Left wing is demandingof the Party immediate propaganda in favour of and prepara-tion for, revolutionary action, not the “immediate practical achievement of socialism”. 
 From the necessity of imperialism the Left wing deduces the necessity of revolutionary action. 
 The “theory of ultra-imperialism”, however, serves Kautsky as a means to justify the opportunists , to present the situation in such a light as to create the impression that they have not gone over tothe bourgeoisie but simply “do not believe” that socialism can arrive immediately, and expect that a new “era” of disar-mament and lasting peace “may be” ushered in. 
 This “theory”boils down, and can only boil down, to the following: Kaut-sky is exploiting the hope for a new peaceful era of capi-talisms as to justify the adhesion of the opportunists andthe official Social-Democratic parties to the bourgeoisie, and their rejection of revolutionary, i. 
e. 
, proletarian, tactics in the present stormy era , this despite the solemn declarations of the Basle resolution! At the same time Kautsky does not say that this new phase follows, and necessarily so, from certain definitecircumstances and conditions. 
 On the contrary, he states quite outspokenly that he cannot yet even decide whether or not this new phase is “ achievable ”. 
 Indeed, consider the “trends” towards the new era, which have been indicated byKautsky. 
 Astonishingly enough, the author has includedamong the economic facts “the trend towards disarmament”!This means that, behind innocent philistine talk and pipe-dreaming, Kautsky is trying to hide from indisputable facts that do not at all fit in with the theory of the mitigation ofcontradictions. 
 Kautsky’s “ultra-imperialism”—this term, incidentally does not at all express what the author wants to say—implies a tremendous mitigation of the contradictions of capitalism. 
 We are told that Protectionism is subsiding in Britain and America. 
 But where is there the least trend towards a new era? Extreme Protectionism is now subsidingin America, but Protectionism remains, just as the privileges, the preferential tariffs favouring Britain, have remained in that country’s colonies. 
 Let us recall what the passagefrom the previous and “peaceful” period of capitalism to the present and imperialist period has been based on: free competition has yielded to monopolist capitalist combines,and the world has been partitioned. 
 Both these facts (and factors) are obviously of world-wide significance: Free Trade and peaceful competition were possible and necessary as long as capital was in a position to enlarge its colonies without hindrance, and seize unoccupied land in Africa, etc. 
, and aslong as the concentration of capital was still weak and nomonopolist concerns existed, i. 
e. 
, concerns of a magnitudepermitting domination in an entire branch of industry. 
 The appearance and growth of such monopolist concerns (has this process been stopped in Britain or America? Not even Kautsky will dare deny that the war has accelerated andintensified it) have rendered the free competition of formertimes impossible ; they have cut the ground from under its feet, while the partition of the world compels the capitalists to go over from peaceful expansion to an armed struggle for the repartitioning of colonies and spheres of influence. 
 It is ridiculous to think that the subsiding of Protectionism in two countries can change anything in this respect. 
 Let us further examine the fall in capital exports from two countries in the course of a few years. 
 In 1912 thesetwo countries, France and Germany, each had about 35,000 million marks (about 17,000 million rubles) of foreign invest-ments, this according to Harms’s statistics, while Britainalone had twice that sum. 
 * The increase in exports of capital has never proceeded evenly under capitalism, norcould that have been so. 
 Kautsky dares not even suggestthat the accumulation of capital has decreased, or that the capacity of the home market has undergone any important change, say through a big improvement in the conditions ofthe masses. 
 In these circumstances, the fall in capitalexports from two countries over several years cannot implythe advent of a new era. 
 “The growing international interweaving between the cliques of finance capital” is the only really general and indu-bitable tendency, not during the last few years and in twocountries, but throughout the whole capitalist world. 
 But *See Bernhard Harms, Probleme der Weltwirtschaft , Jena, 1912; George Paish, “Great Britain’s Capital Investments in the Colo-nies, etc. 
” in the Journal of the Royal Statistical Society , Vol. 
 LXXIV, 1910/11, p. 
 167. 
 Lloyd George, in a speech early in 1915, estimated British capital invested abroad at £4,000,000,000, i. 
e. 
, about 80,000,000,000 marks. 
 why should this trend engender a striving towards disar-mament, not armaments, as hitherto? Take any one of the world-famous cannon (and arms) manufacturers, Armstrong, for instance. 
 The British Economist (May 1, 1915) published figures showing that this firm’s profits rose from £606,000 (about 6,000,000 rubles) in 1905/6to £856,000 in 1913, and to £940,000 ( 9,000,000 rubles ) in 1914. 
 Here, the intertwining of finance capital is most pro-nounced, and is on the increase, German capitalists have “holdings” in British firms; British firms build submarinesfor Austria, and so on. 
 Interlinked on a world-wide scale,capital is thriving on armaments and wars. 
 To think that thefact of capital in the individual states combining and inter-linking on an international scale must of necessity produce an economic trend towards disarmament means, in effect, allowing well-meaning philistine expectations of an easingof class contradictions take the place of the actual intensifica-tion of those contradictions. 
 V It is in a wholly philistine spirit that Kautsky speaks of the “lessons” of the war, presenting those lessons in thelight of a moral abhorrence at the misery it causes. 
 Here,for instance, is how he argues in the pamphlet entitledThe National State, etc. 
: “It stands beyond doubt and needs no proof that there are strata of the population that are greatly interested in universal peace and disarmament. 
 The petty bourgeoisie and the small peasants, and evenmany capitalists and intellectuals, are not tied to imperialism by anyinterests that outweigh the damage suffered by these strata as a resultof war and armaments” (p. 
 21). 
 This was written in February 1915! The facts show that all the propertied classes, down to the petty bourgeoisieand the “intelligentsia”, have joined the imperialists en masse , and yet Kautsky, like Chekhov’s man in a muffler 121 shrugs off the facts with an air of extraordinary smugness and with the aid of saccharine phrases. 
 He judges of theinterests of the petty bourgeoisie, not by their conduct , but by the words of certain petty bourgeois, although at every step such words are refuted by the deeds. 
 It is exactly like judg-ing of the “interests” of the bourgeoisie in general, not by their deeds, but by the benevolent speeches made by bourgeois clergymen who avow that the present-day system is imbuedwith the ideals of Christianity. 
 Kautsky applies Marxism ina way that voids it of all content, so that what remains isthe catchword of “interests”, in a kind of supernatural, other-worldly meaning, for it implies, not real economics, but pious wishes for the common weal. 
 Marxism appraises “interests” according to the class antagonisms and the class struggle which find expression inmillions of facts of daily life. 
 The petty bourgeoisie prattle anddream of the abatement of antagonisms, whose aggravation,they “argue”, leads to “harmful consequences”. 
 Imperialism means the subjugation of all strata of the propertied classes to finance capital, and the partition of the world among fiveor six “Great ” Powers, most of which are now involved in the war. 
 The partition of the world among the Great Powersmeans that all their propertied classes are interested in pos-sessing colonies and spheres of influence, in oppressing other nations, and in securing the more or less lucrative posts and privileges that stem from belonging to a “Great” Powerand an oppressor nation. 
 * Life cannot go on in the old way, in the comparatively tranquil, cultured and peaceful conditions of a capitalismthat is smoothly developing and gradually spreading to new countries. 
 A new epoch has arrived. 
 Finance capital ousts , and will completely oust, a particular country from the *E. 
 Schultze states that by 1915 the value of securities in the whole world was calculated at 732,000 million francs, including state and municipal loans, the mortgages and shares of commercial and manufacturing corporations, etc. 
 Of this sum, Britain’s share was130,000 million francs, that of the United States 115,000 million,France 100,000 million and Germany 75,000 million, i. 
e. 
, the shareof all four Great Powers being 420,000 million francs, over half thetotal. 
 From this one can realise the advantages and privileges accru-ing to the leading Great Powers, which have outstripped other nations oppressing and plundering the latter. 
 (Dr. 
 Ernst Schultze, Das fran-zösische Kapital in Russland i n Finanz-Archiv , Berlin, 1915, 32nd year of publication, p. 
 127. 
) To a Great Power “defence of thefatherland” means defence of the right to share in the plunderingof foreign countries. 
 In Russia, as is common knowledge, capitalist imperialism is weaker than military-feudal imperialism is. 
 ranks of Great Powers, will deprive it of its colonies and spheres of influence (as Germany, which has gone to war with Britain, threatens to do), and it will deprive the petty bour-geoisie of their dominant-nation privileges and additionalincomes. 
 This has been proved by the war. 
 It is the outcome of that aggravation of antagonisms which has long beenadmitted by all, including Kautsky, in his pamphlet The Road to Power . 
 Now that the armed conflict for Great-Power privi-leges has become a fact, Kautsky wants to persuade the capi-talists and the petty bourgeoisie to believe that war ishorrible, while disarmament is beneficial, in exactly thesame way and with exactly the same results as the Christianchurchman, speaking from the pulpit, would persuade the capitalist to believe that love of one’s fellow-men is a Divine commandment, as well as the spiritual yearning and the morallaw of civilisation. 
 What Kautsky calls an economic trendtowards “ultra-imperialism” is just a petty-bourgeois exhor-tation to the financiers that they should refrain from doing evil. 
 The export of capital? But more capital is exported to independent countries such as the United States ofAmerica, than to the colonies. 
 The seizure of colonies?But they have all been seized, and nearly all of them are striving for liberation. 
 “India may cease to be a British pos-session, but as an integral empire it will never fall under the sway of another foreign power” (p. 
 49 in the pamphlet quoted). 
 “Any attempt on the part of any industrial capital-ist state to acquire for itself a colonial empire sufficient to make it independent of other countries in regard to raw materials must cause all other capitalist states to unite against it and involve it in endless and exhausting wars, without bringing it nearer to its goal. 
 Such a policy would be the surest road towards the bankruptcy of the entire economic life of that state” (pp. 
 72-73). 
 Is not this a philistine attempt to persuade financiers to renounce imperialism? Any attempt to frighten capitalists with the prospect of bankruptcy is like advising against speculating in shares on the Stock Exchange because many fortunes have been lost in this way. 
 Capital gains from the bankruptcy of a rival capitalist or of a rival nation, because in this way capital becomes more concentrat-ed. 
 Hence the keener and “closer” economic competition becomes, i. 
e. 
, the economic driving of a competitor towards bankruptcy, the more the capitalists strive to add military pressure in order to drive the competitor in that direction. 
The fewer the countries to which capital can still beexported as advantageously as to colonies or to such dependentstates as Turkey—since in such cases the financier reaps a triple profit as against capital exports to a free, independent and civilised country like the United States of America—thefiercer is the struggle for the subjugation and partition of Turkey, China, etc. 
 That is what economic theory revealsabout the period of finance capital and imperialism. 
 That iswhat the facts reveal. 
 But Kautsky turns everything into a trite petty-bourgeois “moral”: it is not worth while getting worked up and certainly not worth while going to war overthe partition of Turkey, or the seizure of India, since theycannot be held for long anyway, and, moreover, it would bebetter to develop capitalism peacefully .... 
 It w ould be better still, of course, to develop capitalism and expand the home market by increasing wages; this is quite “conceivable” and it is a very fitting topic for a churchman to preach on to thefinanciers .... 
 The good Kautsky has almost succeeded in persuading the German financiers that it is not worth whilewaging war against Britain for the colonies, because thesecolonies will soon secure their liberation in any case! Britain’s exports to and imports from Egypt between 1872 and 1912 have not kept pace with the overall growth ofBritish exports and imports, whence the “Marxist” Kautskydraws the following moral: “We have no reason to supposethat British trade with Egypt would have been less devel-oped as a result of the mere operation of economic factors, without military occupation” (p. 
 72). 
 “Capital’s urge to expand ... can be best promoted, not by the violent methods of imperialism, but by peaceful democracy ” (p. 
 70). 
 What a remarkably serious, scientific and “Marxist” analysis! Kautsky has splendidly “rectified” unreasonablehistory; he has “proved” that there was no need for the British to have taken Egypt from the French, that it was absolutely not worth the German financiers’ while to have started thewar, organised the Turkish campaign, and taken other meas-ures to drive the British out of Egypt! All this is merely a misunderstanding—it has not yet dawned upon the British that it would be “best” to give up forcible methods in Egypt, and adopt “peaceful democracy” (so as to increase exportsof capital à la Kautsky !). 
 “Of course it was an illusion on the part of the bourgeois Free-Traders to think that Free Trade would entirely eliminate the eco-nomic antagonisms generated by capitalism. 
 Neither Free Trade nordemocracy can eliminate these. 
 We, in all respects are interested inhaving these antagonisms eliminated by a struggle waged in suchforms as will impose the least amount of suffering and sacrifice on themasses” (p. 
 73) The Lord help us, the Lord have mercy on us! “What is a philistine?” Lassalle used to ask, and answered by quoting the words of the well-known poet: “A philistine is a gut void of everything but fear and hope that God will have mercyon him. 
” 122 Kautsky has degraded Marxism to unparalleled prostitu-tion and has turned into a real churchman. 
 The latter triesto persuade the capitalists to adopt peaceful democracy—and calls this dialectics: if at first, he argues, there was Free Trade, and then arrived the monopolies and imperial-ism, why should there not he “ultra-imperialism”, and thenFree Trade again? The churchman consoles the oppressed masses by depicting the blessings this “ultra-imperialism”will bring, although he has not even the courage to say whether it can be “achieved”! Feuerbach was right when, in reply to those who defended religion on the ground that itconsoles the people, he indicated the reactionary signifi-cance of consolation: whoever consoles the slave instead ofarousing him to rise up against slavery is aiding the slave-owner. 
 All oppressing classes stand in need of two social functions to safeguard their rule: the function of the hangman and thefunction of the priest. 
 The hangman is required to quell theprotests and the indignation of the oppressed; the priest isrequired to console the oppressed, to depict to them the pros-pects of their sufferings and sacrifices being mitigated (this is particularly easy to do without guaranteeing that these prospects will be “achieved”), while preserving class rule,and thereby to reconcile them to class rule, win them away from revolutionary action, undermine their revolutionary spirit and destroy their revolutionary determination. 
 Kautsky has turned Marxism into a most hideous and stupid counter-revolutionary theory, into the lowest kind ofclericalism. 
 In 1909, he acknowledged, in his The Road to Power , the fact of the unrefuted and irrefutable intensification ofantagonisms within capitalism, the approach of a period of wars and revolutions, of a new “revolutionary period”. 
 There can be no “premature” revolution, he said, and brandedas “a direct betrayal of our cause” any refusal to count onthe possibility of victory in an uprising, even though,before the fighting began, the prospect of defeat could not bedenied. 
 With the advent of war, the antagonisms have become still more bitter. 
 The sufferings of the masses have assumed tremendous proportions. 
 The end of the war is not in sightand the hostilities are spreading more and more. 
 Kautskyis writing pamphlet after pamphlet and, meekly submittingto the dictates of the censorship, refrains from quoting the facts on the land-grabbing, the horrors of war, the scandalous profiteering of the war contractors, the high cost of livingand the actual slavery of the workers mobilised in the muni-tions industries; instead, he keeps on consoling the prole-tariat. 
 He does so by quoting the instance of wars in whichthe bourgeoisie was revolutionary and progressive, in regard to which “Marx himself” desired victory for one bourgeoisie or the other; he consoles it by quoting rows and columns offigures to prove that capitalism is “possible” without colo-nies, without the plundering of others, without wars andarmaments, and to prove that “peaceful democracy” ispreferable. 
 Not daring to deny that the sufferings of the masses are becoming more acute and that a revolutionary situation is arising before our very eyes (one must not talk about this,since it is not permitted by the censor!), Kautsky, in hisservility to the bourgeoisie and the opportunists, depictsthe “prospect” (he does not guarantee that it can be “achieved”) of forms of struggle in a new phase, which will entail “less sacrifice and suffering” .... 
 Franz Mehring and Rosa Luxemburg were quite right when, for this very reason,they called Kautsky a street-walker ( Mädchen für alle ). 
 * * * In August 1905 a revolutionary situation existed in Russia. 
 The tsar had promised convocation of the BulyginDuma 123 in order to “console” the masses who were in a state of unrest. 
 If the abandoning of armaments by the financiersand their agreeing to a “lasting peace” can be called “ultra-imperialism”, then the Bulygin regime of consultative par-liamentary representation may be described as “ultra-autoc-racy”. 
 Let us assume for a moment that tomorrow a hundredof the world’s biggest financiers, “interwoven” as they arein hundreds of colossal enterprises, will promise the peoples that they will stand for disarmament after the war (we makethis assumption only for a moment in order to draw political conclusions from Kautsky’s foolish little theory). 
 Even if that happened, it would be downright treachery to theproletariat to dissuade it from taking revolutionary action,without which all promises and all fine prospects are onlya mirage. 
 The war has not only brought the capitalist class huge profits and splendid prospects of fresh plunder (Turkey, China, etc. 
), new contracts worth thousands of millions andnew loans at increased rates of interest; it has also broughtthe capitalist class still greater political advantages in that ithas split and corrupted the proletariat. 
 Kautsky is encouragingthis corruption; he sanctifies this international split among the militant proletarians in the name of unity with the opportunists of their “own” nations, with the Südekums! Andyet there are people who fail to understand that the unityslogan of the old parties means the “unity” of the proletariatof a given nation with the bourgeoisie of that nation, and asplit among the proletariat of the various nations.... 
 VI The preceding lines had already been written when Die Neue Zeit of May 28 (No. 
 9) appeared with Kautsky’s con-cluding arguments on the collapse of Social-Democracy” (Section 7 of his reply to Cunow). 
 Kautsky sums up all his old sophisms, and a new one, in defence of social-chauvinism as follows: “It is simply untrue to say that the war is a purely imperialist one, that at the outbreak of the war the alternative was either imperialism or socialism, that the socialist parties and the proletarian masses of Germany, France and, in many respects, also of Britain, unthinkinglyand at the mere call of a handful of parliamentarians, threw themselves into the arms of imperialism, betrayed socialism and thus caused a collapse unexampled in history. 
” A new sophism and a new deception of the workers: the war, if you please, is not a “purely” imperialist one! Kautsky vacillates amazingly on the question of the character and significance of the present war; this partyleader evades the precise and formal declarations of the Basleand Chemnitz congresses, as studiedly as a thief keeps awayfrom the place where he has just committed a theft. 
 In hispamphlet, The National State, etc. 
, written in February 1915, Kautsky asserted that “still, in the final analysis”, the war is an “imperialist one” (p. 
 64). 
 Now a fresh reservationis introduced: it is not a purely imperialist war. 
 What else can it he? It appears that it is also a national war! Kautsky arrives at this monstrous conclusion by means of the following “Plekhanovist” pseudo-dialectic: “The present war is not only the child of imperialism, but also of the Russian revolution. 
” As early as 1904, he, Kautsky, foresaw that the Russian revolution would revive Pan-Slavism in a new form, that“democratic Russia would, inevitably, greatly fan the desire of the Austrian and Turkish Slavs for national independence .... 
 Then the Polish question would also become acute .... 
 A ustria would fall apart because, with the collapse of tsarism, the iron band which at present binds the centrifugal elements together would be destroyed” (Kautsky himself quotes this last phrase from his 1904 article). 
 “The Russianrevolution ... gave a new and powerful impetus to the national aspirations of the East, adding Asia’s problems to those of Europe. 
 All these prob-lems are making themselves very strongly felt in the present war and are acquiring very decisive significance for the mood of the masses of the people , including the proletarian masses, whereas among the ruling classes imperialist tendencies are predominant” (p. 
 273, italics ours). 
 This is another sample of the prostitution of Marxism! Inasmuch as a “democratic Russia” would foster a striving towards freedom in the nations of Eastern Europe (this is indisputable), the present war, which will not liberate a single nation, but, whatever the outcome, will enslave manynations, is not a “purely” imperialist war. 
 Inasmuch as the “collapse of tsarism” would mean the disintegration of Austria, owing to its undemocratic national structure, a tempo-rarily strengthened, and counter-revolutionary tsarism, which is plundering Austria and is bringing still greater oppression to the nations inhabiting Austria, has given “the present war”, not a purely imperialist character but, to a certain degree, a national character. 
 Inasmuch as “the ruling classes” are deluding the stupid petty bourgeois and browbeaten peas-ants with fables about the national aims of the imperialist war, a man of science, an authority on “Marxism”, and repre-sentative of the Second International, is entitled to reconcilethe masses to this deception by means of a “formula” whichclaims that the ruling classes reveal imperialist tendencies,while the “people” and the proletarian masses reveal “na-tional” aspirations. 
 Dialectic is turned into the meanest and basest sophistry! In the present war the national element is represented only by Serbia’s war against Austria (which, by the way, was noted in the resolution of our Party’s Berne Confer-ence). 
 * It is only in Serbia and among the Serbs that we can find a national-liberation movement of long standing, embracing millions, “the masses of the people”, a movement of which the present war of Serbia against Austria is a “continua-tion”. 
 If this war were an isolated one, i. 
e. 
, if it were not connected with the general European war, with the selfish and predatory aims of Britain, Russia, etc. 
, it would have been the duty of all socialists to desire the success of the Serbian bourgeoisie —this is the only correct and absolutely inevitable conclusion to be drawn from the national element in the present war. 
 However it is this conclusion that the sophist Kautsky, who is now in the service of the Austrian bourgeoisie, clericals and militarists, has failed to draw. 
 Further, Marxist dialectics, as the last word in the scien-tific-evolutionary method, excludes any isolated examina-tion of an object, i. 
e. 
, one that is one-sided and monstrouslydistorted. 
 The national element in the Serbo-Austrian war is not, and cannot be, of any serious significance in the general European war. 
 If Germany wins, she will throttle Belgium, one more part of Poland, perhaps part of France, etc. 
If Russia wins, she will throttle Galicia, one more part of *See p. 
 159 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 Poland, Armenia, etc. 
 If the war ends in a “draw”, the old national oppression will remain. 
 To Serbia, i. 
e. 
, to perhaps one per cent or so of the participants in the present war, the war is a “continuation of the politics” of the bourgeois-liberation movement. 
 To the other ninety-nine per cent, thewar is a continuation of the politics of imperialism, i. 
e. 
, ofthe decrepit bourgeoisie, which is capable only of rapingnations, not freeing them. 
 The Triple Entente, which is “liberating” Serbia, is selling the interests of Serbian liberty to Italian imperialism in return for the latter’s aid inrobbing Austria. 
 All this, which is common knowledge, has been unblush-ingly distorted by Kautsky to justify the opportunists. 
There are no “pure” phenomena, nor can there be, either in Nature or in society—that is what Marxist dialectics teaches us, for dialectics shows that the very concept of purity indicates a certain narrowness, a one-sidedness of human cognition, which cannot embrace an object in all its totality and complexity. 
 There is no “pure” capitalism in the world, nor can there be; what we always find is admixtures either of feudalism, philistinism, or of something else. 
 Therefore, if anyone recalls that the war is not “purely” imperialist, when we are discussing the flagrant deception of “the masses of the people” by the imperialists, who are deliberately con-cealing the aims of undisguised robbery with “national” phraseology, then such a person is either an infinitely stupid pedant, or a pettifogger and deceiver. 
 The whole point is that Kautsky is supporting the deception of the people by the imperialists when he asserts that to “the masses of the people, including the proletarian masses”, the problems of national liberation were “of decisive significance” whereas to the ruling classes the decisive factors were “imperialisttendencies” (p. 
 273), and when he “reinforces” this with analleged dialectical reference to the “infinite variety of reality” (p. 
 274). 
 Certainly, reality is infinitely varied. 
 That is absolutely true! But it is equally indubitable that amidstthis infinite variety there are two main and fundamentalstrains: the objective content of the war is a “continuationof the politics” of imperialism, i. 
e. 
, the plunder of othernations by the decrepit bourgeoisie of the “Great Powers” (and their governments), whereas the prevailing “subjective” ideology consists of “national” phraseology which is being spread to fool the masses. 
 Kautsky’s old sophism, repeated time and again, claiming that “at the outbreak of war” the “Lefts” regarded the situa-tion as presenting an alternative between imperialism orsocialism, has already been analysed. 
 This is a shamelesssubterfuge, for Kautsky knows very well that the Leftsadvanced a different alternative, viz. 
, either that the party join in the imperialist plunder and deception, or else prop-agate and prepare for revolutionary action. 
 Kautsky knowsalso that it is the censorship alone that prevents the Lefts in Germany from exposing the stupid fable that his servilityto the Südekums makes him spread. 
 As for the relation between the “proletarian masses” and a “handful of parliamentarians”, Kautsky advances a most threadbare objection: “Let us disregard the Germans, so as not to plead in our own behalf; who would seriously assert that men like Vaillant, Guesde, Hynd-man and Plekhanov became imperialists overnight and betrayed social-ism? Let us disregard the parliamentarians and the ‘leading bodies’ ...[Kautsky is obviously hinting at Die Internationale , the journal issued by Rosa Luxemburg and Franz Mehring, in which the policy ofthe leading bodies, i. 
e. 
, the official bodies of the German Social-Demo-cratic Party, its Executive, the “ Vorstand ”, its parliamentary group, etc. 
, is treated with deserved contempt] ... who would dare assert that an order given by a handful of parliamentarians is sufficient tomake four million class-conscious German proletarians turn right-about-face within twenty-four hours, in direct opposition to their formeraims? If this were true, it would, of course, be evidence of a terriblecollapse, not only of our Party, but also of the masses . 
 [Kautsky’s italics. 
] If the masses were such a spineless flock of sheep, we might just as well allow ourselves to be buried” (p. 
 274). 
 Politically and scientifically, Karl Kautsky, the great authority, gave himself a burial long ago through his conduct and his collection of pitiful evasions. 
 Those who fail to understand or at least to feel this, are hopeless as far associalism is concerned; it is for this very reason that thetone adopted, in Die Internationale , by Mehring, Rosa Luxemburg and their adherents, in treating Kautsky and Co. 
as most despicable creatures, was the only correct one in the circumstances. 
 Consider: the only people in a position to express their attitude to the war more or less freely (i. 
e. 
, without being immediately seized and dragged to the barracks, or the immediate risk of being shot) were a “handful of parliamen-tarians” (who were free to vote, with the right to do so; they were quite able to vote in opposition. 
 Even in Russia, noone was beaten up or even arrested for this), a handful ofofficials, journalists, etc. 
 And now, Kautsky nobly placeson the masses the blame for the treachery and the spineless-ness of that social stratum of whose links with the tactics and ideology of opportunism Kautsky himself has written scores of times over a number of years! The first and mostfundamental demand of scientific research in general and ofMarxist dialectic in particular is that a writer should exam-ine the link between the present struggle of trends in the socialist movement—between the trend that is doing the talking, vociferating, and raising a hullabaloo about treach-ery, and the trend which sees no treachery—and the strugglethat preceded it for whole decades . 
 Kautsky, however, does not say a word about this; he does not even wish to raisethe question of trends and tendencies . 
 Till now there have been tendencies, but now there are none! Today, there are only the resonant names of “authorities”, which the servile spirits always invoke as their trump card. 
 In this connec-tion it is most convenient for one to refer to the other andto cover up one’s “peccadilloes” in a friendly fashion, accord-ing to the rule: you roll my log and I’ll roll yours. 
 “Howcan this be called opportunism,” Martov exclaimed at a lec-ture in Berne (see No. 
 36 of Sotsial-Demokrat ), “when Guesde, Plekhanov and Kautsky...”! “We must be more carefulin accusing men like Guesde of opportunism,” Axelrod wrote(Golos Nos. 
 86 and 87). 
 “I will not defend myself,” Kautsky echoed in Berlin, “but Vaillant, Guesde, Hyndman andPlekhanov...”! What a mutual admiration society! In his writings, Kautsky has revealed such servile zeal as to fawn upon even Hyndman and to make it appear thatit was only yesterday that the latter deserted to the side ofimperialism. 
 And yet the selfsame Neue Zeit and scores of Social-Democratic papers all over the world have beenwriting about Hyndman’s imperialism for many years . 
 Had Kautsky gone to the trouble of thoroughly studying the political biographies of the persons he mentions, he would have recalled whether or not those biographies contained traits and events which paved the way for their desertion to impe-rialism, not “overnight”, but over decades; whether Vail-lant had been held captive by the Jaurèsists, and Plekhanov by the Mensheviks and liquidators; whether the Guesdisttrend had been publicly giving up the ghost in that typical-ly lifeless and insipid Guesdist magazine, Le Socialisme ,124 which was incapable of taking an independent stand on any important issue; whether Kautsky himself (we add this for the benefit of those who very properly put him alongside Hyndman and Plekhanov) had been supine in the questionof Millerandism, in the early stage of the struggle againstBernsteinism, etc. 
 But Kautsky does not display the slightest shadow of interest in any scientific examination of these leaders’ biographies. 
 He does not even attempt to see whether these leaders are defending themselves with their own arguments or by repeating the arguments of the opportunists and thebourgeoisie; whether the actions of these leaders haveacquired serious political significance because of their ownextraordinary influence, or because they have adhered to some other really “influential” trend which is supported by a military organisation, namely, the bourgeois trend. 
 Kautskyhas not even set about examining this question; his onlyconcern is to throw dust in the eyes of the masses, dumbfoundthem with the sound of authoritative names, prevent themfrom raising a clear issue and examining it from all sides. 
 * “...an order given by a handful of parliamentarians is sufficient to make four million class-conscious proletariansturn right-about-face.... 
” *Kautsky’s references to Vaillant and Guesde, Hyndman and Plekhanov are characteristic also in another connection. 
 The out-spoken imperialists of the Lensch and Haenisch variety (to say nothingof the opportunists) refer to Hyndman and Plekhanov so as to justifytheir own policy, and they have a right to do so. 
 They are speaking the truth when they say it is one and the same policy. 
 Kautsky, how-ever, speaks with disdain of Lensch and Haenisch, radicals who haveturned towards imperialism. 
 Kautsky thanks God that he is unlikesuch sinners, that he disagrees with them, and has remained a revolu-tionary ( sic!). 
 As a matter of fact , Kautsky’s stand is the same as theirs. 
 Kautsky, the hypocritical chauvinist who employs sentimental phrases, is much more odious than the chauvinist simpletons, David and Heine, Lensch and Haenisch. 
 Every word uttered here is a lie. 
 The German Party organi-sation had a membership of one million, not four million. 
 As is the case with any organisation, the united will of this mass organisation was expressed only through its united political centre, the “handful”, who betrayed socialism. 
 Itwas this handful who were asked to express their opinion; itwas this handful who were called upon to vote, they werein a position to vote; they were in a position to write arti-cles, etc. 
 The masses were not consulted. 
 Not only were they not permitted to vote, but they were disunited and coerced“by orders ”, not from a handful of parliamentarians, but from the military authorities. 
 A military organisation existed;there was no treachery among the leaders of this organisa-tion. 
 It called up the “masses” one by one , confronted the individual with the ultimatum: either join the army, as your leaders advise you to, or be shot. 
 The masses could not actin an organised fashion because their previously createdorganisation, an organisation embodied in a “handful” ofLegiens, Kautskys and Scheidemanns, had betrayed them. 
 Ittakes time to create a new organisation, as well as a deter-mination to consign the old, rotten, and obsolete organisa-tion to the scrap heap. 
 Kautsky tries to defeat his opponents, the Lefts, by ascrib-ing to them the nonsensical idea that the “masses”, “inretaliation” to war, should make a revolution “within twenty-four hours”, and institute “socialism” as opposed to imperial-ism, or otherwise the “masses” would be revealing “spineless-ness and treachery”. 
 But this is sheer nonsense, which thecompilers of illiterate bourgeois and police booklets havehitherto used to “defeat” the revolutionaries, and Kautskynow flaunts in our faces. 
 Kautsky’s Left opponents know per-fectly well that a revolution cannot be “made”, that revolu-tions develop from objectively (i. 
e. 
, independently of the will of parties and classes) mature crises and turns in history,that without organisation the masses lack unity of will,and that the struggle against a centralised state’s powerfulterrorist military organisation is a difficult and lengthybusiness. 
 Owing to the treachery of their leaders, the masses could not do anything at the crucial moment, whereas this “handful” of leaders were in an excellent position and in duty bound to vote against the war credits, take a stand against a “class truce” and justification of the war, express themselves in favour of the defeat of their own governments, set up an international apparatus for the purpose of carrying on propaganda in favour of fraternisation in the trenches, organ-ise the publication of illegal literature * on the necessity of starting revolutionary activities, etc. 
 Kautsky knows perfectly well that it is precisely such or rather similar actions that the German “Lefts” have in mind, and that under a military censorship they cannot talk about these things directly , openly. 
 Kautsky’s desire to defend the opportunists at all costs has led him into unparalleledinfamy: taking cover behind the military censors, heattributes patent absurdities to the Lefts, in the confidencethat the censors will protect him from exposure. 
 VII The serious scientific and political question, which Kautsky has deliberately evaded by means of subterfuges of all kinds, thereby giving enormous pleasure to the opportun-ists, is this: how was it possible for the most prominent representatives of the Second International to betray so-cialism? This question should not, of course, be considered from the standpoint of the biographies of the individual leaders. 
 Their future biographers will have to analyse the problem from this angle as well, but what interests the socialistmovement today is not that, but a study of the historical *Incidentally, it would not have been at all necessary to close all Social-Democratic papers in reply to the government’s ban on writing about class hatred and class struggle. 
 To agree not to writeabout this, as Vorwärts did was mean and cowardly. 
 Vorwärts died politically when it did this and Martov was right when he said so. 
 It was, however, possible to retain the legal papers by declaring that they were non-Party and non-Social-Democratic , and served the techni-cal needs of a section of the workers, i. 
e. 
, that they were non-political papers . 
 Underground Social-Democratic literature containing an assessment of the war, and legally published working-class literature without that assessment , a literature that does not say what is not true, but keeps silent about the truth—why should this not have been possible? origins, the conditions, the significance and the strength of the social-chauvinist trend . 
 (1) Where did social-chauvin-ism spring from? (2) What gave it strength? (3) How must it be combated? Only such an approach to the question can beregarded as serious, the “personal” approach being in prac-tice an evasion, a piece of sophistry. 
 To answer the first question we must see, first, whether the ideological and political content of social-chauvinism is connected with some previous trend in socialism; and second, in what relation—from the standpoint of actualpolitical divisions—the present division of socialists intoopponents and defenders of social-chauvinism stands todivisions which historically preceded it. 
 By social-chauvinism we mean acceptance of the idea of the defence of the fatherland in the present imperialist war, justification of an alliance between socialists and thebourgeoisie and the governments of their “own” countries inthis war, a refusal to propagate and support proletarian-revolutionary action against one’s “own” bourgeoisie, etc. 
It is perfectly obvious that social-chauvinism’s basic ideo-logical and political content fully coincides with the founda-tions of opportunism. 
 It is one and the same tendency. 
 In the conditions of the war of 1914-15, opportunism leadsto social-chauvinism. 
 The idea of class collaboration is opportunism’s main feature. 
 The war has brought this ideato its logical conclusion, and has augmented its usual factors and stimuli with a number of extraordinary ones; through the operation of special threats and coercion it has compelled the philistine and disunited masses to collaborate with the bourgeoisie. 
 This circumstance has naturally multiplied adherents of opportunism and fully explains why many radi-cals of yesterday have deserted to that camp. 
 Opportunism means sacrificing the fundamental inter-ests of the masses to the temporary interests of an insignifi-cant minority of the workers or, in other words, an alliance between a section of the workers and the bourgeoisie, di-rected against the mass of the proletariat. 
 The war has made such an alliance particularly conspicuous and inescapable. 
 Opportunism was engendered in the course of decades by the special features in the period of the development of capitalism, when the comparatively peaceful and cultured life of a stratum of privileged workingmen “bourgeoisified” them, gave them crumbs from the table of their national capitalists, and isolated them from the suffering, misery and revolutionary temper of the impoverished and ruined masses. 
 Theimperialist war is the direct continuation and culminationof this state of affairs, because this is a war for the privileges of the Great-Power nations, for the repartition of colonies,and domination over other nations. 
 To defend and strength-en their privileged position as a petty-bourgeois “upper stratum” or aristocracy (and bureaucracy) of the workingclass—such is the natural wartime continuation of petty-bourgeois opportunist hopes and the corresponding tactics,such is the economic foundation of present-day social-imperialism. 
 * And, of course, the force of habit, the routine of relatively “peaceful” evolution, national prejudices, a fear of sharp turns and a disbelief in them—all these were addi-tional circumstances which enhanced both opportunism anda hypocritical and a craven reconciliation with opportunism—ostensibly only for a time and only because of extraor-dinary causes and motives. 
 The war has changed this opportunism, which had been fostered for decades, raised it to a higher stage, increased the number and the variety ofits shades, augmented the ranks of its adherents, enrichedtheir arguments with a multitude of new sophisms, and has *Here are several examples showing how highly the imperial-ists and the bourgeoisie value the importance of “Great-Power” andnational privileges as a means of dividing the workers and divertingthem from socialism. 
 In a book entitled Greater Rome and Greater Britain (Oxford, 1912), the British imperialist Lucas acknowledges the legal disabilities of coloured people in the present British Em-pire (pp. 
 96-97), and remarks that “in our own Empire, where whiteworkers and coloured workers are side by side, ... they do not work onthe same level, and that the white man is rather the overseer of ... thecoloured man. 
 In a pamphlet entitled Social-Democracy after the War (1915), Erwin Belger, a former secretary of the Imperial Alliance against Social-Democrats, praises the conduct of the Social-Democrats anddeclares that they must become a “purely labour party” (p. 
 43),a “national”, a “German labour party” (p. 
 45), without “internation-alist, Utopian”, and “revolutionary” ideas (p. 
 44). 
 In a book dealingwith capital investments abroad (1907), the German imperialist Sartorius von Waltershausen blames the German Social-Democrats for ignoring the “national welfare” (p. 
 438)—which consists in theseizure of colonies—and praises the British workers’ “realism”, forinstance, their struggle against immigration. 
 In a book on the merged, so to say, many new streams and rivulets with the mainstream of opportunism. 
 However, the mainstream has not disappeared. 
 Quite the reverse. 
 Social-chauvinism is an opportunism which has matured to such a degree that the continued existence of this bourgeois abscess within the socialist parties has become impossible. 
 Those who refuse to see the closest and unbreakable link between social-chauvinism and opportunism clutch at indi-vidual instances—this opportunist or another, they say, has turned internationalist; this radical or another has turnedchauvinist. 
 But this kind of argument carries no weight asfar as the development of trends is concerned. 
 Firstly, chau-vinism and opportunism in the labour movement have thesame economic basis: the alliance between a numerically small upper stratum of the proletariat and the petty bour-geoisie—who get but morsels of the privileges of their “own”national capital—against the masses of the proletarians, themasses of the toilers and the oppressed in general. 
 Secondly,the two trends have the same ideological and political con-tent. 
 Thirdly, the old division of socialists into an oppor-tunist trend and a revolutionary, which was characteristic of the period of the Second International (1889-1914),corresponds , by and large, to the new division into chauvinists and internationalists. 
 To realise the correctness of the latter statement, one must remember that social science (like science generally) usually deals with mass phenomena, not with individual cases. 
 principles of world politics, the German diplomat Ruedorffer stresses the generally known fact that the internationalisation of capital by no means eliminates the national capitalists’ intensified strugglefor power and influence, for “majority share-holding” (p. 
 161). 
The author notes that the workers become involved in this intensi-fied struggle (p. 
 175). 
 The book is dated October 1913, and the authorspeaks with perfect clarity of the “interests of capital” (p. 
 157) as the cause of modern wars. 
 He says that the question of the “national tendency” becomes the kingpin of socialism (p. 
 176), and that thegovernments have nothing to fear from the internationalist manifestosof the Social-Democrats (p. 
 177), who in reality are turning moreand more national (pp. 
 103, 110, 176). 
 International socialism willbe victorious, he says, if it extricates the workers from national influence, since nothing can be achieved through violence alone; however, it will suffer defeat if national sentiments gain the upperhand (pp. 
 173-74). 
 Let us take ten European countries: Germany, Britain, Russia, Italy, Holland, Sweden, Bulgaria, Switzerland, France and Belgium. 
 In the first eight countries, the new division of socialists (according to internationalism) cor-responds to the old division (according to opportunism): inGermany the magazine Soziali stische Monatshefte , which was a stronghold of opportunism, has become a strongholdof chauvinism. 
 The ideas of internationalism have the sup-port of the extreme Lefts. 
 In Britain about three-sevenths of the British Socialist Party are internationalists (66 votesfor an internationalist resolution and 84 against it, as shownby the latest counts), while in the opportunist bloc (the La-bour Party plus the Fabians, plus the Independent LabourParty) less than one-seventh are internationalists. 
 * In Rus-sia, the liquidationist Nasha Zarya , the mainstay of the opportunists, has become the mainstay of chauvinism. 
Plekhanov and Alexinsky are making more noise, but we knowfrom five years’ experience (1910-14) that they are inca-pable of conducting systematic propaganda among the massesin Russia. 
 The nucleus of the internationalists in Russia is made up of “Pravdism” 125 and the Russian Social-Demo-cratic Labour group in the Duma as representing the advancedworkers who restored the Party in January 1912. 
 In Italy, the party of Bissolati and Co. 
, which was purely opportunist, has turned chauvinist. 
 Internationalism isrepresented by the workers ’ party. 
 The masses of the workers are for this party; the opportunists, the parliamentarians and the petty bourgeoisie are for chauvinism. 
 In thecourse of several months a free choice could be made andindeed was made in Italy, not fortuitously but in conformitywith the difference in the class stand of rank-and-file prole-tarians and the petty-bourgeois groups. 
 In Holland, Troelstra’s opportunist party is reconciled to chauvinism in general (one must not be deceived by the *The Independent Labour Party alone is usually compared with the British Socialist Party. 
 That is wrong. 
 The essentials should beconsidered, not the forms of organisation. 
 Take the daily newspapers:there were two of them—one, the Daily Herald , mouthpiece of the British Socialist Party, the other, the Daily Citizen , mouthpiece of the opportunist bloc. 
 The dailies do the actual work of propaganda,agitation and organisation. 
 fact that in Holland the petty bourgeoisie, like the big bour-geoisie, have a particular hatred of Germany, because the latter can “swallow” them up easiest of all). 
 It is the Marxist party, led by Gorter and Pannekoek, that has produced con-sistent, sincere, ardent and convinced internationalists. 
In Sweden, Branting, the opportunist leader, is indignantat the German socialists being accused of treachery, whileHöglund, leader of the Lefts, has declared that this is pre-cisely the opinion of some of his adherents (see Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 36). 
 In Bulgaria, the “Tesnyaki”, who are opposed to opportunism, have, in their press (the paperNovo Vreme 126), accused the German Social-Democrats of having “perpetrated a foul act”. 
 In Switzerland, the adherentsof the opportunist Greulich are inclined to justify the German Social-Democrats (see their organ, the Zurich Volks-recht , whereas those who support the much more radical R. 
 Grimm have turned the Berne paper, Berner Tagwacht , into an organ of the German Lefts. 
 Only two countries outof the ten—France and Belgium—are exceptions, but evenhere, strictly speaking, we see, not an absence of internation-alists, but their excessive weakness and dejection (due in part to causes that can be readily understood); let us notforget that Vaillant himself has admitted, in l’Humanité , that he has received from his readers letters of an internation-alist character, letters which, however, he has not publishedin full, not a single one of them! By and large, if we take the trends and tendencies, we must admit that it was the opportunist wing of Europeansocialism that betrayed socialism and deserted to chauvinism. 
What is the source of its strength and its seeming omnipo-tence within the official parties? Now that he himself isinvolved, Kautsky, who is well versed in raising questions of history, especially with reference to ancient Rome or similar matters that do not have a direct bearing on prob-lems of our times, hypocritically pretends a lack of under-standing. 
 But the whole thing is crystal-clear. 
 The immensestrength of the opportunists and the chauvinists stems fromtheir alliance with the bourgeoisie, with the governments and the General Staffs. 
 This is often overlooked in Russia, where it is assumed the opportunists are a section of the socialist parties, that there always have been and will be two extreme wings within those parties, that “extremes” should be avoided, etc. 
, etc. 
—and plenty of similar philistine copy book maxims. 
 In reality, the opportunists’ formal membership in work-ers’ parties by no means disproves their objectively being apolitical detachment of the bourgeoisie, conductors of itsinfluence, and its agents in the labour movement. 
 When theopportunist Südekum, whose claim to fame is like that of Herostratus, convincingly demonstrated this social and class truth, many good people gasped with amazement. 
 The Frenchsocialists and Plekhanov pointed the finger of scorn at Süde-kum—although had Vandervelde, Semhat or Plekhanovlooked into a mirror they would have seen nothing but a Südekum , with slightly different national features. 
 The members of the German Executive ( Vorstand ), who now praise Kautsky and are praised by Kautsky, have madehaste to declare—cautiously, modestly and politely (withoutnaming Südekum)—that they “do not agree” with Südekum’sline. 
 This is ridiculous, because, at the crucial moment, Süde-kum alone, actually proved stronger in the policies of the German Social-Democratic Party than a hundred Haasesand Kautskys (just as Nasha Zarya alone is stronger than all the Brussels bloc trends, which are afraid to break awayfrom that paper). 
 Why is that so? It is because behind Südekum are the bour-geoisie, the government, and the General Staff of a Great Power. 
 These support Südekum’s policy in a thousandways, whereas his opponents’ policy is frustrated by everymeans, including prison and the firing squad. 
 Südekum’svoice reaches the public in millions of copies of bourgeoisnewspapers (as do the voices of Vandervelde, Sembat, and Plekhanov), whereas the voices of his opponents cannot be heard in the legal press because of the military censorship! It is generally agreed that opportunism is no chance occurrence, sin, slip, or treachery on the part of individu-als, but a social product of an entire period of history. 
The significance of this truth is not always given sufficient thought. 
 Opportunism has been nurtured by legalism. 
 The workers’ parties of the period between 1889 and 1914 had totake advantage of bourgeois legality. 
 When the crisis came, they should have adopted illegal methods of work (but this could not be done otherwise than with the greatest vig-our and determination, combined with a number of strata-gems). 
 A single Südekum was sufficient to prevent the adop-tion of illegal methods, because, speaking in a historico-philosophical sense, he had the whole of the “old world”behind him, and because he, Südekum, has always betrayed,and will always betray, to the bourgeoisie all the military plans of its class enemy, speaking in the sense of practical politics. 
 It is a fact that the entire German Social-Democratic Party (and the same holds for the French and other parties) does only that which pleases Südekum or can be tolerated by Südekum. 
 Nothing else can be done legally. 
 Anything honest and really socialist that takes place in the German Social-Democratic Party, is done in opposition to its centres, by circumventing its Executive and Central Organ, by violating organisational discipline, in a factional manner, on behalf of new and anonymous centres of a new party, aswas the case, for instance, with the German Lefts’ manifesto published in Berner Tagwacht on May 31 of this year. 
 127 As a matter of fact, a new party is growing up, gaining strength and being organised, a real workers’ party, a genuinelyrevolutionary Social-Democratic Party, unlike the oldand corrupt national-liberal party of Legien, Südekum,Kautsky, Haase, Scheidemann and Co. 
 * *What happened before the historic voting of August 4 [for war credits. 
— Ed. 
] is extremely characteristic. 
 The official party has cast the cloak of bureaucratic hypocrisy over this event, saying that the majority decided and that all voted unanimously in favour . 
 But this hypocrisy was exposed by Ströbel who told the truth in thejournal Die Internationale . 
 The Social-Democratic members of the Reichstag split into two groups, each of whom came with an ulti-matum , i. 
e. 
, a dissentient decision, i. 
e. 
, one signifying a split. 
 One group, the opportunists, who were about thirty strong, decided to vote in favour , under all circumstances ; the other and Left group numbering about fifteen, decided—less resolutely—to voteagainst. 
 When the “Centre” or the “Marsh”, who never take a firmstand, voted with the opportunists, the Lefts sustained a crushingdefeat and—submitted! Talk about the “unity” of the GermanSocial-Democrats is sheer hypocrisy, which actually covers up the inevitable submission of the Lefts to ultimatums from the oppor-tunists. 
 It was, therefore, a profound historical truth that the opportunist “Monitor” blurted out in the conservative Preus-sische Jahrbücher128 when he said it would be bad for the opportunists ( i. 
e. 
, the bourgeoisie ) if present-day Social-Democracy were to swing to the right —because in that case the workers would desert it. 
 The opportunists (and the bour-geoisie) need the party as it is today, a party combining the Right and the Left wings and officially represented by Kaut-sky, who will be able to reconcile everything in the world by means of smooth, “thoroughly Marxist” phrases. 
 In word,socialism and the revolutionary spirit for the people, themasses, the workers; indeed, Südekumism, adhering to thebourgeoisie in any grave crisis. 
 We say: any crisis, because in any serious political strike, and not only in time of war, “feudalist” Germany like “free and parliamentary” Britain or France will immediately introduce martial law under one name or another. 
 No one of sound mind and judgement canhave any doubt about this. 
 Hence logically follows the reply to the question raised above, viz. 
, how is social-chauvinism to be combated? Social-chauvinism is an opportunism which has matured to such a degree, grown so strong and brazen during the longperiod of comparatively “peaceful” capitalism, so definitein its political ideology, and so closely associated withthe bourgeoisie and the governments, that the existence ofsuch a trend within the Social-Democratic workers’ parties cannot be tolerated. 
 Flimsy, thin-soled shoes may be good enough to walk in on the well-paved streets of a small pro-vincial town, but heavy hob-nailed boots are needed forwalking in the hills. 
 In Europe socialism has emerged froma comparatively peaceful stage that is confined within narrowand national limits. 
 With the outbreak of the war of 1914-15, it entered the stage of revolutionary action; there can be no doubt that the time has come for a complete break withopportunism, for its expulsion from the workers’ parties. 
 This definition of the tasks the new era of international development confronts socialism with does not, of course,immediately show how rapidly and in what definite forms the process of separation of the workers’ revolutionary So-cial-Democratic parties from the petty-bourgeois opportunistparties will proceed in the various countries. 
 It does, however, reveal the need clearly to realise that such a separation is inevitable, and that the entire policy of the workers’ parties must be directed from this standpoint. 
 The war of 1914-15 is such a great turn in history that the attitudetowards opportunism cannot remain the same as it has been. 
 What has happened cannot be erased. 
 It is impossibleto obliterate from the minds of the workers, or from theexperience of the bourgeoisie, or from the political lessons of our epoch in general, the fact that, at a moment of crisis, the opportunists proved to be the nucleus of those elementswithin the workers’ parties that deserted to the bourgeoisie. 
Opportunism—to speak on a European scale—was in itsadolescent stage, as it were, before the war. 
 With the out-break of the war it grew to manhood and its “innocence” and youth cannot be restored. 
 An entire social stratum, consist-ing of parliamentarians, journalists, labour officials, priv-ileged office personnel, and certain strata of the proletariat,has sprung up and has become amalgamated with its own national bourgeoisie, which has proved fully capable ofappreciating and “adapting” it. 
 The course of history cannot be turned back or checked—we can and must go fearlessly onward, from the preparatory legal working-class organisa-tions, which are in the grip of opportunism, to revolutionaryorganisations that know how not to confine themselves to legality and are capable of safeguarding themselves againstopportunist treachery, organisations of a proletariat that is beginning a “struggle for power”, a struggle for the over-throw of the bourgeoisie. 
 This, incidentally, proves how wrong are the views of those who befog both their own minds and those of the work-ers with the question as to what should he done with suchoutstanding authorities of the Second International as Guesde, Plekhanov, Kautsky, etc. 
 In fact, no such question arises. 
 If these persons fail to understand the new tasks, they willhave to stand aside or remain as they are at present, in cap-tivity to the opportunists. 
 If these persons free themselvesfrom “captivity” they are hardly likely to encounter political obstacles to their return to the camp of the revolutionaries. 
 At all events, it is absurd to substitute the question of the role of individuals for the question of the struggle betweentrends and of the new period in the working-class movement. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR VIII Legal mass organisations of the working class are perhaps the most important feature of the socialist parties in theepoch of the Second International. 
 They were the strongestin the German Party, and it was here that the war of 1914-15created a most acute crisis and made the issue a most press-ing one. 
 The initiation of revolutionary activities would obviously have led to the dissolution of these legal organi-sations by the police, and the old party—from Legien toKautsky inclusively—sacrificed the revolutionary aims ofthe proletariat for the sake of preserving the present legalorganisations. 
 No matter how much this may be denied, itis a fact. 
 The proletariat’s right to revolution was sold for a mess of pottage—organisations permitted by the present police law. 
 Take the pamphlet by Karl Legien, leader of the German Social-Democratic trade unions, entitled Why Trade Union Officials Must Take a More Active Part in the Internal Lifeof the Party (Berlin, 1915). 
 This is a paper read by the author to a gathering of trade union officials on January 27, 1915. 
 In the course of this lecture Legien read—andreproduced in his pamphlet—a most interesting documentthat would not otherwise have been passed by the militarycensor. 
 This document—the so-called Notes for Speakers in the District of Niederbarnim (a suburb of Berlin)—is an exposition of the views of the German Left-wing Social-Democrats, of their protest against the Party. 
 The revolu-tionary Social-Democrats, says the document, did not andcould not foresee a certain factor, viz. 
: “That the whole of the organised power of the German Social-Demo-cratic Party and the trade unions would take the side of the war govern-ment, and that the whole of this power would be used for the purposeof suppressing the revolutionary energy of the masses” (p. 
 34 of Legien’s pamphlet). 
 This is the absolute truth. 
 Also true is the following statement contained in the same document: “The vote of the Social-Democratic group in the Reichstag on August 4 proved that a different attitude, even had it been deeply rooted in the masses, could not have asserted itself under the leadership of a tested party. 
 It could have asserted itself only against the will of the leading party bodies, only by overcoming the resistance of the party and the trade unions” ( ibid. 
). 
 This is the absolute truth. 
 “Had the Social-Democratic group in the Reichstag done its duty on August 4, the external form of organisation would probably have been destroyed, but the spirit would have remained, the spirit that animated the Party under the Anti-Socialist Law and helped it to overcome alldifficulties” ( ibid . 
). 
 It is pointed out in Legien’s pamphlet that the “leaders”, brought together to listen to his lecture and styling them-selves leading trade union officials, laughed when they heard this. 
 The idea that it was possible and necessary to organiseillegal revolutionary organisations at a moment of crisis(as was done under the Anti-Socialist Law) seemed ridiculous to them. 
 Legien, that most faithful watchdog of the bour-geoisie, exclaimed, beating his breast: “This is an obviously anarchist idea: to wreck the organisation in order to bring about a solution of the problem by the masses. 
 There is no doubt in my mind that this is an anarchist idea!” “Hear, hear!” came a chorus of exclamations ( ibid . 
, p. 
 37) from the lackeys of the bourgeoisie, who style themselvesleaders of the Social-Democratic organisations of theworking class. 
 An edifying picture. 
 People are so degraded and stulti-fied by bourgeois legality that they cannot even conceive of the need for organisations of another kind, illegal organi-sations, for the purpose of guiding the revolutionary struggle. 
So low have people fallen that they imagine that legalunions existing with the permission of the police are a kindof ultima Thule—as though the preservation of such unions as leading bodies is at all conceivable at a time of crisis! Here you have the living dialectic of opportunism: the mere growth of legal unions and the mere habit that stupid butconscientious philistines have of confining themselves tobookkeeping, have created a situation in which, during acrisis, these conscientious philistines have proved to be trai-tors and betrayers, who would smother the revolutionary energy of the masses. 
 This is no chance occurrence. 
 The build-ing of a revolutionary organisation must be begun—thatis demanded by the new historical situation, by the epoch of proletarian revolutionary action—but it can be begun only over the heads of the old leaders, the stranglers of revo-lutionary energy, over the heads of the old party, through its destruction . 
 Of course, the counter-revolutionary philistines cry out “anarchism!”, just as the opportunist Eduard David cried“anarchism” when he denounced Karl Liebknecht. 
 In Ger-many, only those leaders seem to have remained honest so-cialists whom the opportunists revile as anarchists.... 
 Take the army of today. 
 It is a good example of organisa-tion. 
 This organisation is good only because it is flexible and is able at the same time to give millions of people a single will . 
 Today these millions are living in their homes in various parts of the country; tomorrow mobilisation is ordered, and they report for duty. 
 Today they lie in the trenches, and this may go on for months; tomorrow they are ledto the attack in another order. 
 Today they perform miraclesin sheltering from bullets and shrapnel; tomorrow theyperform miracles in hand-to-hand-combat. 
 Today their ad-vance detachments lay minefields; tomorrow they advance scores of miles guided by airmen flying overhead. 
 When, in the pursuit of a single aim and animated by a singlewill, millions alter the forms of their communication andtheir behaviour, change the place and the mode of theiractivities, change their tools and weapons in accordancewith the changing conditions and the requirements of the struggle—all this is genuine organisation. 
 The same holds true for the working-class struggle against the bourgeoisie. 
 Today there is no revolutionary situation, theconditions that cause unrest among the masses or heightentheir activities do not exist; today you are given a ballotpaper—take it, learn to organise so as to use it as a weapon against your enemies, not as a means of getting cushy legis-lative jobs for men who cling to their parliamentary seatsfor fear of having to go to prison. 
 Tomorrow your ballot pa-per is taken from you and you are given a rifle or a splendidand most up-to-date quick-firing gun—take this weapon ofdeath and destruction, pay no heed to the mawkish snivel-lers who are afraid of war; too much still remains in the world that must be destroyed with fire and sword for the emancipa-tion of the working class; if anger and desperation grow among the masses, if a revolutionary situation arises, pre-pare to create new organisations and use these useful weapons of death and destruction against your own government and your own bourgeoisie. 
 That is not easy, to be sure. 
 It will demand arduous pre-paratory activities and heavy sacrifices. 
 This is a new form of organisation and struggle that also has to be learnt , and knowledge is not acquired without errors and setbacks. 
 This form of the class struggle stands in the same relation to participation in elections as an assault against a fortressstands in relation to manoeuvring, marches, or lying in thetrenches. 
 It is not so often that history places this form of struggle on the order of the day, but then its significance isfelt for decades to come. 
 Days on which such method of struggle can and must be employed are equal to scores of years of other historical epochs. 
 Compare K. 
 Kautsky and K. 
 Legien. 
 Kautsky writes: “As long as the party was small, every protest against war had propaganda value as an act of bravery .... 
 the conduct of the Russian and Serbian comrades has met with general appreciation. 
 The strongera party becomes, the more are the propaganda considerations, in themotives of its decisions, interwoven with the calculation of practical consequences, the more difficult does it become to give due regard equally to both motives, and yet neither of them must be neglected. 
 Therefore,the stronger we become, the more easily differences arise between usin every new and complex situation” ( Internationalism and the War , p. 
 30). 
 These arguments of Kautsky’s differ from Legien’s only in that they are hypocritical and cowardly. 
 In substance,Kautsky supports and justifies the Legien’s despicable renunciation of revolutionary activities, but he does so stealthily, without committing himself; he makes shift withhints, and confines himself to complimenting both Legien andthe revolutionary behaviour of the Russians. 
 We Russiansare used to witnessing this kind of attitude towards revolu-tionaries only among the liberals; the latter are always ready to acknowledge the “courage” of the revolutionaries, but at the same time they will on no account renounce their ultra-opportunist tactics. 
 Self-respecting revolutionaries will notaccept Kautsky’s “expressions of appreciation” and willindignantly reject such a presentation of the question. 
 Werethere no revolutionary situation, were it not obligatory to propagate revolutionary action, the conduct of the Rus-sians and Serbians would be incorrect , and their tactics would be wrong. 
 Let such knightly persons as Legien and Kautsky at least have the courage of their convictions;let them say this openly. 
 If, however, the tactics of the Russian and Serbian social-ists deserve “appreciation”, then it is wrong and criminalto justify the contrary tactics of the “strong” parties, the German, the French, etc. 
 By means of an intentionally vague expression—”practical consequences”—Kautsky has con-cealed the plain truth that the great and strong parties were frightened by the prospect of their organisations being dis-solved, their funds sequestered and their leaders arrested bythe government. 
 This means that Kautsky justifies betrayal of socialism by pleading the unpleasant “practical conse-quences” that follow from revolutionary tactics. 
 Is this not aprostitution of Marxism? “We would have been arrested,” one of the Social-Demo-cratic deputies who voted for the war credits on August 4 is alleged to have declared at a workers’ meeting in Berlin. 
 The workers shouted in reply: “Well, what would have been bad about that?” If there was no other signal that would instil in the Ger-man and the French working masses revolutionary sentiments and the need to prepare for revolutionary action, the arrest of a member of parliament for a courageous speech would have been useful as a call for unity of the proletarians of the various countries in their revolutionary work. 
 It is not easy to bring about such unity; all the more was it the duty ofmembers of parliament, whose high office made their purviewof the entire political scene so extensive, to take the initiative . 
 Not only in wartime but positively in any acute politi-cal situation, to say nothing of periods of revolutionary mass action of any kind, the governments of even the freest bourgeois countries will threaten to dissolve the legalorganisations, seize their funds, arrest their leaders, andthreaten other “practical consequences” of the same kind. 
What are we to do then? Justify the opportunists on these grounds, as Kautsky does? But this would mean sanctifying the transformation of the Social-Democratic parties intonational liberal-labour parties. 
 There is only one conclusion a socialist can draw, namely, that pure legalism, the legalism-and-nothing-but-legalism of the “European” parties, is now obsolete and, as a result of the development of capitalism in the pre-imperialist stage,has become the foundation for a bourgeois labour policy. 
It must be augmented by the creation of an illegal basis,an illegal organisation, illegal Social-Democratic work,without, however, surrendering a single legal position. 
 Ex-perience will show how this is to be done, if only the desire to take this road exists, as well as a realisation that it is neces-sary. 
 In 1912-14, the revolutionary Social-Democrats ofRussia proved that this problem can be solved. 
 Muranov, theworkers’ deputy in the Duma, who at the trial behaved betterthan the rest and was exiled to Siberia, clearly demonstrated that—besides “ ministeriable ” parliamentarism (from Hender-son, Sembat and Vandervelde down to Südekum and Schei-demann, the latter two are also being completely “ministe-riable”, although they are not admitted further than the ante-room!)—there can be illegal and revolutionary parliamen-tarism. 
 Let the Kosovskys and Potresovs admire the “European” parliamentarism of the lackeys or accept it—we shall not tire of telling the workers that such legalism, such Social-Democracy of the Legien, Kautsky, Scheidemann brand,deserves nothing but contempt. 
 IX To sum up. 
The collapse of the Second International has been most strikingly expressed in the flagrant betrayal of their con-victions and of the solemn Stuttgart and Basle resolutionsby the majority of the official Social-Democratic parties of Europe. 
 This collapse, however, which signifies the complete victory of opportunism, the transformation of the Social-Democratic parties into national liberal-labour parties,is merely the result of the entire historical epoch of theSecond International—the close of the nineteenth century andthe beginning of the twentieth. 
 The objective conditions of this epoch—transitional from the consummation of West-European bourgeois and national revolutions to the begin-ning of socialist revolutions—engendered and fostered opportunism. 
 During this period we see a split in the working-class and socialist movement in some European countries, which, in the main, was cleavage along the line of opportun-ism (Britain, Italy, Holland, Bulgaria and Russia); inother countries, we see a long and stubborn struggle oftrends along the same line (Germany, France, Belgium,Sweden and Switzerland). 
 The crisis created by the great warhas torn away all coverings, swept away conventions, exposed an abscess that has long come to a head, and revealed oppor-tunism in its true role of ally of the bourgeoisie. 
 The completeorganisational severance of this element from the workers’parties has become imperative. 
 The epoch of imperialismcannot permit the existence, in a single party, of the revolu-tionary proletariat’s vanguard and the semi-petty-bourgeois aristocracy of the working class, who enjoy morsels of the privileges of their “own” nation’s “Great-Power” status. 
The old theory that opportunism is a “legitimate shade”in a single party that knows no “extremes” has now turnedinto a tremendous deception of the workers and a tremendoushindrance to the working-class movement. 
 Undisguised opportunism, which immediately repels the working masses, is not so frightful and injurious as this theory of the goldenmean, which uses Marxist catchwords to justify opportunistpractice, and tries to prove, with a series of sophisms, thatrevolutionary action is premature, etc. 
 Kautsky, the mostoutstanding spokesman of this theory, and also the leading authority in the Second International, has shown himself a consummate hypocrite and a past master in the art ofprostituting Marxism. 
 All members of the million-strongGerman party who are at all honest, class-conscious and revolu-tionary have turned away in indignation from an “authority”of this kind so ardently defended by the Südekums and the Scheidemanns. 
 The proletarian masses—probably about nine-tenths of whose former leaders have gone over to the bourgeoisie—havefound themselves disunited and helpless amid a spate ofchauvinism and under the pressure of martial law and thewar censorship. 
 But the objective war-created revolutionary situation, which is extending and developing, is inevitably engendering revolutionary sentiments; it is tempering andenlightening all the finest and most class-conscious prole-tarians. 
 A sudden change in the mood of the masses is not only possible, but is becoming more and more probable, a change similar to that which was to be seen in Russia early in 1905 in connection with the “Gaponade”,129 when, in the course of several months and sometimes of several weeks,there emerged from the backward proletarian masses an armyof millions, which followed the proletariat’s revolutionaryvanguard. 
 We cannot tell whether a powerful revolutionary movement will develop immediately after this war, or during it, etc. 
, but at all events, it is only work in this direction that deserves the name of socialist work. 
 The slogan of acivil war is the one that summarises and directs this work,and helps unite and consolidate those who wish to aid therevolutionary struggle of the proletariat against its own government and its own bourgeoisie. 
 In Russia, the complete severance of the revolutionary Social-Democratic proletarian elements from the petty-bour-geois opportunist elements has been prepared by the entirehistory of the working-class movement. 
 Those who disregardthat history, and, by declaiming against “factionalism”, make themselves incapable of understanding the real process of the formation of a proletarian party in Russia, whichhas developed in the course of many years of struggle againstvarious varieties of opportunism, are rendering that move-ment the worst possible service. 
 Of all the “Great” Powersengaged in the present war, Russia is the only one that recently experienced a revolution. 
 The bourgeois content of that revolution, in which the proletariat nevertheless playeda decisive part, could not but cause a split between the bour-geois and proletarian trends in the working-class movement. 
In the approximately twenty years (1894-1914) that RussianSocial-Democracy has existed as an organisation linked with the mass working-class movement (and not only as an ideological trend, as in 1883-94), there was a strugglebetween the proletarian-revolutionary trends and the petty-bourgeois, opportunist trends. 
 The Economism 130 of 1894-1902 was undoubtedly a trend of the latter kind. 
 A numberof its arguments and ideological features—the “Struvist distortion of Marxism, references to the “masses’ in order to justify opportunism, and the like—bear a strikingresemblance to the present vulgarised Marxism of Kautsky, Cunow, Plekhanov, etc. 
 It would be a very grateful task to remind the present generation of Social-Democrats of the old Rabochaya Mysl131 and Rabocheye Dyel o, as132 a paral-lel to the Kautsky of today. 
 The “Menshevism” of the next period (1903-08) was the direct successor, both ideological and organisational, to Economism. 
 During the Russian revolution, it pursued tac-tics that objectively meant the dependence of the proletariat upon the liberal bourgeoisie, and expressed petty-bourgeois, opportunist trends. 
 When, in the ensuing period (1908-14),the mainstream of the Menshevik trend produced liquidation-ism, the class significance of that trend became so apparentthat the best representatives of Menshevism were continuallyprotesting against the policy of Nasha Zarya group. 
 It is that very group—the only one which, during the past fiveor six years, has conducted systematic work among themasses in opposition to the revolutionary Marxist party of the working class—that has proved to be social-chauvinist in the war of 1914-15! And this in a country where absolutismstill exists, the bourgeois revolution is far from consum-mated, and forty-three per cent of the population oppresses a majority consisting of non-Russian nations. 
 The “European”type of development, in which certain strata of thepetty bourgeoisie, especially the intelligentsia and an insig-nificant section of the labour aristocracy can share in the“Great-Power” privileges of their “own” nation, could not but have its Russian counterpart. 
 All their history has prepared the working class and the workers’ Social-Democratic Party of Russia for “interna-tionalist” tactics, i. 
e. 
, such that are truly revolutionaryand consistently revolutionary. 
 P. 
S. 
 This article had already been set when a manifesto ap-peared in the press, jointly issued by Kautsky, Haase andBernstein, who, seeing that the masses are swinging to theleft, are therefore now prepared to “make peace” with the Leftwing—naturally, at the price of maintaining “peace” with the Südekums. 
 Verily, Mädchen für alle ! BRITISH PACIFISM AND THE BRITISH DISLIKE OF THEORY Political freedom has hitherto been far more extensive in Britain than elsewhere in Europe. 
 Here, more than any-where else, the bourgeoisie are used to governing and know how to govern. 
 The relations between the classes are moredeveloped and in many respects clearer than in other coun-tries. 
 The absence of conscription gives the people moreliberty in their attitude towards the war in the sense that anyone may refuse to join the colours, which is why the government (which in Britain is a committee, in its purest form, for managing the affairs of the bourgeoisie) are com-pelled to bend every effort to rouse “popular” enthusiasmfor the war. 
 That aim could never be attained without aradical change in the laws, had the mass of proletarians notbeen completely disorganised and demoralised by the deser-tion to a Liberal, i. 
e. 
, bourgeois, policy, of a minority of- the best placed, skilled and unionised workers. 
 The Britishtrade unions comprise about one-fifth of all wage workers. 
Most trade union leaders are Liberals; Marx long ago calledthem agents of the bourgeoisie. 
 All these features of Britain help us, on the one hand, better to understand the essence of present-day social-chau-vinism, that essence being identical in autocratic and demo-cratic countries, in militarist and conscription-free coun-tries; on the other hand, they help us to appreciate, onthe basis of facts, the significance of that compromise withsocial-chauvinism which is expressed, for instance, in the extolling of the slogan of peace, etc. 
 The Fabian Society is undoubtedly the most consummate expression of opportunism and of Liberal-Labour policy. 
 The reader should look into the correspondence of Marx and Engels with Sorge (two Russian translations of which have appeared). 
 There he will find an excellent characterisation of that society given by Engels, who treats Messrs. 
 SidneyWebb & Co. 
 as a gang of bourgeois rogues who would demoral-ise the workers, influence them in a counter-revolutionaryspirit. 
 One may vouch for the fact that no Second Inter-national leader with any responsibility and influence has ever attempted to refute this estimation of Engels’s, or even to doubt its correctness. 
 Let us now compare the facts , leaving theory aside for a moment. 
 You will see that the Fabians’ behaviour during the war (see, for instance, their weekly paper, The New Statesman133), and that of the German Social-Democratic Party, including Kautsky, are identical . 
 The same direct and indirect defence of social-chauvinism; the same combi-nation of that defence with a readiness to utter all sorts ofkindly, humane and near-Left phrases about peace, disar-mament, etc. 
, etc. 
 The fact stands, and the conclusion to be drawn—however unpleasant it may be to various persons—is inescapably and undoubtedly the following: in practice the leaders of thepresent-day German Social-Democratic Party, includingKautsky, are exactly the same kind of agents of the bour-geoisie that Engels called the Fabians long ago. 
 The Fabians’non-recognition of Marxism and its “recognition” by Kautsky and Co. 
 make no difference whatever in the essentials, in the facts of politics; the only thing proved is that some writers,politicians, etc. 
, have converted Marxism into Struvism. 
Their hypocrisy is not a private vice with them; in individual cases they may be highly virtuous heads of families; theirhypocrisy is the result of the objective falseness of their social status: they are supposed to represent the revolutionary proletariat, whereas they are actually agents charged withthe business of inculcating bourgeois, chauvinist ideas inthe proletariat. 
 The Fabians are more sincere and honest than Kautsky and Co. 
, because they have not promised to stand for revolu-tion; politically, however, they are of the same kidney. 
 The long history of Britain’s political freedom and the de-veloped condition of her political life in general, and of her bourgeoisie in particular, have resulted in various shades of bourgeois opinion being able to find rapid, free and open expression in that country’s new political organisations. 
 One such organisation is the Union of Democratic Control,whose secretary and treasurer is E. 
 D. 
 Morel, now a regularcontributor to The Labour Leader , the Independent Labour Party’s central organ. 
 This individual was for several yearsthe Liberal Party’s nominee for the Birkenhead constituency. 
 When Morel came out against the war, shortly after its outbreak, the committee of the Birkenhead Liberal Associa-tion notified him, in a letter dated October 2, 1914, thathis candidature would no longer be acceptable, i. 
e. 
, he wassimply expelled from the Party. 
 Morel replied to this in aletter of October 14, which he subsequently published as a pamphlet entitled The Outbreak of the War . 
 Like a number of other articles by Morel, the pamphlet exposes his govern-ment, proving the falseness of assertions that the rape ofBelgium’s neutrality caused the war, or that the war isaimed at the destruction of Prussian imperialism, etc. 
, etc. 
 Morel defends the programme of the Union of Democratic Control—peace, disarmament, all territories to have the right of self-determination by plebiscite, and the democraticcontrol of foreign policy. 
 All this shows that as an individual, Morel undoubtedly deserves credit for his sincere sympathy with democracy, forturning away from the jingoist bourgeoisie to the pacifist bourgeoisie. 
 When Morel cites the facts to prove that his government duped the people when it denied the existenceof secret treaties although such treaties actually existed;that the British bourgeoisie, as early as 1887, fully real-ised that Belgium’s neutrality would inevitably be violatedin the event of a Franco-German war, and emphatically rejected the idea of interfering (Germany not yet being a dangerous competitor!); that in a number of books publishedbefore the war French militarists such as Colonel Boucherquite openly acknowledged the existence of plans for anaggressive war by France and Russia against Germany; that the well-known British military authority, Colonel Repington, admitted in 1911 in the press, that the growth of Russian armaments after 1905 had been a threat to Germany—when Morel reveals all this, we cannot but admit that we are dealing with an exceptionally honest and courageous bourgeois, who is not afraid to break with his own party. 
 Yet anyone will at once concede that, after all, Morel is a bourgeois, whose talk about peace and disarma-ment is a lot of empty phrases, since without revolutionaryaction by the proletariat there can be neither a democraticpeace nor disarmament. 
 Though he has broken with theLiberals on the question of the present war, Morel remains a Liberal on all other economic and political issues. 
 Why is it, then, that when Kautsky, in Germany, gives a Marxistguise to the selfsame bourgeois phrases about peace and dis-armament, this is not considered hypocrisy on his part, butstands to his merit? Only the undeveloped character of polit-ical relations and the absence of political freedom prevent the formation in Germany, as rapidly and smoothly as in Britain, of a bourgeois league for peace and disarmament,with Kautsky’s programme. 
 Let us, then, admit the truth that Kautsky’s stand is that of a pacifist bourgeois, not of a revolutionary Social-Democrat. 
 The events we are living amidst are great enough for us to be courageous in recognising the truth, no matter whomit may concern. 
 With their dislike of abstract theory and their pride in their practicality, the British often pose political issuesmore directly , thus helping the socialists of other countries to discover the actual content beneath the husk of wording of every-kind (including the “Marxist”). 
 Instructive in thisrespect is the pamphlet Socialism and War ,* published before the war by the jingoist paper, The Clarion . 
 The pamphlet contains an anti-war “manifesto” by Upton Sinclair, the U. 
S. 
socialist, and also a reply to him from the jingoist Robert Blatchford, who has long adopted Hyndman’s imperialist viewpoint. 
 Sinclair is a socialist of the emotions, without any theo-retical training. 
 He states the issue in “simple” fashion;incensed by the approach of war, he seeks salvation fromit in socialism. 
 *Socialism and War . 
 The Clarion Press, 44 Worship Street, London, E. 
 C. 
 “We are told,” Sinclair writes, “that the socialist move-ment is yet too weak so that we must wait for its evolution. 
 But evolution is working in the hearts of men; we are its instruments, and if we do not struggle, there is no evolution. 
We are told that the movement [against war] would becrushed out; but I declare my faith that the crushing out of anyrebellion which sought, from motive of sublime humanity,to prevent war, would be the greatest victory that socialism has ever gained—would shake the conscience of civilisation and rouse the workers of the world as nothing in all historyhas yet done. 
 Let us not be too fearful for our movement,nor put too much stress upon numbers and the outwardappearances of power. 
 A thousand men aglow with faith anddetermination are stronger than a million grown cautious and respectable; and there is no danger to the socialist movement so great as the danger of becoming an establishedinstitution. 
” This, as can be seen, is a naïve, theoretically unreasoned, but profoundly correct warning against any vulgarising ofsocialism, and a call to revolutionary struggle. 
 What does Blatchford say in reply to Sinclair? “It is capitalists and militarists who make wars. 
 That is true ...,” he says. 
 Blatchford is as anxious for peace and for socialism taking the place of capitalism as any socialistin the world. 
 But Sinclair will not convince him, or do awaywith the facts with “rhetoric and fine phrases”. 
 “Facts, my dear Sinclair, are obstinate things, and the German danger is a fact. 
” Neither the British nor the German socialists arestrong enough to prevent war, and “Sinclair greatly exag-gerates the power of British socialism. 
 The British socialists ...are not united; they have no money, no arms, no discipline”. 
The only thing they can do is to help the British Govern-ment build up the navy; there is not, nor can there be, any other guarantee of peace. 
 Neither before nor since the outbreak of the war have the chauvinists ever been so outspoken in Continental Europe. 
In Germany it is not frankness that is prevalent, but Kaut-sky’s hypocrisy and playing at sophistry. 
 The same is true of Plekhanov. 
 That is why it is so instructive to cast a glance at the situation in a more advanced country, where nobodywill be taken in with sophisms or a travesty of Marxism. 
 Here issues are stated in a more straightforward and truthful manner. 
 Let us learn from the “advanced” British. 
 Sinclair is naïve in his appeal, although fundamentally it is a very correct one; he is naïve because he ignores thedevelopment of mass socialism over the last fifty years andthe struggle of trends within socialism; he ignores the condi-tions for the growth of revolutionary action when an objec-tively revolutionary situation and a revolutionary organisation exist. 
 The “emotional” approach cannot make up for that. 
 The intense and bitter struggle between powerfultrends in socialism, between the opportunist and revolu-tionary trends, cannot be evaded by the use of rhetoric. 
 Blatchford speaks out undisguisedly, revealing the most covert argument of the Kautskyites and Co. 
, who are afraid to tell the truth. 
 We are still weak, that is all, says Blatch-ford; but his outspokenness at once lays bare his oppor-tunism, his jingoism. 
 It at once becomes obvious that heserves the bourgeoisie and the opportunists. 
 By declaringthat socialism is “ weak ” he himself weakens it by preaching an anti-socialist, bourgeois, policy. 
 Like Sinclair, but conversely, like a coward and not like a fighter, like a traitor and not like the recklessly brave, he,too, ignores the conditions making for a revolutionarysituation. 
 As for his practical conclusions, his policy (the rejection of revolutionary action, of propaganda for such action and preparation of it), Blatchford, the vulgar jingoist, is in complete accord with Plekhanov and Kautsky. 
 Marxist words have in our days become a cover for a total renunciation of Marxism; to be a Marxist, one mustexpose the “Marxist hypocrisy” of the leaders of the SecondInternational, fearlessly recognise the struggle of the two trends in socialism, and get to the bottom of the problems relating to that struggle. 
 Such is the conclusion to be drawnfrom British relationships, which show us the Marxist essence of the matter, without Marxist words. 
 Written in June 1915 First published on July 27, 1924 , Published according to in Pravda No. 
 169 the manuscript HOW SERVILITY TO REACTION IS BLENDED WITH PLAYING AT DEMOCRACY The Cadet collection of articles entitled What Russia Expects of the War (Petrograd, 1915) is a very useful book for those wishing to acquaint themselves with the politics of the liberal intelligentsia. 
 The extent to which our Cadetsand liberals have turned chauvinist is sufficiently known. 
The present issue of our magazine contains a special articleon this question. 
 However, the assembly, in one bookof the works of various Cadets dealing with a variety of subjects bearing on the war shows concretely the role, not only of the Constitutional-Democratic Party in present-dayimperialist politics, but also of the liberal intelligentsiaas a whole. 
 The specific function of such an intelligentsia and of this particular party is to disguise reaction and imperi-alism with all kinds of democratic phrases, assurances, sophisms, and subterfuges. 
 The principal article in the book,entitled “Russia’s Territorial Acquisitions”, is by Milyukov,the Cadet leader. 
 An article like this could not but setforth the actual significance of the present war, as far as Russia is concerned: her desire to seize Galicia, and take part of Poland from Austria and Germany, and Constanti-nople, the Straits, and Armenia from Turkey. 
 To providea democratic screen, phrases are pronounced about “Slavunity”, the interests of “small nationalities”, and the “menaceto European peace” presented by Germany. 
 Only in passing,almost casually as it were, does Milyukov blurt out the truth in one of his sentences “To unite Eastern Galicia with Russia has long been the aim of a Russian political party which has the backing of one of the political parties in Galicia, the so-called Mos-cowphiles” (p. 
 49). 
 Exactly! The Russian party referred to is the most reactionary in Russia, that of Purishkevich and Co. 
, a party of the feudalist-minded landowners led bytsarism. 
 This “party”—tsarism, the Purishkeviches andthe rest—have long been intriguing both in Galicia andArmenia, etc. 
 spending millions on bribing the “Moscow-philes”, stopping at no crime to achieve the lofty aim of “uniting” Eastern Galicia with Russia. 
 War is a “continu-ation of the politics” of this party. 
 The war has been useful in having brushed aside all conventions, torn awayall veils, let the people see the full truth with their own eyes:preservation of the tsarist monarchy means the need tosacrifice millions of lives (and thousands of millions of the people’s money) so as to enslave other nations. 
 In practice, it is these policies that have been backed and served by theConstitutional-Democratic Party. 
 This truth is unpalatable to the liberal intellectual, who considers himself humane, freedom-loving, and demo-cratic, and is deeply indignant at the “calumny” that asserts he is a servant to the Purishkeviches. 
 The war, how-ever, has shown this “calumny” to be the most obvious truth. 
 Let us cast a glance at other articles in the book. 
“Our future can be happy and bright only when interna-tional politics rest on a foundation of justice. 
 Faith inlife and its value will at the same time be the triumph of peace... [215]. 
 Russian women, and with them all think-ing humanity...” hope that “when peace is concluded, allthe belligerent states will simultaneously sign a pact accord-ing to which all international misunderstandings [whata word! As if what has happened among states were merely“misunderstandings”!] ... shall be settled by arbitration” (216). 
 “Russian women, who represent the people, will carry into the people the ideas of Christian love and the brother-hood of nations ... [216]. 
 [Here the censor has deleted oneline and a half, apparently super-“humanitarian” expres-sions such as liberty, equality, fraternity. 
] ... Those who know that the writer of these lines can least of all be sus-pected of nationalism, do not need to be persuaded that theideas propounded here have nothing whatsoever in common with any kind of national exclusiveness... [83]. 
 Only now do we realise and actually feel that in modern wars we are threatened, not by the loss of colonies, however precious, or by failure to free other nations, but by disintegrationof the state itself...” (147). 
 Read and give thought to how it is being done ! Learn how an allegedly democratic party conducts its politics, i. 
e. 
,leads the masses ! To serve the class of the Purishkeviches, one must, at the decisive moments of history (at times when the aims ofthat class are to be achieved by war), help that class, orat least “ offer no resistance to the war ”. 
 At the same time, one must console the “people”, the “masses”, and “democracy”, with fine words such as justice, peace, national liberation, settling international conflicts by arbitration, the brotherhood of nations, liberty, reforms, democracy, universal suf-frage, etc. 
 In doing so, one must beat one’s breast in token ofsincerity, aver and swear that “we” “can least of all be sus-pected of nationalism”, that “our” ideas have “nothingwhatsoever in common with any kind of national exclusive-ness”, and that we are only fighting against “disintegra-tion of the state”! That is how “it is being done”. 
That is how the liberal intellectuals make politics. 
The liberal-labour politicians are behaving essentially in exactly the same way, but in a different environment and in a slightly modified form. 
 These range from Nasha Zarya , which teaches the people and the proletariat “to offer noresistance to the war”, continuing with Nashe Dyelo , which identifies itself with the views of Messrs. 
 Potresov and Co. 
(No. 
 2, p. 
 19) and Plekhanov (No. 
 2, p. 
 103) and whichreprints without a single dissenting remark similar ideas of Axelrod (No. 
 2, pp. 
 107-10), continuing further with Semkovsky, who battles in Nashe Slovo and in Izvestia of the Organising Committee against “disintegration”,to Chkheidze’s group, the Organising Committee and theBund, who are fighting tooth and nail against a “split”(with the Nashe Dyelo group). 
 Moreover, they all stand for the brotherhood of the workers, peace, internationalism, and whatever you please; they will sign whatever you wish;they will renounce “nationalism” millions of times, on the single and “minor” condition—that “unity” should not be sundered with that Russian political group which alone (of the entire company) has some weight and, in journal and newspaper, has been teaching the workers opportunism,nationalism, and non-resistance to the war. 
 That is how “it is being done”. 
 Written in June 1915 First published in a special Published according to issue, entitled Along the Path the manuscript of Lenin , of the journal Sputnik Kommunista , 1925 Signed: N. 
 Lenin THE MAIN GERMAN OPPORTUNIST WORK ON THE WAR Eduard David’s book Die Sozialdemokratie im Welt-krieg (Vorwärts Publishers, Berlin, 1915) provides a good collection of facts and arguments on the tactics pursued by the official German Social-Democratic Party in the presentwar. 
 Those who follow opportunist literature and that ofthe German Social-Democrats in general will find nothingnew in this book. 
 It is, however, quite useful, and notonly for purposes of reference. 
 Anyone who would gain a deeper insight into the historic collapse of German Social-Democracy, anyone who really wishes to understand thereasons why a leading Social-Democratic party has “sud-denly” (allegedly all of a sudden) become a party of lackeysof the German bourgeoisie and the Junkers, anyone whowishes to inquire into the meaning of the commonplace sophisms which serve to justify or conceal that collapse, will find David’s dull book far from tedious. 
 As a matterof fact, there is an integral quality in David’s opinions; he hasthe conviction of a liberal-labour politician, something thatis entirely missing in the works of Kautsky, for instance,that hypocrite who trims his sails to the wind. 
 David is an opportunist through and through, a contribu-tor of long standing to Sozialistische Monatshefte —the Ger-man counterpart of Nashe Dyelo ; he is the author of a big volume on the agrarian question, which contains not evena grain of socialism or Marxism. 
 The very fact that a personlike this, whose entire life has been devoted to corrupting the working-class movement in the bourgeois spirit, has become one of many just as opportunist party leaders , a Deputy, and even a member of the Executive ( Vorstand ) of the German Social-Democratic parliamentary party, is a serious enough indication of the extent, depth and violence of the process of putrefaction within the German Social-Democracy. 
 David’s book is of no scientific value whatever, since the author cannot or will not even pose the question of howthe principal classes of present-day society have for decadesbeen preparing, encouraging and building up their present attitude towards the war, this through definite politics that stem from definite class interests. 
 Even the thought that, without an examination like the one just mentioned, noMarxist attitude towards the war can exist, and that onlyan examination such as this can provide the basis for astudy of the ideology of the various classes in their attitude towards the war, is entirely alien to David. 
 He is an advocate of a liberal-labour policy, who adapts all his expositionand all his arguments to the task of influencing working-class audiences, concealing from them the weak points in his stand, making liberal tactics acceptable to them, andstifling proletarian revolutionary instincts with the aid of the greatest possible number of authoritative examples from “The Socialists’ Tactics in the West-European States”(Chapter 7 in David’s book), etc. 
, etc. 
 From the ideological standpoint David’s book is therefore interesting only inasmuch as it provides an opportunityto analyse how the bourgeoisie should speak to the workers in order to influence them . 
 The essence of Eduard David’s ideological stand, considered from this angle, the only cor-rect one, is contained in the following proposition: “Thesignificance of our vote [for war credits] =We voted , not for war but against defeat ” (p. 
 3, table of contents, and many passages in the book). 
 This is the theme of the entire book. 
 To back this main thesis, David has hand-picked examples of the way Marx, Engels and Lassalle regarded Germany’snational wars (Chapter 2), data on the Triple Entente’svast plans of conquest (Chapter 4), as well as facts from thediplomatic history of the war (Chapter 5), the latter beingnothing more than an attempt to whitewash Germany by referring to the ridiculously trivial and no less ridiculously insincere official exchange of telegrams on the eve of thewar, etc. 
 A special chapter (6) entitled “The Magnitude of the Danger” contains considerations and figures on the Triple Entente’s preponderance of might, the reactionary nature of tsarism, etc. 
 Of course, David is fully in favour of peace. 
 The preface to the book, dated May 1, 1915, windsup with the slogan, “Peace on Earth!” David, of course,considers himself an internationalist: the German Social-Democratic Party, he says, “has not betrayed the spiritof the International” (p. 
 8); it has “fought against the sowing of poisonous hatred among the peoples” (p. 
 8); it “has declared since the very first day of the war that in principleit is ready for peace as soon as the security of the countryhas been achieved” (p. 
 8). 
 David’s book strikingly reveals that, to influence the workers and the masses in general, the liberal bourgeoisie (and their agents in the labour movement, i. 
e. 
, the oppor-tunists) are prepared to swear allegiance to internationalismany number of times, accept the peace slogan, renounce theannexationist aims of the war, condemn chauvinism, andso on and so forth—anything except revolutionary action against their own government, anything in the world, if only they can come out “against defeat”. 
 In point of fact, this ideology, in terms of mathematics, is both necessary and sufficient to fool the workers. 
 One cannot offer them less because the masses cannot be rallied unless they are promiseda just peace, and scared with the danger of invasion,and unless allegiance to internationalism is sworn to; one need not offer them more because all that is “more”, i. 
e. 
, the seizure of colonies, the annexation of foreign territo-ries, the pillaging of conquered countries, the conclusion ofadvantageous trade agreements, etc. 
, will be effected, not directly by the liberal bourgeoisie, but by the imperialist-militarist governmental war clique after the war. 
 The roles are well distributed; while the government and the military clique—with the support of the multi-million-aires and all bourgeois “men of affairs”—are waging thewar, the liberals console and dupe the masses with the nation-alist ideology of a defensive war, with promises of a demo-cratic peace, etc. 
 Eduard David’s ideology is that of the liberal and humanitarian pacifist bourgeois; so is the ideology of the Russian opportunists in the Organising Com-mittee, who are waging a struggle against the desirability of defeat, against the disintegration of Russia, for the peace slogan, etc. 
 A non-liberal brand of tactics, one that differs in prin-ciple from the above, begins with the onset of a decisivebreak with any attempts to justify participation in the war, with the practical conduct of a policy of propaganda and preparation for revolutionary action, in wartime and withthe full exploitation of wartime difficulties, against the respective governments. 
 David does approach this border-line, the real line between bourgeois and proletarian poli-tics, but he approaches it only with the purpose of glossingover an unpleasant subject. 
 He mentions the Basle Mani-festo several times, but he carefully steers clear of all itsrevolutionary passages; he recalls how Vaillant appealed in Basle “for a military strike and social revolution” (p. 
 119), but does so only to defend himself by using the example of the chauvinist Vaillant, not in order to citeand analyse the revolutionary directives of the resolutionof the Basle Congress. 
 David quotes a considerable portion of our Central Com-mittee’s Manifesto, including its main slogan—the conver-sion of the imperialist war into a civil war—but he doesit only to declare that these “Russian” tactics are nothingshort of “madness” and “gross distortion of the decisions ofthe International” (pp. 
 169, 172). 
 This, he says, is Hervé-ism (p. 
 176); Hervé’s book, he says “contains the whole theory of Lenin, Luxemburg, Radek, Pannekoek, etc. 
” But, my dear David, is not there some Hervéism in the revo-lutionary passages of the Basle resolution and the Commu-nist Manifesto ? The mention of the latter document is just as unpleasant to David as the name of our journal, whichis reminiscent of that very document, is unpleasant to Semkovsky. 
 The thesis of the Communist Manifesto to the effect that “the workingmen have no country” has, as Davidis convinced, “long been disproved” (p. 
 176 ff. 
). 
 As to thequestion of nationalities, the entire concluding chapter ofDavid’s book offers us the most unmitigated bourgeoisnonsense about the “biological law of differentiation” (!), etc. 
 What is international is not at all anti-national; we stand for the right of nations to self-assertion; we are against the browbeating of weak nations, David asserts, fail-ing to understand (or rather pretending not to understand) that justifying participation in the imperialist war and advancing the “against-defeat” slogan in this war meansacting, not only as an anti-socialist, but also as an anti-national politician. 
 For the present-day imperialist waris a war between Great Powers (i. 
e. 
, powers that oppress anumber of other nations), conducted for the purpose of oppressing new nations. 
 One cannot be “national” in an imperialist war otherwise than by being a socialist politi-cian, i. 
e. 
, by recognising the right of oppressed nations toliberation, to secession from the Great Powers that oppressthem. 
 In the era of imperialism, there can be no other sal-vation for most of the world’s nations than through revolu-tionary action undertaken by the proletariat of the Great Powers, spreading beyond the boundaries of nationality,smashing those boundaries, and overthrowing the interna-tional bourgeoisie. 
 Until the bourgeoisie is overthrown, therewill remain nations known as “Great Powers”, i. 
e. 
, theoppression will remain of nine-tenths of the nations of the whole world. 
 The overthrow of the bourgeoisie will enor-mously accelerate the downfall of national partitions of every kind, this without decreasing but, on the contrary,increasing a millionfold the “differentiation” of humanity,in the meaning of the wealth and the variety in spirituallife, ideological trends, tendencies, and shades. 
 Written in June -July 1915 First published in Pravda Published according to No. 
 169, July 27, 1924 the manuscript THE DEFEAT OF ONE ’S OWN GOVERNMENT IN THE IMPERIALIST WAR During a reactionary war a revolutionary class cannot but desire the defeat of its government. 
 This is axiomatic, and disputed only by conscious parti-sans or helpless satellites of the social-chauvinists. 
 Amongthe former, for instance, is Semkovsky of the OrganisingCommittee (No. 
 2 of its Izvestia ), and among the latter, Trotsky and Bukvoyed, 134 and Kautsky in Germany. 
 To desire Russia’s defeat, Trotsky writes, is “an uncalled-for and absolutely unjustifiable concession to the political methodology of social-patriotism, which would replace therevolutionary struggle against the war and the conditionscausing it, with an orientation—highly arbitrary in thepresent conditions—towards the lesser evil” ( Nashe Slovo No. 
 105). 
 This is an instance of high-flown phraseology with which Trotsky always justifies opportunism. 
 A “revolutionarystruggle against the war” is merely an empty and meaning-less exclamation, something at which the heroes of theSecond International excel, unless it means revolutionary action against one’s own government even in wartime. 
 One has only to do some thinking in order to understand this. 
 Wartime revolutionary action against one’s own govern-ment indubitably means, not only desiring its defeat, butreally facilitating such a defeat. 
 (“Discerning reader”: notethat this does not mean “blowing up bridges”, organisingunsuccessful strikes in the war industries, and in general helping the government defeat the revolutionaries. 
) The phrase-bandying Trotsky has completely lost his bearings on a simple issue. 
 It seems to him that to desire Russia’s defeat means desiring the victory of Germany. 
 (Bukvoyed and Semkovsky give more direct expression to the “thought”, or rather want of thought, which they share with Trotsky. 
) But Trotsky regards this as the “method-ology of social-patriotism”! To help people that are unableto think for themselves, the Berne resolution ( Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 40) * made it clear that in all imperialist countries the proletariat must now desire the defeat of its own government. 
 Bukvoyed and Trotsky preferred to avoid this truth, while Semkovsky (an opportunist who is moreuseful to the working class than all the others, thanks tohis naïvely frank reiteration of bourgeois wisdom) blurtedout the following: “This is nonsense, because either Germanyor Russia can win” ( Izvestia No. 
 2). 
 Take the example of the Paris Commune. 
 France was defeated by Germany but the workers were defeated by Bis-marck and Thiers! Had Bukvoyed and Trotsky done a littlethinking, they would have realised that they have adopted the viewpoint on the war held by governments and the bour-geoisie , i. 
e. 
, that they cringe to the “political methodology of social-patriotism”, to use Trotsky’s pretentious language. 
 A revolution in wartime means civil war; the conversion of a war between governments into a civil war is, on the onehand, facilitated by military reverses (“defeats”) of govern-ments; on the other hand, one cannot actually strive for such a conversion without thereby facilitating defeat. 
 The reason why the chauvinist (including the Organising Committee and the Chkheidze group) repudiate the defeat“slogan” is that this slogan alone implies a consistent call for revolutionary action against one’s own government inwartime. 
 Without such action, millions of ultra-revolutionaryphrases such as a war against “the war and the condi-tions, etc. 
” are not worth a brass farthing. 
 Anyone who would in all earnest refute the “slogan” of defeat for one’s own government in the imperialist warshould prove one of three things: (1) that the war of 1914-15is not reactionary, or (2) that a revolution stemming fromthat war is impossible, or (3) that co-ordination and mutual aid are possible between revolutionary movements in all the *See p. 
 163 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 belligerent countries. 
 The third point is particularly important to Russia, a most backward country, where an im-mediate socialist revolution is impossible. 
 That is why the Russian Social-Democrats had to be the first to advance the“theory and practice” of the defeat “slogan”. 
 The tsaristgovernment was perfectly right in asserting that the agitationconducted by the Russian Social-Democratic Labour groupin the Duma—the sole instance in the International, not only of parliamentary opposition but of genuine revolutionary anti-government agitation among the masses—that thisagitation has weakened Russia’s “military might” and islikely to lead to its defeat. 
 This is a fact to which it isfoolish to close one’s eyes. 
 The opponents of the defeat slogan are simply afraid of themselves when they refuse to recognise the very obvious fact of the inseparable link between revolutionary agitationagainst the government and helping bring about its defeat. 
 Are co-ordination and mutual aid possible between the Russian movement, which is revolutionary in the bourgeois-democratic sense, and the socialist movement in the West? No socialist who has publicly spoken on the matter during the last decade has doubted this, the movement among theAustrian proletariat after October 17, 1905, 135 actually proving it possible. 
 Ask any Social-Democrat who calls himself an internation-alist whether or not he approves of an understanding between the Social-Democrats of the various belligerent countries on joint revolutionary action against all bel-ligerent governments. 
 Many of them will reply that it isimpossible, as Kautsky has done ( Die Neue Zeit , October 2, 1914), thereby fully proving his social-chauvinism. 
 This, on the one hand, is a deliberate and vicious lie, which clashes with the generally known facts and the Basle Manifesto. 
 On the other hand, if it were true, the opportunists would be quite right in many respects ! Many will voice their approval of such an understanding. 
 To this we shall say: if this approval is not hypocritical,it is ridiculous to think that, in wartime and for the conduct of a war, some “formal” understanding is necessary, such as the election of representatives, the arrangement of a meet-ing, the signing of an agreement, and the choice of the day and hour! Only the Semkovskys are capable of thinking so. 
 An understanding on revolutionary action even in a single country, to say nothing of a number of countries, can be achieved only by the force of the example of serious revolu-tionary action, by launching such action and developing it. 
 However, such action cannot be launched without desiringthe defeat of the government, and without contributingto such a defeat. 
 The conversion of the imperialist war into a civil war cannot be “made”, any more than a revo-lution can be “made”. 
 It develops out of a number of diverse phenomena, aspects, features, characteristics and conse-quences of the imperialist war. 
 That development isimpossible without a series of military reverses and defeats of governments that receive blows from their own oppressed classes. 
 To repudiate the defeat slogan means allowing one’s revolutionary ardour to degenerate into an empty phrase,or sheer hypocrisy. 
 What is the substitute proposed for the defeat slogan? It is that of “neither victory nor defeat” (Semkovsky in Izvestia No. 
 2; also the entire Organising Committee in No. 
 1). 
 This, however, is nothing but a paraphrase of the“defence of the fatherland ” slogan. 
 It means shifting the issue to the level of a war between governments (who, accordingto the content of this slogan, are to keep to their old stand, “retain their positions”), and not to the level of the struggle of the oppressed classes against their governments! It means justifying the chauvinism of all the imperialist nations, whose bourgeoisie are always ready to say— and do say to the people —that they are “only” fighting “against defeat ”. 
 “The significance of our August 4 vote was that we are notfor war but against defeat ,” David, a leader of the opportun-ists, writes in his book. 
 The Organising Committee, together with Bukvoyed and Trotsky, stand on fully the same ground as David when they defend the “neither-victory-nor-defeat” slogan. 
 On closer examination, this slogan will be found to mean a “class truce”, the renunciation of the class struggle by the oppressed classes in all belligerent countries, since the class struggle is impossible without dealing blows at one’s “own”bourgeoisie, one’s “own” government, whereas dealing a blow at one’s own government in wartime is (for Bukvoyed’s information) high treason, means contributing to the defeat of one’s own country. 
 Those who accept the “neither-victory-nor-defeat” slogan can only be hypocritically infavour of the class struggle, of “disrupting the class truce”;in practice , such people are renouncing an independent pro-letarian policy because they subordinate the proletariatof all belligerent countries to the absolutely bourgeois task of safeguarding the imperialist governments against defeat. 
 The only policy of actual, not verbal disruption of the“class truce”, of acceptance of the class struggle,is for the proletariat to take advantage of the difficulties experienced by its government and its bourgeoisie in order to overthrow them . 
 This, however, cannot be achieved or striven for , without desiring the defeat of one’s own government and without contributing to that defeat. 
 When, before the war, the Italian Social-Democrats raised the question of a mass strike, the bourgeoisie replied,no doubt correctly from their own point of view, that this would be high treason, and that Social-Democrats would be dealt with as traitors. 
 That is true, just as it is true that fraternisation in the trenches is high treason. 
 Those whowrite against “high treason”, as Bukvoyed does, or againstthe “disintegration of Russia”, as Semkovsky does, are adopt-ing the bourgeois, not the proletarian point of view. 
 Aproletarian cannot deal a class blow at his government or hold out (in fact) a hand to his brother, the proletarian of the “foreign” country which is at war with “our side”,without committing “high treason”, without contributing to the defeat, to the disintegration of his “own”, imperialist “Great” Power. 
 Whoever is in favour of the slogan of “neither victory nor defeat” is consciously or unconsciously a chauvinist; at best he is a conciliatory petty bourgeois but in any casehe is an enemy to proletarian policy, a partisan of the existing governments, of the present-day ruling classes. 
 Let us look at the question from yet another angle. 
 The war cannot but evoke among the masses the most turbulent sentiments, which upset the usual sluggish state of mass mentality. 
 Revolutionary tactics are impossible if they are not adjusted to these new turbulent sentiments. 
 What are the main currents of these turbulent sentiments? They are: (1) Horror and despair. 
 Hence, a growth of religious feeling. 
 Again the churches are crowded, the reaction-aries joyfully declare. 
 “Wherever there is suffering there isreligion,” says the arch-reactionary Barres. 
 He is right, too. 
(2) Hatred of the “enemy”, a sentiment that is carefullyfostered by the bourgeoisie (not so much by the priests),and is of economic and political value only to the bourgeoi-sie. 
 (3) Hatred of one’s own government and one’s own bour-geoisie—the sentiment of all class-conscious workers whounderstand, on the one hand, that war is a “continuationof the politics” of imperialism, which they counter by a“continuation” of their hatred of their class enemy, and, onthe other hand, that “a war against war” is a banal phrase unless it means a revolution against their own government. 
 Hatred of one’s own government and one’s own bourgeoisiecannot be aroused unless their defeat is desired; one cannot be a sincere opponent of a civil (i. 
e. 
, class) truce withoutarousing hatred of one’s own government and bourgeoisie! Those who stand for the “neither-victory-nor-defeat” slogan are in fact on the side of the bourgeoisie and the oppor-tunists, for they do not believe in the possibility of inter-national revolutionary action by the working class againsttheir own governments, and do not wish to help develop such action, which, though undoubtedly difficult, is the onlytask worthy of a proletarian, the only socialist task. 
 It is the proletariat in the most backward of the belligerent Great Powers which, through the medium of their party, have hadto adopt—especially in view of the shameful treachery of theGerman and French Social-Democrats—revolutionary tacticsthat are quite unfeasible unless they “contribute to thedefeat” of their own government, but which alone lead to a European revolution, to the permanent peace of socialism, to the liberation of humanity from the horrors, misery,savagery and brutality now prevailing. 
 Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 43, Published according to July 26, 1915 the text in Sotsial-Demokrat THE STATE OF AFFAIRS IN RUSSIAN SOCIAL-DEMOCRACY The second issues of the Organising Committee’s Izve-stia and of Nashe Dyelo reveal this state of affairs in a most instructive and illuminating way. 
 Both papers, each in its own way, and in accordance with their places of publi-cation and their political aim, are purposefully directingtheir efforts towards strengthening social-chauvinism. 
 Nashe Dyelo has not only failed to inform the readers of any differences or shades of opinion among its editors, hasnot only failed to raise the faintest objection to “Potresov-ism”, but has voiced, in a special “editorial” statement (p. 
 19), its solidarity with Potresovism by declaring that“internationalism” calls for an “orientation in the interna-tional situation” which will help decide the success of which bourgeoisie in the present war is more desirable to the prole-tariat. 
 This means that all the editors are basically and essentially social-chauvinists. 
 Besides, it is only on shades of social-chauvinism that the editors disagree with Kautsky,whose pamphlet, entirely devoted to justification of inter-national social-chauvinism, they have endowed with suchepithets as “brilliant”, “exhaustive” and “theoreticallyvaluable”. 
 Whoever has eyes to see cannot but notice that the Nashe Dyelo ’s editors are, firstly, thereby sanctioning Russian chauvinism, and secondly, have expressed readiness toamnesty international social-chauvinism and reconcilethemselves to it. 
 In the section “In Russia and Abroad”, the paper quotes the views of Plekhanov and Axelrod, which the editors (with good reason) do not distinguish between. 
 A special note, again editorial (p. 
 103), declares that Plekhanov’s “views coincide in many respects” with those of Nashe Dyelo . 
 The picture could not be clearer. 
 That legalist “current” which finds expression in Nashe Dyelo and, thanks to a thousand links with the liberal bourgeoisie, has, alone out of the entire “Brussels bloc”, been a reality in Russiain 1910-15, has fully consolidated and completed its oppor-tunist development, supplementing liquidationism withsocial-chauvinism. 
 The actual programme of that group,which was expelled from our Party 136 in January 1912, has been augmented with a new and very important item: the propagation in the working class of ideas which call for thepreservation and enlargement, even at the price of war ifnecessary, of the dominant-nation advantages and privilegesof the Great-Russian landowners and bourgeoisie. 
 An attempt to conceal this political reality with “Left” phrases and quasi-Social-Democratic ideology—such is the actual political significance of the legal activities of theChkheidze group and of the Organising Committee’s illegalactivities. 
 In the realm of ideology the “neither-victory-nor-defeat” slogan; in the realm of practice—an anti-“split”struggle which permeates literally all the articles in Izves-tia’s second issue, particularly those by Martov, Yonov, and Mashinadze—such is the businesslike and (from theopportunists’ standpoint) perfectly correct programme of“peace” with Nashe Dyelo and Plekhanov. 
 Read the letter of Mr. 
 Alexinsky, the “former revolutionary”, in Rech No. 
 143 (May 27, 1915), on “defence of the country” as the “task of democracy”, and you will see that this zealous henchman of Plekhanov, the chauvinist of today, will get fully recon-ciled to the slogan of “neither victory nor defeat”. 
 In fact,this is a slogan common to Plekhanov, Nashe Dyelo , Axelrod and Kosovsky, Martov and Semkovsky, who will of course(no doubt about that!) keep their “quite legitimate shades” and “differences on details”. 
 In the ideological sense and on the fundamentals, this fraternity are content with accept-ing as common ground the slogan of “neither victory nordefeat” (speaking parenthetically; whose victories or defeats? Obviously, those of the existing governments , of the present-day ruling classes!). 
 In the sphere of practical policies, they are content with the “unity” slogan, i. 
e. 
, unity with Nashe Dyelo , which means acceptance of the fact that, in Russia, Nashe Dyelo will, with the aid of the Chkheidze group, continue to conduct serious policies and do serious work among the masses (“serious” in the bourgeois sense), while abroad and underground, the Organising Committee and Co. 
 will permit themselves “Left” petty reservationsand near-revolutionary phrases, and so on and so forth. 
Let us harbour no illusions: the Brussels bloc which imme-diately fell apart, thus proving that it contained nothing buthypocrisy, is, for that very reason, highly suited to covering up a politically unsavoury situation. 
 In July 1914, it covered up Nasha Zarya and Severnaya Rabochaya Gazeta with non-committal near-Left resolutions. 
 In July 1915, thereis as yet no “meeting of friends” and no “Minutes”, but thereis already an agreement, in principle, between the chief“actors” regarding joint concealment of the social-chauvin-ism of Nashe Dyelo , Plekhanov and Axelrod by using the same kind of near-Left phrases. 
 A year has passed, a grave andimportant year in the history of Europe. 
 It has become appar-ent that the abscess of national liberal-labour politicshas asphyxiated most of the Social-Democratic parties of Europe and that it has come to a head within liquidationism too—but the “friends”, like the musicians in Krylov’s fable “The Quartet” 137 have only changed seats to strike up in chorus and in false tones the same old song. 
 Unity,unity—(with Nashe Dyelo )! The example of Nashe Slovo , which comes out in Paris, is particularly instructive to sincere adherents of “unity”. 
 Issue No. 
 2 of the Organising Committee’s Izvestia has dealt Nashe Slovo a mortal blow so that the latter’s demise (po-litical or “physical”, it does not matter very much) is nowonly a matter of time. 
 Issue No. 
 2 of the Organising Commit-tee’s Izvestia has “killed” Nashe Slovo simply by declaring that Martov (who found himself a member of the Organ-ising Committee’s secretariat, evidently having been “unani-mously” co-opted by Semkovsky and Axelrod, probablyin exchange for his consent to repeat no more unguardedphrases about the “death” of Vorwärts ) and “a good half of the contributors to Nashe Slovo , who are organisationally attached to the Organising Committee”, have admitted their error , they have admitted that they “ naïvely ” (Martov in the role of an ingénu , quite an eyeful!) considered Nashe Slovo the “joint organ of the Russian internation-alists”, whereas in reality Nashe Slovo proved to be both “factional” and “pursuing splitting [for his part, Semkovsky has added “anarcho-syndicalist ”] tendencies ”, and also “making excuses to Lenin’s Sotsial-Demokrat ”. 
 The public have seen three Nashe Slovo elements, which for seven or eight months have been unsuccessfully tryingto unite. 
 These are: (1) two Left-wing members of the edi-torial staff ( Nashe Slovo No. 
 107) who sincerely sympathise with internationalism and gravitate towards Sotsial-Demokrat (see the resolution of greeting addressed to them by the Paris group of our Party, in Nashe Slovo No. 
 122), (2) Martov and the Organising Committee members (“a goodhalf”); (3) Trotsky, who as always entirely disagrees withthe social-chauvinists in principle, but agrees with them in everything in practice (incidentally, thanks to the “felicitous mediation”—is that what they call it in diplomaticlanguage?—of the Chkheidze group). 
 Sincere friends of unity must be asking themselves: why did Nashe Slovo collapse and split? It is customary to ex-plain splits by the misanthropic “splitting policy” of the horrible “Leninists” (the articles by Semkovsky in Izvestia No. 
 2, by Axelrod in Nashe Slovo , etc. 
, etc. 
). 
 These horrible people, however, took no part at all in Nashe Slovo and for this simple reason they could not have split away or left it. 
 What, then, is the reason? Was it accidental? Or was it because unity between Social-Democratic workers and the conductors of bourgeois influence (in reality agents of liberal and chauvinist bourgeoisie) who are centred in Nashe Dyelo is impossible and damaging? Let the friends of “unity” ponder over this. 
Of the European Social-Democrats, Kautsky and Haase jointly with Bernstein himself, have come out—in some-what different surroundings and form—in favour of “unity”. 
 Sensing that the masses are swinging towards the Left, these“authorities” are proposing peace to the Left Social-Demo-crats, on the tacit condition of peace with the Südekums. 
To renounce, in word, the “policy of August 4”; to paperover the rift between the national liberal-labour policies and the Social-Democratic working-class policies, with the aid of some non-committal (in certain respects not unfa-vourable even to Hindenburg and Joffre) “peace” phrases (the peace slogan being highly suited to the purpose), and by platonically denouncing annexations, etc. 
—such, approxi-mately, is Kautsky’s and Bernstein’s programme, which the French social-chauvinists would not be loath to join, as maybe seen from the tone of some statements in l’Humanité . 
 The British in the Independent Labour Party will, of course,heartily support such an amnesty for social-chauvinism ifonly it is concealed by a number of compliments for the Left. 
 The Organising Committee members and Trotsky seem to be predestined to hang on to the coat-tails of Kautsky andBernstein, at the present juncture. 
 We consider this leftward turn by the leader of the oppor-tunists and the leader of the hypocritical chauvinists ofthe “radical” camp a farce designed to save what is rotten in Social-Democracy, by means of a bow towards the Left, with the aim of bolstering the national liberal-labour poli-cies at the price of petty verbal concessions to the “Lefts”. 
 The objective situation in Europe is such that, among the masses, disappointment, dissatisfaction, protest, indig-nation, and revolutionary temper are mounting, which, at a certain stage of that temper’s development, may turn into action with incredible speed. 
 Either aid the growth anddevelopment of revolutionary action against one’s own bourgeoisie and one’s own government, or else hamper, sootheand extinguish the revolutionary temper—this is the onlypractical way in which the issue now stands. 
 To achieve the latter of these alternatives, the liberal bourgeoisie and the opportunists will agree (and, from the standpoint oftheir interests, must agree) to any verbal concessions to the Left, to any number of promises concerning disarmament,peace, the repudiation of annexations, reforms of everykind, anything under the sun, if only a rupture between the masses and their opportunist leaders, and a resumption of more and more serious revolutionary action can beaverted. 
 Do not trust any high-sounding programmes, we say to the masses; rely on your own mass revolutionary actionagainst your governments and your bourgeoisie and try to build up such action; there is no escape from barbarism, no possibility of progress in Europe, without a civil war forsocialism. 
 P. 
S. 
 This article had already been set when we received a collection of articles under the title of The War , by Mr. 
 Plekhanov and the “former revolutionary” G. 
 Alexinsky and Co. 
 This is an assortment of sophisms and lies bysocial-chauvinists, who would make the tsarism’s reaction-ary war of plunder appear “just”, “defensive”, etc. 
! We wouldbring this disgraceful sheaf of servility to tsarism to theattention of all those who honestly wish to understand why the Second International has collapsed. 
 It is, incidentally noteworthy that these outspoken social-chauvinists areentirely satisfied both with Chkheidze and his entire group. 
 The Organising Committee, Trotsky, Plekhanov, and Alex-insky and Co. 
 are naturally also satisfied with the Chkheidzegroup because for years the latter have proved their skill in shielding the opportunists and serving them. 
 Messrs. 
 Plekhanov and Alexinsky are shamelessly lying about the Russian Social-Democratic Labour group in theDuma, now exiled to Siberia. 
 The time is probably at handwhen it will be possible to cite documents to refute theselies. 
 Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 43, Published according to July 26, 1915 the text in Sotsial-Demokrat THE “PEACE ” SLOGAN APPRAISED In its issue of June 27, 1915, the Vienna Arbeiter-Zei-tung , central organ of the Austrian Social-Democrats, cites a very instructive declaration contained in the German governmental Norddeutsche Allgemeine Zeitung . 
 The declaration deals with an article by one of the best known (and vilest) opportunists of the “Social-Democratic”Party of Germany named Quarck, who said inter alia : “We German Social-Democrats and our Austrian comrades have repeatedly declared ourselves ready to establish contacts (with the British and French Social-Democrats) for the pur-pose of beginning peace talks. 
 The German Imperial Govern-ment know of this , and have not placed the slightest obstacle in our way . 
” Nationalliberale Korrespondenz , a German national-liberal paper, has said that the concluding words permit of a double interpretation. 
 The first is that the government have put no obstacles in the way of “international politicalaction” by the Social-Democrats, insofar as it does not trans-gress the limits of legality and “is not dangerous to theState”. 
 This, the paper says, is perfectly intelligible fromthe angle of “political freedom”. 
 The second interpretation is that the German Government “at least tacitly approve of the Social-Democratic interna-tionalist peace propaganda, and even consider it a suitablemeans of laying down the initial basis for exploring thepossibility of peace”. 
 The national-liberal paper naturally considers this latter interpretation out of the question. 
 In this it has the official support of the government newspaper, which goes on tosay that “the government have nothing in common with internationalist peace propaganda and have authorised neither Social-Democratic nor any other intermediaries to conduct that propaganda”. 
 An edifying farce, is it not? Will anybody believe that the German Government, who have forbidden Vorwärts to write about the class struggle, have introduced harshmilitary laws against popular meetings and veritable “mili-tary slavery” for the proletariat—that this government have, out of sheer liberalism , “put no obstacles” in the way of Messrs. 
 Quarck and Südekum, or that they are not inconstant communication with the latter gentlemen? Is it not a thousand times more likely that Quarck inad-vertently told the truth (namely, that the peace propaganda was started by the German Social-Democrats when they had reached a direct or indirect understanding with their government), and that he was “officially refuted” only forthe purpose of concealing the truth. 
 This is a lesson to those phrase-lovers who, like Trotsky (see No. 
 105 of Nashe Slovo ), defend—in opposition to us— the peace slogan, alleging among other things that “all Left-wingers” have united for the purpose of “action” under this very slogan! The Junker government have now demon-strated the correctness of our Berne resolution ( Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 40), which says that the propaganda of peace “unaccompanied by a call for revolutionary mass action’ canonly “sow illusions” and “turn the proletariat into a plaything in the hands of the secret diplomacy of the belligerent countries”. 
 * This has been literally proved!In a few years diplomatic history will prove that there was an understanding, direct or indirect, between the oppor-tunists and the governments on peace palaver and this, not in Germany alone ! Diplomacy may conceal such things, but murder will out! When the Lefts began to unite under the peace slogan, this deserved encouragement, provided it was the first step in protest against the chauvinists, in the same fashion asthe Caponade was the Russian worker’s first timid protest against the tsar. 
 But since the Lefts are even *See p. 
 163 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 now confining themselves to this slogan (slogans are the business of intelligent political leaders), they are shoddy Lefts, there is consequently not a grain of “action ” in their resolutions, and they are consequently a plaything in thehands of the Südekums, Quarcks, Sembats, Hyndmans,Joffres, and Hindenburgs. 
 Anyone who fails to understand this even today, when the peace slogan (“unaccompanied by a call for revolution-ary mass action”) has been prostituted by the Vienna Conference 138 of Bernstein, Kautsky and Co. 
 with the Schei-demanns (the German Vorstand , their Executive), is simply an unwitting participant in the social-chauvinist humbug-ging of the people. 
 Written in July-August 1915 First published in the magazine Published according to Proletarskaya Revolutsia No. 
 5 the manuscript (28), 1924 THE QUESTION OF PEACE The question of peace as an immediate programme of action for the socialists, and in this connection thequestion of peace terms, presents a universal interest. 
 One canonly be grateful to Berner Tagwacht for its efforts to pose the question, not from the usual petty-bourgeois national angle, but from one that is genuinely proletarian and inter-nationalist. 
 The editorial note in No. 
 73 (“ Friedenssehnsucht ”), that the German Social-Democrats who wish for peace mustbreak ( sich lossagen ) with the policies of the Junker govern-ment, was excellent. 
 Also excellent was Comrade A. 
 P. 
’s 139 attack (Nos. 
 73 and 75) on the “pompous airs of impotentphrase-mongers” ( Wichtigtuerei machtloser Schönredner ), who are vainly attempting to solve the peace question fromthe petty-bourgeois point of view. 
 Let us see how this question should be posed by social-ists. 
 The peace slogan can be advanced either in connection with definite peace terms, or without any conditions at all,as a struggle, not for a definite kind of peace, but for peacein general ( Frieden ohne weiters ). 
 In the latter case, we obviously have a slogan that is not only non-socialist butentirely devoid of meaning and content. 
 Most people are defi-nitely in favour of peace in general, including even Kitche-ner, Joffre, Hindenburg, and Nicholas the Bloodstained, foreach of them wants an end to the war. 
 The trouble is that every one of them advances peace terms that are imperialist(i. 
e. 
, predatory and oppressive, towards other peoples),and to the advantage of his “own” nation. 
 Slogans must be brought forward so as to enable the masses, through propa-ganda and agitation, to see the unbridgeable distinctionbetween socialism and capitalism (imperialism), and not for the purpose of reconciling two hostile classes and two hostile political lines, with the aid of a formula that “unites” the most different things. 
 To continue: can the socialists of different countries be united on definite terms of peace? If so, such terms must undoubtedly include the recognition of the right to self-determination for all nations, and also renunciation of all“annexations”, i. 
e. 
, infringements of that right. 
 If, however, that right is recognised only for some nations, then you are defending the privileges of certain nations, i. 
e. 
, you are a nationalist and imperialist, not a socialist. 
 If, however,that right is recognised for all nations, then you cannot single out Belgium alone, for instance; you must take all the oppressed peoples, both in Europe (the Irish in Britain, the Italians in Nice, the Danes in Germany, fifty-seven per cent of Russia’s population, etc. 
) and outside of Europe , i. 
e. 
, all colonies. 
 Comrade A. 
 P. 
 has done well to remindus of them. 
 Britain, France, and Germany have a totalpopulation of some one hundred and fifty million, whereasthe populations they oppress in the colonies number over four hundred million! The essence of the imperialist war, i. 
e. 
, a war waged for the interests of the capitalists, consists,not only in the war being waged with the aim of oppressingnew nations, of carving up the colonies, but also in its beingwaged primarily by the advanced nations, which oppress a number of other peoples comprising the majority of the earth’s population. 
 The German Social-Democrats, who justify the seizure of Belgium or reconcile themselves to it, are actually imperial-ists and nationalists, not Social-Democrats, since theydefend the “right” of the German bourgeoisie (partly also ofthe German workers) to oppress the Belgians, the Alsatians, the Danes, the Poles, the Negroes in Africa, etc. 
 They are not socialists, but menials to the German bourgeoisie, whom they are aiding to rob other nations. 
 The Belgian socialistswho demand the liberation and indemnification of Belgiumalone are also actually defending a demand of the Belgian bourgeoisie, who would go on plundering the 15,000,000 Congolese population and obtaining concessions and privileges in other countries. 
 The Belgian bourgeoisie’sforeign investments amount to something like three thousand million francs. 
 Safeguarding the profits from these invest-ments by using every kind of fraud and machinations is the real “national interest” of “gallant Belgium”. 
 The same applies in a still greater degree to Russia, Britain, Franceand Japan. 
 It follows that if the demand for the freedom of nations is not to be a false phrase covering up the imperialism andthe nationalism of certain individual countries, it must be extended to all peoples and to all colonies. 
 Such a demand however, is obviously meaningless unless it is accompanied by a series of revolutions in all the advanced countries. 
 Moreover, it cannot be accomplished without a successfulsocialist revolution. 
 Should this be taken to mean that socialists can remain indifferent to the peace demand that is coming from ever greater masses of the people? By no means. 
 The slogans ofthe workers’ class-conscious vanguard are one thing, whilethe spontaneous demands of the masses are something quitedifferent. 
 The yearning for peace is one of the most importantsymptoms revealing the beginnings of disappointment in the bourgeois lie about a war of “liberation”, the “defence of the fatherland”, and similar falsehoods that the class of capitalistsbeguiles the mob with. 
 This symptom should attract theclosest attention from socialists. 
 All efforts must be benttowards utilising the masses’ desire for peace. 
 But how is it to be utilised? To recognise the peace slogan and repeat it would mean encouraging “pompous airs of impotent [and frequently what is worse: hypocritical ] phrase-mongers”; it would mean deceiving the people with illusion that the existing govern-ments, the present-day master classes, are capable —without being “taught” a lesson (or rather without being eliminated)by a series of revolutions—of granting a peace in any way satisfactory to democracy and the working class. 
 Nothing is more harmful than such deception. 
 Nothing throws moredust in the eyes of the workers, nothing imbues them with amore deceptive idea about the absence of deep contradic-tion between capitalism and socialism, nothing embellishes capitalist slavery more than this deception does. 
 No, we must make use of the desire for peace so as to explain to the masses that the benefits they expect from peace cannot beobtained without a series of revolutions. 
 An end to wars, peace among the nations, the cessation of pillaging and violence—such is our ideal, but only bour-geois sophists can seduce the masses with this ideal, if the latter is divorced from a direct and immediate call for revo-lutionary action. 
 The ground for such propaganda is prepared;to practice that propaganda, one need only break withthe opportunists, those allies of the bourgeoisie, who are ham-pering revolutionary work both directly (even to the extent of passing information to the authorities) and indirectly. 
 The slogan of self-determination of nations should also be advanced in connection with the imperialist era of capi-talism. 
 We do not stand for the status quo , or for the philis-tine Utopia of standing aside in great wars. 
 We stand for a revolutionary struggle against imperialism, i. 
e. 
, capitalism. 
 Imperialism consists in a striving of nations that oppress a number of other nations to extend and increase thatoppression and to repartition the colonies. 
 That is why thequestion of self-determination of nations today hinges on the conduct of socialists of the oppressor nations. 
 A socialist of any of the oppressor nations (Britain, France, Germany, Japan, Russia, the United States of America, etc. 
) who does not recognise and does not struggle for the right of oppressednations to self-determination (i. 
e. 
, the right to secession)is in reality a chauvinist, not a socialist. 
 Only this point of view can lead to a sincere and con-sistent struggle against imperialism, to a proletarian, not a philistine approach (today) to the national question. 
 Only this point of view can lead to a consistent applicationof the principle of combating any form of the oppressionof nations; it removes mistrust among the proletarians ofthe oppressor and oppressed nations, makes for a unitedinternational struggle for the socialist revolution (i. 
e. 
, for the only accomplishable regime of complete national equality), as distinct from the philistine Utopia of freedomfor all small states in general, under capitalism. 
 This is the point of view adopted by our Party, i. 
e. 
, by those Social-Democrats of Russia who have rallied aroundthe Central Committee. 
 This was the point of view adopted by Marx when he taught the proletariat that “no nation can be free if it oppresses other nations”. 
 It was from this pointof view that Marx demanded the separation of Ireland from /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR Britain, this in the interests of the freedom movement, not only of the Irish, but especially of the British workers. 
 If the socialists of Britain do not recognise and uphold Ireland’s right to secession, if the French do not do the same for Italian Nice, the Germans for Alsace-Lorraine, Danish Schleswig, and Poland, the Russians for Poland, Finland,the Ukraine, etc. 
, and the Poles for the Ukraine—if all thesocialists of the “Great” Powers, i. 
e. 
, the great robberpowers, do not uphold that right in respect of the colonies, itis solely because they are in fact imperialists, not socialists. 
 It is ridiculous to cherish illusions that people who do not fight for “the right to self-determination” of the oppressednations, while they themselves belong to the oppressornations, are capable of practising socialist policies. 
 Instead of leaving it to the hypocritical phrase-mongers to deceive the people by phrases and promises concerning the possibility of a democratic peace, socialists must explain to the masses the impossibility of anything resemblinga democratic peace, unless there are a series of revolutionsand unless a revolutionary struggle is waged in every countryagainst the respective government. 
 Instead of allowing the bourgeois politicians to deceive the peoples with talk about the freedom of nations, socialists must explain to the masses in the oppressor nations that they cannot hope for their liberation, as long as they help oppress othernations, and do not recognise and uphold the right of thosenations to self-determination, i. 
e. 
, the freedom to secede. 
That is the socialist, as distinct from the imperialist, policy to be applied to all countries, on the question of peace and the national question. 
 True, this line is in most cases incom-patible with the laws punishing high treason—but so isthe Basle resolution, which has been so shamefully betrayedby almost all the socialists of the oppressor nations. 
 The choice is between socialism and submission to the laws of Joffre and Hindenburg, between revolutionary struggle and servility to imperialism. 
 There is no middle course. 
The greatest harm is caused to the proletariat by the hypocritical (or obtuse) authors of the “middle-course” policy. 
 Written in July-August 1915 Signed: Lenin First published unsigned in the Published according to magazine Proletarskaya Revolutsia the manuscript No. 
 5 (28), 1924 SOCIALISM AND WAR THE ATTITUDE OF THE R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 TOWARD THE WAR140 Written in July-August 1915 Published in pamphlet form Published according to in the autumn of 1915 the pamphlet text by the Sotsial-Demokrat Editorial Board in Geneva SOCIALISM AND WAR THE ATTITUDE OF THE R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 TOWARD THE WAR140 Written in July-August 1915 Published in pamphlet form Published according to in the autumn of 1915 the pamphlet text by the Sotsial-Demokrat Editorial Board in Geneva PREFACE TO THE FIRST (FOREIGN) EDITION The war has been in progress for already a year. 
 At the very outset of the war, our Party’s attitude towards it wasdefined in the Central Committee’s manifesto drawn up inSeptember 1914 and (after it had been sent to the members of the C. 
C. 
 and to our Party’s responsible representatives in Russia, and had received their consent) published onNovember 1, 1914, in No. 
 33 of Sotsial-Demokrat ,* our Party’s Central Organ. 
 Later, in No. 
 40 (March 29, 1915), theresolutions of the Berne Conference ** were published, in which our principles and tactics were set forth more precisely. 
 At present there is an obvious growth of revolutionary temper among the masses. 
 In other countries, symptoms ofthe same phenomenon are to be seen on all sides, despitethe suppression of the revolutionary aspirations of the pro-letariat by most of the official Social-Democratic parties, which have taken sides with their governments and their bourgeoisie. 
 This state of affairs makes particularly urgentthe publication of a pamphlet that sums up Social-Democratictactics in relation to the war. 
 In reprinting in full theabove-mentioned Party documents, we have provided themwith brief comment, endeavouring to take due stock of all the main arguments in favour of bourgeois and of prole-tarian tactics that have been expressed in the appropriateliterature and at Party meetings. 
 * See pp. 
 25-34 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 ** See pp. 
 158-64 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION This pamphlet was written in the summer of 1915, just before the Zimmerwald Conference. 
141 It also appeared in German and French, and was reprinted in full in Norwegianin the organ of the Norwegian Social-Democratic YouthLeague. 
 The German edition of the pamphlet was secretly brought to Germany—Berlin, Leipzig, Bremen and other cities, where it was secretly distributed by supporters of theZimmerwald Left and by the Karl Liebknecht group. 
 TheFrench edition was secretly printed in Paris and distributedthere by the French Zimmerwaldists. 
 The Russian-languageedition reached Russia in a very limited number of copies, and in Moscow was copied out in handwriting by workers. 
 We are now reprinting this pamphlet in full, as a docu-ment. 
 The reader should all the time remember that thepamphlet was written in August 1915. 
 This must be keptin view particularly in connection with those passages whichrefer to Russia: Russia at that time was still tsarist, Roma-nov Russia. 
 Published in the 1918 edition Published according to of the pamphlet the pamphlet text C H A P T E R I THE PRINCIPLES OF SOCIALISM AND THE WAR OF 1914-1915 THE ATTITUDE OF SOCIALISTS TOWARDS WARS Socialists have always condemned wars between nations as barbarous and brutal. 
 Our attitude towards war, however,is fundamentally different from that of the bourgeois pacifists(supporters and advocates of peace) and of the anarchists. 
 We differ from the former in that we understand the inevi-table connection between wars and the class struggle withina country; we understand that wars cannot be abolished unlessclasses are abolished and socialism is created; we also differin that we regard civil wars, i. 
e. 
, wars waged by an oppressedclass against the oppressor class, by slaves against slave-holders, by serfs against landowners, and by wage-workers against the bourgeoisie, as fully legitimate, progressive andnecessary. 
 We Marxists differ from both pacifists and anarch-ists in that we deem it necessary to study each war histor-ically (from the standpoint of Marx’s dialectical material-ism) and separately. 
 There have been in the past numerous wars which, despite all the horrors, atrocities, distress and suffering that inevitably accompany all wars were progres-sive, i. 
e. 
, benefited the development of mankind by helpingto destroy most harmful and reactionary institutions (e. 
g. 
,an autocracy or serfdom) and the most barbarous despotismsin Europe (the Turkish and the Russian). 
 That is why the features historically specific to the present war must come up for examination. 
 THE HISTORICAL TYPES OF WARS IN MODERN TIMES The Great French Revolution ushered in a new epoch in the history of mankind. 
 From that time down to the Paris Commune, i. 
e. 
, between 1789 and 1871, one type of warwas of a bourgeois-progressive character, waged for national liberation. 
 In other words, the overthrow of absolutism and feudalism, the undermining of these institutions, and the overthrow of alien oppression, formed the chief content and historical significance of such wars. 
 These were therefore progressive wars; during such wars, all honest and revolu-tionary democrats, as well as all socialists, always wishedsuccess to that country (i. 
e. 
, that bourgeoisie) which hadhelped to overthrow or undermine the most baneful founda-tions of feudalism, absolutism and the oppression of other nations. 
 For example, the revolutionary wars wagedby France contained an element of plunder and the conquestof foreign territory by the French, but this does not in theleast alter the fundamental historical significance of thosewars, which destroyed and shattered feudalism and absolut-ism in the whole of the old, serf-owning Europe. 
 In the Franco-Prussian war, Germany plundered France, but thisdoes not alter the fundamental historical significance ofthat war, which liberated tens of millions of German peoplefrom feudal disunity and from the oppression of two despots,the Russian tsar and Napoleon III. 
 THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN WARS OF AGGRESSION AND OF DEFENCE The period of 1789-1871 left behind it deep marks and revolutionary memories. 
 There could be no development of the proletarian struggle for socialism prior to the overthrow of feudalism, absolutism and alien oppression. 
 When, inspeaking of the wars of such periods, socialists stressed the legitimacy of “defensive” wars, they always had these aimsin mind, namely revolution against medievalism and serf-dom. 
 By a “defensive” war socialists have always understood a “just ” war in this particular sense (Wilhelm Liebknecht once expressed himself precisely in this way). 
 It is only inthis sense that socialists have always regarded wars “for thedefence of the fatherland”, or “defensive” wars, as legitimate,progressive and just. 
 For example, if tomorrow, Moroccowere to declare war on France, or India on Britain, or Persia or China on Russia, and so on, these would be “just”, and “defensive” wars, irrespective of who would be the first to attack; any socialist would wish the oppressed, dependent and unequal states victory over the oppressor, slave-holding and predatory “Great” Powers. 
 But imagine a slave-holder who owns 100 slaves warring against another who owns 200 slaves, for a more “just” redis-tribution of slaves. 
 The use of the term of a “defensive” war,or a war “for the defence of the fatherland”, would clearlybe historically false in such a case and would in practice besheer deception of the common people, philistines, and the ignorant, by the astute slave-holders. 
 It is in this way that the peoples are being deceived with “national”ideology and the term of “defence of the fatherland”, by thepresent-day imperialist bourgeoisie, in the war now beingwaged between slave-holders with the purpose of consoli-dating slavery. 
 THE WAR OF TODAY IS AN IMPERIALIST WAR It is almost universally admitted that this war is an imperialist war. 
 In most cases, however, this term isdistorted, or applied to one side, or else a loophole is left forthe assertion that this war may, after all, be bourgeois-pro-gressive, and of significance to the national-liberation move-ment. 
 Imperialism is the highest stage in the developmentof capitalism, reached only in the twentieth century. 
 Capi-talism now finds that the old national states, without whoseformation it could not have overthrown feudalism, are toocramped for it. 
 Capitalism has developed concentration to such a degree that entire branches of industry are controlled by syndicates, trusts and associations of capitalist multi-millionaires and almost the entire globe has been dividedup among the “lords of capital” either in the form of colo-nies, or by entangling other countries in thousands ofthreads of financial exploitation. 
 Free trade and competition have been superseded by a striving towards monopolies, the seizure of territory for the investment of capital and assources of raw materials, and so on. 
 From the liberatorof nations, which it was in the struggle against feudalism,capitalism in its imperialist stage has turned into the great-est oppressor of nations. 
 Formerly progressive, capitalism has become reactionary; it has developed the forces of pro-duction to such a degree that mankind is faced with thealternative of adopting socialism or of experiencing years and even decades of armed struggle between the “Great” Powers for the artificial preservation of capitalism by means of colonies, monopolies, privileges and national oppression of every kind. 
 A WAR BETWEEN THE BIGGEST SLAVE -HOLDERS FOR THE MAINTENANCE AND CONSOLIDATION OF SLAVERY To make the significance of imperialism clear, we will quote precise figures showing the partition of the world among the so-called “Great” Powers (i. 
e. 
, those successfulin great plunder). 
 Partition of the World Among the “Great ” Slave-holding Powers Colonies Metropolis Total 1876 1914 1914 “Great” Powers millions millions millions millions Britain .... 
. 
 22. 
5 251. 
9 33. 
5 393. 
5 0. 
3 46. 
5 33. 
8 440. 
0 Russia .... 
. 
 17. 
015. 
9 17. 
4 33. 
2 5. 
4 136. 
2 22. 
8 169. 
4 France .... 
. 
 0. 
9 6. 
0 10. 
6 55. 
5 0. 
5 39. 
6 11. 
1 95. 
1 Germany .... 
 — — 2. 
9 12. 
3 0. 
5 64. 
9 3. 
4 77. 
2 Japan .... 
. 
 — — 0. 
3 19. 
2 0. 
4 53. 
0 0. 
7 72. 
2 United States of America ... — — 0. 
3 9. 
7 9. 
4 97. 
0 9. 
7 106. 
7 Total for the six “Great” Powers 40. 
4 273. 
8 65. 
0 523. 
4 16. 
5 437. 
2 81. 
5 960. 
6 Colonies belonging to other than Great Powers (Belgium, Hol-land and otherstates).... 
 9. 
9 45. 
3 9. 
9 45. 
3 Three “semi-colonial” countries (Turkey, China and Persia) 14. 
5 361. 
2 Total 105. 
9 1,367. 
1 Other states and countries ............ 28. 
0289. 
9 Entire globe (exclusive of Arctic and Antarctic regions) Grand Total 133. 
9 1,657. 
0Square kilo-metres Population Square kilo-metres Population Square kilo-metres Population Square kilo-metres Population Hence it will be seen that, since 1876, most of the nations which were foremost fighters for freedom in 1789-1871, have, on the basis of a highly developed and “over-mature” capi-talism, become oppressors and enslavers of most of the popu-lation and the nations of the globe. 
 From 1876 to 1914, six“Great” Powers grabbed 25 million square kilometres, i. 
e. 
,an area two and a half times that of Europe! Six Powers haveenslaved 523 million people in the colonies. 
 For every four inhabitants in the “Great” Powers there are five in “their” colonies. 
 It is common knowledge that colonies are conqueredwith fire and sword, that the population of the coloniesare brutally treated, and that they are exploited in a thousandways (by exporting capital, through concessions, etc. 
, cheat-ing in the sale of goods, subjugation by the authorities of the “ruling” nation, and so on and so forth). 
 The Anglo-French bourgeoisie are deceiving the people when they saythat they are waging a war for the freedom of nations andof Belgium; in fact they are waging a war for the purposeof retaining the colonies they have grabbed and robbed. 
The German imperialists would free Belgium, etc. 
, at once if the British and French would agree to “fairly” share their colonies with them. 
 A feature of the situation is that in thiswar the fate of the colonies is being decided by a war on theContinent. 
 From the standpoint of bourgeois justice andnational freedom (or the right of nations to existence), Ger-many might be considered absolutely in the right as against Britain and France, for she has been “done out” of colonies, her enemies are oppressing an immeasurably far largernumber of nations than she is, and the Slavs thatare being oppressed by her ally, Austria, undoubtedlyenjoy far more freedom than those of tsarist Russia,that veritable “prison of nations”. 
 Germany, however, is fight-ing, not for the liberation of nations, but for their oppression. 
 It is not the business of socialists to helpthe younger and stronger robber (Germany) to plunder theolder and overgorged robbers. 
 Socialists must take advantageof the struggle between the robbers to overthrow all of them. 
To be able to do this, socialists must first of all tell the people the truth, namely, that this war is, in three respects, a war between slave-holders with the aim of consolidating slavery. 
This is a war, firstly, to increase the enslavement of the colo-nies by means of a “more equitable” distribution and subse-quent more concerted exploitation of them; secondly, to increase the oppression of other nations within the “Great”Powers, since both Austria and Russia (Russia in greater-degree and with results far worse than Austria) maintain their rule only by such oppression, intensifying it by meansof war; and thirdly, to increase and prolong wage slavery, since the proletariat is split up and suppressed, while the capitalists are the gainers, making fortunes out of the war,fanning national prejudices and intensifying reaction, which has raised its head in all countries, even in the freest and most republican. 
 WAR IS THE CONTINUATION OF POLITICS BY OTHER (I. 
E. 
: VIOLENT) “MEANS”142 This famous dictum was uttered by Clausewitz, one of the profoundest writers on the problems of war. 
 Marxists have always rightly regarded this thesis as the theoreticalbasis of views on the significance of any war. 
 It was from this viewpoint that Marx and Engels always regarded the various wars. 
 Apply this view to the present war. 
 You will see that far decades, for almost half a century, the governments and the ruling classes of Britain and France, Germany andItaly, Austria and Russia have pursued a policy of plunder-ing colonies, oppressing other nations, and suppressing the working-class movement. 
 It is this, and only this, policythat is being continued in the present war. 
 In particular, the policy of both Austria and Russia, in peacetime as well as in wartime, is a policy of enslaving nations, not of liber-ating them. 
 In China, Persia, India and other dependent countries, on the contrary, we have seen during the past decades a policy of rousing tens and hundreds of millionsof people to a national life, of their liberation from the reactionary “Great” Powers’ oppression. 
 A war waged on such a historical basis can even today be a bourgeois-progres-sive war of national liberation. 
 If the present war is regarded as a continuation of the politics of the “Great” Powers and of the principal classes within them, a glance will immediately reveal the glaringanti-historicity, falseness and hypocrisy of the view that the “defence-of-the-fatherland” idea can be justified in the present war. 
 THE CASE OF BELGIUM The favourite plea of the social-chauvinists of the Triple (now Quadruple) Entente143 (in Russia, Plekhanov and Co. 
) is the case of Belgium. 
 This instance, however, speaks against them. 
 The German imperialists have brazenly violatedthe neutrality of Belgium, as belligerent states have done always and everywhere, trampling upon all treaties and obligations if necessary. 
 Let us suppose that all statesinterested in the observance of international treaties should declare war on Germany with the demand that Belgium be liberated and indemnified. 
 In that case, the sympathies ofsocialists would, of course, be with Germany’s enemies. 
 But the whole point is that the Triple (and Quadruple) Entente is waging war, not over Belgium; this is common knowledge and only hypocrites will disguise the fact. 
 Britain is grab-bing at Germany’s colonies and Turkey, Russia is grabbing at Galicia and Turkey, France wants Alsace-Lorraine andeven the left bank of the Rhine; a treaty has been concluded with Italy for the division of the spoils (Albania and Asia Minor); bargaining is going on with Bulgaria and Rumania,also for the division of the spoils. 
 In the present war waged by the governments of today, it is impossible to help Belgium otherwise than by helping to throttle Austria or Turkey, etc. 
! Where does “defence of the fatherland” come in here? Herein lies the specific feature of imperialist war, a war between reactionary-bourgeois and historically outmoded govern-ments, waged for the purpose of oppressing other nations. 
 Whoever justifies participation in the present war is perpetuating the imperialist oppression of nations. 
 Whoeveradvocates taking advantage of the present embarrassments of the governments so as to fight for the social revolution is championing the real freedom of really all nations, which is possible only under socialism. 
 WHAT RUSSIA IS FIGHTING FOR In Russia, capitalist imperialism of the latest type has fully revealed itself in the policy of tsarism towards Persia, Manchuria and Mongolia, but, in general, military andfeudal imperialism is predominant in Russia. 
 In no countryin the world are the majority of the population oppressed somuch as in Russia; Great Russians constitute only 43 percent of the population, i. 
e. 
, less than half; the non-Russians are denied all rights. 
 Of the 170 million inhab-itants of Russia, about 100 million are oppressed and denied their rights. 
 Tsarism is waging a war to seize Galicia andfinally crush the liberties of the Ukrainians, and to obtainpossession of Armenia, Constantinople, etc. 
 Tsarism regardsthe war as a means of diverting attention from the mounting discontent within the country and of suppressing the growing revolutionary movement. 
 To every two Great Russiansin Russia today there are two or three non-Russianswithout even elementary rights: tsarism is striving, by meansof the war, to increase the number of nations oppressed byRussia, to perpetuate this oppression, and thereby undermine the struggle for freedom which the Great Russians them-selves are waging. 
 The possibility of oppressing and robbingother nations perpetuates economic stagnation, because thesource of income is frequently, not the development of pro-ductive forces, but the semi-feudal exploitation of non-Rus-sians. 
 Thus on the part of Russia, the war is marked by its profoundly reactionary character, its hostility to national liberation. 
 WHAT SOCIAL -CHAUVINISM IS Social-chauvinism is advocacy of the idea of “defence of the fatherland” in the present war. 
 This idea logicallyleads to the abandonment of the class struggle during the war, to voting for war credits, etc. 
 In fact, the social-chau-vinists are pursuing an anti-proletarian bourgeois policy, for they are actually championing, not “defence of the father-land” in the sense of combating foreign oppression, but the“right” of one or other of the “Great” Powers to plunder colo-nies and to oppress other nations. 
 The social-chauvinistsreiterate the bourgeois deception of the people that the waris being waged to protect the freedom and existence of nations, thereby taking sides with the bourgeoisie against the proletariat. 
 Among the social-chauvinists are those whojustify and varnish the governments and bourgeoisie of one of the belligerent groups of powers, as well as those who,like Kautsky, argue that the socialists of all the belligerent powers are equally entitled to “defend the fatherland”. 
 So-cial-chauvinism, which is, in effect, defence of the privileges, the advantages, the right to pillage and plunder, of one’s“own” (or any) imperialist bourgeoisie, is the utter betrayalof all socialist convictions and of the decision of the BasleInternational Socialist Congress. 
 THE BASLE MANIFESTO The Manifesto on war unanimously adopted in Basle in 1912 has in view the very kind of war between Britain andGermany and their present allies, which broke out in 1914. 
The Manifesto openly declares that no interests of the people can serve to justify such a war waged for the sake of the profits of the capitalists and the ambitions of dynasties”,on the basis of the imperialist, predatory policy of the GreatPowers. 
 The Manifesto openly declares that war is dangerousto “governments” (all of them without exception), notestheir fear of “a proletarian revolution”, and very definitely points to the example set by the Commune of 1871, and by October-December 1905, i. 
e. 
, to the examples of revolution and civil war . 
 Thus, the Basle Manifesto lays down, precisely for the present war, the tactics of the workers’ revolution-ary struggle on an international scale against their govern-ments, the tactics of proletarian revolution. 
 The Basle Manifesto repeats the words in the Stuttgart resolution that, in the event of war, socialists must take advantage of the“economic and political crisis” it will cause so as to “hasten the downfall of capitalism”, i. 
e. 
, take advantage of the governments’ wartime difficulties and the indignation of the masses, to advance the socialist revolution. 
 The social-chauvinists’ policy, their justification of the war from the bourgeois-liberation standpoint, their sanction-ing of “defence of the fatherland”, their voting for credits,membership in governments, and so on and so forth, aredownright treachery to socialism, which can be explained only, as we will soon show, by the victory of opportunism and of the national liberal-labour policy in the majorityof European parties. 
 FALSE REFERENCES TO AND ENGELS The Russian social-chauvinists (headed by Plekhanov) make references to Marx’s tactics in the war of 1870; theGerman (of the type of Lensch, David and Co. 
)—to Engels’sstatement in 1891 that, in the event of war against Russiaand France combined, it would be the duty of the Germansocialists to defend their fatherland; finally, the social-chauvinists of the Kautsky type, who want to reconcile and legitimatise international chauvinism, refer to the fact thatMarx and Engels, while condemning war, nevertheless, from1854-55 to 1870-71 and 1876-77, always took the side of onebelligerent state or another, once war had broken out. 
 All these references are outrageous distortions of the views of Marx and Engels, in the interest of the bourgeoisie and the opportunists, in just the same way as the writings ofthe anarchists Guillaume and Co. 
 distort the views of Marxand Engels so as to justify anarchism. 
 The war of 1870-71was historically progressive on the part of Germany, untilNapoleon III was defeated: the latter, together with the tsar, had oppressed Germany for years, keeping her in a state of feudal disunity. 
 But as soon as the war developedinto the plundering of France (the annexation of Alsaceand Lorraine), Marx and Engels emphatically condemnedthe Germans. 
 Even at the beginning of the war, Marxand Engels approved of the refusal of Bebel and Liebknecht to vote for war credits, and advised Social-Democrats not to merge with the bourgeoisie, but to uphold the independ-ent class interests of the proletariat. 
 To apply to the present imperialist war the appraisal of this bourgeois-progressive war of national liberation is a mockery of the truth. 
 The same applies with still greater force to the war of 1854-55, and to all the wars of the nineteenth century, when thereexisted no modern imperialism, no mature objective condi-tions for socialism, and no mass socialist parties in any of the belligerent countries, i. 
e. 
, none of the conditions fromwhich the Basle Manifesto deduced the tactics of a “prole-tarian revolution” in connection with a war between Great Powers. 
 Anyone who today refers to Marx’s attitude towards the wars of the epoch of the progressive bourgeoisie, and forgets Marx’s statement that “the workingmen have no country”—a statement that applies precisely to the period of the reactionary and outmoded bourgeoisie, to the epoch of the socialist revolution, is shamelessly distorting Marx, and issubstituting the bourgeois point of view for the socialist. 
 THE COLLAPSE OF THE SECOND INTERNATIONAL Socialists of all the world solemnly declared in Basle, in 1912, that they regarded the impending war in Europeas the “criminal” and most reactionary deed of all the govern-ments, which must hasten the downfall of capitalism by inevitably engendering a revolution against it. 
 The warcame, the crisis was there. 
 Instead of revolutionary tactics,most of the Social-Democratic parties launched reactionarytactics, and went over to the side of their respective govern-ments and bourgeoisie. 
 This betrayal of socialism signifies the collapse of the Second (1889-1914) International, and we must realise what caused this collapse, what broughtsocial-chauvinism into being and gave it strength. 
 SOCIAL -CHAUVINISM IS THE ACME OF OPPORTUNISM Throughout the existence of the Second International, a struggle was raging within all the Social-Democratic par-ties, between their revolutionary and the opportunist wings. 
 In a number of countries a split took place along this line (Britain, Italy, Holland, Bulgaria). 
 Not one Marxist hasever doubted that opportunism expresses bourgeois policies within the working-class movement, expresses the interests of the petty bourgeoisie and the alliance of a tiny section of bourgeoisified workers with their “ own ” bourgeoisie, against the interests of the proletarian masses, the oppressedmasses. 
 The objective conditions at the close of the nineteenth century greatly intensified opportunism, converted theutilisation of bourgeois legality into subservience to the latter, created a thin crust of a working-class officialdom and aristocracy and attracted numerous petty-bourgeois “fellowtravellers ” to the Social-Democratic parties. 
 The war has speeded up this development and transformed opportunism into social-chauvinism, transformed thesecret alliance between the opportunists and the bourgeoisie into an open one. 
 Simultaneously, the military authorities have everywhere instituted martial law and have muzzledthe mass of the workers, whose old leaders have nearly allgone over to the bourgeoisie. 
 Opportunism and social-chauvinism stand on a common economic basis—the interests of a thin crust of privileged workers and of the petty bourgeoisie, who are defending their privileged position, their “right” to some modicum ofthe profits that their “own” national bourgeoisie obtainfrom robbing other nations, from the advantages of theirGreat-Power status, etc. 
 Opportunism and social-chauvinism have the same politico-ideological content—class collaboration instead of the class struggle, renunciation of revolutionary methods ofstruggle, helping one’s “own” government in its embarrassedsituation, instead of taking advantage of these embarrass-ments so as to advance the revolution. 
 If we take Europeas a whole and if we pay attention, not to individuals (even the most authoritative), we will find that it is the opportun-ist trend that has become the bulwark of social-chauvinism, whereas from the camp of the revolutionaries, more of lessconsistent protests against it are heard from almost allsides. 
 And if we take, for example, the grouping of trends atthe Stuttgart International Socialist Congress in 1907, we shall find that international Marxism was opposed to imperialism, while international opportunism was alreadyin favour of it at the time. 
 UNITY WITH THE OPPORTUNISTS MEANS AN ALLIANCE BETWEEN THE WORKERS AND THEIR “OWN” NATIONAL BOURGEOISIE, AND SPLITTING THE INTERNATIONAL REVOLUTIONARY WORKING CLASS In the past, before the war, opportunism was often looked upon as a legitimate, though “deviationist” and “extremist”,component of the Social-Democratic Party. 
 The war has shown the impossibility of this in the future. 
 Opportunism has “matured”, and is now playing to the full its role asemissary of the bourgeoisie in the working-class movement. 
Unity with the opportunists has become sheer hypocrisy,exemplified by the German Social-Democratic Party. 
 Onevery important occasion (e. 
g. 
, the August 4 vote), the opportunists present an ultimatum, to which they give effect through their numerous links with the bourgeoisie, theirmajority on the executives of the trade unions, etc. 
 Todayunity with the opportunists actually means subordinating the working class to their “own” national bourgeoisie, andan alliance with the latter for the purpose of oppressing other nations and of fighting for dominant-nation privileges; it means splitting the revolutionary proletariat of all countries. 
 No matter how hard, in individual instances, the struggle may be against the opportunists, who predominate in manyorganisations, whatever the specific nature of the purging of the workers’ parties of opportunists in individual coun-tries, this process is inevitable and fruitful. 
 Reformist social-ism is dying; regenerated socialism “will be revolutionary,uncompromising and insurrectionary”, to use the aptexpression of the French Socialist Paul Golay. 
 “KAUTSKYISM” Kautsky, the leading authority in the Second Interna-tional, is a most typical and striking example of how averbal recognition of Marxism has led in practice to itsconversion into “Struvism” or into “Brentanoism”. 
 144 Another example is Plekhanov. 
 By means of patent sophistry, Marxism is stripped of its revolutionary living spirit;everything is recognised in Marxism except the revolutionary methods of struggle, the propaganda and preparation of those methods, and the education of the masses in this direction. 
 Kautsky “reconciles” in an unprincipled way the fundamental idea of social-chauvinism, recognition of defence of the fatherland in the present war, with a diplomatic sham concession to the Lefts—his abstentionfrom voting for war credits, his verbal claim to be in theopposition, etc. 
 Kautsky, who in 1909 wrote a book on theapproaching epoch of revolutions and on the connectionbetween war and revolution, Kautsky, who in 1912 signed the Basle Manifesto on taking revolutionary advantage of the impending war, is outdoing himself in justifyingand embellishing social-chauvinism and, like Plekhanov,joins the bourgeoisie in ridiculing any thought of revolu-tion and all steps towards the immediate revolutionarystruggle. 
 The working class cannot play its world-revolutionary role unless it wages a ruthless struggle against this backsliding,spinelessness, subservience to opportunism, and unparal-leled vulgarisation of the theories of Marxism. 
 Kautskyismis not fortuitous; it is the social product of the contradic-tions within the Second International, a blend of loyalty to Marxism in word, and subordination to opportunism in deed. 
 This fundamental falseness of “Kautskyism” manifests itself in different ways in different countries. 
 In Holland,Roland-Holst, while rejecting the idea of defending thefatherland, defends unity with the opportunists’ party. 
 In Russia, Trotsky, while rejecting this idea, also defends unity with the opportunist and chauvinist Nasha Zarya group. 
 In Rumania, Rakovsky, while declaring war onopportunism as being responsible for the collapse of theInternational, is at the same time ready to recognise thelegitimacy of the idea of defending the fatherland. 
 All this is a manifestation of the evil which the Dutch Marxists (Gorter and Pannekoek) have called “passive radicalism”, and whichamounts to replacing revolutionary Marxism with eclecti-cism in theory, and servility to or impotence towardsopportunism, in practice. 
 THE ISTS’ SLOGAN IS A SLOGAN OF REVOLUTIONARY SOCIAL -DEMOCRACY The war has undoubtedly created a most acute crisis and has immeasurably increased the distress of the masses. 
 The reactionary nature of this war, and the unblushing lies told by the bourgeoisie of all countries to conceal their predatory aims with “national” ideology are, on the basis of an objec-tively revolutionary situation, inevitably creating revolu-tionary moods among the masses. 
 It is our duty to help themasses become conscious of these moods, deepen them and give them shape. 
 This task finds correct expression only in the slogan: convert the imperialist war into a civil war;all consistently waged class struggles in wartime and all seriously conducted “mass-action” tactics inevitably leadto this. 
 It is impossible to foretell whether a powerful revo-lutionary movement will flare-up in connection with, during or after the first or the second imperialist war of the Great Powers; in any case it is our bounden duty to work systema-tically and unswervingly in this direction. 
 The Basle Manifesto makes direct reference to the example set by the Paris Commune, i. 
e. 
, the conversion of a warbetween governments into a civil war. 
 Half a century ago, the proletariat was too weak; the objective conditions for socialism had not yet matured, there could be no co-ordi-nation and co-operation between the revolutionary move-ments in all the belligerent countries; the “national ideology”(the traditions of 1792), with which a section of the Parisianworkers were imbued, was a petty-bourgeois weakness, which Marx noted at the time, and was one of the causes of the downfall of the Commune. 
 Half a century since thattime, the conditions that then weakened the revolution haveceased to operate, and today it is unpardonable for a socialistto resign himself to a renunciation of activities in thespirit of the Paris Communards. 
 THE EXAMPLE SET BY THE FRATERNISATION IN THE TRENCHES Cases of fraternisation between the soldiers of the bel-ligerent nations, even in the trenches, have been reported in the bourgeois newspapers of all the belligerent countries. 
 The grave importance attached to the matter by the governments and the bourgeoisie is evidenced by the harsh orders against such fraternisation issued by the military authorities (of Germany and Britain). 
 If such cases offraternisation have proved possible even when opportunismreigns supreme in the top ranks of the Social-Democraticparties of Western Europe, and when social-chauvinismhas the support of the entire Social-Democratic press and all the authorities of the Second International, then that shows us how possible it would be to shorten the presentcriminal, reactionary and slave-holders’ war and to organisea revolutionary international movement, if systematicwork were conducted in this direction, at least by the Left-wing socialists in all the belligerent countries. 
 THE IMPORTANCE OF AN UNDERGROUND ORGANISATION No less than the opportunists, leading anarchists all over the world have disgraced themselves with social-chauvinism (in the spirit of Plekhanov and Kautsky) in this war. 
 One of the useful results of this war will undoubtedly be that it will kill both anarchism andopportunism. 
 While under no circumstances or conditions refraining from utilising all legal opportunities, however small, fororganising the masses and for the propaganda of socialism, the Social-Democratic parties must break with subservience to legality. 
 “You shoot first, Messieurs the Bourgeoisie,”wrote Engels, hinting at civil war and at the necessity ofour violating legality after the bourgeoisie had done so. 
 The crisis has shown that the bourgeoisie violate it in allcountries, even the freest, and that it is impossible to lead the masses to a revolution unless an underground organisa-tion is set up for the purpose of advocating, discussing,appraising and preparing revolutionary methods of struggle. 
In Germany, for example, all the honest things that socialists are doing, are being done despite despicable opportunismand hypocritical “Kautskyism”, and moreover are being done secretly. 
 In Britain, people are being sentenced to penal servitude for printing appeals against joining up. 
 It is a betrayal of socialism to consider compatible with membership in the Social-Democratic Party any repudiation of underground methods of propaganda, and ridicule of those methods, in the legally published press. 
 ON THE DEFEAT OF ONE’S “OWN” GOVERNMENT IN THE IMPERIALIST WAR The standpoint of social-chauvinism is shared equally by both advocates of victory for their governments in thepresent war and by advocates of the slogan of “neither vic-tory nor defeat”. 
 A revolutionary class cannot but wish for the defeat of its government in a reactionary war, and cannot fail to see that the latter’s military reverses mustfacilitate its overthrow. 
 Only a bourgeois who believes thata war started by governments must necessarily end as a warbetween governments, and wants it to end as such, canregard as “ridiculous” and “absurd” the idea that the socialists of all the belligerent countries should express their wish that all their “own” governments should be defeated. 
 On the contrary, it is a statement of this kind that would be inkeeping with the innermost thoughts of every class-consciousworker, and be in line with our activities for the conversionof the imperialist war into a civil war. 
 The serious anti-war agitation being conducted by a sec-tion of the British, German and Russian socialists has un-doubtedly “weakened the military might” of the respectivegovernments, but that agitation stands to the credit of thesocialists. 
 The latter must explain to the masses that theyhave no other road of salvation except the revolutionary overthrow of their “own” governments, whose difficulties in the present war must be taken advantage of precisely forthat purpose. 
 PACIFISM AND THE PEACE SLOGAN The temper of the masses in favour of peace often expresses the beginning of protest, anger and a realisation of thereactionary nature of the war. 
 It is the duty of all Social-Democrats to utilise that temper. 
 They will take a most ardent part in any movement and in any demonstration motivated by that sentiment, but they will not deceive the people with admitting the idea that a peace without annexa-tions, without oppression of nations, without plunder, and without the embryo of new wars among the present govern-ments and ruling classes, is possible in the absence of a revo-lutionary movement. 
 Such deception of the people wouldmerely mean playing into the hands of the secret diplomacyof the belligerent governments and facilitating their counter-revolutionary plans. 
 Whoever wants a lasting and demo-cratic peace must stand for civil war against the governments and the bourgeoisie. 
 THE RIGHT OF NATIONS TO SELF -DETERMINATION The most widespread deception of the people by the bourgeoisie in the present war consists in their using the ideology of “national liberation” to cloak their predatoryaims. 
 The British have promised the liberation of Belgium,the Germans—of Poland, etc. 
 Actually, as we have seen,this is a war waged by the oppressors of most of the world’snations for the purpose of increasing and expanding that oppression. 
 Socialists cannot achieve their great aim without fighting against all oppression of nations. 
 They must, therefore,unequivocally demand that the Social-Democratic partiesof the oppressor countries (especially of the so-called “Great” Powers) should recognise and champion the oppressed nation’s right to self-determination, in the specifically politi-cal sense of the term, i. 
e. 
, the right to political secession. 
The socialist of a ruling or a colonial nation who does notstand for that right is a chauvinist. 
 The championing of this right, far from encouraging the formation of petty states, leads, on the contrary, to the freer, fearless and therefore wider and more universal forma-tion of large states and federations of states, which are moreto the advantage of the masses and are more in keeping witheconomic development. 
 In their turn, the socialists of the oppressed nations must unfailingly fight for complete unity of the workers of the oppressed and oppressor nationalities (this including organ-isational unity). 
 The idea of the juridical separation of onenation from another (the so-called “cultural-national autonomy” advocated by Bauer and Renner) is reac-tionary. 
 Imperialism is the epoch of the constantly increasing oppression of the nations of the world by a handful of “Great”Powers; it is therefore impossible to fight for the socialistinternational revolution against imperialism unless theright of nations to self-determination is recognised. 
 “No na-tion can be free if it oppresses other nations” (Marx and Engels). 
 A proletariat that tolerates the slightest coercion of other nations by its “own” nation cannot be a socialistproletariat. 
 C H A P T E R II CLASSES AND PARTIES IN RUSSIA THE BOURGEOISIE AND THE WAR In one respect, the Russian Government has not lagged behind its European confrères ; like them, it has succeeded in deceiving its “own” people on a grand scale. 
 A huge and monstrous machine of falsehood and cunning has been set going in Russia as well, to infect the masses with chauvin-ism, and create the impression that the tsarist governmentis waging a “just” war, and is disinterestedly defending its“Slav brothers”, etc. 
 The landowning class and the upper stratum of the com-mercial and industrial bourgeoisie have ardently supported the tsarist government’s bellicose policy. 
 They are rightlyexpecting enormous material gains and privileges for them-selves from the carving up of the Turkish and the Austrianlegacy. 
 A series of their congresses have already voiced anti-cipation of the profits that will flow into their pockets should the tsarist army be victorious. 
 Moreover, the reactionaries are very well aware that if anything can stave off thedownfall of the Romanov monarchy and delay the new revo-lution in Russia, it can only be a foreign war ending invictory for the tsar. 
 Broad strata of the urban “middle” bourgeoisie, of the bourgeois intelligentsia, professional people, etc. 
, have also been infected with chauvinism—at all events at thebeginning of the war. 
 The Cadets—the party of the Russian liberal bourgeoisie—have given the tsar’s government full and unconditional support. 
 In the sphere of foreign policy, the Cadets have long been a government party. 
 Pan-Slavism—with the aid of which tsarist diplomacy has morethan once carried out its grand political swindles—hasbecome the official ideology of the Cadets. 
 Russian liberalismhas degenerated into national liberalism. 
 It is vying in “patriotism” with the Black Hundreds; it always willingly votes for militarism on land and at sea, etc. 
 Approximately the same thing is to be seen in the camp of Russianliberalism as in Germany in the seventies of the last century,when “free-thinking” liberalism decayed and from it arosea national-liberal party. 
 The Russian liberal bourgeoisiehas definitely taken to the path of counter-revolution. 
 The R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
’s point of view on this question has been fully confirmed. 
 The facts have shattered the view held by ouropportunists that Russian liberalism is still a motive forceof a revolution in Russia. 
 The ruling clique has also succeeded, with the aid of the bourgeois press, the clergy, etc. 
, in rousing chauvinist sentiments among the peasantry. 
 With the return of the soldiers from the field of slaughter, however, sentiment inthe rural areas will undoubtedly turn against the tsaristmonarchy. 
 The bourgeois-democratic parties that come intocontact with the peasantry have failed to withstand the chau-vinist wave. 
 The Trudovik party in the Duma refused to vote for war credits, but through its leader Kerensky it made a “patriotic” declaration which played into the hands of themonarchy. 
 In general, the entire legally published Narodnikpress followed the liberals’ lead. 
 Even the Left wing of bour-geois democracy—the so-called Socialist-RevolutionaryParty, which is affiliated to the International Socialist Bureau—is swimming with the same tide. 
 Mr. 
 Rubanovich, that party’s representative on the I. 
S. 
B. 
, has come out asa self-confessed social-chauvinist. 
 Half of the number ofthis party’s delegates to the London Conference of Socialistsof the Entente countries voted for a chauvinist resolution(while the other half abstained from voting). 
 Chauvin-ists predominate in the illegally published press of the Socialist-Revolutionaries (the newspaper Novosti 145 and others). 
 The revolutionaries from “bourgeois circles”, i. 
e. 
, bourgeois revolutionaries who are not connected with the working class, have come to a dead end in this war. 
 The sad fate of Kropotkin, Burtsev and Rubanovich is highly significant. 
 THE WORKING CLASS AND THE WAR The proletariat is the only class in Russia that nobody has been able to infect with chauvinism. 
 Only the most ignorant strata of the workers were involved in the fewexcesses that occurred in the early days of the war. 
 The partplayed by workers in the Moscow anti-German riots hasbeen greatly exaggerated. 
 By and large, the working classof Russia has proved immune to chauvinism. 
 The explanation lies in the revolutionary situation in the country and in the Russian proletariat’s general conditionsof life. 
 The years 1912-14 marked the beginning of a great new revolutionary upswing in Russia. 
 We again witnessed agreat strike movement, the like of which the world has never known. 
 The number involved in the mass revolution-ary strike in 1913 was, at the very lowest estimate, one anda half million, and in 1914 it rose to over two million,approaching the 1905 level. 
 The first barricade battlestook place in St. 
 Petersburg, on the eve of the war. 
 The underground Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party has performed its duty to the International. 
 The-ban-ner of internationalism has not wavered in its hands. 
 OurParty long ago severed all organisational ties with the op-portunist groups and elements; its feet were not weighed downwith the fetters of opportunism and of “legalism at anyprice”, this circumstance helping it perform its revolutionary duty—just as the break with Bissolati’s opportunist party has helped the Italian comrades. 
 The general situation in our country does not favour any efflorescence of “socialist” opportunism among the massesof the workers. 
 In Russia we see a series of shades of oppor-tunism and reformism among the intelligentsia, the petty bourgeoisie, etc. 
, but it has affected an insignificant minority among the politically active sections of the workers. 
 Theprivileged stratum of factory workers and clerical staff is very thin in our country. 
 The fetishism of legality could not appear here. 
 Before the war, the liquidators (the party of the opportunists led by Axelrod, Potresov, Chere-vanin, Maslov, and others) found no serious support amongthe masses of the workers. 
 The elections to the Fourth Dumaresulted in the return of all six of the anti-liquidationist working-class candidates. 
 The circulation of the legally pub-lished workers’ press in Petrograd and Moscow and the col-lection of funds for it have incontrovertibly proved that four-fifths of the class-conscious workers are opposed toopportunism and liquidationism. 
 Since the beginning of the war, the tsar’s government has arrested and exiled thousands and thousands of advancedworkers, members of our underground R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 This cir-cumstance, together with the establishment of martial law in the country, the suppression of our newspapers, and soforth, has retarded the movement. 
 But for all that, our Partyis continuing its underground revolutionary activities. 
In Petrograd, our Party Committee is publishing the under-ground newspaper Proletarsky Golos . 
 146 Articles from Sotsial-Demokrat , the Central Organ pub-lished abroad, are reprinted in Petrograd and sent out tothe provinces. 
 Leaflets are secretly printed, and are circu-lated even in army barracks. 
 In various secluded placesoutside the city, secret workers’ meetings are held. 
 Of late,big strikes of metalworkers have begun in Petrograd. 
 In connection with these strikes, our Petrograd Committee has issued several appeals to the workers. 
 THE RUSSIAN SOCIAL -DEMOCRATIC LABOUR GROUP IN THE DUMA, AND THE WAR In 1913 a split took place among the Social-Democratic deputies to the Duma. 
 On one side were the seven supportersof opportunism, led by Chkheidze; they had been returnedby seven non-proletarian gubernias, where the workerstotalled 214,000. 
 On the other side were six deputies, all from the workers’ curia, elected for the most industrialised centres in Russia, in which the workers number 1,008,000. 
 The chief issue in the split was the alternative between the tactics of revolutionary Marxism and the tactics of op-portunist reformism. 
 In practice, the disagreement manifested itself mainly in the sphere of extra-parliamentary work among the masses. 
 In Russia this work had to be conducted secretly, if those conducting it wished to remain on a revo-lutionary basis. 
 The Chkheidze group remained a faithfulally of the liquidators (who repudiated underground work)and defended them in all talks with workers and at all meetings. 
Hence the split. 
 The six deputies formed the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
 Duma group, which, as a year’s work has incontrovertibly shown, has the support of the vast majority of Russianworkers. 
 On the outbreak of the war the disagreement stood out in glaring relief. 
 The Chkheidze group confined itself toparliamentary action. 
 It did not vote for war credits, for that would have roused a storm of indignation among the workers (we have seen that in Russia even the petty-bour-geois Trudoviks did not vote for war credits); neither didit utter any protest against social-chauvinism. 
 Expressing the political line of our Party, the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
 Duma group acted quite differently. 
 It carried into the midst of the working class a protest against the war, and conducted anti-imperialist propaganda among the masses of the Rus-sian proletarians. 
 It met with a very sympathetic response from the work-ers—which frightened the government, compelling it, inflagrant violation of its own laws, to arrest our deputy comrades and exile them to Siberia for life. 
 In its very first official announcement of the arrest of our comrades, thetsarist government wrote: “An entirely exceptional position in this respect was taken by some members of Social-Democratic societies, the objectof whose activities was to shake the military might of Russia by agitating against the war, by means of underground appeals and verbal propaganda. 
” Only our Party, through its Central Committee, gave a negative reply to Vandervelde’s well-known appeal for a“temporary” cessation of the struggle against tsarism. 
Moreover, it has now become known, from the testimony of Prince Kudashev, the tsar’s envoy to Belgium, that Vander-velde did not draw up this appeal alone, but in collabora-tion with the above-mentioned envoy. 
 The guiding centre of the liquidators agreed with Vandervelde and officially stated in the press that “in its activities it does not oppose the war ”. 
 The principal accusation levelled by the tsar’s government against our deputy comrades was that they distributed thisnegative reply to Vandervelde among the workers. 
 At the trial, the Prosecutor for the Crown, Mr. 
 Nenaro-komov, set up the German and French socialists as examples to our comrades. 
 “The German Social-Democrats,” he said, “voted for war credits and proved to be friends of the govern-ment. 
 That is how the German Social-Democrats acted, butthe dismal knights of Russian Social-Democracy did notact in this way .... 
 The socialists of Belgium and France unanimously forgot their quarrels with the other classes, forgot party strife, and unhesitatingly rallied about the flag. 
” But the members of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
 group, on instructions fromthe Party’s Central Committee, did not act in this way, hecomplained.... 
 The trial revealed an imposing picture of the extensive underground anti-war agitation our Party was conducting among the masses of the proletariat. 
 It goes without saying, that the tsar’s court “uncovered” only a fraction of theactivities our comrades were conducting in this field, but evenwhat was revealed showed how much had been done withinthe brief span of a few months. 
 At the trial the underground manifestos issued by our groups and committees, against the war and for international tactics, were read out. 
 The members of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
 groupwere in touch with the class-conscious workers all over Russiaand did everything in their power to help the workersappraise the war from the Marxist standpoint. 
 Comrade Muranov, the deputy of the workers of Kharkov Gubernia, stated at the trial: “Realising that the people did not return me to the Duma just to warm my seat there, I travelled about the countryto ascertain the mood of the working class. 
” He admittedthat he had undertaken the functions of a secret agitatorof our Party, that in the Urals he had organised workers’ committees at the Verkhneisetsky Works and elsewhere. 
 The trial showed that, after the outbreak of war, membersof the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
 Duma group travelled, for propaganda purposes, throughout almost the whole of Russia and that Muranov, Petrovsky, Badayev and others arranged numerous workers’ meetings, at which anti-war resolutions were passed, and so on. 
 The tsar’s government threatened the accused with capi-tal punishment. 
 That was why they did not all behave atthe trial as courageously as Comrade Muranov. 
 They tried tomake it difficult for the Prosecutors to secure convictions. 
 This is being unworthily utilised by the Russian social-chauvinists so as to obscure the crux of the issue, viz. 
, thekind of parliamentarianism the working class needs. 
 Parliamentarianism is recognised by Südekum and Heine, Sembat and Vaillant, Bissolati and Mussolini, Chkheidzeand Plekhanov; it is also recognised by our comrades in the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
 group, as well as by the Bulgarian and Italian comrades who have broken with the chauvinists. 
 Thereare different kinds of parliamentarianism. 
 Some utilise theparliamentary arena in order to curry favour with theirgovernments, or, at best, to wash their hands of everything,as the Chkheidze group has done. 
 Others utilise parliamen-tarianism in order to remain revolutionary to the end, to per-form their duty as socialists and internationalists even underthe most difficult circumstances. 
 The parliamentary activi-ties of some give them ministerial posts; the parliamentaryactivities of others take them to prison, exile, and penalservitude. 
 Some serve the bourgeoisie, others—the prole-tariat. 
 Some are social-imperialists. 
 Others are revolutionary Marxists. 
 C H A P T E R III THE RESTORATION OF THE INTERNATIONAL How should the International be restored? But first, a few words about how the International should not be restored. 
 THE METHOD OF THE SOCIAL-CHAUVINISTS AND OF THE “CENTRE” Of course, the social-chauvinists of all countries are great “internationalists”! Since the very beginning of the war they have been weighed down with concern overthe International. 
 On the one hand, they assure us that the talk about the collapse of the International is “exaggerated”. 
 Actually, nothing out of the common has happened. 
 Listen to Kautsky: the International is simply a “peace-time instrument”; naturally, this instrument has not provedquite up to the mark in wartime. 
 On the other hand, thesocial-chauvinists of all countries have found a verysimple, and, what is most important, an international wayout of the situation that has arisen. 
 The solution is simple: it is only necessary to wait till the war ends, but until then the socialists of each country must defend their“fatherland” and support their “own” government. 
 When thewar ends, there will be a mutual “amnesty”, the admissionthat everybody was right and that in peacetime we live like brothers; in wartime, however, we stick to such-and-such resolutions, and call upon the German workers to exterminate their French brothers, and vice versa. 
 Kautsky, Plekhanov, Victor Adler and Heine are all equally agreed on this. 
 Victor Adler writes that “when wehave passed through this difficult time, our first dutywill be to refrain from pointing to the mote in each other’s eye”. 
 Kautsky asserts that “till now no serious socialists from any side have spoken in a way to arouse apprehension”concerning the fate of the International. 
 “It is unpleasantto grasp hands [of the German Social-Democrats] thatreek of the blood of the innocently slaughtered,” Plekhanovsays, but at once goes on to propose an “amnesty”. 
 “It will here be quite appropriate,” he writes, “to subordinate the heart to the mind . 
 For the sake of the great cause, the International will have to take into consideration evenbelated remorse. 
” In Sozialistische Monatshefte Heine describes Vandervelde’s behaviour as “courageous and digni-fied”, and sets him up as an example to the German Lefts. 
 In short, when the war ends, appoint a commission con-sisting of Kautsky and Plekhanov, Vandervelde and Adler,and a “unanimous” resolution in the spirit of a mutualamnesty will be drawn up in a trice. 
 The dispute will benicely hushed up. 
 Instead of being helped to understandwhat has taken place, the workers will be deceived with a sham and paper “unity”. 
 A union of the social-chauvinists and hypocrites of all countries will be described asrestoration of the International. 
 We must not close our eyes to the great danger inherent in such a “restoration”. 
 The social-chauvinists of all coun-tries are equally interested in that outcome. 
 All of them are equally unwilling that the masses of the workers oftheir respective countries should themselves try to under-stand the issue: socialism or nationalism? All of them are equally interested in concealing one other’s sins. 
None of them are able to propose anything except what has already been proposed by Kautsky, that past master of “international” hypocrisy. 
 Yet this danger has scarcely been realised. 
 During a year of war, we have seen a number of attempts to restoreinternational ties. 
 We shall not speak of the London andVienna conferences, at which outspoken chauvinists got together to help the General Staffs and the bourgeoisie of their “fatherlands”. 
 We are referring to the Lugano andCopenhagen conferences, 147 the International Women’s Conference, and the International Youth Conference. 
148 These assemblies were animated by the best intentions,but they wholly failed to discern the above-mentioned danger. 
 They neither laid down a militant internationalist line, nor indicated to the proletariat the danger threateningit from the social-chauvinists’ method of “restoring” theInternational. 
 At best, they confined themselves to repeatingthe old resolutions, without telling the workers that thecause of socialism is lost unless a struggle is waged against the social-chauvinists. 
 At best they were marking time . 
 THE STATE OF AFFAIRS AMONG THE OPPOSITION There cannot be the least doubt that what interests all internationalists most is the state of affairs among the German Social-Democratic opposition. 
 The official German Social-Democratic Party, the strongest and the foremost inthe Second International, has dealt the internationalworkers’ organisation the most telling blow. 
 At the sametime, however, it was among the German Social-Democratsthat the strongest opposition arose. 
 Of all the big European parties, it is in the German party that a loud voice of protest was first raised by comrades who have remainedloyal to the banner of socialism. 
 We were delighted to read the journals Lichtstrahlen and Die Internationale . 
 It gave us still greater pleasure to learn of the distribution in Germany of secretly printed revolutionary manifestos, as for example the one entitled: “The Main Enemy Is Withinthe Country”. 
 This showed that the spirit of socialism isalive among the German workers, and that there are stillpeople in Germany capable of upholding revolutionaryMarxism. 
 The split in the present-day socialist movement has most strikingly revealed itself within the German Social-Democratic movement. 
 Three trends can be clearlydistinguished here: the opportunist chauvinists, who havenowhere sunk to such foul apostasy as in Germany;the Kautskian “Centre”, which have here proved totally incapable of playing any other role than that of menials to the opportunists; the Lefts, who are the only Social-Democrats in Germany. 
 Naturally, the state of affairs among the German Lefts is what interests us most. 
 In them we see our comrades,the hope of all the internationalist elements. 
 What is the state of affairs among them? The journal Die Internationale was quite right in writing that the German Lefts are still in a state of ferment,that considerable regroupings still await them, and thatwithin them some elements are more resolute and othersless resolute. 
 Of course, we Russian internationalists do not in the least claim the right to interfere in the internal affairsof our comrades, the German Lefts. 
 We understand thatthey alone are fully competent to determine their methodsof combating the opportunists, according to the conditionsof time and place. 
 Only we consider it our right and our duty to express our frank opinion on the state of affairs. 
 We are convinced that the author of the leading article in the journal Die Internationale was perfectly right in stating that the Kautskian “Centre” is doing more harm toMarxism than avowed social-chauvinism. 
 Anyone whoplays down differences, or, in the guise of Marxism, now teaches the workers that which Kautskyism is preaching, is in fact lulling the workers, and doing more harm thanthe Südekums and Heines, who are putting the issue squarely and are compelling the workers to try to make up their own minds. 
 The Fronde against the “official bodies” which Kautsky and Haase have of late been permitting themselves shouldmislead nobody. 
 The disagreements between them and theScheidemanns are not on fundamentals. 
 The former believethat Hindenburg and Mackensen are already victorious and that they can already permit themselves the luxury of protesting against annexations. 
 The latter believe that Hindenburg and Mackensen are not yet victorious and that, therefore, it is necessary “to hold out to the end”. 
 Kautskyism is waging only a sham struggle against the “official bodies” just to be able, after the war, to concealfrom the workers the clash of principles and to paper over the issue with a thousand and one padded resolutions drawn up in a vaguely “Leftist” spirit, in the drafting of whichthe diplomats of the Second International are such experts. 
 It is quite understandable that, in their difficult struggle against the “official bodies”, the German opposition shouldalso make use of this unprincipled Fronde raised by Kautskyism. 
 However, to any internationalist, hostility to-wards neo-Kautskyism must remain the touchstone. 
 Onlyhe is a genuine internationalist who combats Kautskyism,and understands that, even after its leaders’ pretended change of intention, the centre remains, on all fundamentalissues, an ally of the chauvinists and the opportunists . 
 In general, our attitude towards wavering elements in the International is of tremendous importance. 
 These ele-ments—mainly socialists of a pacifist shade—are to be found both in the neutral countries and in some of thebelligerent countries (in Britain, for example, the Inde-pendent Labour Party). 
 Such elements can be our fellow-travellers. 
 Ties with them for a struggle against the social-chauvinists are necessary. 
 It should, however, be remem-bered that they are merely fellow-travellers, and that on all main and fundamental issues, these elements willmarch against us, not with us, when the International isbeing restored; they will side with Kautsky, Scheidemann, Vandervelde, and Sembat. 
 At international conferences we must not restrict our programme to what is acceptableto these elements. 
 If we do, we shall fall captive to the wavering pacifists. 
 This is what happened, for example, at the International Women’s Conference in Berne. 
 There the German delegation, which supported Comrade Clara Zetkin’s point of view, actually played the part of the“Centre”. 
 The Women’s Conference said only that which wasacceptable to the delegates of the opportunist Dutch partyled by Troelstra, and to the delegates of the IndependentLabour Party; we shall always remember that, at the London conference of “Entente” chauvinists, the I. 
L. 
P. 
 voted in favour of Vandervelde’s resolution. 
 We would like toexpress our greatest esteem for the I. 
L. 
P. 
 for thecourageous struggle it has been waging against the BritishGovernment during the war. 
 We know, however, that thisparty has never taken a Marxist stand. 
 For our part, we hold that today it is the main task of the Social-Demo-cratic opposition to raise the banner of revolutionaryMarxism, to tell the workers firmly and definitely howwe regard imperialist wars, and to advance a call for massrevolutionary action, i. 
e. 
, convert the period of impe-rialist wars into the beginning of a period of civil wars. 
 Despite everything, revolutionary Social-Democratic ele-ments exist in many countries. 
 They are to be found inGermany, Russia, Scandinavia (where Comrade Höglundrepresents an influential trend), the Balkans (the party ofthe Bulgarian “Tesnyaki”), Italy, Britain (part of the BritishSocialist Party), France (Vaillant himself has admitted in l’Humanité that he has received letters of protest from internationalists, but he has not published any one of themin full), Holland (the Tribunists 149), and so on. 
 To rally these Marxist elements, however small their numbersmay be at the outset; to reanimate, in their name, thenow forgotten ideals of genuine socialism, and to call upon the workers of all lands to break with the chauvinists and rally about the old banner of Marxism—such is the taskof the day. 
 Conferences with so-called programmes of “action” have till now confined themselves to announcing a more or lessoutspoken programme of sheer pacifism. 
 Marxism is not pacifism. 
 Of course, the speediest possible termination of the war must be striven for. 
 However, the “peace” demandacquires a proletarian significance only if a revolutionary struggle is called for. 
 Without a series of revolutions, what is called a democratic peace is a philistine Utopia. 
 The purpose of a real programme of action can be served only by a Marxist programme which gives the masses a full and clear explanation of what has taken place, explainswhat imperialism is and how it should be combated,declares openly that the collapse of the Second Internationalwas brought about by opportunism, and openly calls for a Marxist International to be built up without and against the opportunists. 
 Only a programme that shows that wehave faith in ourselves and in Marxism and that we haveproclaimed a life-and-death struggle against opportunismwill sooner or later win us the sympathy of the genuinelyproletarian masses. 
 THE RUSSIAN SOCIAL -DEMOCRATIC LABOUR PARTY AND THE THIRD INTERNATIONAL The Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party has long parted company with its opportunists. 
 Besides, the Russianopportunists have now become chauvinists. 
 This only fortifies us in our opinion that a split with them is essen-tial in the interests of socialism. 
 We are convinced thatthe Social-Democrats’ present differences with the social-chauvinists are in no way less marked than the socialists’differences with the anarchists when the Social-Democratsparted company with the latter. 
 The opportunist Monitor was right when he wrote, in Preussische Jahrbücher , that the unity of today is to the advantage of the opportunistsand the bourgeoisie, because it has compelled the Leftsto submit to the chauvinists and prevents the workers fromunderstanding the controversy and forming their owngenuinely working-class and genuinely socialist party. 
 We are firmly convinced that, in the present state of affairs, a split with the opportunists and chauvinists is the primeduty of revolutionaries, just as a split with the yellowtrade unions, the anti-Semites, the liberal workers’ unions,etc. 
, was essential in helping speed up the enlightenmentof backward workers and draw them into the ranks of the Social-Democratic Party. 
 In our opinion, the Third International should be built up on that kind of revolutionary basis. 
 To our Party, the question of the expediency of a break with the social-chauvinists does not exist, it has been answered with finality. 
 The only question that exists for our Party is whether this can be achieved on an international scale in the imme-diate future. 
 It is perfectly obvious that to create an international Marxist organisation, there must be a readiness to formindependent Marxist parties in the various countries. 
 As a country with the oldest and strongest working-class movement, Germany is of decisive importance. 
 The imme-diate future will show whether the conditions are maturefor the formation of a new and Marxist International. 
 Ifthey are, our Party will gladly join such a Third Interna-tional, purged of opportunism and chauvinism. 
 If they are not, then that will show that a more or less protracted period of evolution is needed for that purging to be effected. 
Our Party will then form the extreme opposition withinthe old International, pending the time when the condi-tions in the various countries make possible the formationof an international workingmen’s association standing on the basis of revolutionary Marxism. 
 We do not and cannot know what road world develop-ments will take in the next few years. 
 What we do knowfor certain and are unshakably convinced of is that our Party will work indefatigably in the above-mentioneddirection, in our country and among our proletariat, and through its day-by-day activities will build up the Russian section of the Marxist International. 
 In Russia too there is no lack of avowed social-chauvin-ists and Centrist groups. 
 These people will fight againstthe formation of a Marxist International. 
 We know that,in principle, Plekhanov shares the standpoint of Südekum and is already holding out a hand to the latter. 
 We know that, under Axelrod’s leadership, the so-called OrganisingCommittee is preaching Kautskyism on Russian soil. 
Under a cloak of working-class unity, these people are callingfor unity with the opportunists and, through the latter,with the bourgeoisie. 
 Everything we know about the present-day working-class movement in Russia, however, gives us full assurance that the class-conscious proletariatof Russia will, as hitherto, remain with our Party . 
 C H A P T E R IV THE HISTORY OF THE SPLIT, AND THE PRESENT STATE OF SOCIAL-DEMOCRACY IN RUSSIA The tactics of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 in relation to the war, as outlined above, are the inevitable outcome of the thirtyyears’ development of Social-Democracy in Russia. 
 Thesetactics, as well as the present state of Social-Democracy in our country, cannot be properly understood without going deeper into the history of our Party. 
 That is whyhere, too, we must remind the reader of the major facts inthat history. 
 As an ideological trend, the Social-Democratic move-ment arose in 1883, when Social-Democratic views, as applied to Russia, were for the first time systematically expounded abroad by the Emancipation of Labour group. 
Until the early nineties, Social-Democracy was an ideo-logical trend without links with the mass working-classmovement in Russia. 
 At the beginning of the nineties, thegrowth of public consciousness and the unrest and strike movement among the workers, turned Social-Democracy into an active political force inseparably connected withthe struggle (both economic and political) of the workingclass. 
 It was from that time too that the split intoEconomists and Iskrists began in the Social-Democraticmovement. 
 THE ECONOMISTS AND THE OLD ISKRA (1894 -1903 ) Economism was an opportunist trend in Russian Social-Democracy. 
 Its political essence was summed up in theprogramme: “for the workers—the economic struggle; forthe liberals—the political struggle”. 
 Its theoretical main-stay was so-called “legal Marxism” or “Struvism”, which “recognised” a “Marxism” that was completely devoid ofany revolutionary spirit and adapted to the needs of theliberal bourgeoisie. 
 Pleading the backwardness of themass of workers in Russia, and wishing to “march withthe masses”, the Economists restricted the tasks and scope of the working-class movement to the economic struggle and to political support for liberalism; they set themselvesno independent political or revolutionary tasks. 
 The old Iskra (1900-03) waged a victorious struggle against Economism, for the principles of revolutionary Social-Democracy. 
 The finest elements in the class-conscious proletariat sided with Iskra . 
 Several years before the revolution, the Social-Democrats came out with a mostconsistent and uncompromising programme, whose correct-ness was borne out by the class struggle and by the actionof the masses during the 1905 Revolution. 
 Whereas the Economists adapted themselves to the backwardness of the masses, Iskra was educating the workers’ vanguard that was capable of leading the masses onward. 
 The present-day arguments of the social-chauvinists (i. 
e. 
, the needto reckon with the masses; the progressiveness of imperial-ism; the “illusions” harboured by the revolutionaries, etc. 
), were all advanced by the Economists. 
 It was twenty years ago that the Russian Social-Democrats made their firstacquaintance with the opportunist modification ofMarxism into Struvism. 
 MENSHEVISM AND BOLSHEVISM (1903 -1908 ) The period of bourgeois-democratic revolution gave rise to a fresh struggle between Social-Democratic trends;this was a direct continuation of the previous struggle. 
Economism developed into Menshevism. 
 The defence ofthe old Iskra revolutionary tactics gave rise to Bolshevism. 
 In the turbulent years of 1905-07, Menshevism was an opportunist trend backed by the bourgeois liberals, which brought liberal-bourgeois tendencies into the working-class movement. 
 Its essence lay in an adaptation of theworking-class struggle to suit liberalism. 
 Bolshevism, onthe contrary, set the Social-Democratic workers the taskof rousing the democratic peasantry for the revolutionary struggle, despite the vacillation and treachery of the liberals. 
 As the Mensheviks themselves admitted on more thanone occasion, the mass of workers followed the Bolsheviklead in all the most important actions of the revolution. 
 The 1905 Revolution tested, developed and steeled the uncompromisingly revolutionary Social-Democratic tactics in Russia. 
 The direct action of classes and parties repeatedly revealed the link between Social-Democratic opportunism(Menshevism) and liberalism. 
 ISM AND LIQUIDATIONISM (1908 -1914 ) The period of counter-revolution again placed on the order of the day—this time in an entirely new form—the question of the opportunist and revolutionary tacticsof the Social-Democrats. 
 The mainstream in Menshevism,regardless of protests from many of its finest representa-tives, brought forth the liquidationist trend, a renuncia-tion of the struggle for another revolution in Russia, a renunciation of underground organisation and activities,contempt for and ridicule of the “underground”, of theslogan for a republic, etc. 
 The group of legal contributorsto the journal Nasha Zarya (Messrs. 
 Potresov, Chere-vanin, and others) formed a core—independent of the old Social-Democratic Party—which in a thousand ways has been supported, publicised and nurtured by the liberalbourgeoisie of Russia, who are out to win the workers awayfrom the revolutionary struggle. 
 This group of opportunists was expelled from the Party by the January 1912 Conference of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, which restored the Party, in the teeth of furious resistance from a number of groups and coteries abroad. 
 For over two years(the beginning of 1912 until mid-1914) a stubborn strugglewas in progress between the two Social-Democratic parties:the Central Committee, which was elected in January 1912,and the Organising Committee, which refused to recognise the January Conference and wanted to restore the Party in a different way, by maintaining unity with the Nasha Zarya group. 
 A stubborn struggle raged between the two workers’ dailies ( Pravda , and Luch 150 and their successors), and between the two Social-Democratic groups in theFourth Duma (the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
 group of Pravdists or Marxists, and the “Social-Democratic group” of the liquidators led by Chkheidze). 
 The Pravdists, who championed loyalty to the Party’s revolutionary principles, encouraged the incipient revivalof the working-class movement (especially after the springof 1912), combined underground and legal organisation, the press and agitation, and rallied about themselves the overwhelming majority of the class-conscious workers,whereas the liquidators—who as a political force operated exclusively through the Nasha Zarya group—banked on the all-round support of the liberal-bourgeois elements. 
 The open money contributions made by workers’ groups to the newspapers of the two parties—a form of payment ofS. 
D. 
 membership dues adapted to the Russian conditions of the time (and the only one legally possible and easilyverifiable by the public)—strikingly confirmed the prole-tarian source of the strength and influence of the Pravdists (Marxists), and the bourgeois-liberal source of the liquida-tors (and their O. 
C. 
). 
 Here are the brief figures of thesecontributions, which are given in full in the book Marxism and Liquidationism 151 and summarised in the German Social-Democratic Leipziger Volkszeitung152 of July 21, 1914. 
 The number and sums of contributions to the St. 
 Peters-burg daily newspapers, Marxist (Pravdist) and liquida-tionist, from January 1 to May 13, 1914 were the following: P r a v d i s t s L i q u i d a t o r s Number of Sum in Number of Sum in contribu-rubles contribu-rubles tions tions From workers’ groups 2,873 18,934 671 5,296 From non-workers’ groups 713 2,650453 6,760 Thus by 1914 our Party had united four-fifths of the class-conscious workers of Russia around revolutionarySocial-Democratic tactics. 
 For the whole of 1913 the Prav-dists received contributions from 2,181 workers’ groups, the liquidators from 661. 
 The figures from January 1, 1913 to May 13, 1914 were: 5,054 contributions from workers’groups for the Pravdists (i. 
e. 
, for our Party), and 1,332,i. 
e. 
, 20. 
8 per cent, for the liquidators. 
 ISM AND SOCIAL -CHAUVINISM (1914-1915 ) The great European war of 1914-15 has given all the European Social-Democrats, as well as the Russian, anopportunity of putting their tactics to the test of a crisis of a world-wide scale. 
 The reactionary and predatory nature of this war between slave-holders stands out in far morestriking relief in the case of tsarism than it does in the case of the other governments. 
 Yet the liquidators’ main group (the only one which, besides ours, exerts serious influence in Russia, thanks to its liberal connections) has turned towards social-chauvinism! With its fairly lengthymonopoly of legality, this Nasha Zarya group has conducted propaganda among the masses, in favour of “non-resistanceto the war”, and victory for the Triple (and now Quadruple)Entente; it has accused German imperialism of extraordi-nary sins, etc. 
 Plekhanov, who, since 1903, has given numer-ous examples of his utter political spinelessness and hisdesertion to opportunism, has taken this stand even moreemphatically (which has won him praise from the entirebourgeois press of Russia). 
 Plekhanov has sunk so lowas to declare that tsarism is waging a just war, and to grant interviews to Italian government newspapers, urging that country to enter the war! The correctness of our appraisal of liquidationism and of the expulsion of the main group of liquidators fromour Party has thus been fully confirmed. 
 The liquidators’real programme and the real significance of their trend today consist, not only in opportunism in general, but in a defence of the dominant-nation privileges and advantagesof the Great-Russian landowners and bourgeoisie. 
 Liquida-tionism is a trend of national liberal -labour policy. 
 It is an alliance of a section of the radical petty bourgeoisieand a tiny section of privileged workers, with their “own” national bourgeoisie, against the mass of the proletariat. 
 THE PRESENT STATE OF AFFAIRS IN THE RANKS OF THE RUSSIAN SOCIAL -DEMOCRATS As we have already said, our January 1912 Conference has not been recognised by the liquidators, or by a number of groups abroad (those of Plekhanov, Alexinsky, Trotsky,and others), or by the so-called “national” (i. 
e. 
, non-GreatRussian) Social-Democrats. 
 Among the numberless epithetshurled against us, “usurpers” and “splitters” have beenmost frequently repeated. 
 We have replied by quoting precise and objectively verifiable figures showing that our Party has united four-fifths of the class-consciousworkers in Russia. 
 This is no small figure, considering the difficulties of underground activities in a period of counter-revolution . 
 If “unity” were possible in Russia on the basis of Social-Democratic tactics, without expelling the Nasha Zarya group, why have our numerous opponents not achieved iteven among themselves ? Three and a half years have elapsed since January 1912, and all this time our opponents, muchas they have desired to do so, have failed to form a Social-Democratic party in opposition to us. 
 This fact is our Party’s best defence. 
 The entire history of the Social-Democratic groups that are fighting against our Party has been a history ofcollapse and disintegration. 
 In March 1912, all of them,without exception, “united” in reviling us. 
 But already in August 1912, when the so-called August bloc * was formed against us, disintegration set in among them. 
 Some of thegroups defected from them. 
 They were unable to form aparty and a Central Committee; what they set up was onlyan Organising Committee “for the purpose of restoringunity”. 
 Actually, this O. 
C. 
 proved an ineffective cover for the liquidationist group in Russia. 
 Throughout the tremendous upswing of the working-class movement inRussia and the mass strikes of 1912-14, the only group inthe entire August bloc to conduct work among the masseswas the Nasha Zarya group, whose strength lay in its links with the liberals. 
 Early in 1914, the Lettish Social-Demo-crats officially withdrew from the August bloc (the Polish Social-Democrats did not join it), while Trotsky, one ofthe leaders of the bloc, left it unofficially, again forminghis own separate group. 
 At the Brussels Conferenceof July 1914, at which the Executive Committee of theInternational Socialist Bureau, Kautsky and Vandervelde participated, the so-called Brussels bloc was formed against us, which the Letts did not join, and from which the Polishopposition Social-Democrats forthwith withdrew. 
 On theoutbreak of war, this bloc collapsed. 
 Nasha Zarya , Plekhanov, Alexinsky and An, 153 leader of the Caucasian Social-Democrats, became open social-chauvinists, who came out for the desirability of Germany’s defeat. 
 The *See Note 180. 
— Tr. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR O. 
C. 
 and the Bund defended the social-chauvinists and the principles of social-chauvinism. 
 Although it voted against the war credits (in Russia, even the bourgeois demo-crats, the Trudoviks, voted against them), the ChkheidzeDuma group remained Nasha Zarya ’s faithful ally. 
 Ple-khanov, Alexinsky and Co. 
, our extreme social-chauvinists,were quite pleased with the Chkheidze group. 
 In Paris,the newspaper Nashe Slovo (the former Golos ) was launched, with the participation mainly of Martov and Trotsky, who wanted to combine a platonic defence of internationalismwith an absolute demand for unity with Nasha Zarya , the O. 
C. 
 or the Chkheidze group. 
 After 250 issues, thisnewspaper was itself compelled to admit its disintegra-tion: one section of the editorial board gravitated towards our Party, Martov remained faithful to the O. 
C. 
 which publicly censured Nashe Slovo for its “anarchism” (just as the opportunists in Germany, David and Co. 
, Interna-tionale Korrespondenz154 and Legien and Co. 
 have accused Comrade Liebknecht of anarchism); Trotsky announcedhis rupture with the O. 
C. 
, but wanted to stand with the Chkheidze group. 
 Here are the programme and the tactics of the Chkheidze group, as formulated by one of its leaders. 
 InNo. 
 5, 1915, of Sovremenny Mir ,155 journal of the Plekha-nov and Alexinsky trend, Chkhenkeli wrote: “ To say that German Social-Democracy was in a position to prevent its country from going to war and failed to do so would mean either secretly wishing that it should not only have breathed its last at the barricades , but also have the fatherland breathe its last , or looking at nearby things through an anarchist ’s telescope . 
”* These few lines express the sum and substance of social-chauvinism: both the justification, in principle, of the idea of “defence of the fatherland” in the present war, and mockery—with the permission of the military censors—ofthe preachment of and preparation for revolution. 
 It isnot at all a question of whether the German Social-Demo-*S. 
 M. 
 No. 
 5, 1915, p. 
 148. 
 Trotsky recently announced that he deemed it his task to enhance the prestige of the Chkheidze group in the International. 
 No doubt Chkhenkeli will with equal energy enhance Trotsky’s prestige in the International.... 
 crats were or were not in a position to prevent war, or whether, in general, revolutionaries can guarantee the success of a revolution. 
 The question is: shall socialists behave like socialists or really breathe their last in theembrace of the imperialist bourgeoisie? OUR PARTY’S TASKS Social-Democracy in Russia arose before the bourgeois-democratic revolution (1905) in our country, and gainedstrength during the revolution and counter-revolution. 
 Thebackwardness of Russia explains the extraordinarymultiplicity of trends and shades of petty-bourgeois oppor-tunism in our country; whereas the influence of Marxism in Europe and the stability of the legally existing Social-Democratic parties before the war converted ourexemplary liberals into near-admirers of “reasonable”,“European” (non-revolutionary), “legal” “Marxist” theory andSocial-Democracy. 
 The working class of Russia could notbuild up its party otherwise than in a resolute thirty-year struggle against all the varieties of opportunism. 
 The experience of the world war, which has brought about theshameful collapse of European opportunism and hasstrengthened the alliance between our national-liberals andsocial-chauvinist liquidationism, has still further fortifiedour conviction that our Party must follow the same consistently revolutionary road. 
 ON THE SLOGAN FOR A UNITED STATES OF EUROPE In No. 
 40 of Sotsial-Demokrat we reported that a confer-ence of our Party’s groups abroad had decided to defer the question of the “United States of Europe” slogan pending a discussion, in the press, on the economic aspect of the matter. 
 * At our conference the debate on this question assumed a purely political character. 
 Perhaps this was partly causedby the Central Committee’s Manifesto having formulated this slogan as a forthright political one (“the immediate political slogan...”, as it says there); not only did it advance the slogan of a republican United States of Europe, butexpressly emphasised that this slogan is meaningless andfalse “without the revolutionary overthrow of the German,Austrian and Russian monarchies”. 
 It would be quite wrong to object to such a presentation of the question within the limits of a political appraisal of this slogan—e. 
g. 
, to argue that it obscures or weakens,etc. 
, the slogan of a socialist revolution. 
 Political changesof a truly democratic nature, and especially politicalrevolutions, can under no circumstances whatsoever either obscure or weaken the slogan of a socialist revolution. 
 On the contrary, they always bring it closer, extend its basis,and draw new sections of the petty bourgeoisie and thesemi-proletarian masses into the socialist struggle. 
 On theother hand, political revolutions are inevitable in the courseof the socialist revolution, which should not be regarded as a single act, but as a period of turbulent political and *See p. 
 158 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 economic upheavals, the most intense class struggle, civil war, revolutions, and counter-revolutions. 
 But while the slogan of a republican United States of Europe—if accompanied by the revolutionary overthrow ofthe three most reactionary monarchies in Europe, headedby the Russian—is quite invulnerable as a political sloganthere still remains the highly important question of itseconomic content and significance. 
 From the standpoint of the economic conditions of imperialism—i. 
e. 
, the export of capital and the division of the world by the “advanced”and “civilised” colonial powers—a United States of Europe,under capitalism, is either impossible or reactionary. 
 Capital has become international and monopolist. 
 The world has been carved up by a handful of Great Powers, i. 
e. 
, powers successful in the great plunder and oppression of nations. 
 The four Great Powers of Europe—Britain,France, Russia and Germany, with an aggregate populationof between 250,000,000 and 300,000,000, and an area ofabout 7,000,000 square kilometres—possess colonies witha population of almost 500 million (494,500,000) and an area of 64,600,000 square kilometres, i. 
e. 
, almost half the surface of the globe (133,000,000 square kilometresexclusive of Arctic and Antarctic regions). 
 Add to this thethree Asian states—China, Turkey and Persia, now beingrent piecemeal by thugs that are waging a war of “libera-tion”, namely, Japan, Russia, Britain and France. 
 Those three Asian states, which may be called semi-colonies (in reality they are now 90 per cent colonies), have a totalpopulation of 360,000,000 and an area of 14,500,000 squarekilometres (almost one and a half times the area of allEurope). 
 Furthermore, Britain, France and Germany have invested capital abroad to the value of no less than 70,000 million rubles. 
 The business of securing “legitimate” profits fromthis tidy sum—these exceed 3,000 million rubles annually—is carried out by the national committees of the millionaires,known as governments, which are equipped with armiesand navies and which provide the sons and brothers of the millionaires with jobs in the colonies and semi-colonies as viceroys, consuls, ambassadors, officials of all kinds, cler-gymen, and other leeches. 
 That is how the plunder of about a thousand million of the earth’s population by a handful of Great Powers is organised in the epoch of the highest development of capitalism. 
 No other organisation is possible under capi-talism. 
 Renounce colonies, “spheres of influence”, and theexport of capital? To think that it is possible means comingdown to the level of some snivelling parson who everySunday preaches to the rich on the lofty principles of Chris-tianity and advises them to give the poor, well, if not millions, at least several hundred rubles yearly. 
 A United States of Europe under capitalism is tanta-mount to an agreement on the partition of colonies. 
 Undercapitalism, however, no other basis and no other principleof division are possible except force. 
 A multi-millionaire cannot share the “national income” of a capitalist country with anyone otherwise than “in proportion to the capitalinvested” (with a bonus thrown in, so that the biggestcapital may receive more than its share). 
 Capitalism is privateownership of the means of production, and anarchy in pro-duction. 
 To advocate a “just” division of income on such a basis is sheer Proudhonism, stupid philistinism. 
 No divi-sion can be effected otherwise than in “proportion to strength”,and strength changes with the course of economic develop-ment. 
 Following 1871, the rate of Germany’s accession ofstrength was three or four times as rapid as that of Britainand France, and of Japan about ten times as rapid as Rus-sia’s. 
 There is and there can be no other way of testing the real might of a capitalist state than by war. 
 War does notcontradict the fundamentals of private property—on thecontrary, it is a direct and inevitable outcome of thosefundamentals. 
 Under capitalism the smooth economicgrowth of individual enterprises or individual states is impossible. 
 Under capitalism, there are no other means of restoring the periodically disturbed equilibrium thancrises in industry and wars in politics. 
 Of course, temporary agreements are possible between capitalists and between states. 
 In this sense a United Statesof Europe is possible as an agreement between the European capitalists ... but to what end? Only for the purpose of jointly suppressing socialism in Europe, of jointly pro-tecting colonial booty against Japan and America, who have been badly done out of their share by the present partition of colonies, and the increase of whose might during the last fifty years has been immeasurably more rapid than that of backward and monarchist Europe, nowturning senile. 
 Compared with the United States ofAmerica, Europe as a whole denotes economic stagnation. 
 Onthe present economic basis, i. 
e. 
, under capitalism, a UnitedStates of Europe would signify an organisation of reaction to retard America’s more rapid development. 
 The times when the cause of democracy and socialism was associatedonly with Europe alone have gone for ever. 
 A United States of the World (not of Europe alone) is the state form of the unification and freedom of nationswhich we associate with socialism—until the time when the complete victory of communism brings about the total disappearance of the state, including the democratic. 
 As aseparate slogan, however, the slogan of a United States ofthe World would hardly be a correct one, first, because itmerges with socialism; second, because it may be wronglyinterpreted to mean that the victory of socialism in a single country is impossible, and it may also create misconcep-tions as to the relations of such a country to the others. 
 Uneven economic and political development is an abso-lute law of capitalism. 
 Hence, the victory of socialism ispossible first in several or even in one capitalist countryalone. 
 After expropriating the capitalists and organising their own socialist production, the victorious proletariat of that country will arise against the rest of the world— the capitalist world—attracting to its cause the oppressedclasses of other countries, stirring uprisings in thosecountries against the capitalists, and in case of need usingeven armed force against the exploiting classes and their states. 
 The political form of a society wherein the prole-tariat is victorious in overthrowing the bourgeoisie willbe a democratic republic, which will more and more con-centrate the forces of the proletariat of a given nationor nations, in the struggle against states that have notyet gone over to socialism. 
 The abolition of classes is impossible without a dictatorship of the oppressed class, of the proletariat. 
 A free union of nations in socialism isimpossible without a more or less prolonged and stubborn struggle of the socialist republics against the backward states. 
 It is for these reasons and after repeated discussions at the conference of R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 groups abroad, and follow-ing that conference, that the Central Organ’s editors havecome to the conclusion that the slogan for a United Statesof Europe is an erroneous one. 
 Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 44, Published according to August 23, 1915 the text in Sotsial-Demokrat ON THE SLOGAN FOR THE UNITED STATES OF EUROPE EDITORIAL COMMENT BY SOTSIAL -DEMOKRAT ON THE MANIFESTO ON WAR ISSUED BY THE CENTRAL COMMITTEE OF THE R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 The demand for a United States of Europe, as advanced by the Central Committee’s Manifesto, which accompanied it with a call for the overthrow of the monarchies in Russia,Austria, and Germany, is distinct from the pacifist inter-pretation of this slogan by Kautsky and others. 
 Issue No. 
 44 of Sotsial-Demokrat , our Party’s Central Organ, carries an editorial proving the economic erroneous-ness of the United States of Europe slogan. 
 * Either this is a demand that cannot be implemented under capitalism,inasmuch as it presupposes the establishment of a plannedworld economy, with a partition of colonies, spheres ofinfluence, etc. 
, among the individual countries, or else itis a reactionary slogan, one that signifies a temporary union of the Great Powers of Europe with the aim of enhancing the oppression of colonies and of plunderingthe more rapidly developing countries—Japan and America. 
 Written in late August 1915 Published in the pamphlet Published according Socialism and War ,t o the pamphlet Geneva, 1915 *See pp. 
 339-43 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 THE DRAFT RESOLUTION PROPOSED BY THE LEFT WING AT ZIMMERWALD The present war has been engendered by imperialism. 
 Capitalism has already achieved that highest stage. 
 Society’s productive forces and the magnitudes of capital have out-grown the narrow limits of the individual national states. 
Hence the striving on the part of the Great Powers to enslaveother nations and to seize colonies as sources of raw ma-terial and spheres of investment of capital. 
 The whole world is merging into a single economic organism; it has been carved up among a handful of Great Powers. 
 The objectiveconditions for socialism have fully matured, and thepresent war is a war of the capitalists for privileges andmonopolies that might delay the downfall of capitalism. 
 The socialists, who seek to liberate labour from the yoke of capital and who defend the world-wide solidarity of the workers, are struggling against any kind of oppressionand inequality of nations. 
 When the bourgeoisie was aprogressive class, and the overthrow of feudalism, abso-lutism and oppression by other nations stood on the his-torical order of the day, the socialists, as invariably the most consistent and most resolute of democrats, recognised “defence of the fatherland” in the meaning implied by thoseaims, and in that meaning alone. 
 Today too, should a warof the oppressed nations against the oppressor Great Powersbreak out in the east of Europe or in the colonies, thesocialists’ sympathy would be wholly with the oppressed. 
 The war of today, however, has been engendered by an entirely different historical period, in which the bourgeoisie,from a progressive class, has turned reactionary. 
 With both groups of belligerents, this war is a war of slave-holders, and is designed to preserve and extend slavery; it is a war for the repartitioning of colonies, for the “right” to oppress other nations, for privileges and monopolies forGreat-Power capital, and for the perpetuation of wageslavery by splitting up the workers of the different countriesand crushing them through reaction. 
 That is why, on thepart of both warring groups, all talk about “defence of the fatherland” is deception of the people by the bourgeoisie. 
 Neither the victory of any one group nor a return to thestatus quo can do anything either to protect the freedom of most countries in the world from imperialist oppressionby a handful of Great Powers, or to ensure that the workingclass keep even its present modest cultural gains. 
 The period of a relatively peaceful capitalism has passed, never to return. 
 Imperialism has brought the working classunparalleled intensification of the class struggle, want, andunemployment, a higher cost of living, and the strengthen-ing of oppression by the trusts, of militarism, and thepolitical reactionaries, who are raising their heads in all countries, even the freest. 
 In reality, the “defence of the fatherland” slogan in the present war is tantamount to a defence of the “right” ofone’s “own” national bourgeoisie to oppress other nations;it is in fact a national liberal-labour policy, an alliancebetween a negligible section of the workers and their “own” national bourgeoisie, against the mass of the proletarians and the exploited. 
 Socialists who pursue such a policy arein fact chauvinists, social-chauvinists. 
 The policy of votingfor war credits, of joining governments, of Burgfrieden , * and the like, is a betrayal of socialism. 
 Nurtured by the conditions of the “peaceful”, period which has now come to an end, opportunism has now matured to a degree that calls for a break with socialism; it has become an open enemyto the proletariat’s movement for liberation. 
 The workingclass cannot achieve its historic aims without waging amost resolute struggle against both forthright opportunismand social-chauvinism (the majorities in the Social-Demo-*A class truce. 
— Ed. 
 cratic parties of France, Germany and Austria; Hyndman, the Fabians and the trade unionists in Britain; Rubanovich, Plekhanov and Nasha Zarya in Russia, etc. 
) and the so-called Centre, which has surrendered the Marxist stand tothe chauvinists. 
 Unanimously adopted by socialists of the entire world in anticipation of that very kind of war among the GreatPowers which has now broken out, the Basle Manifesto of 1912 distinctly recognised the imperialist and reactionary nature of that war, declared it criminal for workers of onecountry to shoot at workers of another country, and pro-claimed the approach of the proletarian revolution in connec-tion with that very war. 
 Indeed, the war is creating arevolutionary situation, is engendering revolutionary senti-ments and unrest in the masses, is arousing in the finer part of the proletariat a realisation of the perniciousnessof opportunism, and is intensifying the struggle againstit. 
 The masses’ growing desire for peace expresses theirdisappointment, the defeat of the bourgeois lie regardingthe defence of the fatherland, and the awakening of their revolutionary consciousness. 
 In utilising that temper for their revolutionary agitation, and not shying away in thatagitation from considerations of the defeat of their “own”country, the socialists will not deceive the people withthe hope that, without the revolutionary overthrow of thepresent-day governments, a possibility exists of a speedy democratic peace, which will be durable in some degree and will preclude any oppression of nations, a possibility ofdisarmament, etc. 
 Only the social revolution of the proletar-iat opens the way towards peace and freedom for the na-tions. 
 The imperialist war is ushering in the era of the social revolution. 
 All the objective conditions of recent times have put the proletariat’s revolutionary mass struggle onthe order of the day. 
 It is the duty of socialists, while mak-ing use of every means of the working class’s legal struggle,to subordinate each and every of those means to thisimmediate and most important task, develop the workers’ revolutionary consciousness, rally them in the interna-tional revolutionary struggle, promote and encourageany revolutionary action, and do everything possible to turn the imperialist war between the peoples into a civil war of the oppressed classes against their oppressors, a war for the expropriation of the class of capitalists, for the conquest of political power by the proletariat, and therealisation of socialism. 
 Written prior to August 20 (September 2) 1915 First published in 1930 Published according to in Lenin Miscellany XIV the manuscript THE VOICE OF AN HONEST FRENCH SOCIALIST In French-speaking Switzerland, where Francophile chau-vinism is raging with only a little less intensity than inFrance, the voice of an honest socialist has been heard. 
 In our despicable times this is quite an event. 
 We must pay all the more attention to this voice because in thisinstance we have here to do with a socialist of typicallyFrench (or rather Romance, because the Italians, for in-stance, are the same) temperament and frame of mind. 
 We are referring to a little pamphlet by Paul Golay, the editor of a minor socialist paper published in Lausanne. 
 It was in that city that on March 11, 1915, the authordelivered a lecture on the subject: “The Socialism ThatIs Dying and the Socialism That Must Be Reborn”, thecontents of which he later published separately. 
 * “On August 1, 1914, war broke out. 
 During the weeks preceding this now famous date, and after it, millions of people were waiting. 
” That is how the author begins. 
Millions of people were waiting, he says, to see whether theresolutions and the declarations of the leaders of socialismwould not lead “to a mighty uprising, whose whirlwindwould sweep away the criminal governments”. 
 However, the expectations of millions were thwarted. 
 “We attempted,” says Golay, “in a comradely fashion” to exonerate thesocialists by referring to the “lightning suddenness of thewar”, and to the lack of information, but these excuses didnot satisfy us. 
 “We felt ill at ease, as if our conscience weresteeped in the filthy waters of equivocation and lies. 
” From *Paul Golay, Le socialisme qui meurt et le socialisme qui doit renaître , Lausanne, 1915, 22 pages, 15 centimes. 
 En vente à l’Administration du “Grutleen ”, Maison du Peuple, Lausanne. 
 this the reader will have concluded that Golay is sincere, a quality almost extraordinary in our times. 
 Golay recalls the “revolutionary traditions” of the pro-letariat. 
 Perfectly aware of the fact that “for each situationfitting action is required”, he reminds us that “for excep-tional situations exceptional measures are necessary. 
 Aux grands maux les grands remèdes ”. 
 * He recalls “congress decisions” “addressed directly to the masses and urging them to start revolutionary and insurrectionary action”. 
There come excerpts from the Stuttgart and Basle reso-lutions. 
 The author emphasises that “these various reso-lutions do not contain any argument as to a defensive oroffensive war; consequently they do not propose any special nationalist tactics to supersede the generally accepted fundamental principles”. 
 After reading this, the reader sees that Golay is not only a sincere socialist, but also an honest, convinced socialist,a quality quite exceptional among leaders of the SecondInternational! “The proletariat was congratulated by military commanders, and the bourgeois press warmly praised the resurrection of what it called‘the soul of the nation’. 
 This resurrection has cost us three million corpses. 
 “And yet never has a workers’ organisation had such a large number of dues-paying members, never has there been such an abundance ofparliamentarians, such a splendidly organised press. 
 And never hasthere been a more hideous cause against which one should have risen up. 
 “In the circumstances so tragic, when the lives of millions are at stake, all revolutionary actions are not only permissible, but legiti-mate. 
 They are more than legitimate—they are sacred. 
 The impera-tive duty of the proletariat demanded an attempt to achieve the impos-sible so as to save our generation from events which are turning Europeinto a shambles. 
 “There have been no energetic steps, no attempts at a revolt, nothing leading to an uprising.... 
 “Our opponents cry out about the collapse of socialism. 
 They are too hasty. 
 Still, who will dare assert that they are wrong in all respects?What is dying at this hour is not socialism in general, but a brand ofsocialism, a saccharine socialism without the spirit of idealism andwithout passion, with the manners of a governmental office-holder, and with the paunch of a respectable paterfamilias ; a socialism without audacity or frenzy, a devotee of statistics, up to its neck in amicableagreements with capitalism; a socialism preoccupied only with *Great evils call for strong remedies. 
— Ed. 
 reforms, a socialism that has sold its birthright for a mess of pottage; a socialism that controls people’s impatience in order to aid the bour-geoisie—a sort of automatic brake on audacious proletarian action. 
 “This socialism, which threatens to contaminate the entire Inter-national, is in certain measure responsible for the impotence we are reproached with. 
” Elsewhere in the pamphlet Golay is outspoken about “reformist socialism” and “opportunism” as a distortion of socialism. 
 In referring to that distortion, recognising the “general responsibility” of the proletariat of all the belligerent countries, and emphasising that “this responsibility falls onthe heads of the leaders whom the masses trusted and from whom they expected a slogan”, Golay correctly takes as an example German socialism, which was “the best organised,best formed, the most indoctrinated”, to show “itsnumerical strength and its revolutionary feebleness”. 
 “Inspired with revolutionary fervour, German Social-Democracy could have confronted militarist undertakings with a resistance suf-ficiently definite and stubborn to make the proletariat of the othercountries of central Europe follow it on this, the only road to salva-tion.... 
 “German socialism enjoyed great influence in the International. 
 It could have done more than all other parties. 
 The greatest effort wasexpected of it. 
 But numbers are nothing if individual energy is paralysedby too rigorous discipline and if the ‘leaders’ utilise ... their influ-ence to achieve the least effort. 
 [Much as the second part of the sentenceis correct, the first is wrong: discipline is a splendid and necessary thing, for instance, the discipline of a party that expels opportunists and opponents of revolutionary action. 
] The German proletariat, owing toits responsible leaders, obeyed the call of the military camarilla ...the other sections of the International took fright and acted likewise;in France, two socialists found it necessary to join a bourgeois govern-ment! Thus, several months after the solemn declaration at a con-gress that socialists considered it a crime to shoot at each other, millions of workers were called to the colours and began to commit thatcrime with a persistency and a zeal which won them repeated tributefrom the capitalist bourgeoisie and governments. 
” Golay, however, does not confine himself to mercilessly branding “the socialism that is dying”. 
 He also mani-fests a full understanding of the cause of that dying, andthe kind of socialism that should supersede the dying one. 
“The working masses in every country,” he writes, “submit in some measure to the influence of ideas current in bour-geois circles. 
” “When, under the name of revisionism, Bernstein formulated a kind of democratic reformism,” he writes, “Kautsky shattered him with the aid of relevant facts. 
” “But when appearances had been preserved, the party nevertheless continued its Realpolitik . 
 The Social-Democratic Party became what it is today. 
 An excellent organisation. 
 A powerful body, from which the soul hasgone. 
” Not only German Social-Democracy, but all sectionsof the International reveal the same tendencies. 
 “The grow-ing number of officials” leads to certain consequences;attention is focussed only on the regular payment of mem-bership dues; strikes are looked upon as “manifestations aiming at securing better conditions of agreement” withthe capitalists. 
 It becomes customary to link the interestsof the workers with those of the capitalists; “to subordinatethe fate of the workers to that of capitalism itself”, “towish an intensive development of one’s ‘own’ ‘national’ industry to the detriment of foreign industry”. 
 In one of his articles, R. 
 Schmiedt, a Reichstag deputy, says that regulation of working conditions by the tradeunions is also advantageous to the capitalists, since it“introduces order and stability in economic life” and sinceit “makes the capitalists’ calculations easier, and counteracts unfair competition”. 
 In quoting these words, Golay exclaims: “It appears that the trade union movement must consider it an honour to make the capitalist profits more stable! It is apparently theaim of socialism to demand, within the framework of capitalist society, the maximum of advantages compatible with the existence of the capitalist system itself. 
 In that case, we have here a renunciationof all principles. 
 The proletariat strives, not to consolidate the capitalistregime, not to obtain minimal conditions for hired labour, butto eliminate the system of private property and to destroy the systemof hired labour.... 
 “The secretaries of large organisations become important personages. 
 In the political movement, deputies, men of letters, scientists, lawyers,all those who, together with their science, bring with themselves cer-tain personal ambitions, wield an influence which is at timesdangerous. 
 “The powerful organisation of the trade unions and their substan-tial treasuries have developed a corporative spirit among their mem-bers. 
 One of the negative aspects of the trade union movement, whichis reformist in essence, is that the condition of various categories of wage workers is improved by placing one above the other. 
 This destroys their fundamental unity and creates among the most favoured an apprehension which compels them sometimes to fear a ‘movement’ that might undermine their condition, their treasury and their balance sheet. 
 Thus a certain division between the various categories of the pro-letariat comes into existence, categories artificially created by the trade union movement itself. 
” This, of course, is no argument against strong organisa-tions, says the author, obviously to counter argumentsfrom a certain kind of “critic”. 
 This, he says, only proves thatorganisations must have a “soul”, must have “enthusiasm”. 
 “What are the chief characteristics that must distinguish the socialism of tomorrow? It will be international, intransigent, and rebellious. 
” “Intransigence is a force,” Golay says with good reason, inviting the reader to cast a glance at the “history ofdoctrines”. 
 “When did they exercise an influence? When theywere tamed by the authorities, or when they remainedintransigent? When did Christianity lose its value? Was it not on the day Constantine promised it revenues and offered it, not persecution and executions but the gold-braided vestment of Court servants?... “A French philosopher has said: ‘Dead ideas are those that appear in elegant garments, with no asperity or daring. 
They are dead because they are put into general circu-lation and become part of the ordinary intellectual baggage of the great army of philistines. 
 Strong ideas are those that shock and scandalise, evoke indignation, anger, andanimosity in some, and enthusiasm in others. 
’” The authorfinds it necessary to call this truth to the minds of present-day socialists, among whom he very often finds an absence of any kind of “ardent convictions”: “They believe in noth-ing,” he says, “neither in reforms that are belated, nor in a revolution that has not yet arrived. 
” Intransigence, a readiness for rebellion, the author says, “lead, not to dreaminess but to action. 
 A socialist will neglect no form of action. 
 He will find new ones according to the demands and the circumstances of the moment.... 
He demands immediate reforms; he gets them, not by bickering with the opponent, but he takes them by force, as a concession by a bourgeoisie intimidated by the enthu-siasm and audacity of the masses. 
” After the most bare-faced vulgarising of Marxism and degrading of socialism by Plekhanov, Kautsky, and Co. 
, Golay’s pamphlet is really refreshing. 
 However, the two following shortcomings must be noted. 
 First, Golay, in common with most socialists in the Romance countries, not excluding the present-day Guesd-ists, pays insufficient attention to “doctrine”, i. 
e. 
, to thetheory of socialism. 
 He has a certain prejudice against Marxism, which can be explained, though not justified, by the present prevalence of the most vicious caricature ofMarxism in the writings of Kautsky, in Die Neue Zeit , and among the Germans in general. 
 A man like Golay,who has recognised the necessity of the death of reformist socialism and the revival of a revolutionary, “rebellious” socialism, i. 
e. 
, one who understands the necessity of an uprising, who advocates it, and is capable of seriouslypreparing himself and others for it, is in deed a thousand times closer to Marxism than those gentlemen who knowthe “tests” by heart but are now busy (for instance, inDie Neue Zeit ) justifying social-chauvinism of every kind, including that which says that one must at present “make peace” with the chauvinist Vorstand and “forget the past”. 
 Much as Golay’s disdain for Marxism is explainable and much as he can be cleared of the blame, which can be placed on the moribund or dead trend of the French Marxists (Guesdists), the blame is still there. 
 The world’s greatest movement for liberation of the oppressed class, the most revolutionary class in history, is impossible without arevolutionary theory. 
 That theory cannot be thought up. 
It grows out of the sum total of the revolutionary experi-ence and the revolutionary thinking of all countries in theworld. 
 Such a theory has developed since the second half of the nineteenth century. 
 It is known as Marxism. 
 One cannot be a socialist, a revolutionary Social-Democrat,without participating, in the measure of one’s powers, indeveloping and applying that theory, and without waginga ruthless struggle today against the mutilation of thistheory by Plekhanov, Kautsky, and Co. 
 Inattention to theory has led Golay to make a number of erroneous or hasty attacks against, for instance, central-ism or discipline in general, or against “historical mate-rialism”, which, the author alleges, is not sufficiently “idealistic”, etc. 
 Hence also a remarkable lack of complete-ness in the question of slogans. 
 For instance, the demand that socialism should become “rebellious” is full of profoundcontent and is the sole correct thought, without which alltalk about internationalism, the revolutionary spirit, andMarxism is sheer stupidity, and, as often as not, hypocrisy. 
However, this idea, that of civil war, should have been developed, and made the pivot of tactics, whereas Golay confines himself to stating it. 
 This is a lot for our days, but it is insufficient from the standpoint of the demandsof the proletariat’s revolutionary struggle. 
 For instance,Golay’s treatment of the problem of revolution as a replyto war is, if one may put it so, far too narrow. 
 He fails to consider the fact that, though a revolutionary reply to the war has not been given, yet, the war itself hasbegun to teach, and is teaching, the masses the lesson ofrevolution, by creating a revolutionary situation andby expanding and deepening it. 
 Golay’s second shortcoming is best illustrated by the following argument in his pamphlet: “We blame nobody. 
 To be reborn, the International needs a fraternal spirit to animate the various sections; but it is permissible to affirmthat, in the sight of the great task placed before it by the capitalist bourgeoisie in July and August 1914, reformist, centralist[?] and hierarchical socialism cut a poor figure. 
” “We blame nobody .... 
” This is w here you are mistaken, Comrade Golay! You yourself have admitted that “the socialism that is dying” is tied up to bourgeois ideas (which means that it is nurtured and supported by the bourgeoisie),to a certain ideological current in socialism (“reformism”),to the interests and the specific position of certain strata(parliamentarians, officials, intellectuals, some of thebetter-off sections or groups of workers), etc. 
 From this follows an inevitable conclusion, which you fail to draw. 
 Individuals “die” what is called a natural death; ideological and political trends, however, cannot die in that way . 
 Just as the bourgeoisie will not die until it is overthrown, atrend nurtured and supported by the bourgeoisie, andexpressing the interests of a small group of intellectuals and members of the labour aristocracy that have joined hands with the bourgeoisie, will not die unless it is “killed”, i. 
e. 
, overthrown, deprived of all influence on the socialist pro-letariat. 
 This trend is strong in its links with the bourgeoisie. 
 Because of the objective conditions of the“peaceful” period of 1871-1914, it has become a kind ofcommanding, parasitic stratum in the working-class move-ment. 
 In such conditions, it is our duty, not only to “blame”, but to ring the tocsin, ruthlessly unmask, overthrow, and oust this parasitic stratum from their posts, and destroytheir “unity” with the working-class movement, because such “unity” means, in practice, unity of the proletariatwith the national bourgeoisie and a split in the international proletariat, the unity of lackeys and a split among the revolutionaries. 
 “Intransigence is a force,” Golay says with justice; he demands that “the socialism that must be reborn” shouldbe intransigent. 
 But is it not all the same to the bourgeoisiewhether the proletariat practises reconciliation with itdirectly , or indirectly through bourgeois adherents, defend-ers, and agents within the working-class movement, i. 
e. 
, through the opportunists? The latter is even more advan-tageous to the bourgeoisie, because it secures for it a stronger influence over the workers. 
 Golay is a thousand times right when he says that there is a socialism that is dying and a socialism that must be reborn; this death and this rebirth, however, comprise a ruthless struggle against the trend of opportunism—notmerely an ideological struggle, but the removal of thathideous excrescence from the body of the working-classparties, the expulsion from those organisations of certainrepresentatives of this tactic, which is alien to the prole-tariat, a definite break with them. 
 They will die neither physically nor politically, but the workers will break withthem, will throw them into the cesspool of the servitors ofthe bourgeoisie. 
 The example of their corruption will educatea new generation, or, more correctly, new proletarianarmies capable of an uprising. 
 Kommunist No. 
 1-2, 1915 Published according to Signed: N. 
 Lenin the text in the journal Kommunist IMPERIALISM AND SOCIALISM IN ITALY NOTE To clarify the problems presented to socialism as a result of the present imperialist war, it is useful to cast a glance at the various European countries, so as to learn to distin-guish between national modifications and details of thegeneral picture, and the fundamental and essential. 
 Distancelends clarity to the view. 
 The less the resemblance betweenItaly and Russia, the more interesting it is, in certainrespects, to compare imperialism and socialism in the two countries. 
 In the present note, we intend only to call attention to material on this problem, as provided by a bourgeois pro-fessor, Roberto Michels, in his book Italian Imperialism , and by a socialist, T. 
 Barboni, in a book entitled Inter-nationalism or Class Nationalism? (The Italian Prole-tariat and the European War ), * both of which have been published since the outbreak of the war. 
 The garrulousMichels, who is just as superficial as he is in his otherwritings, hardly touches upon the economic aspect of imperi-alism. 
 His book, however, contains a collection of valuablematerial on the origin of Italian imperialism and on the transition that comprises the essence of the times and is so manifest in Italy, namely, the transition from a periodof wars for national liberation to a period of imperialistand reactionary wars of plunder. 
 Revolutionary-democraticItaly, i. 
e. 
, revolutionary-bourgeois Italy, the Italy that *Roberto Michels, L’imperialismo italiano , Milano, 1914; T. 
 Bar-boni, Internazionalismo o nazionalismo di classes? (Il proletariato d’Italia e la guerra europea ). 
 Edito dall’autore a Campione d’Intelvi (provincia di Como), 1915. 
 cast off the yoke of Austria, the Italy of the times of Gari-baldi, is changing before our very eyes into an Italy that is oppressing other peoples and plundering Turkey and Austria, an Italy of a crude, repulsively reactionary andrapacious bourgeoisie whose mouth waters at the prospectof a share in the loot. 
 Like any respectable professor,Michels, of course, considers that his servility to the bourgeoi-sie is “scientific objectivism”; he calls this sharing of the loot “partitioning of that part of the world which still remains in the hands of debilitated peoples” (p. 
 179). 
 Dis-dainfully rejecting as “Utopian” the viewpoint of socialistshostile towards colonial policies of any kind, Michelsrepeats the arguments of those who think that Italy, judgingby the density of her population and the intensity of emi-gration from that country, “should have been the second colonial power”, second only to Britain. 
 Michels repudiatesby a reference to Britain the argument that forty per centof the Italian people are illiterate, and that even todaycholera riots, etc. 
, take place there. 
 Was not Britain, heasks, a country of unparalleled poverty, humiliation, famine among the working masses, and widespread drunken-ness, misery, and squalor in the city slums, in the firsthalf of the nineteenth century, when the British bourgeoisiewere so successfully laying the foundations of their presentcolonial power? It must be admitted that, from the bourgeois standpoint, this argument is unassailable. 
 Colonial policies and imperial-ism are not unsound but curable disorders of capitalism(the way philistines think, together with Kautsky); theyare an inevitable consequence of the very foundations ofcapitalism. 
 Competition among individual enterprisesinevitably leads either to their becoming ruined or ruining others; competition between individual countries confronts each of them with the alternative of falling behind, everrunning the risk of becoming a second Belgium, or elseruining and conquering other countries, thus elbowingtheir way to a place among the “Great” Powers. 
 Italian imperialism has been called “poor people’s imperialism” ( l’imperialismo della povera gente ), because of the country’s poverty and the utter destitution of the massesof Italian emigrants. 
 Arturo Labriola, the Italian chauvinist, who differs from his former opponent, G. 
 Plekhanov, only in that he somewhat sooner revealed his social-chauvinism, which he reached via petty-bourgeois semi-anarchism, not petty-bourgeois opportunism, wrote in hisbooklet on the Tripolitanian war (1912): “It is obvious that we are fighting, not only against the Turks ... but also against the intrigues, the intimidations,the money, and the armies of plutocratic Europe, which cannot tolerate that small nations should dare to make a single gesture or to say a single word that will compromiseits iron hegemony” (p. 
 92). 
 Corradini, leader of the Italiannationalists, declared at the same time: “Just as socialismwas a method of freeing the proletariat from the bour-geoisie, nationalism will be for us Italians a method of freeing ourselves from the French, the Germans, the British, the North and South Americans, who are our bourgeoisie. 
 Any country which has more colonies, capital and armies than “we” have, deprives “us” of certain privileges, certainprofits or super-profits. 
 Just as among individual capital-ists super-profits go to the one whose machinery is superior to the average or who owns certain monopolies, so among nations the one that is economically better off than theothers gets super-profits. 
 It is the business of the bourgeoisieto fight for privileges and advantages for its national capi-tal, and to fool the nation or the common folk (with the aidof Labriola and Plekhanov) by passing off for a war of national liberation the imperialist struggle for the “right” to plunder others. 
 Prior to the Tripolitanian war, Italy did not plunder other nations, at least to no large extent. 
 Is this not anintolerable slight to the national pride? The Italians areoppressed and humiliated as compared with other nations. 
 Italian emigration was 100,000 annually in the seventies of the last century; it now stands at between 500,000 and1,000,000. 
 All these people are paupers, driven from theircountry by starvation in the literal sense of the word. 
 Allof them provide labour power for the worst paid branchesof industry; this mass inhabit the most crowded, poverty-stricken, and squalid sections of the American and European cities. 
 From 1,000,000 in 1881, the number ofItalians abroad rose to 5,500,000 in 1910, the vast majority of this mass living in the rich and “great” countries, for whom the Italians are the crudest, most unskilled, poor and defenceless labouring mass. 
 Here are the main countries using cheap Italian labour: France—400,000 Italians in1910 (240,000 in 1881); Switzerland—135,000 (41,000 in1881); Austria—80,000 (40,000); Germany—180,000 (7,000);the United States of America— 1,779,000 (170,000);Brazil—1,500,000 (82,000); Argentina— 1,000,000 (254 000). 
 “Glorious” France, which 125 years ago fought for freedom, and therefore calls its present war for her own and theBritish slave-holders’ “colonial rights” a war of liberation,houses hundreds of thousands of Italian workers in areasthat are virtually ghettos. 
 The petty-bourgeois canaille of this “great” nation do all they can to keep these people at a distance, and, insult and humiliate them in every possible way. 
 The Italians are contemptuously dubbed“Macaroni” (the Great-Russian reader should recall howmany contemptuous nicknames are current in our countryfor non-Russians whose birth does not entitle them to thenoble dominant-nation privileges that serve the Purish-keviches as a means of oppressing both the Great-Russian and the other peoples of Russia). 
 In 1896 France, that greatnation, concluded a treaty with Italy, by which the latterundertook not to increase the number of Italian schoolsin Tunisia! Since then the Italian population of Tunisiahas increased sixfold. 
 There are 105,000 Italians in Tunisia, as against 35,000 Frenchmen, but there are only 1,167 holders of land among the former, with an aggregate of83,000 hectares, whereas the latter include 2,395 landownerswho have grabbed 700,000 hectares in that colony. 
 Howcan one fail to agree with Labriola and other Italian“Plekhanovites” that Italy is “entitled” to possess its colony in Tripoli, oppress Slavs in Dalmatia, carve up Asia Minor, etc. 
? * *It is highly instructive to note the connection between Italy’s transformation into an imperialist country and the government’s agreeing to electoral reform. 
 The latter increased the number ofvoters from 3,219,000 to 8,562,000, in other words, it introduced“almost” universal suffrage. 
 Prior to the Tripolitanian war, Giolitti,who carried out the reform, was bitterly opposed to it. 
 “The moti-vation of the change of line by the government” and the moderate Just as Plekhanov supports the Russian war of “liberation” against the German striving to turn Russia into a colony, Bissolati, leader of the Reformist Party, has raised an outcry against the “invasion of Italy by foreign capital”(p. 
 97), namely, German capital in Lombardy, British inSicily, French in Piacentino, Belgian in the street-carenterprises, etc. 
, etc. 
, etc. 
 The question has been squarely put and one must acknowl-edge that the European war has done humanity enormous good by actually confronting hundreds of millions of peopleof various nationalities with an alternative: either defend, with rifle or pen, directly or indirectly, in any form what-ever, the dominant-nation and national privileges in general,as well as the prerogative or the claims of one’s “own” bour-geoisie, that is to say, be its adherent or lackey; or else utilise any struggle, particularly the clash of arms fordominant-nation privileges, so as to unmask and overthrowevery government, in the first place one’s own, by means of the revolutionary action of an internationally unitedproletariat. 
 There is no middle road; in other words, the attempt to take a middle stand means, in effect, covertly taking the side of the imperialist bourgeoisie. 
 Barboni’s booklet is, in substance, entirely devoted to covering up this latter act. 
 Barboni poses as an interna-tionalist exactly as our Mr. 
 Potresov does; he argues that, parties, says Michels, “was essentially patriotic. 
 Notwithstanding their long-standing theoretical aversion from a colonial policy, theindustrial workers, and more so the lower strata, fought againstthe Turks with perfect discipline and obedience, contrary to allexpectations. 
 Such slavish behaviour towards the government’spolicy merited a reward to induce the proletariat to persevere along this new road. 
 The President of the Council of Ministers declared in Parliament that, by his patriotic behaviour on the battlefield ofLibya, the Italian worker had proved to the country that he hadreached the highest stage of political maturity. 
 He who is capableof sacrificing his life for a noble cause is also capable of defendingthe interests of the country as a voter, and he therefore has a right that the state should consider him worthy of full political rights” (p. 
 177). 
 The Italian Ministers are good talkers! Still better are theGerman “radical” Social-Democrats who are repeating the follow-ing servile argument: “We have done ‘our’ duty by helping ‘you’to loot foreign countries, but ‘you’ do not wish to give ‘us’ univer-sal suffrage in Prussia.... 
” from the internationalist point of view, it is necessary to ascertain the success of which side will be more useful or harmless to the proletariat, and, of course, he has decided this question against ... Austria and Germany. 
 In a perfectlyKautskyist spirit, Barboni proposes to the Italian SocialistParty solemnly to proclaim the solidarity of the workersof all countries—in the first place, of course, of the bellig-erent countries—to proclaim internationalist convictions, a programme of peace on the basis of disarmament and national independence of all nations, including the formation ofa “league of all nations for a reciprocal guarantee of theirintegrity and independence” (p. 
 126). 
 It is in the name ofthese principles that Barboni declares that militarism is a“parasitic” phenomenon in capitalism, something “not at all necessary”; that Germany and Austria are imbued with “militarist imperialism”; that their aggressive policies havebeen a “standing threat to European peace”; that Germanyhas “constantly rejected the proposals for a restriction ofarmaments advanced by Russia [sic!] and Britain”, etc. 
, etc. 
,and that the Socialist Party of Italy should declare itself in favour of Italy’s intervention on the side of the Triple Entente at the opportune moment. 
 What remains unknown is the principles that make the bourgeois imperialism of Britain preferable to that of Ger-many. 
 Germany’s economic development in the twentiethcentury has been more rapid than that of the other European countries; in the partition of colonies, she was badly “wronged”. 
 Britain, on the other hand, has developed far moreslowly; she has grabbed a host of colonies, where, far fromEurope, she often uses methods of oppression no less brutalthan the Germans. 
 With her great wealth, she hires millionsof soldiers of various continental powers to plunder Austria, Turkey, etc. 
 In essence, Barboni’s internationalism, like that of Kautsky, is nothing but a verbal defence of socialistprinciples, behind which hypocritical cover his own bour-geoisie, the Italian, is actually defended. 
 One cannot failto notice that Barboni, who has published his book in freeSwitzerland (where the censor deleted only half a line on p. 
 75, evidently criticising Austria), has not deemed it necessary, in its 143 pages, to mention the main principlesof the Basle Manifesto, or conscientiously to analyse them. 
 On the other hand, our Barboni quotes with deep sympathy two former Russian revolutionaries who are now being publicised by the entire Francophile bourgeoisie: the petty-bourgeois anarchist Kropotkin, and the Social-Democraticphilistine Plekhanov (p. 
 103). 
 No wonder! Plekhanov’ssophisms do not differ in substance from Barboni’s. 
 InItaly, however, political freedom more easily tears the veilfrom such sophisms, revealing more clearly Barboni’s actual stand as an agent of the bourgeoisie in the workers’ camp. 
 Barboni regrets the “absence of a real and actual revo-lutionary spirit” within German Social-Democracy (exactlyin Plekhanov’s way); he warmly greets Karl Liebknecht(just as he is greeted by the French social-chauvinists, who do not see the beam in their own eye), but he decidedly declares that “we cannot speak of the bankruptcy of theInternational” (p. 
 92), that the Germans “did not betraythe spirit of the International” (p. 
 111), inasmuch as theywere prompted by a “ bona fide ” conviction that they were defending the fatherland. 
 In Kautsky’s sanctimonious vein, but with an admixture of Romance eloquence, Bar-boni declares that the International is prepared (after avictory over Germany) to “forgive the Germans as Christforgave Peter a moment of distrust, to heal by oblivionthe deep wounds inflicted by a militarist imperialism, andto extend a hand for an honourable and brotherly peace” (p. 
 113). 
 A moving scene: Barboni and Kautsky—probably with aid from our Kosovsky and Axelrod—forgiving each other! While quite pleased with Kautsky and Guesde, with Plekhanov and Kropotkin, Barboni is displeased with hisown Socialist Labour Party in Italy. 
 He complains that in this party, which before the war was fortunate enough to rid itself of the reformists Bissolati and Co. 
, an atmospherehas been created which “cannot be breathed” (p. 
 7) by thosewho, like Barboni, do not agree to the slogan of “absoluteneutrality” (i. 
e. 
, to a determined struggle against thosewho stand for Italy joining the war). 
 Poor Barboni com-plains bitterly that in the Italian Socialist Labour Party men like him are labelled “intellectuals”, “individualswho have lost contact with the masses”, “people hailing from the bourgeoisie”, who have “strayed from the straight path of socialism and internationalism” (p. 
 7). 
 “Our party,” says Barboni indignantly, “fanaticises more than it edu-cates the multitude” (p. 
 4). 
 An old song! It is the Italian variation of the well-known theme of Russian liquidators and opportunists, decryingthe “demagogy” of the wicked Bolsheviks who “incite”the masses against the dear socialists of Nasha Zarya , the Organising Committee, and Chkheidze’s Duma group! But what an invaluable admission this is by an Italiansocial-chauvinist: in the only country where, for severalmonths, the platforms of the social-chauvinists and of therevolutionary internationalists could be freely discussed,the working masses , the class-conscious proletariat , have sided with the latter, whereas the petty-bourgeois intellec-tuals and opportunists have lined up with the former. 
 Neutrality is a narrow-minded egoism, a non-understand-ing of the international situation; it is baseness towardsBelgium, and “absenteeism”, and “the absent are alwayswrong”, says Barboni, entirely in the spirit of Plekhanov and Axelrod. 
 But since there are two legal parties in Italy, one reformist and the other a Social-Democratic labourparty, and since in that country it is impossible to foolthe public by covering up the nudity of the Potresovs,Cherevanins, Levitskys and Co. 
 with the fig-leaf of Chkheid-ze’s Duma group or of the Organising Committee, Barboni frankly admits the following: “From this point of view I see more revolutionism in the activities of the reformist socialists, who have beenquick to realise the enormous importance that such a changein the political situation [in consequence of a victory overGerman militarism] will have for the future anti-capitalist struggle, and who, with perfect consistency, have espoused the cause of the Triple Entente, than there is in the tacticsof the official revolutionary socialists who, like a tortoise,have hidden under a shell of absolute neutrality” (p. 
 81). 
 In connection with this valuable admission, it remains for us only to express the wish that some comrade familiar with the Italian movement should collect and systematically analyse the vast and most interesting material furnishedby Italy’s two parties , as to which social strata and which elements, with whose aid, and with which arguments, have defended the revolutionary policy of the Italian proletariat on the one hand, and servility to the Italian imperialist bourgeoisie on the other. 
 The more such material is gatheredin various countries, the more clearly will the class-conscious workers see the truth as to the causes and significance of the Second International’s collapse. 
 In conclusion, we would like to note that, confronted by a workers’ party, Barboni attempts to use sophistry so as to play up to the workers’ revolutionary instincts. 
 The internationalist socialists of Italy, who are opposed to awar which in fact is being waged for the imperialist interests of the Italian bourgeoisie, are depicted by him asadherents of a cowardly abstinence, a selfish desire to hide from the horrors of war. 
 “A people educated in a fear of the horrors of war,” he says, “will probably also be afraid of thehorrors of a revolution” (p. 
 83). 
 Together with this dis-gusting attempt to assume the guise of a revolutionary,we find a crudely practical reference to the “clear” wordsof Minister Salandra, who said that “order will be maintained at any cost”, and that attempts to hold a general strike directed against mobilisation will only lead to “uselesscarnage”. 
 “We could not prevent the Libyan [Tripolitanian]war; less so will we be able to prevent the war againstAustria” (p. 
 82). 
 Like Kautsky, Cunow and all the other opportunists, Barboni, with the basest intention of fooling a definite section of the masses, deliberately ascribes to the revolu-tionaries the silly plan to “frustrate the war” “immediately”and to allow themselves to be shot down at a moment mostopportune for the bourgeoisie. 
 He thus attempts to evadethe task clearly formulated at Stuttgart and Basle, namely, to utilise the revolutionary crisis for systematic revolu-tionary propaganda and preparations for revolutionarymass action. 
 Barboni sees quite clearly that Europe is livingthrough a revolutionary moment. 
 “There is one point on which I deem it necessary to insist, even at the risk of becoming irksome to the reader, because without a clear idea of that point one cannot cor-rectly estimate the present political situation. 
 The point isthat the period we are living through is a catastrophic one, a period of action, when there is no longer any question of propounding ideas, formulating programmes, or defining a line of political behaviour for the future, but of applying a live and active force to achieve results within months,possibly within weeks. 
 Under such conditions, it is nolonger a question of philosophising over the future of theproletarian movement, but of consolidating the point ofview of the proletariat, in face of the present situation” (pp. 
 87-88). 
 Another sophism under the guise of revolutionism! Forty-four years after the Paris Commune, after half a centuryof the mustering and preparation of mass forces, therevolutionary class of Europe must, at the present moment,when Europe is passing through a catastrophic period, think of how to quickly become the lackey of its national bourgeoi-sie, how to help it plunder, violate, ruin, and conquerother peoples, and how to refrain from launching, on amass scale, direct revolutionary propaganda and prepara-tion for revolutionary action. 
 Kommunist No. 
 1-2, 1915 Published according to Signed: N. 
 Lenin the text in the journal Kommunist APPEAL ON THE WAR Worker Comrades: The European war has been in progress for over a year. 
 All things considered, it will last for a long time, because,while Germany is best prepared and at present the strongest, the Quadruple Entente (Russia, Britain, France, and Italy) has more men and money, and besides, freely gets warmaterial from the United States of America, the world’srichest country. 
 What is this war being fought for, which is bringing mankind unparalleled suffering? The government and the bourgeoisie of each belligerent country are squandering millions of rubles on books and newspapers so as to lay theblame on the foe, arouse the people’s furious hatred of theenemy, and stop at no lie so as to depict themselves as theside that has been unjustly attacked and is now “defending”itself. 
 In reality, this is a war between two groups of predatory Great Powers, and it is being fought for the parti-tioning of colonies, the enslavement of other nations, andadvantages and privileges of the world market. 
 This is amost reactionary war, a war of modern slave-holders aimedat preserving and consolidating capitalist slavery. 
 Britainand France are lying when they assert that they are warring for Belgium’s freedom. 
 In reality, they have long been preparing the war, and are waging it with the purposeof robbing Germany and stripping her of her colonies;they have signed a treaty with Italy and Russia on thepillage and carving up of Turkey and Austria. 
 The tsaristmonarchy in Russia is waging a predatory war aimed at seizing Galicia, taking territory away from Turkey, enslav-ing Persia, Mongolia, etc. 
 Germany is waging war withthe purpose of grabbing British, Belgian, and French colonies. 
 Whether Germany or Russia wins, or whether there is a “draw”, the war will bring humanity fresh oppres-sion of hundreds and hundreds of millions of people in the colonies, in Persia, Turkey and China, a fresh enslavementof nations, and new chains for the working class of allcountries. 
 What are the tasks of the working class with regard to this war? The answer to this question is provided in a reso-lution unanimously adopted by the socialists of the whole world, at the Basle International Socialist Congress of 1912. 
This resolution was adopted in anticipation of a war of thevery kind as started in 1914. 
 This resolution says that thewar is reactionary, that it is being prepared in the interestsof “capitalist profits”, that the workers consider it “a crime to shoot each other down”, that the war will lead to “a proletarian revolution”, that an example for the workers’tactics was set by the Paris Commune of 1871, and byOctober-December 1905, in Russia, i. 
e. 
, by a revolution. 
 All class-conscious workers in Russia are on the side of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour group in the Duma whose members (Petrovsky, Badayev, Muranov, Samoilov and Shagov) have been exiled by the tsar to Siberia forrevolutionary propaganda against the war and againstthe government. 
 It is only in such revolutionary propagandaand in revolutionary activities leading to a revolt of themasses, that the salvation of humanity from the horrors of the present and the future wars lies. 
 Only the revolu-tionary overthrow of the bourgeois governments, in thefirst place of the most reactionary, brutal, and barbaroustsarist government, will open the road to socialism andpeace among nations. 
 The conscious or unwitting servants of the bourgeoisie are lying when they wish to persuade the people that the revolutionary overthrow of the tsarist monarchy can leadonly to victories for and consolidation of the Germanreactionary monarchy and the German bourgeoisie. 
 Althoughthe leaders of the German socialists, like many leadingsocialists in Russia, have gone over to the side of their “own” bourgeoisie and are helping to deceive the people with fables of a war of “defence”, there is mounting amongthe working masses of Germany an ever stronger protest and indignation against their government. 
 The German socialists who have not gone over to the side of the bour-geoisie have declared in the press that they consider the tactics of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour group inthe Duma “heroic”. 
 In Germany, calls against the war andagainst the government are being published illegally. 
 Tensand hundreds of the finest socialists of Germany, includingClara Zetkin, the well-known representative of the women’s labour movement, have been thrown into prison by the German Government for propaganda in a revolutionaryspirit. 
 In all the belligerent countries without exception,indignation is mounting in the working masses, and theexample of revolutionary activities set by the Social-Democrats of Russia, and even more so any success of the revolution in Russia, will not fail to advance the great cause of socialism, of the victory of the proletariat overthe blood-stained bourgeois exploiters. 
 The war is filling the pockets of the capitalists, into whose pockets gold is pouring from the treasuries of theGreat Powers. 
 The war is provoking a blind bitterness against the enemy, the bourgeoisie doing its best to direct the indignation of the people into such channels, to diverttheir attention from the chief enemy—the government and the ruling classes of their own country. 
 However, the war which brings in its train endless misery and suffering forthe toiling masses, enlightens and steels the finest repre-sentatives of the working class. 
 If perish we must, let us perish in the struggle for our own cause, for the cause of theworkers, for the socialist revolution, and not for the interestsof the capitalists, the landowners, and tsars—this is whatevery class-conscious worker sees and feels. 
 RevolutionarySocial-Democratic work may be difficult at present, but it is possible. 
 It is advancing throughout the world, and in this alone lies salvation. 
 Down with the tsarist monarchy, which has drawn Russia into a criminal war, and which oppresses the peoples! Longlive the world brotherhood of the workers, and the inter-national revolution of the proletariat! Written in August 1915 First published in Pravda No. 
 18, Published according to January 21, 1928 the manuscript WE ARE THANKFUL FOR SUCH FRANKNESS “The inane idea of the necessity of forming an Interna-tional of ‘internationalist Social-Democrats’ ... [of] oppo-sition elements picked at random from all the socialistparties .... 
 The International can be restored only from the same elements it has consisted of till now .... 
 A restored International will not be the ‘third’ in succession, as is desiredby a handful of sectarians and experts in the business of arranging splits, but the selfsame Second International, which has not died, but has been temporarily paralysed bya world disaster.... 
” This is what Mr. 
 V. 
 Kosovsky writes in issue No. 
 8 of the Bund’s Information Bulletin . 
 We are deeply thankful for the frankness shown by this Bundist, who is not the brightest of the lot. 
 This is not the first time he has de-fended opportunism with an outspokenness that must bedispleasing to the Bund’s diplomatists. 
 This time again,he will be helping the struggle against opportunism, byrevealing to the workers how hopelessly far the Bund standsfrom proletarian socialism. 
 Mr. 
 V. 
 Kosovsky does not see the link between opportunism and social-chauvinism. 
 To discern that link, one must be able to ask oneself the follow-ing questions: what are the fundamental ideas in the twocurrents? How has opportunism developed in Europe duringthe last few decades? What is the attitude towards social-chauvinism revealed by the opportunist and the revolutionary wing in a number of European countries, as, for instance, in Russia, Germany, Belgium, France, Britain, Italy,Sweden, Switzerland, Holland, and Bulgaria? Has Mr. 
 V. 
 Kosovsky given thought to this? If he at-tempted to reply to at least the first question, he would soon see his mistake. 
 Incidentally, in issue No. 
 7 of the Information Bulletin Mr. 
 V. 
 Kosovsky has displayed a Germanophile chauvinism,for, while accusing the French Social-Democrats,he defends the German Social-Democrats’ voting for warcredits. 
 A certain W. 
 (writing in issue No. 
 8, pp. 
 11-12) defends Mr. 
 V. 
 Kosovsky against the accusation of chau-vinism, asserting that there can be no Germanophile chau-vinism in an organisation that operates in Russia. 
 PerhapsMr. 
 V. 
 Kosovsky will explain to Mr. 
 W. 
 why it is that aUkrainian or a Polish bourgeois in Russia, a Danish or anAlsatian bourgeois in France, or an Irish bourgeois in Britain often reveals a chauvinism hostile to the nations that oppress them. 
 Written in the summer of 1915 First published in 1931 Published according to in Lenin Miscellany XVII the manuscript TO THE INTERNATIONAL SOCIALIST COMMITTEE (I. 
S. 
C. 
) Dear Comrades: We have received your letter of September 25, and hereby express our full sympathy with the plan to set up a perma-nent international “enlarged committee” ( erweiterte Kom-mission ) in Berne. 
 In the confidence that the idea of such a plan is shared by the other organisations adhering to theI. 
S. 
C. 
, we appoint Comrade Zinoviev member of that enlargedcommittee from the Central Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, and, as his assistants or candidates ( suppléant , Stellvertreter ) (1) Comrade Petrova156 and (2) Comrade Lenin. 
 The address for communications is: Herrn Radomislsky (bei Frau Aschwan-den). 
 Hertenstein (Ks. 
 Luzern ). 
 Schweiz . 
* To continue. 
 As for the other questions raised in your letter of September 25 we, for our part, hold the following opinion: 1. 
 We are in complete agreement with you that the “com-mon points of view ” (allgemeine Gesichtspunkte ) as estab-lished by the Conference of September 5-8 are “insufficient”(nicht genügen ). 
 A further, far more detailed and specified development of these principles is an imperative necessity. 
 This is necessary from the viewpoint of both principle and common practice, since giving effect to united action on an international scale calls for both clarity of fundamentalideological views and a precise definiteness in all practicalmethods of action. 
 The great crisis that Europe as a wholeand the European working-class movement are living *Mr. 
 Radomislsky, c/o Mme. 
 Aschwanden, Hertenstein, Lu-cerne Canton. 
 Switzerland. 
— Ed. 
 through can indubitably lead to both aspects of the matter being understood by the masses only by degrees, but it is the task of the I. 
S. 
C. 
 and the parties adhering to it to help bring about that very understanding. 
 Without waitingfor the impossible to happen—the speedy unification ofall on a platform of commonly accepted and preciselyformulated views—we must strive for a precise definition of the basic currents and trends in present-day international-ist socialism, and then for the working masses to get a knowledge of those currents, discuss them comprehensively,and test them in the experience of their practical movement. 
In our opinion, the I. 
S. 
C. 
 should consider this its principaltask. 
 2. 
 The letter of September 25 defines the proletariat’s tasks either as the struggle for peace (should the war con-tinue) or as the “concrete and detailed formulation of theproletariat’s international viewpoint towards the variousproposals and programmes for peace” ( den internationalen Standpunkt des Proletariats zu den verschiedenen Friedens-vorschlägen und Programmen konkret und ins einzelne gehend zu umschreiben ). 
 Special emphasis is placed, in this con-nection, on the national question (Alsace-Lorraine, Poland,Armenia, etc. 
). 
 We consider that the two documents unanimously adopted by the Conference of September 5-8, viz. 
, both the mani-festo and the resolution of sympathy ( Sympathieerklärung ), give expression to the idea of the connection between the struggle for peace and the struggle for socialism (“the strugglefor peace ... is a struggle for socialism”—“ dieser Kampf ist der Kampf ... für den Sozialismus ”, to quote the manifesto), and the “irreconcilable proletarian class struggle” ( unver-söhnlicher proletarischer Klassenkampf ; the text of the resolution voted on by the Conference reads, not the “irreconcilable” class struggle, but the “revolutionary” classstruggle. 
 If the change was made for considerations oflegality, the meaning should not have been changed thereby). 
The resolution on sympathy speaks forthright of the Con-ference’s need and “solemn promise” “to arouse the revolu-tionary spirit in the masses of the international proletariat”. 
 Unless it is linked up with the revolutionary class struggle of the proletariat, the struggle for peace is merely a /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR pacifist phrase of bourgeois who are either sentimental or are deceiving the people. 
 We cannot and must not strike a pose of “statesmen” and draw up “concrete” programmes of peace. 
 On the contrary,we must explain to the masses the delusiveness of all hopesof a democratic peace (without annexations, violence orplunder), without a development of the revolutionary class struggle. 
 In the very beginning of the manifesto we told the masses firmly, clearly and resolutely that imperialism is the cause of war, and that imperialism means the “enslave-ment” of nations, of all the nations of the world, by ahandful of “Great Powers”. 
 Consequently, we must help themasses to overthrow imperialism, without the overthrowof which there can be no peace without annexations. 
 Of course, the struggle for the overthrow of imperialism is an arduous one, but the masses must know the truth about that arduous but necessary struggle. 
 The masses shouldnot be lulled with the hope that peace is possible withoutthe overthrow of imperialism. 
 3. 
 Proceeding from these considerations, we propose: that the following questions be put on the agenda of forthcoming sessions of the enlarged committee (to workout either a summary and publication of theses, ordrafts of a resolution), and then on the agenda of thenext international conference (for the final adoptionof a resolution): (a) the connection between the struggle for peace and mass revolutionary action or the revolutionaryclass struggle of the proletariat; (b) the self-determination of nations; (c) the connection between social-patriotism and opportunism. 
 We emphasise that the manifesto adopted by the con-ference specifically touches upon all these questions, that they are of vital significance both in principle and in practice,and that not a single practical step in the proletarian struggle is conceivable without socialists and syndicalists stumbling upon these questions. 
 Elaboration of these questions is necessary so as to pro-mote the mass struggle for peace, the self-determinationof nations, and socialism, and against the “capitalists’ lies” (to quote the manifesto) about “defence of the father-land” in the present war. 
 If, as is very correctly pointed out in the letter of Sep-tember 25, the fault or the misfortune of the SecondInternational lies in the vagueness and the incom-plete development of important problems, it is our task tohelp the masses pose those problems with clarity and re-solve them with exactness. 
 4. 
 Regarding the publication of the bulletin in three languages, experience has, in our opinion, shown that theplan is ill-advised. 
 If issued monthly, such a publicationwill cost between two and three thousand francs a year, asum that cannot easily be raised. 
 Incidentally almosteverything to be found in the bulletin is published by two Swiss newspapers— Berner Tagwacht and La Sentinelle . 
157 We propose to the I. 
S. 
C. 
: that an attempt be made to reach an understanding with the editorial boards of the above newspapers andwith some U. 
S. 
 newspaper, regarding publication inthese newspapers both of the bulletin and of all reports and materials of the I. 
S. 
C. 
 (either textually in the name of the I. 
S. 
C. 
, or in separate supplements). 
 This will not only be cheaper but will make it possible to keep the working class far better, more fully and morefrequently informed of the I. 
S. 
C. 
’s activities. 
 We are inter-ested in a greater number of workers reading I. 
S. 
C. 
 reports, and in all draft resolutions being published for the workers’ information and to help them evolve their own attitudetowards the war. 
 We hope that there will be no objections to the need to publish both the draft resolution (for whose acceptance asa basis 12 delegates, i. 
e. 
, about 40 per cent of the total number, cast their votes, with 19 against) and the letter from a prominent German socialist 158 (with omission of his name and of everything that does not refer to tactics). 
 We hope that the I. 
S. 
C. 
 will receive systematic infor-mation from the various countries regarding persecutionand arrests for participation in the anti-war struggle, the course of the class struggle against the war, fraternising in the trenches, the closing down of newspapers, the banningof publication of calls for peace, etc. 
 We also hope that all this information will periodically appear in the news-papers mentioned above, on behalf of the I. 
S. 
C. 
 An agreement with an American daily or weekly paper could probably be reached by Mrs. 
 Kollontai, who worksin Nashe Slovo and other Social-Democratic newspapers, and has just left for the U. 
S. 
A. 
 on a lecture tour. 
 We couldget in touch with Kollontai, or let you know her address. 
 5. 
 Regarding the mode of representation of sections of parties (particularly in Germany and France, and also, probably, in Britain), we propose: that the I. 
S. 
C. 
 suggest to the comrades in those par-ties that they discuss the advisability of setting upgroups, under various names, whose appeals to themasses (in the form of leaflets, resolutions, etc. 
) will be published by the I. 
S. 
C. 
, with the mention of the particular group in question. 
 If this method is followed, the masses, in the first place, would be kept informed of the internationalists’ tacticsand views, this despite the military censorship; secondly,it would be possible to discern the development and the successes achieved in the propaganda of internationalist views, in the degree that workers’ meetings, organisations,etc. 
, adopt resolutions of sympathy with one group oranother; thirdly, it would become possible to give expressionto various shades of opinion (i. 
e. 
, the B. 
S. 
P. 
, * its minority , and the I. 
L. 
P. 
 ** in Britain; socialists like Bourderon and others, and syndicalists like Merrheim and others, in France; as the Conference has shown, there are shades among the opposition in Germany). 
 It goes without saying that these groups, as is pointed out in the letter of September 25, would not set up separateorganisational units, but would exist within the old bodies only for contacts with the I. 
S. 
C. 
 and for propaganda of the struggle for peace. 
 These groups would be represented in the “enlarged committee” and at con ferences. 
 6. 
 In the question of the number of members on the “enlarged committee”, and of voting procedure, we propose the following: *The British Socialist Party. 
— Ed. 
 **The Independent Labour Party. 
— Ed. 
 that the number of members should not be limited to a maximum of three, but, instead, fractions of votes 2, 3, etc. 
) should be introduced for small groups. 
 This would be convenient, since to deprive of represen-tation groups that have their own shades of opinion is justimpossible, and injurious to the development and propa-ganda among the masses of the principles established inthe manifesto. 
 7. 
 With reference to the danger of the “enlarged com-mittee” acquiring a “Russo-Polish character”, we think that(however unpleasant that may be to the Russians) thisapprehension is justified , since representation is possible of groups in emigration, which have no serious links with Russia. 
In our opinion, only those organisations and groups should be represented which have proved, by no less than three years of work , their ability to represent the movement in Russia. 
 We propose to the I. 
S. 
C. 
 that it discuss and estab-lish that principle, and also request all groups to send ininformation and figures on their work in Russia. 
 8. 
 Finally, we would take advantage of this opportunity to indicate an inaccuracy in No . 
 1 of the Bulletin 159 and ask that it be rectified in No. 
 2 (or in Berner Tagwacht and La Sentinelle ). 
 Issue No. 
 1 of the Bulletin , p. 
 7, the top of column 1, speaks of the draft resolution having been signedby the Central Committee, the Polish Social-Democrats(Landesvorstand ), the Letts, Swedes, and Norwegians. 
 Omitted in this enumeration are: one German delegate (whose name is not given for reasons readily understood), and one Swiss—Platten. 
 Written not earlier than September 12 (25), 1915 First published in Pravda Published according to No. 
 203, September 6, 1925 the manuscript THE DEFEAT OF RUSSIA AND THE REVOLUTIONARY CRISIS The dissolution of the Fourth Duma in retaliation for the formation of an Opposition bloc consisting of liberals, Octo-brists and nationalists, is one of the most vivid manifesta-tions of the revolutionary crisis in Russia. 
 The defeat ofthe armies of the tsarist monarchy; the growth of the strikemovement and the revolutionary movement of the prole-tariat; the discontent of the masses and the formation ofthe liberal-Octobrist bloc for the purpose of reaching an understanding with the tsar on a programme of reforms and mobilising industry for the victory over Germany—such is the sequence and texture of events at the end ofthe first year of war. 
 There is obviously a revolutionary crisis in Russia, but its significance and the attendant tasks of the proletariat are not correctly understood by all. 
 History seems to be repeating itself: again there is a war, as in 1905, a war tsarism has dragged the country intowith definite, patently annexationist, predatory andreactionary aims. 
 Again there is military defeat, and a revo-lutionary crisis accelerated by it. 
 Again the liberal bour-geoisie—in this case even in conjunction with large sections of the conservative bourgeoisie and the landowners—are advocating a programme of reform and of an understand-ing with the tsar. 
 The situation is almost like that in thesummer of 1905, prior to the Bulygin Duma, or in thesummer of 1906, after the dissolution of the First Duma. 
 There is, however, actually a vast difference, viz. 
, that this war has involved all Europe, all the most advancedcountries with mass and powerful socialist movements. 
 The imperialist war has linked up the Russian revolutionary crisis, which stems from a bourgeois-democratic revolution, with the growing crisis of the proletarian socialist revo-lution in the West. 
 This link is so direct that no individualsolution of revolutionary problems is possible in anysingle country—the Russian bourgeois-democratic revo-lution is now not only a prologue to, but an indivisibleand integral part of, the socialist revolution in the West. 
 In 1905, it was the proletariat’s task to consummate the bourgeois revolution in Russia so as to kindle the prole-tarian revolution in the West. 
 In 1915, the second part ofthis task has acquired an urgency that puts it on a levelwith the first part. 
 A new political division has arisen in Russia on the basis of new, higher, more developed and more complex international relations. 
 This new divisionis between the chauvinist revolutionaries, who desirerevolution so as to defeat Germany, and the proletarianinternationalist revolutionaries, who desire a revolutionin Russia for the sake of the proletarian revolution in the West, and simultaneously with that revolution. 
 This new division is, in essence, one between the urban and the ruralpetty bourgeoisie in Russia, and the socialist proletariat. 
The new division must be clearly understood, for the im-pending revolution makes it the prime duty of a Marxist,i. 
e. 
, of any class-conscious socialist, to realise the position of the various classes , and to interpret general differences over tactics and principles as differences in the positionsof the various classes. 
 There is nothing more puerile, contemptible and harmful, than the idea current among revolutionary philistines,namely, that differences should be “forgotten” “in view” of the immediate common aim in the approaching revolu-tion. 
 People whom the experience of the 1905-14 decadehas not taught the folly of this idea are hopeless from therevolutionary standpoint. 
 Those who confine themselves,at this stage, to revolutionary exclamations, withoutanalysing which classes have proved their ability to adopt, and have indeed adopted, a definite revolutionary pro-gramme do not really differ from “revolutionaries” likeKhrustalyov, Aladyin and Alexinsky. 
 We have before us the clear-cut stand of the monarchy and the feudal-minded landowners—“no surrender” of Russia to the liberal bourgeoisie; better an understanding with the German monarchy. 
 Equally clear is the liberalbourgeoisie’s stand—exploit the defeat and the mountingrevolution in order to wrest concessions from a frightenedmonarchy and compel it to share power with the bourgeoisie. 
Just as clear, too, is the stand of the revolutionary proletariat, which is striving to consummate the revolution by exploiting the vacillation and embarrassment of thegovernment and the bourgeoisie. 
 The petty bourgeoisie,however, i. 
e. 
, the vast mass of the barely awakening popu-lation of Russia, is groping blindly in the wake of thebourgeoisie, a captive to nationalist prejudices, on the one hand, prodded into the revolution by the unparalleled horror and misery of war, the high cost of living,impoverishment, ruin and starvation, but on the other hand,glancing backward at every step towards the idea of defence of the fatherland, towards the idea of Russia’s stateintegrity, or towards the idea of small-peasant prosperity, to be achieved through a victory over tsarism and over Germany, but without a victory over capitalism. 
 This vacillation of the petty bourgeois, of the small peasant, is no accident, but the inevitable outcome of hiseconomic position. 
 It is foolish to shut one’s eyes to thisbitter but profound truth; it must be understood and traced back in the existing political currents and groupings , so as not to deceive ourselves and the people, and not to weakenand paralyse the revolutionary party of the Social-Demo-cratic proletariat. 
 The proletariat will debilitate itself ifit permits its party to vacillate as the petty bourgeoisiedoes. 
 The proletariat will accomplish its task only if it is able to march unfalteringly towards its great goal, pushing the petty bourgeoisie forward, letting the latter learn fromits mistakes when it wavers to the right, and utilising allthe petty bourgeoisie’s forces to the utmost when lifecompels it to move to the left. 
 The Trudoviks, the S. 
R. 
s, and the Organising Committee’s liquidationist supporters—these are the political trends in Russia which have taken shape during the past decade,have proved their links with the various groups, elements and strata in the petty bourgeoisie, and shown vacillation from extreme revolutionism in word, to an alliance with the chauvinist Popular Socialists, or with Nasha Zarya , in deed. 
 On September 3, 1915, for instance, the fivesecretaries of the Organising Committee abroad issued amanifesto on the tasks of the proletariat, which said not aword about opportunism and social-chauvinism, but calledfor a “revolt” in the rear of the German army (this after a whole year of struggle against the slogan of civil war!) and proclaimed a slogan praised so highly in 1905 by theCadets, viz. 
, a “constituent assembly for the liquidation ofthe war and for the abolition of the autocratic [June 3 160] regime”! People who have failed to understand theneed for a cleavage between the party of the proletariat and these petty-bourgeois trends so that the revolution may be successful, have assumed the name of Social-Democrats in vain. 
 No, in the face of the revolutionary crisis in Russia, which is being accelerated by defeat—and this is what themotley opponents of “defeatism” are afraid to admit—it will be the proletariat’s duty to carry on the struggle against opportunism and chauvinism, or otherwise it will be impos-sible to develop the revolutionary consciousness of the masses,and to assist their movement by means of straightforwardrevolutionary slogans. 
 Not a constituent assembly, butthe overthrow of the monarchy, a republic, the confiscation of landed estates, and an eight-hour day will, as hitherto, be the slogans of the Social-Democratic proletariat, theslogans of our Party. 
 In direct connection with this, andto make it possible really to single out the socialist tasksand contrast them with the tasks of bourgeois chauvinism(including the Plekhanov and the Kautsky brands) in all its propaganda and agitation, and in all working-class action, our Party will preserve the slogan of “transformthe imperialist war into a civil war”, i. 
e. 
, the slogan ofthe socialist revolution in the West. 
 The lessons of the war are compelling even our opponents to recognise in practice both the stand of “defeatism” and the necessity of issuing—at first as a spirited phrase in a manifesto, but later more seriously and thoughtfully—theslogan of “a revolt in the rear” of the German militarists, in other words, the slogan of a civil war. 
 The lessons of the war, it appears, are knocking into their heads that which we have been insisting on since the very outset of the war. 
 The defeat of Russia has proved the lesser evil, for it has tremendously enhanced the revolutionary crisis and hasaroused millions, tens and hundreds of millions. 
 Moreover,in conditions of an imperialist war, a revolutionary crisisin Russia could not but lead people’s thoughts to the only salvation for the peoples—the idea of “a revolt in the rear” of the German army, i. 
e. 
, the idea of a civil war in all the belligerent countries. 
 Life teaches. 
 Life is advancing , through the defeat of Russia, towards a revolution in Russia and, through thatrevolution and in connection with it, towards a civil war in Europe. 
 Life has taken this direction. 
 And, drawing fresh strength from these lessons of life, which have justifiedits position, the party of the revolutionary proletariat ofRussia will, with ever greater energy, follow the path ithas chosen. 
 Written in the second half of September 1915 First published in Pravda No. 
 260, Published according to November 7, 1928 the manuscript THE FIRST STEP The development of the international socialist movement is slow during the tremendous crisis created by the war. 
 Yetit is moving towards a break with opportunism and social-chauvinism, as was clearly shown by the International Socialist Conference held at Zimmerwald, Switzerland,between September 5 and 8, 1915. 
 For a whole year, the socialists of the warring and the neutral countries vacillated and temporised. 
 Afraid toadmit to themselves the gravity of the crisis, they did not wish to look reality in the face, and kept deferring in a thousand ways the inevitable break with the opportunismand Kautskyism prevalent in the official parties of WesternEurope. 
 However, the analysis of events which we gave a year ago in the Manifesto of the Central Committee ( Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 33) * has proved correct; the events have borne out its correctness. 
 They took a course that resulted in the first International Socialist Conference being attendedby representatives of the protesting elements of theminorities in Germany, France, Sweden, and Norway,who acted against the decisions of the official parties, i. 
e. 
, in fact acted schismatically. 
 The work of the Conference was summed up in a mani-festo and a resolution expressing sympathy with the arrestedand the persecuted. 
 Both documents appear in thisissue of Sotsial-Demokrat . 
 By nineteen votes to twelve, the Conference refused to submit to a committee the draft resolution proposed by us and other revolutionary Marxists; *See pp. 
 25-34 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 our draft manifesto was passed on to the committee together with two others, for a joint manifesto to be drawn up. 
 The reader will find elsewhere in this issue our two drafts; a comparison of the latter with the manifesto adoptedclearly shows that a number of fundamental ideas ofrevolutionary Marxism were adopted. 
 In practice, the manifesto signifies a step towards an ideological and practical break with opportunism and social-chauvinism. 
 At the same time, the manifesto, as any analysis will show, contains inconsistencies, and doesnot say everything that should be said. 
 The manifesto calls the war imperialist and emphasises two features of imperialism: the striving of the capitalistsof every nation for profits and the exploitation of others, and the striving of the Great Powers to partition the world and “enslave” weaker nations. 
 The manifesto repeats themost essential things that should be said of the imperialistnature of the war, and were said in our resolution. 
 In thisrespect, the manifesto merely popularises our resolution. 
 Popularisation is undoubtedly a useful thing. 
 However, if we want clear thinking in the working class and attach importance to systematic and unflagging propaganda, wemust accurately and fully define the principles to be popu-larised. 
 If that is not done, we risk repeating the error,the fault of the Second International which led to its collapse,viz. 
, we shall be leaving room for ambiguity and misin-terpretations. 
 Is it, for instance, possible to deny the signal importance of the idea, expressed in our resolution, thatthe objective conditions are mature for socialism? The“popular” exposition of the manifesto omitted this idea;failure has attended the attempt to combine, in one docu-ment, a clear and precise resolution based on principle, and an appeal. 
 “The capitalists of all countries ... claim that the war serves to defend the fatherland .... 
 They are lying...”, the manifesto continues. 
 Here again, this forthright statementthat the fundamental idea of opportunism in the presentwar—the “defence-of-the-fatherland” idea—is a lie, is a repetition of the kernel of the revolutionary Marxists’ resolution. 
 Again, the manifesto regrettably fails to sayeverything that should be said; it is half-hearted, afraid to speak the whole truth. 
 After a year of war, who today is not aware of the actual damage caused to socialism, not only by the capitalist press repeating and endorsing the capitalists’ lies (it is its business as a capitalist press to repeat the capitalists’ lies), but also by the greater part ofthe socialist press doing so? Who does not know that Euro-pean socialism’s greatest crisis has been brought about notby the “capitalists’ lies”, but by the lies of Guesde, Hyndman, Vandervelde, Plekhanov and Kautsky ? Who does not know that the lies spoken by such leaders suddenly revealed all the strength of the opportunism that swept them away atthe decisive moment? Let us take a look at what has come about: To make the masses see things in a clearer light, the manifesto says that in the present war the defence of the fatherland idea is a capitalist lie. 
 The European masses, however, are notilliterate, and almost all who have read the manifestohave heard, and still hear that same lie from hundreds of socialist papers, journals, and pamphlets, echoing them [it?]after Plekhanov, Hyndman, Kautsky and Co. 
 What will the readers of the manifesto think? What thoughts will arise in them after this display of timidity by the authorsof the manifesto? Disregard the capitalists’ lie about thedefence of the fatherland, the manifesto tells the workers. 
Well and good. 
 Practically all of them will say or think:the capitalists ’ lie has long stopped bothering us, but the lie of Kautsky and Co. 
 ... The manifesto goes on to repeat another important idea in our resolution, viz. 
, that the socialist parties and theworkers’ organisations of the various countries “have flouted obligations stemming from the decisions of the Stuttgart,Copenhagen and Basle congresses”; that the International Socialist Bureau too has failed to do its duty ; that this failure to do its duty consisted in voting for war credits,joining governments, recognising “a class truce” (submissionto which the manifesto calls slavish ; in other words, it accuses Guesde, Plekhanov, Kautsky and Co. 
 of substitutingfor propaganda of socialism the propaganda of slavish ideas). 
 Is it consistent, we shall ask, to speak, in a “popular” manifesto, of the failure of a number of parties to do their duty (it is common knowledge that the reference is to the strongest parties and the workers’ organisations in the most advanced countries: Britain, France and Germany), without giving any explanation of this startling andunprecedented fact? The greater part of the socialist partiesand the International Socialist Bureau itself have failed to dotheir duty! What is this—an accident and the failure ofindividuals, or the turning-point of an entire epoch? If it is the former, and we circulate that idea among the masses, it is tantamount to our renouncing the fundamentals of socialist doctrine. 
 If it is the latter, how can we fail to sayso forthright? We are facing a moment of historic significance—the collapse of the International as a whole, a turning-point of an entire epoch—and yet we are afraid to tell the masses that the whole truth must be sought for and found, and that we must do our thinking to the very end. 
 It ispreposterous and ridiculous to suppose that the Interna-tional Socialist Bureau and a number of parties could havecollapsed, without linking up this event with the long history of the origin, the growth, the maturing and over-maturity of the general European opportunist movement, with its deep economic roots—deep, not in the sense thatit is intimately linked with the masses, but in the sensethat it is connected with a certain stratum of society. 
 Passing on to the “struggle for peace”, the manifesto states that: “This struggle is a struggle for freedom, the brotherhood of peoples, and socialism”. 
 It goes on to explain that in wartime the workers make sacrifices “in theservice of the ruling classes”, whereas they must learn tomake sacrifices “ for their own cause ” (doubly underscored in the manifesto), “for the sacred aims of socialism”. 
 Theresolution which expresses sympathy with arrested and persecuted fighters says that “the Conference solemnly undertakes to honour the living and the dead by emulating their example ” and that its aim will be to “arouse the revolutionary spirit in the international proletariat”. 
 All these ideas are a reiteration of our resolution’s fun-damental idea that a struggle for peace without a revolu-tionary struggle is a hollow and false phrase, and that a revolutionary struggle for socialism is the only way to put an end to the horror of war. 
 But here too we find inconsist-ency, timidity, and a failure to say everything that ought to be said: it calls upon the masses to emulate the example of the revolutionary fighters; it declares that the five members of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Dumagroup who have been sentenced to exile in Siberia havecarried on “the glorious revolutionary tradition of Russia”;it proclaims the necessity of “arousing the revolutionaryspirit”, but it does not specify forthright and clearly the revolutionary methods of struggle. 
 Was our Central Committee right in signing this mani-festo, with all its inconsistency and timidity? We think itwas. 
 Our non-agreement, the non-agreement, not only ofour Central Committee but of the entire international Left-wing section of the Conference, which stands by the principles of revolutionary Marxism , is openly expressed both in a special resolution, a separate draft manifesto, anda separate declaration on the vote for a compromise mani-festo. 
 We did not conceal a jot of our views, slogans, ortactics. 
 A German edition of our pamphlet, Socialism and War ,* was handed out at the Conference. 
 We have spread, are spreading, and shall continue to spread our views with no less energy than the manifesto will. 
 It is a fact that thismanifesto is a step forward towards a real struggle against opportunism, towards a rupture with it. 
 It would besectarianism to refuse to take this step forward together with the minority of German, French, Swedish, Norwegian, and Swiss socialists, when we retain full freedom and full opportunity to criticise inconsistency and to work for greaterthings. 
 ** It would be poor war tactics to refuse to adhere to the mounting international protest movement againstsocial-chauvinism just because this movement is slow,because it takes “only” a single step forward and because it is ready and willing to take a step backward tomorrow *See pp. 
 295-338 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 **We are not frightened by the fact that the Organising Com-mittee and the Social-Revolutionaries signed the manifesto diplo-matically, retaining all their links with— and all their attachment to Nasha Zarya , Rubanovich, and the July 1915 Conference of the Popular Socialists and the Social-Revolutionaries in Russia. 
161 W e have means enough to combat corrupt diplomacy and unmask it. 
It is more and more unmasking itself. 
 Nasha Zarya and Chkheidze’s group are helping us unmask Axelrod and Co. 
 and make peace with the old International Socialist Bureau. 
 Its readiness to make peace with the opportunists is so far merely wishful thinking. 
 Will the opportunists agree to a peace? Is peace objectively possible between trends that are dividing more and more deeply—social-chauvinismand Kautskyism on the one hand, and on the other, revo-lutionary internationalist Marxism? We consider itimpossible, and we shall continue our line, encouraged as we are by its success at the Conference of September 5-8. 
 The success of our line is beyond doubt. 
 Compare the facts: In September 1914, our Central Committee’s Mani-festo seemed almost isolated. 
 In March 1915, an interna-tional women’s conference adopted a miserable pacifistresolution, which was blindly followed by the Organising Committee. 
 In September 1915, we rallied in a whole group of the international Left wing. 
 We came out with our owntactics, voiced a number of our fundamental ideas in ajoint manifesto, and took part in the formation of an I. 
S. 
C. 
(International Socialist Committee), i. 
e. 
, a practically newInternational Socialist Bureau, against the wishes of the old one, and on the basis of a manifesto that openly con-demns the tactics of the latter. 
 The workers of Russia, whose overwhelming majority followed our Party and its Central Committee even in theyears 1912-14, will now, from the experience of the inter-national socialist movement, see that our tactics are being confirmed in a wider area, and that our fundamental ideas are shared by an ever growing and finer part of the prole-tarian International. 
 Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 45-46 , Published according to October 11, 1915 the text in Sotsial-Demokrat REVOLUTIONARY ISTS AT THE INTERNATIONAL SOCIALIST CONFERENCE, SEPTEMBER 5-8, 1915 The ideological struggle at the Conference was waged be-tween a compact group of internationalists, revolutionaryMarxists, and the vacillating near-Kautskyites, who formedthe Right wing of the Conference. 
 The unitedness of theformer group is one of the most important facts and greatestachievements of the Conference. 
 After a year of war, the trend represented by our Party proved the only trend in the International to adopt a fully definite resolution aswell as a draft manifesto based on the latter, and to unitethe consistent Marxists of Russia, Poland, the Lettishterritory, Germany, Sweden, Norway, Switzerland, andHolland. 
 What arguments did the vacillating elements advance against us? The Germans admitted that we were advancingtowards revolutionary battles, but, they said, we do not haveto proclaim from the house-tops such things as fraternisationin the trenches, political strikes, street demonstrationsand civil war. 
 Such things are done, they said, but not spoken of. 
 Others added: this is childishness, verbal pyro-technics. 
 The German semi-Kautskyites castigated themselves for these ridiculously, indecently contradictory and evasivespeeches by passing a resolution of sympathy and a declara-tion on the need to “follow the example” of the members of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
 Duma group, who distributed Sotsial-Demo-krat , our Central Organ, which proclaimed civil war from the house-tops. 
 You are following the bad example set by Kautsky, we replied to the Germans; in word, you recognise the impending revolution; in deed, you refuse to tell the masses about it openly, to call for it, and indicate the most concrete meansof struggle which the masses are to test and legitimise inthe course of the revolution. 
 In 1847, Marx and Engels,who were living abroad —the German philistines were horrified at revolutionary methods of struggle being spoken of from abroad!—called for revolution, in their celebrated Manifesto of the Communist Party ; they spoke forthright of the use of force, and branded as contemptible any attemptto conceal the revolutionary aims, tasks and methods ofthe struggle. 
 The Revolution of 1848 proved that Marx andEngels alone had applied the correct tactics to the events Several years prior to the 1905 Revolution in Russia Plekhanov, who was then still a Marxist, wrote an unsignedarticle in the old Iskra of 1901, expressing the editorial board’s views on the coming insurrection, on ways of preparing it,such as street demonstrations; and even on technical devices,such as using wire in combating cavalry. 
 The Russian revolution proved that the old Iskrists alone had approached the events with the correct tactics. 
 We are now faced withthe following alternative: either we are really and truly con-vinced that the war is creating a revolutionary situation inEurope, and that all the economic and socio-political cir-cumstances of the imperialist period are leading up to a revolution of the proletariat—in which case we are in duty bound to explain to the masses the need for revolution, callfor it, create the necessary organisations, and speak fear-lessly and most concretely of the various methods of theforcible struggle and its “technique”. 
 This duty of oursdoes not depend upon whether the revolution will be strong enough, or whether it will arrive with a first or a second imperialist war, etc. 
 Or else we are not convinced thatthe situation is revolutionary, in which case there is nosense in our just talking about a war against war. 
 In thatcase, we are, in fact, national liberal-labour politiciansof the Südekum-Plekhanov or Kautsky variety. 
 The French delegates also declared that the present situation in Europe, as they saw it, would lead to revolu-tion. 
 But, they said, first, “we have not come here to pro-vide a formula for a Third International”; secondly, the French worker “believes nobody and nothing”; he is demoral-ised and satiated with anarchist and Hervéist phrases. 
 The former argument is unreasonable, because the jointcompromise manifesto does “provide a formula” for a Third International, though it is inconsistent, incomplete and notgiven sufficient thought. 
 The latter argument is very impor-tant as a very serious factual argument, which takes the specific situation in France into account, not in the meaning of defence of the fatherland, or the enemy invasion, but intaking note of the “sore points” in the French labour move-ment. 
 The only thing that logically follows from this,however, is that the French socialists would perhaps joingeneral European revolutionary action by the proletariat more slowly than others, and not that such action is un-necessary. 
 The question as to how rapidly , in which way and in-which particular forms, the proletariat of the variouscountries are capable of taking revolutionary action was notraised at the Conference and could not have been. 
 The con-ditions for this are not yet ripe. 
 For the present it is our task to jointly propagandise the correct tactics and leave it to events to indicate the tempo of the movement, and the modifications in the mainstream (according to nation,locality and trade). 
 If the French proletariat has been demor-alised by anarchist phrases, it has been demoralised byMillerandism too, and it is not our business to increase this demoralisation by leaving things unsaid in the mani-festo. 
 It was none other than Merrheim who uttered the characteristic and profoundly correct phrase: “The [Socialist]Party, Jouhaux [secretary of the General Confederation ofLabour 162] and the government are three heads under one bonnet. 
” This is the truth, a fact proved by the experience of the year of struggle waged by the French international-ists against the Party and Messrs. 
 Jouhaux. 
 There is, however,only one conclusion to be drawn: the government cannotbe fought unless the opportunist parties and the leadersof anarcho-syndicalism are fought against. 
 Unlike our resolution, the joint manifesto merely indicated the tasks in the struggle but did not say everything that should havebeen said about them. 
 Arguing against our tactics, one of the Italians said: “Your tactics come either too late [since the war has al-ready begun] or too soon [because the war has not yet created the conditions for revolution]; besides, you propose to‘change the programme’ of the International, since all ourpropaganda has always been conducted ‘against violence’. 
”It was very easy for us to reply to this by quoting JulesGuesde in En garde! to the effect that not a single influen-tial leader of the Second International ever rejected the use of violence and direct revolutionary methods of thestruggle in general. 
 It has always been argued that thelegal struggle, parliamentarism and insurrection are inter-linked, and must inevitably pass into each other according to the changes in the conditions of the movement. 
 From the same book, En garde! , we quoted a passage in a speech delivered by Guesde in 1899, in which he spoke of the pos-sibility of a war for markets, colonies, etc. 
, and went onto say that if there were any French, German and BritishMillerands in such a war, then “what would become ofinternational working-class solidarity?” In this speech Guesde condemned himself in advance. 
 As for declaring propaganda of revolution “inopportune”, this objection rests on a confu-sion of concepts usual among socialists in the Romance coun-tries: they confuse the beginning of a revolution with openand direct propaganda for revolution. 
 In Russia, nobodyplaces the beginning of the 1905 Revolution before January 9, 1905, 163 whereas revolutionary propaganda, in the very narrow sense of the word, the propaganda and the prepara-tion of mass action, demonstrations, strikes, barricades,had been conducted for years prior to that. 
 The old Iskra , for instance, began to propagandise the matter at the end of1900, as Marx did in 1847, when nobody thought as yet of the beginning of a revolution in Europe. 
 After a revolution has begun, it is “recognised” even by the liberals and its other enemies; they often recogniseit so as to deceive and betray it. 
 Before the revolution, revolutionaries foresee it, realise its inevitability, makethe masses understand its necessity, and explain its course and methods to the masses. 
 By the irony of history, Kautsky and his friends, who tried to take out of Grimm’s hands the initiative of con-vening the Conference, and attempted to disrupt the Con-ference of the Left wing (Kautsky’s closest friends even went on a tour for this purpose, as Grimm disclosed at the Conference), were the very ones who pushed the Conference to the left . 
 By their deeds, the opportunists and the Kaut-skyites have proved the correctness of the stand taken byour Party. 
 Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 45-46 , Published according to October 11, 1915 the text in Sotsial-Demokrat KAUTSKY, AXELROD, AND MARTOV — TRUE INTERNATIONALISTS Shortly before the Zimmerwald Conference, a pamphlet by P. 
 Axelrod came out in Zurich in the German language, under the title of The Crisis and the Tasks of International Social-Democracy . 
* The Zurich Volksrecht subsequently pub-lished two articles by L. 
 Martov in praise of the pamphlet. 
We do not know whether the two authors will bring outthese works in Russian. 
 It would be hard to find a better illustration of the way the leaders of the Organising Com-mittee are defending opportunism and social-chauvinism. 
 The struggle against “dangers threatening party unity” runs through the whole pamphlet. 
 “A rupture and dissen-sion”—this is what Axelrod is afraid of, and endlesslyrepeats ad nauseam . 
 Do not imagine, however, that it is the present state of affairs in Social-Democracy, the present alliance between its leaders and their respective nationalbourgeoisie, that Axelrod considers dissension and a rup-ture. 
 Oh, no! In Axelrod’s opinion, dissension means draw-ing a clear line of distinction between true socialists andsocial-chauvinists. 
 Kautsky is numbered by Axelrod among the comrades “whose internationalist sentiments and con-sciousness are beyond any doubt”. 
 Yet, in all the forty-six pages of the pamphlet there is not the slightest attemptto bring Kautsky’s views together, quote them correctly,and ascertain whether recognition of the defence of the father-land idea in the present war does not imply chauvinism. 
 *Die Krise und die Aufgaben der internationalen Sozial-demo-kratie . 
—Ed. 
 Not a word on the issue, or about our arguments. 
 What we find is a “report to the authorities”. 
 In the course of a lecture delivered in Zurich, Lenin, he writes, called Kautsky chau-vinist, philistine, traitor (p. 
 21). 
 Dear Martov and Axelrod,this is no longer literature, but a desk-sergeant’s report. 
 “In the West,” the pamphlet says, “we do not find that variety of supermen who utilise each party crisis, any diffi-cult situation, to step forth in the role of the Party’s sole saviours from destruction, and light-heartedly conduct an inner-party policy of chaos and disorganisation” (p. 
 22). 
Is this literature? But if there are no such super-monsters “in the West” who dare consider Kautsky and Axelrod chauvinists andopportunists, and at the very thought of whom dear Axel-rod trembles with rage and emits a spate of such elegant and choice language, how could Axelrod have written two pagesearlier: “If one considers the indignation that is mounting in ever broader party circles, especially in Germany and France,against the policy of ‘seeing it through’ that is followed by our responsible party organs, it is by no means impossible that the practical tendencies of the Leninist propagandamay, through various channels, penetrate into the ranks ofWestern Social-Democracy. 
” That being the case, the fault does not seem to lie with the genuinely Russian super-monsters who are flaying dear Axelrod! It would appear that the international chauvinism of the official parties—both in Germany and France, asAxelrod himself admits (note this!)—is evoking indignationin and resistance from international revolutionary Social-Democrats. 
 Consequently, we have two trends , both inter-national. 
 The angry Axelrod is abusive because he does not realise the inevitability of both trends, of a decisive struggle between them; another reason is that it painshis conscience and sensibilities, and that it is not tohis advantage openly to show his own stand, whichconsists in a desire to appear internationalist while being chauvinist. 
 “The problem of internationalising the working-class movement is not identical with the question of revolu-tionising our forms and methods of struggle,” he says; it is, as you see, “an ideological explanation” when one reduces everything to opportunism and ignores the “tremendous force” of “patriotic ideas” which are “the product of thousand-year-old historical processes”. 
 “One must therefore strive,” hecontinues, “to create within the framework of this bour-geois society an actual reality [italics by Axelrod], objective conditions of existence, at least for the struggling massesof workers, which can weaken the above-mentioned depend-ence”, namely, “the dependence of the masses upon the historically evolved national and territorial social forma-tions”. 
 “For instance,” Axelrod goes on to illustrate his pro-found idea, “labour protection and insurance legislation, aswell as various other important political demands, and,finally, the cultural and educational needs and strivings of the workers, must become the object of their international [italics by Axelrod] action and organisations. 
” Everything,he says, reduces itself to “internationalising the day-by-day struggle for the demands of the moment”. 
 This is certainly enticing and so unlike the struggle against opportunism invented by some super-monsters! True inter-nationalism in italics and a true “Marxism” that is not satisfied with “ideological” explanations consist in concernover the internationalisation of insurance legislation!Wonderful! The idea of a genius. 
 Without any “struggle,rupture or dissension”, all international opportunists orinternational liberals, from Lloyd George to Friedrich Nau-mann and from Leroy Beaulieu to Milyukov, Struve and Guchkov, will eagerly subscribe to the scientific, profoundand objective “internationalism” of Axelrod, Martov, andKautsky. 
 Here are some real gems of “internationalism”! Kautsky says: If I defend my fatherland in an imperialist war, i. 
e. 
, a war to plunder and enslave other countries, and recognise that the workers of the other belligerent countriesare entitled to defend their fatherland, this is true inter-nationalism. 
 Axelrod says: One must not be carried away by“ideological” attacks on opportunism but must carry on apractical struggle against thousand-year-old nationalism by means of (also a thousand-year-old) internationalisation of day-by-day work in the field of insurance laws. 
 Martovagrees with Axelrod. 
 Axelrod’s phrases about the thousand-year-old roots of nationalism, etc. 
, have about as much political sense as the declarations of the Russian serf-owners prior to 1861, * about the thousand-year-old roots of serfdom. 
 Such phrases are grist to the mill of the reactionaries and the bourgeoi-sie, since Axelrod fails to mention—modestly fails to men-tion—that decades of capitalist development, particularlyafter 1871, have created those objective international links between the proletarians of all countries which today, at the present juncture, must find expression in internationalrevolutionary action. 
 Axelrod is opposed to such action. 
He is in favour of referring to the thousand-year-old rootsof the knout, but he is opposed to action aimed at destroy-ing the knout! But what about the proletarian revolution? The 1912 Basle Manifesto spoke of it in connection with the impend-ing war, which actually broke out two years later. 
Perhaps Axelrod considers that this manifesto is alsofrivolous “ideology”—an expression quite in the spirit ofStruve’s and Cunow’s “Marxism”!—for he does not say a word about it. 
 As for the revolution, he dismisses it as follows: “The tendency to view stormy and revolutionary mass action or uprisings as the sole way of overcoming nationalismwould have some justification if we were on the eve of asocial revolution, in the very same way, for instance, as was the case in Russia beginning with the students’ demonstra-tions of 1901, which were the precursors of the approach-ing decisive battles against absolutism. 
 But even thosecomrades who place all their hopes on the speedy beginningof a stormy revolutionary period will not risk statingdefinitely that the decisive conflict between the prole-tariat and the bourgeoisie is imminent. 
 On the contrary, they too count on a period lasting decades” (p. 
 41). 
This, of course, is followed by fulmination againstthe “Utopia” and the “Bakuninists” among Russianémigrés. 
 This example, chosen by Axelrod, exposes our oppor-tunist in peerless fashion. 
 Could anybody in his right mind *The year of the abolition of serfdom in Russia. 
— Ed. 
 have “definitely stated” in 1901 that the decisive struggle against absolutism in Russia was “imminent”? Nobody could have done so and nobody did say so. 
 Nobody could have known at the time that four years later one of the decisive clashes (December 1905) was to come, and that thenext “decisive” battle against absolutism would take placeperhaps in 1915-16, or even later. 
 If nobody asserted in 1901, either definitely or in any other way, that a decisive battle was “imminent”; if we de-clared at the time that the “hysterical” outcries of Krichevsky,Martynov and Co. 
 about an “imminent” battle were lackingin seriousness, then we revolutionary Social-Democratswere at that time positively affirming something else: we affirmed that only hopeless opportunists could fail to under-stand in 1901 the task of actively supporting the revolution-ary demonstrations of 1901, encouraging and developingthem, and providing them with the most determined revo-lutionary slogans. 
 History has proved that we, and only we,were right; history has condemned the opportunists, and hasthrown them out of the working-class movement, although no decisive battle was “imminent” at the time, and the first decisive battle took place only four years later and yet did not prove to be the last battle, i. 
e. 
, the final and decisivebattle. 
 Today Europe is going through quite the same experience, literally the same experience. 
 There cannot be the slight-est doubt that a revolutionary situation exists in the Europe of 1915, as in the Russia of 1901. 
 We cannot tell whetherthe proletariat’s first “decisive” battle against the bourgeoi-sie will take place in four years or two, within a decade ormore; we cannot tell whether the second “decisive” battlewill take place a decade after that, but we do know firmly and we declare “positively” that at present it is our imme-diate and bounden duty to support the growing unrest andthe demonstrations which have already begun. 
 It is a fact that in Germany a crowd has booed Scheidemann, and that inmany countries crowds have demonstrated against the highcost of living. 
 Axelrod is evading this immediate and impera-tive duty of Social-Democrats; Axelrod would dissuade the workers from performing that duty. 
 If one weighs thepolitical sum and substance of Axelrod’s arguments, one will see that he is with the leaders of social-patriotism and social-chauvinism, and against the immediate propaganda of and preparations for revolutionary action. 
 This is the gist of the matter. 
 All the rest is just words. 
 We are undoubtedly on the eve of a socialist revolution. 
 This was recognised by ultra-cautious theorists, like Kaut-sky, as early as 1909 ( Der Weg zur Macht ); it was recognised in the unanimously adopted Basle Manifesto of 1912. 
 Just as in 1901 we did not know whether the “eve” of the first Russian revolution would last four years, we do not knowthat today. 
 The revolution may and probably will consistof many years of fighting, of several periods of onslaughtwith intervals of counter-revolutionary convulsions of thebourgeois system. 
 The main issue of the present political situation boils down to the question of whether the already existing revolutionary situation should be exploited by sup-porting and developing revolutionary movements. 
 Yes or no? That is the question that at present politically dividessocial-chauvinists and revolutionary internationalists. 
Despite the revolutionary phrases of all three, as well as of the five secretaries of the Organising Committee abroad, Kautsky, Axelrod, and Martov are, on this issue, on the sideof the social-chauvinists. 
 Axelrod makes use of a profusion of phrases to cover up his defence of social-chauvinism. 
 His pamphlet may serveas an example of how opinions can be concealed and how language and print can be used to disguise ideas. 
 Axelrod harps on the word internationalism. 
 He censures both thesocial-patriots and their friends for not wanting to shiftto the left, hints that he stands left of Kautsky, and speaksof the need for a Third International, which, he says, shouldbe strong enough to reply to attempts by the bourgeoisie to kindle a world war conflagration “not with threats but by unleashing a revolutionary storm” (p. 
 14), and so on andso forth ad infinitum . 
 In word, Axelrod is prepared to recognise anything, including a revolutionary storm; in deed,he wants unity with Kautsky and consequently with Schei-demann in Germany, with the chauvinist and counter-revolutionary Nache Dyelo and with Chkheidze’s group in Russia, in deed, he is against supporting and furthering at present the incipient revolutionary movement . 
 In word, everything; in deed, nothing. 
 In word, he vehemently avows that he is an “internationalist” and a revolutionary; in deed, he supports the social-chauvinists and opportunists of the whole world in their struggle against the revolutionaryinternationalists . 
 Written not earlier than September 28 (October 11), 1915 First published in 1924 , Published according to in the journal Proletarskaya the manuscript Revolutsia No. 
 3 (26) SEVERAL THESES PROPOSED BY THE EDITORS The material published in this issue shows the tremen-dous scope of the work being done by the St. 
 Petersburg Committee of our Party. 
 To Russia, and indeed to the entireInternational, this is indeed a model of Social-Democraticwork during a reactionary war and in most difficult condi-tions. 
 The workers of St. 
 Petersburg and Russia will bendevery effort to give support to that work and will continue it along the same road ever more energetically and exten-sively. 
 Complying with advice from comrades in Russia, we have drawn up several theses on current problems of Social-Democratic work: (1) The slogan of a “constituent assembly” is wrong as an independent slogan, because the question now is: who will convene it? The liberals accepted that slogan in 1905because it could have been interpreted as meaning that a “constituent assembly” would be convened by the tsar andwould be in agreement with him. 
 The most correct slogansare the “three pillars” (a democratic republic, confiscation of the landed estates and an eight-hour working day), with the addition (cf. 
 No. 
 9) of a call for the workers’ interna-tional solidarity in the struggle for socialism and therevolutionary overthrow of the belligerent governments,and against the war. 
 (2) We are opposed to participation in the war indus-tries committees, 164 which help prosecute the imperialist and reactionary war. 
 We are in favour of utilising theelection campaign; for instance, we are for participation in the first stage of the elections for the sole purpose of agi-tation and organisation. 
 There can be no talk of boycotting the Duma. 
 Participation in the second ballot is essen-tial. 
 While we have no Duma deputies from our Party, we must utilise everything that happens in the Duma so asto advance the aims of revolutionary Social-Democracy. 
 (3) We consider that the consolidation and extension of Social-Democratic work among the proletariat and its extension to the rural proletariat, the rural poor and the army are the immediate and pressing tasks. 
 It is revolution-ary Social-Democracy’s most pressing task to develop theincipient strike movement, and to conduct it under theslogan of the “three pillars”. 
 The demand for the immediatecessation of the war should be given due attention. 
 Among other demands, the workers must not lose sight of the demand for the immediate reinstatement of the workers’ deputies,members of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
 Duma group. 
 (4) Soviets of Workers’ Deputies and similar institutions must be regarded as organs of insurrection, of revolutionaryrule. 
 It is only in connection with the development of a mass political strike and with an insurrection, and in the measure of the latter’s preparedness, development andsuccess that such institutions can be of lasting value. 
 (5) Only a revolutionary-democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and the peasantry can form the social contentof the impending revolution in Russia. 
 The revolution cannot be victorious in Russia unless it overthrows the monarchy and the feudal-minded landowners, and thesecannot be overthrown unless the proletariat is supported bythe peasantry. 
 The step forward made in the differentiationof the rural population into wealthy “homestead farmers”and rural proletarians has not done away with the oppres-sion of the rural areas by the Markovs and Co. 
 165 We have urged and still urge the absolute need, in all and anycircumstances, for a separate organisation for rural prole-tarians. 
 (6) The task confronting the proletariat of Russia is the consummation of the bourgeois-democratic revolution in Russia in order to kindle the socialist revolution in Europe. 
 The latter task now stands very close to the former,yet it remains a special and second task, for it is a ques-tion of the different classes which are collaborating with the proletariat of Russia. 
 In the former task, it is the petty-bourgeois peasantry of Russia who are collabo-rating; in the latter, it is the proletariat of othercountries. 
 (7) As hitherto, we consider it admissible for Social-Democrats to join a provisional revolutionary governmenttogether with the democratic petty bourgeoisie, but not with the revolutionary chauvinists. 
 (8) By revolutionary chauvinists we mean those who want a victory over tsarism so as to achieve victory overGermany, plunder other countries, consolidate Great-Rus-sian rule over the other peoples of Russia, etc. 
 Revolution-ary chauvinism is based on the class position of the petty bourgeoisie. 
 The latter always vacillates between the bour-geoisie and the proletariat. 
 At present it is vacillatingbetween chauvinism (which prevents it from being consistentlyrevolutionary, even in the meaning of a democratic revolu-tion), and proletarian internationalism. 
 At the moment theTrudoviks, the Socialist-Revolutionaries, Nasha Zarya , Chkheidze’s Duma group, the Organising Committee, Mr. 
 Plekhanov and the like are political spokesmen for thispetty bourgeoisie in Russia. 
 (9) If the revolutionary chauvinists won in Russia, we would be opposed to a defence of their “fatherland” in the present war. 
 Our slogan is: against the chauvinists, even if they are revolutionary and republican— against them, and for an alliance of the international proletariat for the socialist revolution. 
 (10) To the question of whether it is possible for the pro-letariat to assume the leadership in the bourgeois Russianrevolution, our answer is: yes, it is possible, if the petty bourgeoisie swings to the left at the decisive moment; it is being pushed to the left, not only by our propaganda,but by a number of objective factors, economic, financial(the burden of war), military, political, and others. 
 (11) To the question of what the party of the proletariat would do if the revolution placed power in its hands in the present war, our answer is as follows: we would propose peace to all the belligerents on the condition that freedom is given to the colonies and all peoples that are dependent, oppressed and deprived of rights. 
 Under the present govern-ments, neither Germany, nor Britain and France would accept this condition. 
 In that case, we would have to prepare for and wage a revolutionary war, i. 
e. 
, not onlyresolutely carry out the whole of our minimum programme, 166 but work systematically to bring about an uprisingamong all peoples now oppressed by the Great Russians,all colonies and dependent countries in Asia (India, China, Persia, etc. 
), and also, and first and foremost, we would raise up the socialist proletariat of Europe for an insurrec-tion against their governments and despite the social-chau-vinists. 
 There is no doubt that a victory of the proletariat inRussia would create extraordinarily favourable conditionsfor the development of the revolution in both Asia and Europe. 
 Even 1905 proved that. 
 The international solidarity of the revolutionary proletariat is a fact, despite the scum of opportunism and social-chauvinism. 
 We now present these theses for discussion among the comrades, and shall develop our views in the next issuesof the Central Organ. 
 Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 47, Published according to October 13, 1915 the text in Sotsial-Demokrat First page of Lenin’s manuscript “The Revolutionary Proletariat and the Right of Nations to Self-Determination”, 1915 (in German) Reduced First page of Lenin’s manuscript “The Revolutionary Proletariat and the Right of Nations to Self-Determination”, 1915 (in German) Reduced THE REVOLUTIONARY PROLETARIAT AND THE RIGHT OF NATIONS TO SELF-DETERMINATION Like most programmes or tactical resolutions of the Social-Democratic parties, the Zimmerwald Manifesto pro-claims the “right of nations to self-determination”. 
 InNos. 
 252 and 253 of Berner Tagwacht , Parabellum 167 has called “illusory” “the struggle for the non-existent right toself-determination”, and has contraposed to it “the prole-tariat’s revolutionary mass struggle against capitalism”, while at the same time assuring us that “we are against annexations” (an assurance is repeated five times in Parabellum’s article), and against all violence againstnations. 
 The arguments advanced by Parabellum in support of his position boil down to an assertion that today all national problems, like those of Alsace-Lorraine, Armenia, etc. 
, are problems of imperialism; that capital has outgrown theframework of national states; that it is impossible to turnthe clock of history back to the obsolete ideal of nationalstates, etc. 
 Let us see whether Parabellum’s reasoning is correct. 
 First of all, it is Parabellum who is looking backward, not forward, when, in opposing working-class acceptance“of the ideal of the national state”, he looks towards Brit-ain, France, Italy, Germany, i. 
e. 
, countries where the move-ment for national liberation is a thing of the past, and nottowards the East, towards Asia, Africa, and the colonies, where this movement is a thing of the present and the future. 
 Mention of India, China, Persia, and Egypt will besufficient. 
 Furthermore, imperialism means that capital has outgrown the framework of national states; it means that national oppression has been extended and heightened on a new historical foundation. 
 Hence, it follows that, despiteParabellum, we must link the revolutionary struggle for socialism with a revolutionary programme on the nationalquestion. 
 From what Parabellum says, it appears that, in the name of the socialist revolution, he scornfully rejects a consist-ently revolutionary programme in the sphere of democracy. 
He is wrong to do so. 
 The proletariat cannot be victoriousexcept through democracy, i. 
e. 
, by giving full effect todemocracy and by linking with each step of its struggledemocratic demands formulated in the most resolute terms. 
 It is absurd to contrapose the socialist revolution and the revolutionary struggle against capitalism to a single prob-lem of democracy, in this case, the national question. 
 Wemust combine the revolutionary struggle against capitalism with a revolutionary programme and tactics on all demo-cratic demands: a republic, a militia, the popular election of officials, equal rights for women, the self-determination of nations, etc. 
 While capitalism exists, these demands—allof them—can only be accomplished as an exception, and eventhen in an incomplete and distorted form. 
 Basing ourselveson the democracy already achieved, and exposing its incom-pleteness under capitalism, we demand the overthrow of capitalism, the expropriation of the bourgeoisie, as a necessary basis both for the abolition of the poverty of themasses and for the complete and all-round institution of all democratic reforms. 
 Some of these reforms will be startedbefore the overthrow of the bourgeoisie, others in the course of that overthrow, and still others after it. 
 The social revo-lution is not a single battle, but a period covering a series of battles over all sorts of problems of economic and demo-cratic reform, which are consummated only by the expro-priation of the bourgeoisie. 
 It is for the sake of this final aimthat we must formulate every one of our democratic demands in a consistently revolutionary way. 
 It is quite conceivable that the workers of some particular country will overthrow the bourgeoisie before even a single fundamental democratic reform has been fully achieved. 
 It is, however, quite inconceivable that the proletariat, as a historical class, will be able to defeat the bourgeoisie, unless it is prepared for that by being educated in the spirit of the most consistent and resolutely revolutionary democracy. 
 Imperialism means the progressively mounting oppression of the nations of the world by a handful of Great Powers;it means a period of wars between the latter to extendand consolidate the oppression of nations; it means a period in which the masses of the people are deceived by hypocriti-cal social-patriots, i. 
e. 
, individuals who, under the pretext of the “freedom of nations”, “the right of nations to self-determination”, and “defence of the fatherland”, justifyand defend the oppression of the majority of the world’snations by the Great Powers. 
 That is why the focal point in the Social-Democratic programme must be that division of nations into oppressorand oppressed which forms the essence of imperialism, and is deceitfully evaded by the social-chauvinists and Kautsky. 
 This division is not significant from the angle of bourgeoispacifism or the philistine Utopia of peaceful competition among independent nations under capitalism, but it is most significant from the angle of the revolutionary struggleagainst imperialism. 
 It is from this division that our defi-nition of the “right of nations to self-determination” mustfollow, a definition that is consistently democratic, revolu-tionary, and in accord with the general task of the immedi-ate struggle for socialism. 
 It is for that right, and in a struggle to achieve sincere recognition for it, that theSocial-Democrats of the oppressor nations must demand thatthe oppressed nations should have the right of secession,for otherwise recognition of equal rights for nations andof international working-class solidarity would in fact be merely empty phrase-mongering, sheer hypocrisy. 
 On the other hand, the Social-Democrats of the oppressed nationsmust attach prime significance to the unity and the mergingof the workers of the oppressed nations with those of theoppressor nations; otherwise these Social-Democrats willinvoluntarily become the allies of their own national bour-geoisie , which always betrays the interests of the people and of democracy, and is always ready, in its turn, to annex territory and oppress other nations. 
 The way in which the national question was posed at the end of the sixties of the past century may serve as an instructive example. 
 The petty-bourgeois democrats, to whom any thought of the class struggle and of the socialistrevolution was wholly alien, pictured to themselves a Utopiaof peaceful competition among free and equal nations, undercapitalism. 
 In examining the immediate tasks of the socialrevolution, the Proudhonists totally “negated” the national question and the right of nations to self-determination. 
 Marx ridiculed French Proudhonism and showed the affinitybetween it and French chauvinism. 
 (“All Europe must andwill sit quietly on their hindquarters until the gentlemen inFrance abolish ‘poverty’ .... 
 By the negation of nationalities they appeared, quite unconsciously, to understand their absorption by the model French nation. 
”) Marx demanded the separation of Ireland from Britain “although after the separation there may come federation”, demanding it, notfrom the standpoint of the petty-bourgeois Utopia of apeaceful capitalism, or from considerations of “justice forIreland”, 168 but from the standpoint of the interests of the revolutionary struggle of the proletariat of the oppressor , i. 
e. 
, British , nation against capitalism. 
 The freedom of that nation has been cramped and mutilated by the fact that it has oppressed another nation. 
 The British prole-tariat’s internationalism would remain a hypocritical phraseif they did not demand the separation of Ireland. 
 Never in favour of petty states, or the splitting up of states in general, or the principle of federation, Marx considered theseparation of an oppressed nation to be a step towards federa-tion, and consequently, not towards a split, but towardsconcentration, both political and economic, but concen-tration on the basis of democracy. 
 As Parabellum sees it, Marx was probably waging an “illusory struggle” in demand-ing separation for Ireland. 
 Actually, however, this demandalone presented a consistently revolutionary programme; it alone was in accord with internationalism; it alone advo-cated concentration along non-imperialist lines. 
 The imperialism of our days has led to a situation in which the Great-Power oppression of nations has become general. 
 The view that a struggle must be conducted againstthe social-chauvinism of the dominant nations, who are now engaged in an imperialist war to enhance the oppression of nations, and are oppressing most of the world’s nations and most of the earth’s population—this view must be de-cisive, cardinal and basic in the national programme ofSocial-Democracy. 
 Take a glance at the present trends in Social-Democratic thinking on this subject. 
 The petty-bourgeois Utopians,who dreamt of equality and peace among nations under capitalism, have been succeeded by the social-imperialists. 
 In combating the former, Parabellum is tilting at windmills,thereby unwittingly playing in the hands of the social-imperialists. 
 What is the social-chauvinists’ programme onthe national question? They either entirely deny the right to self-determina-tion, using arguments like those advanced by Parabellum (Cunow, Parvus, the Russian opportunists Semkovsky,Liebman, and others), or they recognise that right in a patentlyhypocritical fashion, namely, without applying it to thosevery nations that are oppressed by their own nation or by hermilitary allies (Plekhanov, Hyndman, all the pro-French patriots, then Scheidemann, etc. 
, etc. 
). 
 The most plausible formulation of the social-chauvinist lie, one that is there-fore most dangerous to the proletariat, is provided byKautsky. 
 In word, he is in favour of the self-determina-tion of nations; in word, he is for the Social-DemocraticParty “ die Selbständigkeit der Nationen allseitig [!] und rückhaltlos [?] achtet und fordert ”* (Die Neue Zeit No. 
 33, II, S. 
 241, May 21, 1915). 
 In deed , however, he has adapted the national programme to the prevailing social-chauvinism,distorted and docked it; he gives no precise definition ofthe duties of the socialists in the oppressor nations, andpatently falsifies the democratic principle itself when he says that to demand “state independence” ( staatliche Selb-ständigkeit ) for every nation would mean demanding “too much” (“ zu viel ”, Die Neue Zeit No. 
 33, II, S. 
 77, April 16, 1915). 
 “National autonomy”, if you please, is enough!The principal question, the one the imperialist bourgeoisiewill not permit discussion of, namely, the question of the *“comprehensively [!] and unreservedly [?] respecting and demanding the independence of nations”— Ed. 
 boundaries of a state that is built upon the oppression of nations, is evaded by Kautsky, who, to please that bourgeoi-sie, has thrown out of the programme what is most essen-tial. 
 The bourgeoisie are ready to promise all the “nationalequality” and “national autonomy” you please, so long asthe proletariat remain within the framework of legalityand “peacefully” submit to them on the question of the stateboundaries ! Kautsky has formulated the national programme of Social-Democracy in a reformist, not a revolutionary man-ner. 
 Parabellum’s national programme, or, to be more precise, his assurances that “we are against annexations”, has the wholehearted backing of the Parteivorstand , * Kautsky, Plekhanov and Co. 
, for the very reason that the programme does not expose the dominant social-patriots. 
 Bourgeois paci-fists would also endorse that programme. 
 Parabellum’ssplendid general programme (“a revolutionary mass struggle against capitalism”) serves him—as it did the Proudhonistsof the sixties—not for the drawing up, in conformitywith it and in its spirit, of a programme on the national question that is uncompromising and equally revolutionary, but in order to leave the way open to the social-patriots. 
In our imperialist times most socialists throughout theworld are members of nations that oppress other nationsand strive to extend that oppression. 
 That is why our “struggleagainst annexations” will be meaningless and will not scare the social-patriots in the least, unless we declare that a socialist of an oppressor nation who does not conduct bothpeacetime and wartime propaganda in favour of freedom ofsecession for oppressed nations, is no socialist and no in-ternationalist, but a chauvinist! The socialist of an oppressornation who fails to conduct such propaganda in defiance of government bans, i. 
e. 
, in the free, i. 
e. 
, in the illegal press, is a hypocritical advocate of equal rights for nations! Parabellum has only a single sentence on Russia, which has not yet completed its bourgeois-democratic revolu-tion: “ Selbst das wirtschaftlich sehr zurückgebliebene Russ-land hat in der Haltung der Polnischen , Lettischen , Armeni-*The Executive of the German Social-Democratic Party— Ed. 
 schen Bourgeoisie gezeigt , dass nicht nur die militärische Bewachung es ist , die die Völker in diesem ‘Zuchthaus der Völker ’ zusammenhält , sondern Bedürfnisse der kapitalis-tischen Expansion , für die das ungeheure Territorium ein glänzender Boden der Entwicklung ist. 
 ”* That is not a “Social-Democratic standpoint” but a liberal-bourgeois one, not an internationalist, but a Great-Russian chauvinist standpoint. 
 Parabellum, who is such a fine fighter against the German social-patriots, seems to have little knowledge of Russian chauvinism. 
 For Parabel-lum’s wording to be converted into a Social-Democraticpostulate and for Social-Democratic conclusions to be drawnfrom it, it should be modified and supplemented as follows: Russia is a prison of peoples, not only because of the military-feudal character of tsarism and not only because the Great-Russian bourgeoisie support tsarism, but alsobecause the Polish, etc. 
, bourgeoisie have sacrificed the free-dom of nations and democracy in general for the interestsof capitalist expansion. 
 The Russian proletariat cannotmarch at the head of the people towards a victorious demo-cratic revolution (which is its immediate task), or fight alongside its brothers, the proletarians of Europe, for asocialist revolution, without immediately demanding, fullyand “ rückhaltlos ”, ** for all nations oppressed by tsarism, the freedom to secede from Russia. 
 This we demand, not inde-pendently of our revolutionary struggle for socialism, but because this struggle will remain a hollow phrase if it is not linked up with a revolutionary approach to all questions ofdemocracy, including the national question. 
 We demandfreedom of self-determination, i. 
e. 
, independence, i. 
e. 
, freedom of secession for the oppressed nations, not becausewe have dreamt of splitting up the country economically, or of the ideal of small states, but, on the contrary, because we want large states and the closer unity and even fusion of *“Even economically very backward Russia has proved, in the stand taken by the Polish, Lettish and Armenian bourgeoisiethat it is not only the military guard that keeps together the peoplesin that ‘prison of peoples’, but also the need for capitalist expan-sion, for which the vast territory is a splendid ground for develop-ment. 
”— Ed. 
 **“unreservedly”. 
— Ed. 
 nations, only on a truly democratic, truly internationalist basis, which is inconceivable without the freedom to secede. 
 Just as Marx, in 1869, demanded the separation of Ireland, not for a split between Ireland and Britain, but for a sub-sequent free union between them, not so as to secure “jus-tice for Ireland”, but in the interests of the revolutionarystruggle of the British proletariat, we in the same wayconsider the refusal of Russian socialists to demand freedom of self-determination for nations, in the sense we have indicated above, to be a direct betrayal of democracy, in-ternationalism and socialism. 
 Written in German not earlier Published according to than October 16 (29), 1915 the translation from the German First published in 1927made by N. 
 K. 
 Krupskaya, in Lenin Miscellany VIwith corrections by V. 
 I. 
 Lenin ON THE TWO LINES IN THE REVOLUTION In Prizyv169 (No. 
 3), Mr. 
 Plekhanov attempts to present the fundamental theoretical problem of the impending revolution in Russia. 
 He quotes a passage from Marx to the effect that the 1789 Revolution in France followed an ascend-ing line, whereas the 1848 Revolution followed a descendingline. 
 In the first instance, power passed gradually fromthe moderate party to the more radical—the Constitutional-ists, the Girondists, the Jacobins. 
 In the second instance, the reverse took place—the proletariat, the petty-bourgeois democrats, the bourgeois republicans, Napoleon III. 
 “It isdesirable,” our author infers, “that the Russian revolutionshould be directed along an ascending line”, i. 
e. 
, that powershould first pass to the Cadets and Octobrists, then to theTrudoviks, and then to the socialists. 
 The conclusion to be drawn from this reasoning is, of course, that the Left wing in Russia is unwise in not wishing to support the Cadetsand in prematurely discrediting them. 
 Mr. 
 Plekhanov’s “theoretical” reasoning is another example of the substitution of liberalism for Marxism. 
 Mr. 
 Plekha-nov reduces the matter to the question of whether the “strategic conceptions” of the advanced elements were “right” or wrong. 
 Marx’s reasoning was different. 
 He noted a fact:in each case the revolution proceeded in a different fashion;he did not however seek the explanation of this difference in “strategic conceptions”. 
 From the Marxist point of viewit is ridiculous to seek it in conceptions. 
 It should be sought in the difference in the alignment of classes . 
 Marx himself wrote that in 1789 the French bourgeoisie united withthe peasantry and that in 1848 petty-bourgeois democracy betrayed the proletariat. 
 Mr. 
 Plekhanov knows Marx’s opinion on the matter, but he does not mention it, because he wants to depict Marx as looking like Struve. 
 In the France of 1789, it was a question of overthrowing absolutismand the nobility. 
 At the then prevalent level of economicand political development, the bourgeoisie believed in aharmony of interests; it had no fears about the stability ofits rule and was prepared to enter into an alliance with the peasantry. 
 That alliance secured the complete victory of the revolution. 
 In 1848 it was a question of the prole-tariat overthrowing the bourgeoisie. 
 The proletariat wasunable to win over the petty bourgeoisie, whose treacheryled to the defeat of the revolution. 
 The ascending line of1789 was a form of revolution in which the mass of the people defeated absolutism. 
 The descending line of 1848 was a form of revolution in which the betrayal of the prole-tariat by the mass of the petty bourgeoisie led to thedefeat of the revolution. 
 Mr. 
 Plekhanov is substituting vulgar idealism for Marxism when he reduces the question to one of “strategic conceptions”, not of the alignment of classes. 
 The experience of the 1905 Revolution and of the subse-quent counter-revolutionary period in Russia teaches usthat in our country two lines of revolution could be observed, in the sense that there was a struggle between two classes—the proletariat and the liberal bourgeoisie—for leadership of the masses. 
 The proletariat advanced in a revolutionary fashion, and was leading the democratic peasantry towardsthe overthrow of the monarchy and the landowners. 
 That thepeasantry revealed revolutionary tendencies in the demo-cratic sense was proved on a mass scale by all the great political events: the peasant insurrections of 1905-06, the unrest in the army in the same years, the “Peasants’ Union” of 1905, and the first two Dumas, in which the peasant Trudo-viks stood not only “to the left of the Cadets”, but were also more revolutionary than the intellectual Social-Revolu-tionaries and Trudoviks. 
 Unfortunately, this is often for-gotten, but still it is a fact. 
 Both in the Third and in the Fourth Dumas the peasant Trudoviks, despite their weak-ness, showed that the peasant masses were opposed to the landed proprietors. 
 The first line of the Russian bourgeois-democratic revo-lution, as deduced from the facts and not from “strategic” prattle, was marked by a resolute struggle of the prole-tariat, which was irresolutely followed by the peasantry. 
Both these classes fought against the monarchy and thelandowners. 
 The lack of strength and resolution in theseclasses led to their defeat (although a partial breach was madein the edifice of the autocracy). 
 The behaviour of the liberal bourgeoisie was the second line. 
 We Bolsheviks have always affirmed, especially sincethe spring of 1906, that this line was represented by theCadets and Octobrists as a single force. 
 The 1905-15 decade has proved the correctness of our view. 
 At the decisive mo-ments of the struggle, the Cadets, together with the Octobrists, betrayed democracy and went to the aid of the tsar and the landowners. 
 The “liberal” line of the Russian revolutionwas marked by the “pacification” and the fragmentarycharacter of the masses’ struggle so as to enable thebourgeoisie to make peace with the monarchy. 
 Theinternational background to the Russian revolution and the strength of the Russian proletariat rendered this behaviour of the liberals inevitable. 
 The Bolsheviks helped the proletariat consciously to follow the first line, to fight with supreme courage andto lead the peasants. 
 The Mensheviks were constantly slip-ping into the second line; they demoralised the proletariat by adapting its movement to the liberals—from the invita-tion to enter the Bulygin Duma (August 1905), to the CadetCabinet in 1906 and the bloc with the Cadets against democracy in 1907. 
 (From Mr. 
 Plekhanov’s point of view, wewill observe parenthetically, the “correct strategic concep-tions” of the Cadets and the Mensheviks suffered A defeat at the time. 
 Why was that? Why did the masses not pay heed to the wise counsels of Mr. 
 Plekhanov and the Cadets, whichwere publicised a hundred times more extensively than theadvice from the Bolsheviks?) Only these trends—the Bolshevik and the Menshevik— manifested themselves in the politics of the masses in 1904-08, and later, in 1908-14. 
 Why was that? It was because only these trends had firm class roots—the former in theproletariat, the latter in the liberal bourgeoisie. 
 Today we are again advancing towards a revolution. 
 Everybody sees that. 
 Khvostov himself says that the mood of the peasants is reminiscent of 1905-06. 
 And again we see the same two lines in the revolution, the same alignment of classes, only modified by a changed international situation. 
In 1905, the entire European bourgeoisie supported tsarismand helped it either with their thousands of millions (theFrench), or by training a counter-revolutionary army (the Germans). 
 In 1914 the European war flared up. 
 Everywhere the bourgeoisie vanquished the proletariat for a time, andswept them into the turbid spate of nationalism and chauvin-ism. 
 In Russia, as hitherto, the petty-bourgeois masses ofthe people, primarily the peasantry, form the majority ofthe population. 
 They are oppressed first and foremost by the landowners. 
 Politically, part of the peasantry are dor-mant, and part vacillate between chauvinism (“the defeatof Germany”, “defence of the fatherland”) and revolutionaryspirit. 
 The political spokesmen of these masses—and of theirvacillation—are, on the one hand, the Narodniks (theTrudoviks and Social-Revolutionaries), and on the other hand, the opportunist Social-Democrats ( Nashe Dyelo , Ple-khanov, the Chkheidze group, the Organising Committee),who since 1910, have been determinedly following the roadof liberal-labour politics, and in 1915 have achieved thesocial-chauvinism of Potresov, Cherevanin, Levitsky, andMaslov, or have demanded “unity” with them. 
 This state of affairs patently indicates the task of the proletariat. 
 That task is the waging of a supremely coura-geous revolutionary struggle against the monarchy (uti-lising the slogans of the January Conference of 1912, the“three pillars”), a struggle that will sweep along in itswake all the democratic masses, i. 
e. 
, mainly the peasantry. 
 At the same time, the proletariat must wage a ruthless struggle against chauvinism, a struggle in alliance with theEuropean proletariat for the socialist revolution in Europe. 
 The vacillation of the petty bourgeoisie is no accident; itis inevitable, for it logically follows from their class stand. 
The war crisis has strengthened the economic and political factors that are impelling the petty bourgeoisie, including the peasantry, to the left. 
 Herein lies the objective founda-tion of the full possibility of victory for the democratic revolution in Russia. 
 There is no need here for us to prove that the objective conditions in Western Europe are ripe for a socialist revolution; this was admitted before the war by all influential socialists in all advanced countries. 
 To bring clarity into the alignment of classes in the impending revolution is the main task of a revolutionaryparty. 
 This task is being shirked by the Organising Commit-tee, which within Russia remains a faithful ally to Nashe Dyelo , and abroad utters meaningless “Left” phrases. 
 This task is being wrongly tackled in Nashe Slovo by Trotsky, who is repeating his “original” 1905 theory and refuses togive some thought to the reason why, in the course of tenyears, life has been bypassing this splendid theory. 
 From the Bolsheviks Trotsky’s original theory has borrowed their call for a decisive proletarian revolutionary struggle and for the conquest of political power by the pro-letariat, while from the Mensheviks it has borrowed “repu-diation” of the peasantry’s role. 
 The peasantry, he asserts,are divided into strata, have become differentiated; theirpotential revolutionary role has dwindled more and more; in Russia a “national” revolution is impossible; “we are living in the era of imperialism,” says Trotsky, and “impe-rialism does not contrapose the bourgeois nation to the oldregime, but the proletariat to the bourgeois nation. 
” Here we have an amusing example of playing with the word “imperialism”. 
 If, in Russia , the proletariat already stands contraposed to the “bourgeois nation”, then Russia is facing a socialist revolution (!), and the slogan “Confis-cate the landed estates ” (repeated by Trotsky in 1915, fol-lowing the January Conference of 1912), is incorrect; inthat case we must speak, not of a “revolutionary workers’”government, but of a “workers’ socialist ” government! The length Trotsky’s muddled thinking goes to is evident from his phrase that by their resoluteness the proletariatwill attract the “ non-proletarian [!] popular masses” as well (No. 
 217)! Trotsky has not realised that if the proletariatinduce the non-proletarian masses to confiscate the landedestates and overthrow the monarchy, then that will be the consummation of the “national bourgeois revolution” in Russia; it will be a revolutionary-democratic dictatorshipof the proletariat and the peasantry! A whole decade—the great decade of 190-15—has shown the existence of two and only two class lines in the Russian revolution. 
 The differentiation of the peasantry has enhanced the class struggle within them; it has arousedvery many hitherto politically dormant elements. 
 It hasdrawn the rural proletariat closer to the urban proletariat(the Bolsheviks have insisted ever since 1906 that the for-mer should be separately organised, and they included this demand in the resolution of the Menshevik congress in Stock-holm). 
 However, the antagonism between the peasantry,on the one hand, and the Markovs, Romanovs and Khvos-tovs, on the other, has become stronger and more acute. 
This is such an obvious truth that not even the thousands of phrases in scores of Trotsky’s Paris articles will “refute” it. 
 Trotsky is in fact helping the liberal-labour politicians in Russia, who by “repudiation” of the role of the peasantryunderstand a refusal to raise up the peasants for the revo-lution! That is the crux of the matter today. 
 The proletariat are fighting, and will fight valiantly, to win power, for a republic, for the confiscation of the land, i. 
e. 
, to win over the peasantry, make full use of their revolutionary powers, and get the “ non-proletarian masses of the people” to take part in liberating bourgeois Russia from military-feudal “imperialism” (tsarism). 
 The proletariat will at once utilisethis ridding of bourgeois Russia of tsarism and the rule of the landowners, not to aid the rich peasants in their struggle against the rural workers, but to bring about the socialistrevolution in alliance with the proletarians of Europe. 
 Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 48, Published according to November 20, 1915 the text in Sotsial-Demokrat AT THE UTTERMOST LIMIT The transformation of individuals from radical Social-Democrats and revolutionary Marxists into social-chau-vinists is a phenomenon common to all the belligerents. 
 The spate of chauvinism is so overwhelming that on all sides it has carried along with it a number of Left-wingSocial-Democrats who are spineless or have outlived them-selves. 
 Parvus, who showed himself to be an adventurer asfar back as the Russian revolution, has now really reachedthe uttermost limit, this in his little magazine, Die Glocke 170. 
 With an incredibly brazen air of self-satisfaction,he has taken the German opportunists under his wing. 
 Heflouts the beliefs he once cherished, and has forgotten thestruggle between the revolutionary and the opportunisttrends, and their history in the international Social-Demo-cratic movement. 
 With the bounce of a columnist confident of the bourgeoisie’s approval, he pats Marx on the shoulder, “correcting” him, without a vestige of conscientious orattentive criticism. 
 He treats a certain Engels withundisguised contempt, and defends Britain’s pacifists andinternationalists and Germany’s nationalists and jingoists. 
Rebuking the British social-patriots, whom he calls chauvin-ists and toadies to the bourgeoisie, he at the same time lauds the German social-patriots as revolutionary Social-Demo-crats and exchanges embraces with Lensch, Haenisch,Grunwald. 
 He fawns upon Hindenburg, assuring his readersthat “the German General Staff has taken a stand for a revo-lution in Russia”, and publishing servile paeans to this “embodiment of the German people’s soul”, its “mighty revo-lutionary sentiment”. 
 He promises Germany a painlesstransition to socialism through an alliance between the conservatives and part of the socialists, and through “bread ration cards”. 
 Like the petty coward he is, he condescendingly semi-approves of the Zimmerwald Conference, pretending not to have noticed in its manifesto the expressions directedagainst all shades of social-chauvinism, from the Parvusand Plekhanov variety, to that of Kolb and Kautsky. 
 In all six issues of his little journal there is not a single honest thought or earnest argument or sincere article. 
 It is nothing but a cesspool of German chauvinism covered over with a coarsely painted signboard, which alleges it representsthe interests of the Russian revolution! It is perfectlynatural for this cesspool to come in for praise from suchopportunists as Kolb and the editors of the Chemnitz Volksstimme . 
 171 Mr. 
 Parvus has the effrontery to publicly declare it his “mission” “to serve as an ideological link between thearmed German proletariat and the revolutionary Russianproletariat”. 
 It is enough to expose this clownish phrase tothe ridicule of the Russian workers. 
 If Prizyv of Messrs. 
 Plekhanov, Bunakov and Co. 
 has won full approval from the chauvinists and the Khvostovs in Russia, then Mr. 
 Parvus’s Die Glocke is the organ of apostasy and grovelling flunkeyism in Germany. 
 In this connection another useful aspect of the present war should be noted. 
 Not only are its quick-firing gunskilling opportunism and anarchism, but the war itself is stripping the mask off the adventurers and renegades of socialism. 
 It is to the proletariat’s advantage that historyhas started this preliminary purge of its movement on theeve of the socialist revolution, not during its course. 
 Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 48, Published according to November 20, 1915 the text in Sotsial-Demokrat LETTE R TO THE SECRETARY OF THE SOCIALIS T PROPAGAND A LEAG UE172 Dear Comrades! * We are extremely glad to get your leaflet. 
 Your appeal to the members of the Socialist Party to struggle for a new International, for clear-cut revolutionary socialism as taughtby Marx and Engels, and against the opportunism, especiallyagainst those who are in favor of working class participationin a war of defence, corresponds fully with the positionour party (Social-Democratic Labor Party of Russia, Central Committee ) has taken from the beginning of this war and has always taken during more than ten years. 
 We send you our sincerest greetings & best wishes of success in our fight for true internationalism. 
 In our press & in our propaganda we differ from your programme in several points & we think it is quite necessarythat we expose you briefly these points in order to make im-mediate & serious steps for the coordination of the interna-tional strife of the incompromisingly revolutionary Social-ists especially Marxists in all countries. 
 We criticise in the most severe manner the old, Second (1889-1914) International, we declare it dead & not worth to be restored on old basis. 
 But we never say in our press that too great emphasis has been heretofore placed upon so-called“Immediate Demands”, and that thereby the socialismcan be diluted: we say & we prove that all bourgeois parties,all parties except the working-class revolutionary Party, areliars & hypocrites when they speak about reforms. 
 We try to help the working class to get the smallest possible but *This letter was written by Lenin in English. 
— Ed. 
 real improvement (economic & political) in their situation & we add always that no reform can be durable, sincere, seri-ous if not seconded by revolutionary methods of struggle of the masses. 
 We preach always that a socialist party notuniting this struggle for reforms with the revolutionarymethods of working-class movement can become a sect, canbe severed from the masses, & that that is the most perni-cious menace to the success of the clear-cut revolutionary socialism. 
 We defend always in our press the democracy in the party. 
 But we never speak against the centralization of the party. 
We are for the democratic centralism. 
 We say that the cen-tralization of the German Labor movement is not a feeblebut a strong and good feature of it. 
 The vice of the present Social-Democratic Party of Germany consists not in the cen-tralization but in the preponderance of the opportunists,which should be excluded from the party especially nowafter their treacherous conduct in the war. 
 If in any givencrisis the small group (for instance our Central Committeeis a small group) can act for directing the mighty mass in a revolutionary direction , it would be very good. 
 And in all crises the masses can not act immediately, the masses wantto be helped by the small groups of the central institutionsof the parties. 
 Our Central Committee quite at the begin-ning of this war, in September 1914, has directed the massesnot to accept the lie about “the war of defence” & to break off with the opportunists & the “would-be-socialists-jingoes” (we call so the “Socialists” who are now in favor of the war of defence). 
 We think that this centralistic measureof our Central Committee was useful & necessary. 
 We agree with you that we must be against craft Union-ism & in favor of industrial Unionism, i. 
e. 
 of big, central-ized Trade Unions & in favor of the most active participa-tion of all members of party in all economic struggles & in all trade union & cooperative organizations of the working class. 
 But we consider that such people as Mr. 
 Legien inGermany & Mr. 
 Gompers in the U. 
 St. 
 are bourgeois andthat their policy is not a socialist but a nationalistic, middle class policy. 
 Mr. 
 Legien, Mr. 
 Gompers & similar persons are not the representatives of working class, they represent thearistocracy & bureaucracy of the working class. 
 First page of Lenin’s letter to the Secretary of the Socialist Propaganda League. 
 November 1915 (in English) Reduced First page of Lenin’s letter to the Secretary of the Socialist Propaganda League. 
 November 1915 (in English) Reduced We entirely sympathize with you when in political action you claim the “mass action” of the workers. 
 The German revo-lutionary & internationalist Socialists claim it also. 
 In our press we try to define with more details what must beunderstood by political mass action, as f. 
 i. 
 political strikes(very usual in Russia), street demonstrations and civil warprepared by the present imperialist war betweennations. 
 We do not preach unity in the present (prevailing in the Second International) socialist parties. 
 On the contrary wepreach secession with the opportunists. 
 The war is the best object-lesson. 
 In all countries the opportunists, their lead-ers, their most influential dailies & reviews are for the war, in other words, they have in reality united with “their” national bourgeoisie (middle class, capitalists) against the proletarian masses. 
 You say, that in America there are alsoSocialists who have expressed themselves in favor of theparticipation in a war of defence. 
 We are convinced, thatunity with such men is an evil. 
 Such unity is unity with the national middle class & capitalists, and a division with the international revolutionary working class. 
 And we are for secession with nationalistic opportunists and unitywith international revolutionary Marxists & working-classparties. 
 We never object in our press to the unity of S. 
P. 
 & S. 
L. 
P. 
 in America. 
 173 We always quote letters from Marx & Engels (especially to Sorge, active member of American socialist movement), where both condemn the sectariancharacter of the S. 
L. 
P. 
 We fully agree with you in your criticism of the old International. 
 We have participated in the conference ofZimmerwald (Switzerland) 5-8. 
IX. 
 1915. 
 We have formed there a left wing , and have proposed our resolution & our draught of a manifesto. 
 We have just published these docu-ments in German & I send them to you (with the Germantranslation of our small book about “Socialism & War”),hoping that in your League there are probably comrades,that know German. 
 If you could help us to publish these things in English (it is possible only in America and later on we should send it to England), we would gladly acceptyour help. 
 In our struggle for true internationalism & against “jingo-socialism” we always quote in our press the example of the opportunist leaders of the S. 
P. 
 in America, who are in favor of restrictions of the immigration of Chinese andJapanese workers (especially after the Congress of Stutt-gart, 1907, & against the decisions of Stuttgart). 
 We think that one can not be internationalist & be at the same time infavor of such restrictions. 
 And we assert that Socialists in America, especially English Socialists, belonging to the rul-ing, and oppressing nation, who are not against any restric-tions of immigration, against the possession of colonies(Hawaii) and for the entire freedom of colonies, that suchSocialists are in reality jingoes. 
 For conclusion I repeat once more best greetings & wishes for your League. 
 We should be very glad to have a further information from you & to unite our struggle against oppor-tunism & for the true internationalism. 
 Yours N. 
 Lenin N. 
B. 
 There are two Soc. 
-Dem. 
 parties in Russia. 
 Our party (“ Central Committee”) is against opportunism. 
 The other party (“ Organization Committee”) is opportunist. 
 We are against the unity with them. 
 You can write to our official address (Bibliothèque russe. 
 For the C. 
 K. 
 7 rue Hugo de Senger. 
 7. 
 Geneve. 
 Switzerland). 
But better write to my personal address: Wl. 
 Ulianow. 
 Seidenweg 4a, III Berne . 
 Switzerland. 
 Written in English before November 9 (23), 1915 First published in 1924 Published according to in Lenin Miscellany II the manuscript SOCIAL -CHAUVINIST POLICY BEHIND A COVER OF INTERNATIONALIST PHRASES How are political facts related to political literature, political events to political slogans, and political reality to political ideology? This question is now of fundamentalsignificance for an understanding of the entire crisis ofthe International, since any crisis, even any turning point,in a development inevitably leads to a discrepancy betweenthe old form and the new content. 
 We say nothing of the fact that bourgeois society is continually producing politicians who love to assert they belong to no class, and opportunistswho love to call themselves socialists, both of whom delib-erately and systematically deceive the masses with the mostflorid and “radical” words. 
 In times of crisis, however,even well-meaning participants therein very often reveal a discrepancy between word and deed. 
 The great and progres-sive significance of all crises, even the gravest, most arduousand painful, lies in the tremendous speed, force and claritywith which they expose and sweep aside rotten phrases, evenif well meaning, and rotten institutions even if they arebuilt on the best of intentions. 
 The outstanding fact in the life of Russian Social-Democ-racy today is the elections of St. 
 Petersburg workers tothe war industries committees. 
 For the first time duringthe war, these elections have drawn masses of the proletar-ians into a discussion and solution of basic problems ofpresent-day politics; they have revealed the real picture of the state of affairs within Social-Democracy as a mass party. 
 What has been revealed is that there are two currentsand only two: one is revolutionary and internationalist, genuinely proletarian, organised by our Party, and against defence of the fatherland; the other is the “defenc e” or social-chauvinist current, a bloc of the Nashe Dyelo people (i. 
e. 
, the backbone of the liquidators), the Plekhanovites, Narod-niks and non-partisans, this bloc being backed by the entire bourgeois press and all the Black Hundreds in Russia, which proves the bourgeois and non-proletarian essence of the bloc’s policy. 
 Such are the facts, the reality. 
 But what about slogans and ideology? The St. 
 Petersburg Rabocheye Utro No. 
 2 (October 22),174 the collection of articles issued by the Organising Committee crowd (The International and War No. 
 1, November 30, 1915), and the latest issues of Nashe Slovo provide an answer which should give food for hard thinking by anyone interested in politics in a way different from the interest Gogol’s Petrushka175 took in reading. 
 Let us examine the content and significance of this ideology. 
 The St. 
 Petersburg Rabocheye Utro is the most important document. 
 It is here that the leaders of liquidationism and social-chauvinism get together with Mr. 
 Gvozdev, the informer. 
 Those people know well what preceded the September 27 elections, and what took place at the elections. 
 They were able to throw a veil over their bloc with the Plekhanovites, the Narodniks and non-partisans, and they did so. 
 They said not a word about the bloc’s significance, or about the relative numerical strength of its various ele-ments. 
 It was to their advantage to conceal such a “trifle” (Mr. 
 Gvozdev and his Rabocheye Utro friends undoubtedly possessed the relevant information), and they concealed it. 
 But even they were unable to invent a third group apart from the Ninety and the Eighty-one. 
 It is impossible to lie on the spot, in St. 
 Petersburg, in face of the workers, by trump-ing up a “third” group, fiction about which comes from an “anonymous contributor in Copenhagen ”176 writing in the German press and Nashe Slovo. 
 This is impossible, because sane people will never lie if they know that they cannot escape summary exposure. 
 That is why Rabocheye Utro has published the article by K. 
 Oransky177 (an old acquaint-ance!) entitled “Two Stands”, in which he gives a detailed analysis of the stands taken by the Ninety and the Eighty-one groups, without saying a word about the third stand. 
 We shall note, in passing, that the censor mutilated issue No. 
 2 of Rabocheye Utro almost throughout; there are almost more blank columns than printed ones, but of the articlesonly two were spared: “Two Stands”, and another whichdistorts in the spirit of liberalism the history of 1905; inboth the Bolsheviks were abused for “anarchism” and “boycott-ism”. 
 It is to the tsarist government’s advantage that such things should be written and published! It is not fortuitous that this kind of writing enjoys the monopoly of legalityeverywhere, from despotic Russia to republican France! What, then, are the arguments used by Rabocheye Utro to defend its stand of “defence of the country” or “social-chauvinism”? These are, without exception, examples of evasion and of internationalist phrases! Our stand, they assert, is not at all “national”, not at all in favour of “defence”;we are merely expressing “what is not at all expressed inthe attitude of the first group” (the Ninety group), viz. 
, a“not indifferent attitude to the state of the country”, toits “salvation” “from defeat and ruin”. 
 Our stand, they claim, has been “genuinely internationalist”, while showing the methods and means of “liberating” the country, we were“in agreement [with the first stand!] in appraising theorigin of the war and its socio-political substance”, wewere “in agreement [with the first stand!] in posing thegeneral problem of the international organisation and inter-national work of the proletariat [all this is in dead earnest!] and of democracy in wartime, during literally all periods ofthe development of the world conflict”. 
 We declared in ourinstructions, they say, that, “in the present socio-politicalcircumstances, the working class cannot assume any respon-sibility for the defence of the fatherland”; we, “firmly iden-tified ourselves, in the first place, with the international tasks of democracy”, and “made our contribution to thecurrent of aspirations whose milestones were Copenhagen andZimmerwald”. 
 (That’s the kind of people we are!) We stand,they claim, for the slogan of “peace without annexations ” (italics in Rabocheye Utro ); “to the abstract nature and the cosmopolitan anarchism of the first current, we have coun-terposed the realism and internationalism of our stand andour tactics”. 
 Each of these claims is a gem, to say the least. 
 Besides ignorance and Repetilov-like178 lying, however, all these gems contain a diplomacy that is perfectly sober and cor-rect from the bourgeois point of view. 
 To influence theworkers, the bourgeois must assume the guise of socialists,Social-Democrats, internationalists, and the like, for other-wise they can exert no influence. 
 The Rabocheye Utro group disguise themselves; they apply plenty of paint and powder, prettify themselves, cast sheep eyes all around, and go the limit! They are ready to sign the ZimmerwaldManifesto a hundred times (a slap in the face for thoseZimmerwaldists who signed the Manifesto without combat-ing its timidity or making reservations!) or any other reso-lution on the imperialist nature of the war, or take any oath of allegiance to “internationalism” and “revolutionism” (“liberation of the country” in the censored press being theequivalent of “revolution” in the underground press), if only—if only they are not prevented from calling upon the workersto participate in the war industries committees, i. 
e. 
, in practice to participate in the reactionary war of plunder (“a war of defence”). 
 Only this is action; all the rest is words. 
 Only this is real-ity; all the rest is phrases. 
 Only this is needed by the police, by the tsarist monarchy, Khvostov and the bourgeoisie. 
The clever bourgeois in countries that are cleverer are moretolerant of internationalist and socialist phrases if only par-ticipation in defence is assured, as is evidenced by comment in the French reactionary press regarding the London Con-ference of the socialists of the “Triple Entente”. 
 With thesocialist gentry, one of these papers said, it’s a kind of tic douloureux , a species of nervous malady which forces people involuntarily to repeat the same gesture, the same mus-cular movement, the same word. 
 It is for that reason, the paper said, that “our own” socialists cannot speak aboutanything without repeating the words, “We are international-ists; we stand for social revolution”. 
 This is not dangerous,the bourgeois paper concludes, only a “tic”; what is importantto “us” is their stand for the defence of the country. 
 That is how the clever French and British bourgeois rea-son. 
 If participation in a war of plunder is defended withphrases about democracy, socialism, etc. 
, is this not to the advantage of rapacious governments, the imperialist bourgeoisie? Is it not to the master’s advantage to keep a lackey who swears to all and sundry that his master loves them, and has dedicated his life to their welfare? The Rabocheye Utro people swear by Zimmerwald, and in word separate themselves from the Plekhanovites by declar-ing (No. 
 2) that they “disagree in many things” with them; in practic e, however, they agree with them on the fundamen-tals, participate with them and with their bourgeoisie, in the “defence” institutions of the chauvinist bourgeoisie. 
 The Organising Committee not only swear by Zimmerwald, but “sign” formal declarations; they not only stand aside from the Plekhanovites, but also delegate a certain anony-mous A. 
 M. 
,179 who, sheltering behind his anonymity, declares: “We, who have adhered to the August bloc180 [per-haps A. 
 M. 
 is not one, but two “adherents”?], consider it necessary to state that the Prizyv organisation has greatly exceeded the limits which can be tolerated in our Party, aswe understand them, and that there can be no room withinthe August bloc organisations for members of groups that are bolstering Prizyv ”. 
 What bold people these “adhering” A. 
 M. 
s are, who so unflinchingly speak the naked truth! Of the five persons comprising the “Secretariat Abroad” of the Organising Committee, which has published the col-lection of articles quoted, none wished to come out with socourageous a statement! It follows that the five secretaries are against a break with Plekhanov (not so very long ago Axelrod said that the Menshevik Plekhanov was closer tohim than the internationalist Bolsheviks) but, afraid of theworkers and unwilling to injure their “reputations”, theyprefer to keep it dark; however, they have put forward acouple of anonymous “adherents” so as to make a splash with a cheap and safe internationalism.... 
 On the one hand, some of the secretaries—Martynov, Martov and Astrov—have engaged Nashe Dyelo in a polemic, Martov even coming out with a private opinion opposed to participation in the war industries committees. 
 On theother hand, the Bundist Yonov, who considers himself “Left” of Kosovsky—a man who reflects the Bund’s actual policy— is willingly advanced by the Bundists to cover up theirnationalism; he advocates the “further development of the old tactics [of the Second International, which led to its collapse] but by no means its liquidation”. 
 The editors have supplied Yonov’s article with ambiguous, vapid and diplo-matically evasive reservations, but they do not object toits substance , to a defence of the rotten and opportunist in the “old tactics”. 
 The anonymous A. 
 M. 
s, who have “adhered”to the August bloc, openly defend Nasha Zarya ; even if it did “deviate” from the internationalist stand, yet it “re-jected [?] the Burgfrieden policy for Russia; it recognised the necessity of immediately re-establishing international linksand, to the best of our knowledge [i. 
e. 
, of the adheringanonymous A. 
 M. 
s], it approved of Mankov’s expulsion fromthe Duma group”. 
 An excellent defence! The petty-bourgeoisNarodniks favour the re-establishment of links, Kerensky is opposed to Mankov, but to say that those who have come out in favour of “non-resistance to the war” are opposed to apolicy of a class truce ( Burgfrieden ) means deceiving the workers with empty words. 
 The editors of the Organising Committee’s journal have come out in a body with an article entitled “Dangerous Tendencies”. 
 This is a model of political evasiveness! On the one hand, here are clamorous Left phrases against theauthors of calls for defence of the country (i. 
e. 
, the Moscow andPetrograd social-chauvinists); on the other hand, they write:“It is difficult to judge which party circles both declarations emanated from ”! In reality, there is not the slightest doubt that they emanated “ from the circles ” of Nashe Dyelo , although the contributors to this legally published journalare, of course, not guilty of having drawn up an undergrounddeclaration. 
 Instead of dealing with the ideological rootsof these declarations, and with the full identity betweenthese roots and the liquidationist, social-chauvinist and Nashe Dyelo trends , the Organising Committee crowd have busied themselves with a ridiculous pettifogging that is ofno value for anybody but the police, namely, the personal authorship of members of one circle or another. 
 On the one hand, the editors bluster out threats: we internationalistsof the August bloc, they say, will close our ranks for “the most energetic resistance to defence tendencies” (p. 
 129), for “an uncompromising struggle” (p. 
 126); on the other hand,we find right next to such declarations the following piece /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR of skulduggery: “The line of the Duma group, which has the support of the Organising Committee, has met [hitherto!] with no open opposition” (p. 
 129)! As the authors themselves are well aware, this line consists in an absence of any line, and is a covert defenceof Nashe Dyelo and Rabocheye Utro . 
 Take the most “Left” and the most “principled” article in the collection, the one written by Martov. 
 It will suffice to quote a single sentence expressing the author’s main idea, to see what his adherence to principles is like. 
 “It isself-evident,” he writes, “that if the present crisis shouldlead to the victory of a democratic revolution, to a republic,then the character of the war would radically change”(p. 
 116). 
 All this is a shameless lie. 
 Martov could not but have known that a democratic revolution and a republic mean a bourgeois-democratic revolution and a bourgeois-democratic republic. 
 The character of this war between thebourgeois and imperialist Great Powers would not change a jot were the military-autocratic and feudal imperialism to be swept away in one of these countries. 
 That is because, in such conditions, a purely bourgeois imperialism would not vanish, but would only gain strength . 
 It is for that reason that our paper, issue No. 
 47, declared, in Thesis 9, * that the party of Russia’s proletariat will not defend, in thepresent war, even a fatherland of republicans and revolu-tionaries, whilst they are chauvinists like Plekhanov, the Narodniks, Kautsky, the Nashe Dyelo people, Chkheidze, the Organising Committee, etc. 
 Martov’s evasive phrase in a footnote to p. 
 118 will do him no good. 
 Here, in contradiction to what he says, onp. 
 116, he “doubts” whether bourgeois democracy can fight“against international imperialism” (of course it cannot); he expresses “doubt” whether the bourgeoisie will not turn a 1793 republic into a Gambetta and Clemenceau republic. 
Here the basic theoretical error remains: in 1793 the foremostclass in a French bourgeois revolution fought against Euro-pean pre-revolutionary monarchies, whereas the Russia of 1915 is fighting, not more backward countries, but more advanced countries, which are on the eve of a socialist *See p. 
 403 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 revolution. 
 It follows that, in the war of 1914-15, only a proletariat that is carrying out a victorious socialist revolution, can play the part of the Jacobins of 1793. 
 Consequently, in the present war, the Russian proletariatcould “defend the fatherland” and consider “the characterof the war radically changed”, only and exclusively if the revolution were to put the party of the proletariat inpower, and were to permit only that party to guide the entire force of a revolutionary upheaval and the entire machinery of state towards an instant and direct conclusion of analliance with the socialist proletariat of Germany and Europe( Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 47, Thesis 11). 
 * Martov concludes his article, in which he juggles with sonorous phrases, by dramatically appealing to “Russian Social-Democracy” to “take a clear-cut revolutionary-inter-nationalist stand at the outset of the political crisis”. 
 Thereader who wants to find out whether these dramatic wordsdo not conceal something rotten at the core should ask himselfwhat a political stand is usually taken to mean. 
 It means(1) bringing forward a formulated appraisal of the moment and the tactics to be used, and a series of resolutions, all this on behalf of an organisation (at least on behalf of a “quintetof secretaries”); (2) advancing a militant slogan for thecurrent moment; (3) linking up these two points with action by the proletarian masses and their class-conscious vanguard Martov and Axelrod, the ideological leaders of the “quintet”, have not only failed to do any of these three things, but on all of these points have given practical support to the social-chauvinists , have shielded them! During the sixteen months of war, the five secretaries abroad have not taken a“clear-cut stand”, or any stand at all on the question ofprogramme and tactics. 
 Martov vacillates now to the left, now to the right. 
 Axelrod’s urge is only to the right (see his German pamphlet particularly). 
 Here there is nothing clear,formulated or organised, no stand whatever! “The centralmilitant slogan for the Russian proletariat at the currentmoment,” Martov writes in his own name, “must be a nationalconstituent assembly for the liquidation of both tsarism and the war. 
” This is neither a central nor a militant slogan. 
 *See pp. 
 403-04 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 It is quite useless because it does not reveal the basic social and class content, or the clear-cut political content of the concept of this dual “liquidation”. 
 It is a cheap bourgeois-democratic phrase, not a central, or militant, orproletarian slogan. 
 Finally, on the main issue, i. 
e. 
, connections with the masses in Russia, what Martov and Co. 
 have to offer, is not merely a zero, but a negative quantity. 
 They have noth-ing and nobody behind them. 
 The elections have shown that only the bourgeoisie’s bloc with Rabocheye Utro has some of the masses behind it, whereas reference to the OrganisingCommittee and the Chkheidze group means only shieldingthat bourgeois bloc with falsehoods. 
 Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 49, Published according to December 21, 1915 the text in Sotsial-Demokrat OPPORTUNISM, AND THE COLLAPSE OF THE SECOND INTERNATIONAL It is instructive to compare the attitudes of the vari-ous classes and parties towards the collapse of the Interna-tional, which has been revealed by the 1914-15 war. 
 On one hand, the bourgeoisie extols to the sky those socialists whohave expressed themselves in favour of “defending thefatherland”, i. 
e. 
, in favour of the war and of aiding thebourgeoisie. 
 On the other hand, the bourgeoisie’s moreoutspoken or less diplomatic representatives are expressing malicious joy over the collapse of the International, the collapse of the “illusions” of socialism. 
 Among socialists whoare “defending the fatherland” there are also two shades: the“extremists” like the Germans W. 
 Kolb and W. 
 Heine, whoadmit the collapse of the International, for which they blamethe “revolutionary illusions”; these are out to restore a still more opportunist International. 
 In practice, however, they agree with the “moderates”, the cautious socialist “de-fenders of the fatherland”, such as Kautsky, Renaudel, andVandervelde, who stubbornly deny that the Internationalhas collapsed, consider it merely suspended temporarily,and defend the Second International’s viability and right to exist. 
 Revolutionary Social-Democrats in the various countries recognise the collapse of the Second Internationaland the need to create a Third International. 
 To decide who is right, let us examine an historic docu-ment which bears upon the present war, and carries theunanimous and official signatures of all socialist parties in the world. 
 That document is the Basle Manifesto of 1912. 
 Noteworthy enough, no socialist would, in theory, dare denythe need for a concretely historical analysis of every war. 
 Today, however, none but the “Left” Social-Democrats, who are but few in number, would be so bold as to publicly and definitely repudiate the Basle Manifesto, or declare it erro-neous, or analyse it carefully, comparing its decisions withthe conduct of the socialists after the outbreak of the war. 
 Why is that so? It is because the Basle Manifesto ruth-lessly exposes the wrong reasoning and conduct of themajority of official socialists. 
 There is not a single word in this Manifesto on either the “defence of the fatherland” or the difference between a war of aggression and a war ofdefence! Not a syllable on a subject the official S. 
D. 
 leaders both in Germany and in the Quadruple Entente have beentalking and vociferating about most. 
 In a perfectly clear,precise, and definite manner, the Basle Manifesto analyses the concrete clashes of interests which led towards war in 1912 and brought about war in 1914. 
 The Manifesto says that these areclashes arising on the basis of “capitalist imperialism”,clashes between Austria and Russia for domination over theBalkans, clashes between Britain, France, and Germanyover their “policies of conquest in Asia Minor” (the poli-cies of all of them! ), clashes between Austria and Italy over their attempt to “draw Albania into their sphere of influence”,subject her to their “rule”, and clashes between Britainand Germany because of their mutual “antagonism”, andfurther, because of “tsarism’s attempts to grab Armenia,Constantinople, etc. 
” It will be seen that this applies in full to the present war. 
 The undisguised predatory, imperialist and reactionary character of this war, which is being wagedfor the enslavement of nations, is most clearly recognisedin the Manifesto, which draws the necessary conclusion thatwar “cannot be justified on the slightest pretext of being inthe least in the interests of the people”, that war is prepared “for the sake of the profits of capitalists and ambitions of dynasties”, and that on the part of the workers it would be“a crime to fire at one another”. 
 These propositions contain the fundamentals for an understanding of the radical distinction between two greathistorical periods. 
 One was the period between 1789 and 1871, when, in most cases, wars in Europe were indubitably connected with the most important “interests of the people”, namely, a powerful bourgeois-progressive movement for national liberation which involved millions of people, with the destruction of feudalism, absolutism, and foreign oppression. 
 It was on this basis alone that there arose the concept of “defence of the fatherland”, defence of a bourgeoisnation that is liberating itself from medievalism. 
 Only inthis sense did socialists recognise “defence of the fatherland”. 
Even today it must be recognised in this sense ; for instance, the defence of Persia or China against Russia or Britain, of Turkey against Germany or Russia, of Albania against Austria and Italy, etc. 
 The 1914-15 war, as clearly expressed in the Basle Mani-festo, pertains to an entirely different historical periodand is of an entirely different character. 
 This is a war amongpredators for division of the loot, for the enslavement of other countries. 
 Victory for Russia, Britain, and France means the strangulation of Armenia, Asia Minor, etc. 
—this is stated in the Basle Manifesto. 
 Germany’s victory means the strangulation of Asia Minor, Serbia, Albania, etc. 
This is stated in the selfsame Manifesto, and has been recog-nised by all socialists! All phrases about a war of defence or about the defence of the fatherland by the Great Powers (i. 
e. 
, the great predators), who are fighting for world domi-nation, markets and “spheres of influence”, and the enslave-ment of nations, are false, meaningless and hypocritical!It is not surprising that “socialists” who are in favour of de-fending the fatherland are afraid to recall or to exactly quote the Basle Manifesto, for it exposes their hypocrisy. 
 The Basle Manifesto proves that socialists who stand for the “defence of the fatherland” in the 1914-15 war are socialists only inword and chauvinists in deed. 
 They are social-chauvinists. 
 Recognition of this war as connected with national liberation leads to one line of socialist tactics; recognition of a war as imperialist, predatory and aggressive, leads to another line. 
 The latter has been clearly defined in theBasle Manifesto. 
 The war, it says, will evoke an “economicand political crisis”, which, it continues, must be “utilised”to “hasten the collapse of the rule of capital”. 
 These wordsrecognise that social revolution is ripe , that it is possible , that it is approaching in connection with the war. 
 The “ruling classes” are afraid of a “proletarian revolution”, says theManifesto, quoting the example of the Paris Commune and of 1905, i. 
e. 
, the examples of revolutions, strikes, and civil war. 
 It is a lie for anybody to say that the socialists “have not discussed”, or “have not decided” the question of their attitude towards the war. 
 The Basle Manifesto has decided this question; it has mapped out the line of tactics—thatof proletarian revolutionary action and civil war. 
 It would be erroneous to think that the Basle Manifesto is a piece of empty declamation, a bureaucratic phrase, a none-too-serious threat. 
 Those whom the Manifesto exposes are prepared to say such things. 
 But that is not the truth!The Basle Manifesto sums up the vast amount of propagandaand agitation material of the entire epoch of the SecondInternational, namely, the period between 1889 and 1914. 
This Manifesto summarises , without any exaggeration, millions upon millions of leaflets, press articles, books, and speeches by socialists of all lands. 
 To declare this Manifestoerroneous means declaring the entire Second Internationalerroneous, the work done in decades and decades by allSocial-Democratic parties. 
 To brush aside the Basle Mani-festo means brushing aside the entire history of socialism. 
 The Basle Manifesto says nothing unusual or out of the ordi-nary . 
 It provides only and exclusively that which enabled the socialists to lead the masses —recognition of “peaceful” work as preparation for a proletarian revolution. 
 The Basle Manifesto repeated what Guesde said at the 1899 Congress,where he ridiculed socialists’ ministerialism manifesting itself in the event of a war for markets, “ brigandages capi-talistes ” (En garde! pp. 
 175-76), or what Kautsky said in 1909, in his pamphlet Der Weg zur Macht , in which he spoke of the end of the “peaceful epoch” and the advent of an epochof wars, revolutions, and the proletariat’s struggle forpower. 
 The Basle Manifesto incontestably proves the complete betrayal of socialism by those socialists who voted for warcredits; joined governments, and recognised the defence ofthe fatherland in 1914-15. 
 This betrayal is undeniable. 
 Itwill be denied by hypocrites alone. 
 The only question is:how is it to be explained . 
 It would be unscientific, absurd and ridiculous to reduce the question to personalities , to refer to Kautsky, Guesde, Plekhanov (and say: “even” such persons!). 
 That would be a wretched subterfuge. 
 Any serious explanation calls, in the first place, for an economic analysis of the significance of present-day politics, then for an analysis of their fundamen-tal ideas , and, finally, for a study of the historic trends within socialism. 
 What is the economic implication of “defence of the fatherland” in the 1914-15 war? The answer to this questionhas been given in the Basle Manifesto. 
 The war is being fought by all the Great Powers for the purpose of plunder, carving up the world, acquiring markets, and enslavingnations. 
 To the bourgeoisie it brings higher profits; to athin crust of the labour bureaucracy and aristocracy, andalso to the petty bourgeoisie (the intelligentsia, etc. 
) which“travels” with the working-class movement, it promises morsels of those profits. 
 The economic basis of “social-chauvinism” (this term being more precise than the termsocial-patriotism, as the latter embellishes the evil) and ofopportunism is the same, namely, an alliance between aninsignificant section at the “top” of the labour movement,and its “own” national bourgeoisie, directed against the masses of the proletariat, an alliance between the servants of the bourgeoisie and the bourgeoisie, directed against the class that is exploited by the bourgeoisie. 
 Social-chauvinism is aconsummated opportunism. 
 Social-chauvinism and opportunism are the same in their political essence; class collaboration, repudiation of the pro-letarian dictatorship, rejection of revolutionary action, obeisance to bourgeois legality, non-confidence in the prole-tariat, and confidence in the bourgeoisie. 
 The politicalideas are identical, and so is the political content of theirtactics. 
 Social-chauvinism is the direct continuation andconsummation of Millerandism, Bernsteinism, and British liberal-labour policies, their sum, their total, their highest achievement. 
 Throughout the entire period between 1889 and 1914, two lines in socialism—the opportunist and the revolu-tionary—are to be seen. 
 Today there are also two linesin socialism. 
 Let us not follow the method of referring to persons , which is practised by the bourgeois and opportunist liars, and let us take the trends to be seen in a number of countries. 
 Let us take ten European coun-tries: Germany, Britain, Russia, Italy, Holland, Sweden, Bulgaria, Switzerland, Belgium and France. 
 In the first eight countries, the division into the opportunist and revo-lutionary trends coincides with the division into social-chauvinists and revolutionary internationalists. 
 The mainnuclei of social-chauvinism in the social and political sense are: Sozialistische Monatshefte and Co. 
 in Germany; the Fabians and the Labour Party in Britain (the Independent Labour Party entered in a bloc with both, the influence of social-chauvinism in the latter being considerably strongerthan in the British Socialist Party, in which about three-sevenths are internationalists, namely, 66 to 84); Nasha Zarya and the Organising Committee (as well as Nashe Dyelo ) in Russia; Bissolati’s party in Italy; Troelstra’s party in Holland; Branting and Co. 
 in Sweden; the “Shiro-ki” 181 in Bulgaria; Greulich and “his” people * in Switzerland. 
 It is from revolutionary Social-Democrats in all these coun-tries that a more or less sharp protest has emanated againstsocial-chauvinism. 
 Two countries out of the ten are theexception, but even there internationalists are weak , but not absent; the facts are rather unknown (Vaillant has admitted having received letters from internationalists,which he did not publish) than non-existent. 
 Social-chauvinism is a consummated opportunism. 
 That is beyond doubt. 
 The alliance with the bourgeoisie used tobe ideological and secret. 
 It is now public and unseemly. 
 Social-chauvinism draws its strength from nowhere else but this alliance with the bourgeoisie and the GeneralStaffs. 
 It is a falsehood for anybody (including Kautsky)to say that the “masses” of proletarians have turned towardschauvinism; nowhere have the masses been asked (with the exception, perhaps, of Italy, where a discussion went on for nine months prior to the declaration of war, and where the masses also were against the Bissolati party). 
 The masses were dumbfounded, panic-stricken, disunited, and crushedby the state of martial law. 
 The free vote was a privilege ofthe leaders alone —and they voted for the bourgeoisie and against the proletariat! It is ridiculous and monstrous to consider opportunism an inner-party phenomenon! All *In the MS. 
 Lenin wrote “wing” above the word “people”. 
— Ed. 
 Marxists in Germany, France, and other countries have al-ways stated and insisted that opportunism is a manifesta-tion of the bourgeoisie’s influence over the proletariat; that it is a bourgeois labour policy, an alliance between aninsignificant section of near-proletarian elements and thebourgeoisie. 
 Having for decades to mature in conditions of“peaceful” capitalism, opportunism was so mature by1914-15 that it proved an open ally of the bourgeoisie. 
 Unity with opportunism means unity between the proletariat and its national bourgeoisie, i. 
e. 
, submission to the latter, asplit in the international revolutionary working class. 
 Wedo not say that an immediate split with the opportunistsin all countries is desirable, or even possible at present;we do say that such a split has come to a head, that it has become inevitable, is progressive in nature, and necessary to the revolutionary struggle of the proletariat, and thathistory, having turned away from “peaceful” capitalismtowards imperialism, has thereby turned towards such asplit. 
 Volentem ducunt fata , nolentem trahunt . 
 * Since the onset of the war, the bourgeoisie of all coun-tries, the belligerents in the first place, have united in lauding socialists who recognise the “defence of the father-land”, i. 
e. 
, the defence of the bourgeoisie’s predatoryinterests in the imperialist war, against the proletariat . 
 See how this basic interest of the international bourgeoisieis making its way into the socialist parties, into the working-class movement, to find expression there! The example of Germany is particularly instructive in this respect, sincethe epoch of the Second International saw the growth ofthe greatest party in that country, but the very same thing is to be seen in other countries, with only minor variationsin form, aspect and outward appearance. 
 In its issue of April 1915, Preussische Jahrbücher , a con-servative German journal, published an article by a Social-Democrat , a member of the Social-Democratic Party, who concealed his identity behind the pseudonym of Monitor. 
This opportunist blurted out the truth regarding the sub-stance of the policy pursued by the entire world bourgeoisie towards the working-class movement of the twentieth cen-*Fate leads the willing, but drags the unwilling (Lat. 
). 
— Ed. 
 tury. 
 The latter can neither be brushed aside nor suppressed by brute force, he says. 
 It must be demoralised from within, by buying its top section. 
 It was exactly in this manner that the Anglo-French bourgeoisie has been actingfor decades, by buying up the trade-union leaders, the Mil-lerands, the Briands and Co. 
 It is in this manner thatthe German bourgeoisie is now acting. 
 The Social-Demo-cratic Party’s behaviour, Monitor says to (and in essence in the name of ) the bourgeoisie, is “irreproachable” in the present war (i. 
e. 
, it is irreproachably serving the bourgeoisie against the proletariat). 
 The process of thetransformation” of the Social-Democratic Party into anational liberal-labour party is proceeding excellently. 
 Itwould, however, be dangerous to the bourgeoisie, Monitor adds, if the party were to turn to the right ; “it must retain the character of a workers’ party with socialist ideals. 
 Onthe day it gives that up, a new party will arise to take upthe rejected programme, giving it a still more radical formu-lation” ( Preussische Jahrbücher , 1915, No. 
 4, pp. 
 50-51). 
 These words openly express that which the bourgeoisie has always and everywhere done covertly. 
 “Radical” words are needed for the masses to believe in. 
 The opportunists are prepared to reiterate them hypocritically. 
 Such parties as the Social-Democratic parties of the Second Internationalused to be are useful and necessary to the opportunistsbecause they engendered the socialists’ defence of the bourgeoisie during the 1914-15 crisis. 
 Exactly the same kind of policy as that of the German Monitor is beingpursued by the Fabians and the liberal trade-unionleaders in Britain, and the opportunists and the Jaurèsistsin France. 
 Monitor is an outspoken and cynical opportunist. 
Then there is another shade, a covert or “honest” opportun-ist (Engels was right when he once said that the “honest” opportunists are the most dangerous to the working-classmovement). 
 Kautsky is an example of such an oppor-tunist. 
 In Die Neue Zeit No. 
 9, of November 26, 1915, he wrote that the majority of the official party was violating its programme (Kautsky himself upheld the policy of the majority for a whole year after the outbreak of the war, justi-fying the “defence of the fatherland” lie!). 
 “Opposition to the majority is growing,” he said (p. 
 272). 
 (“ Die Opposition ge-gen die Mehrheit im Wachsen ist. 
 ) The masses are “in opposi-tion” ( oppositionell ). 
 “Nach dem Kriege [nur nach dem Kriege ?] ... werden die Klassengegensätze sich so verschärfen , dass der Radikalismus in den Massen die Oberhandgewinnt ” (p. 
 272). 
 Es “droht uns nach dem Kriege [nur nach dem Kriege ?] ... die Flucht der radikalen Elemente aus der Partei und ihr Zustrom zu einer Richtung antiparlamentar-ischer [?? soll heissen : ausserparlamentarischer ] Massen-aktionen .... 
 So zerfällt unsere Partei in zwei Extreme , die nichts Gemeinsames haben . 
”* Kautsky wants to represent the golden mean, and to reconcile the “two extremes” which “ have nothing in common ”! Today (sixteen months after the outbreak of war) he admits that the masses are revolutionary. 
 Condemning in the same breath revolutionary action, which he calls “ Abenteuer ” “in den Strassen ”** (p. 
 272), Kautsky wants to “reconcile” the revolutionary masses with the opportunist leaders, whohave “nothing in common” with them— but on what basis ? On the basis of mere words! On the basis of “Left-wing” words of the “Left-wing” minority in the Reichstag! Let the minority, like Kautsky, condemn revolutionary action , calling it adventurism , but it must feed the masses with Left-wing words . 
 Then there will be peace in the Party, unity with the Südekums, Legiens, Davids, and Monitors! But that is Monitor’s selfsame programme in its entirety, a programme of the bourgeoisie, only expressed in dulcet tones and in honeyed phrases! The same programme wascarried out by Wurm as well, when at the session of theSocial-Democratic group in the Reichstag, March 18, 1915,“er die Fraktion ‘warnte ’, den Bogen zu überspannen ; in den Arbeitermassen wachse die Opposition gegen die Fraktions-*“After the war [only after the war?] the class antagonisms will become so sharpened that radicalism will gain the upper handamong the masses [p. 
 272] .... 
 We are threatened with the flight of the radical element from the Party after the war [only after the war?] ... and with their rushing to join the current of anti-parlia-mentary [?? should be: extra-parliamentary] mass action .... 
 Thus our Party is divided into two extremes which have nothing in com-mon. 
”— Ed. 
 **Street adventurism. 
— Ed. 
 taktik ; es gelte , beim marxistischen Zentrum zu verharren ” (Klassenkampf gegen den Krieg! Material zum “Fall Lieb-knecht ”. 
 Als Manuskript gedruckt , S. 
 67). 
 * Let us note the acknowledgement, on behalf of the “Marxist Centre” (including Kautsky), that the masses werein a revolutionary temper! This was March 18, 1915! Eight and a half months later , on November 26, 1915, Kautsky again proposed that the revolutionary masses be appeased with Left phrases! Kautsky’s opportunism differs from Monitor’s only in the wording, in shades, and the methods of achieving thesame end: preservation of the opportunists’ influence (i. 
e. 
, the bourgeoisie’s) over the masses, preservation of the pro-letariat’s submission to the opportunists (i. 
e. 
, the bour-geoisie )! Pannekoek and Gorter have very properly dubbed Kautsky’s stand “passive radicalism”. 
 (It is verbiage , to quote the French who have had occasion to make a thoroughstudy of this variety of revolutionism, from their “home-made” models!) I would rather prefer to call it covert, timid,saccharine and hypocritical opportunism. 
 In substance, the two trends in Social-Democracy now disagree, not in words or in phrases. 
 When it comes to theart of blending “defence of the fatherland” (i. 
e. 
, defenceof bourgeois plundering) with phrases on socialism, interna-tionalism, freedom for the peoples, etc. 
, Vandervelde,Renaudel, Sembat, Hyndman, Henderson, and Lloyd George are in no wise inferior to Legien, Südekum, Kautsky, or Haase! The actual difference begins with a completerejection of defence of the fatherland in the present war,and with acceptance of revolutionary action in connectionwith the war, during and after it. 
 In this question, the only serious and business-like one, Kautsky is at one with Kolb and Heine. 
 Compare the Fabians in Britain and the Kautskyites in Germany. 
 The former are almost liberals, who have neverrecognised Marxism. 
 Engels wrote of the Fabians on *“He warned the group not to test the patience of the masses too far, as opposition is growing among the masses against the group’s tactics; one must remain with the Marxist Centre. 
” ( The Class Struggle Against the War! Material on the Liebknecht Case . 
 Published as a manuscript, p. 
 67). 
— Ed. 
 January 18, 1893: “A gang of place hunters, shrewd enough to understand the inevitability of the social revolution, but totally unwilling to entrust this gigantic work to the imma-ture proletariat alone .... 
 Their fundamental principle is fear of revolution.... 
” And on November 11, 1893, he wrote:“Haughty bourgeois, benevolently descending to the prole-tariat to liberate it from above, if only it is willing to under-stand that such a raw, uneducated mass cannot liberate itself, and can attain nothing without the charity of those clever attorneys, litterateurs, and sentimental females. 
” 182 How far from these the Kautskyites seem to be in their“theory”! In practice, however, in their attitude towardsthe war, they are quite identical ! This is convincing proof of how the Marxism of the Kautskyites has withered, turned into a dead letter, a piece of cant. 
 The following instances will reveal the kind of obvious sophisms used by the Kautskyites since the outbreak of war,to refute the tactics of revolutionary proletarian action,as unanimously adopted by the socialists in Basle. 
 Kautskyadvanced his theory of “ultra-imperialism”. 
 By this he meant the substitution of “joint exploitation of the world by internationally united finance capital, for the struggle ofcapital of some nations against that of other countries”(Die Neue Zeit No. 
 5, April 30, 1915, p. 
 144). 
 At the same time, Kautsky himself added: “Can such a new phase of capi-talism be at all achieved? Sufficient premises are still lack-ing to enable us to answer this question!” On the ground that a new phase is “conceivable”, though he himself lacksthe courage even to declare it “achievable”, he now rejects the revolutionary tasks of the proletariat at a time when thephase of crisis and war has obviously arrived! Revolutionary action is rejected by the selfsame leader of the Second International who, in 1909, wrote a book entitled Der Weg zur Macht . 
 Translated into almost all the principal European languages, the book revealed the connection between the impending war and the revolution, and proved that “revolution cannot be premature”! In 1909, Kautsky proved that the epoch of “peaceful” capitalism had passed, and that the epoch of wars and revo-lutions was at hand. 
 In 1912, the Basle Manifesto made this view the basis of the entire tactic of the world socialist parties. 
 In 1914 war came, followed by the “economic and political crisis” foreseen at Stuttgart and Basle. 
 At this juncture Kautsky invented theoretical “subterfuges” to be used against revolutionary tactics! Axelrod has advanced the same ideas, only clothed in a phraseology a little more to the “Left”. 
 He writes infree Switzerland, and it is his desire to exert an influenceon Russian revolutionary workers. 
 In his pamphlet, Die Krise und die Aufgaben der internationalen Sozialdemokratie , Zurich, 1915, we find a discovery that is so pleasing to theopportunists and the bourgeois of the whole world, namely,that “ das Internationalisierungsproblem der Arbeiterbewegung ist mit der Frage der Revolutionisierung unserer Kampfesfor-men und Methoden nicht identisch ” (p. 
 37) and that “ der Schwerpunkt des Internationalisierungsproblems der prole-tarischen Befreiungsbewegung liegt in der weiteren Entwick-lung und Internationalisierung eben jener Alltagspraxis[p. 
 40] ... beispielsweise müssen die Arbeiterschutz-und Versicherungsgesetzgebung ... zum Objekt ihrer [der Arbei-ter] internationalen Aktionen und Organisationen werden ” (p. 
 39). 
 * It goes without saying that such “internationalism” has the full approval, not only of the Südekums, Legiens andHyndmans, together with the Vanderveldes, but also of theLloyd Georges, Naumanns and Briands! Axelrod defendsKautsky’s “internationalism” without even quoting or analys-ing any of the latter’s arguments for defence of the father-land. 
 Like the Francophile social-chauvinists, Axelrod iseven afraid to mention that it is revolutionary tactics thatthe Basle Manifesto speaks of. 
 Against the future—theuncertain and unknown future—Axelrod is prepared toadvance the most Left-wing and blatantly revolutionary phrases, such as saying that the future International will meet, entgegentreten wird (den Regierungen im Falle der Kriegs-*“The problem of internationalising the labour movement is not identical with the question of revolutionising the forms and methods of our struggle” (p. 
 37) and that “the gist of the problem of internationalising the proletarian movement for freedom liesin the future development and internationalisation of everydaypractices [p. 
 40] ... for instance , labour protection and insurance legislation must become the object of their [workers’] international action and organisations” (p. 
 39). 
— Ed. 
 gefahr ) “mit der Entfachung eines revolutionären Sturmes. 
 ... Einleitung der sozialistischen Revolution ” (p. 
 14). 
 * N o joking here! When, however, it is a matter of applying revolutionary tactics right now, during the present crisis,Axelrod says ganz à la Kautsky **: “Revolutionäre Massen-aktionen ”—such tactics “ hätte noch eine gewisse Berechti-gung, wenn wir unmittelbar am Vorabend der sozialen Revo-lution ständen , ähnlich wie es etwa in Russland seit den Studentendemonstrationen des Jahres 1901 der Fall war , die das Herannahen entscheidender Kämpfe gegen den Absolutis-mus ankündigten ” *** (pp. 
 40-41), and then he fulminates against the “ Utopien ”, “Bakunismus ”, quite in the spirit of Kolb, Heine, Südekum, and Legien. 
 The example of Russiaexposes Axelrod most strikingly. 
 Four years elapsed between 1901 and 1905, and nobody could guarantee, in 1901, that the revolution in Russia (the first revolution against abso-lutism) would take place four years later. 
 Prior to thesocial revolution, Europe is in exactly the same situation. 
Nobody can tell whether the first revolution of this kind willcome about in four years. 
 That a revolutionary situation, however, actually exists is a fact that was predicted in 1912 and became a reality in 1914. 
 The 1914 demonstra-tions of workers and starving citizens in Russia and Germanyalso undoubtedly “ ankündigen das Herannahen entscheidender Kämpfe ”. 
 **** It is the bounden duty of socialists to support and develop such demonstrations and every kind of “revo-lutionary mass action” (economic and political strikes, unrest among the troops, right up to insurrection and civilwar); furnish them with clear slogans; create an undergroundorganisation and publish underground literature, withoutwhich the masses cannot be called upon to rise up in revolu-tion; help them get a clear understanding of the revolution, *will meet (the governments in case of a war danger) “with the release of a revolutionary storm ... the inauguration of thesocialist revolution. 
”— Ed. 
 **“quite in the Kautsky spirit”. 
— Ed. 
 *** “Revolutionary mass action”—such tactics “would have a certain justification if we were immediately on the eve of a social revolution in the very same way, for instance, as, was the case in Russia beginning with the student demonstrations of 1901, which were theforerunners of approaching decisive battles against absolutism”. 
— Ed. 
 **** “proclaims the approaching decisive battles”. 
— Ed. 
 and organise for it. 
 It is in this way that the Social-Democrats acted in Russia in 1901, on the eve (“ am Vorabend ”) of the bourgeois revolution which began in 1905, but has not ended even in 1915. 
 In the very same way, the Social-Demo-crats are obliged to act in Europe in 1914-15 “ am Vorabend der sozialistischen Revolution ”. 
 Revolutions are never born ready-made; they do not spring out of Jupiter’s head;they do not kindle at once. 
 They are always preceded by a process of unrest, crises, movements, revolts, the beginnings of revolution, the latter not always developing to the very end (if, for instance, the revolutionary class is not strongenough). 
 Axelrod invents pretexts so as to distract Social-Democrats from their duty of helping develop the revolution-ary movements burgeoning within the existing revolution-ary situation. 
 Axelrod defends the tactics of David and the Fabians, while masking his own opportunism with Left-wing phrases. 
 “Den Weltkrieg in einen Bürgerkrieg umwandeln zu wollen wäre Wahnsinn gewesen ,” * writes David, leader of the oppor-tunists ( Die Sozialdemokratie im Weltkrieg ,** Berlin, 1915, p. 
 172), in objecting to the manifesto of the Central Committee of our Party, the Russian Social-DemocraticLabour Party, which was published on November 1, 1914. 
The manifesto advanced the civil war slogan, adding:“Wie gross die Schwierigkeiten dieser Umwandlung zur gege-benen Zeit auch sein mögen—die Sozialisten werden niemals ablehnen , die Vorarbeiten in der bezeichneten Richtung systematisch, unbeugsam, und energisch auszuführen , falls der Krieg zur Tatsache geworden ist. 
 ”*** (Quoted by David, p. 
 171. 
) It is noteworthy that a month before David’s bookappeared (May 1, 1915), our Party published (in Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 40, March 29) resolutions on the war, which advocate systematic “steps towards turning the present imperialist war into a civil war”, these steps being defined in *“It would be madness to wish to turn the world war into a civil war. 
”— Ed. 
 **Social-Democracy in the World War . 
—Ed. 
 *** “However difficult such a transformation may seem at any given moment, socialists will never relinquish systematic , persistent , and undeviating preparatory work in this direction, once war hasbecome a fact. 
 ”—Ed. 
 the following way: (1) refusal to vote for war credits, etc. 
; (2) rejection of “ Burgfrieden ”*; (3) formation of an under-ground organisation; (4) support for fraternisation by the men in the trenches; (5) support for every kind of revolu-tionary mass action by the proletariat in general. 
 O brave David! In 1912 he did not think it “madness” to refer to the example of the Paris Commune. 
 In 1914, however,he was echoing the bourgeois outcry of “madness”. 
 Plekhanov, a typical representative of the social-chau-vinists of the Quadruple Entente, has given an appraisal ofrevolutionary tactics, which is fully in accord with David’s. 
He has called the idea on ** ... to wit, the Vorabend *** o f the social revolution, from which a period of four years or moremay elapse before the entscheidende Kämpfe . 
 **** These are, in fact, the first beginnings—weak as yet, but beginnings, nevertheless—of the “proletarian revolution” which theBasle resolution spoke of and which will never become strong suddenly, but will inevitably pass through the stagesof relatively weak beginnings. 
 Support for and the development, extension and intensi-fication of revolutionary mass action and the revolutionary movement; the creation of an illegal organisation for prop-aganda and agitation in this direction, so as to help themasses understand the movement and its tasks, methods andaims—these are the two points that any practical programmeof Social-Democratic activity in the present war must inevi-tably boil down to. 
 All the rest is opportunist and counter-revolutionary phrases, no matter what Leftist, pseudo-Marx-ist and pacifist contortions those phrases may be disguisedwith. 
 Whenever exclamations like the following are made in protest to us—all this in the usual fashion of the diehards in the Second International: “O those ‘Russian’ methods!” (“Die russische Taktik ”—Kap. 
 VIII bei David), ***** we reply *“a class truce”. 
— Ed. 
 **The page breaks off here. 
 Several words are missing from the beginning of the next page of the manuscript. 
 This is the firstpublication of the continuation of the article. 
— Ed. 
 *** “the eve”. 
— Ed. 
 **** “decisive battles”. 
— Ed. 
 ***** “The Russian tactics”. 
 Chapter 8 in David’s book. 
— Ed. 
 merely by referring to the facts. 
 On October 30, 1915, sev-eral hundred women ( einiger Hundert ) demonstrated in front of the Parteivorstand , and sent it the following message through a deputation: “ Die Verbreitung von unzensierten Flugblättern und Druckschriften und die Abhaltung nicht genehmigter Versammlungen wäre bei dem grossen Organisa-tionsapparat heute leichter möglich als zur Zeit des Sozial-istengesetzes. 
 Es fehlt nicht an Mitteln und Wegen , sondern offensichtlich an dem Willen ”* (my italics). 
 ( Berner Tag-wacht No. 
 271. 
) I suppose these Berlin women workers must have been led astray by the “Bakuninist” and “adventurist”, “sectarian”(see Kolb and Co. 
) and “reckless” manifesto of the RussianParty’s Central Committee, dated November 1. 
 Written at the end of 1915 First published in Proletarskaya Published according to Revolutsia No. 
 5 (28), 1924 the manuscript *“Today, with the existence of a big machine of organisation, it would be far easier to distribute illegal leaflets and pamphlets and to hold banned meetings than it was during the Anti-Socialist Law. 
 There is no shortage of means and methods, but there seems to be a lack of determination. 
”— Ed. 
 N O T E S 1 2 3 4 5These theses on the war were drawn up by Lenin not later than August 24 (September 6), 1914 after he had come to Berne from Poronin (Galicia). 
 They were discussed at a meeting of the Bolshe-vik group in Berne on August 24-26 (September 6-8). 
 Approved by the group, the theses were circulated among Bolshevik groups abroad. 
 To throw the police off the scent, the copy of the theses made out by N. 
 K. 
 Krupskaya, carried the inscription: “Copy of the manifesto issued in Denmark. 
” The theses were smuggled into Russia for discussion by the Russian section of the Central Committee, Party organisations, and the Bolshevik Duma group. 
 Through Swiss Social-Democrats the theses were submitted to the conference of the Swiss and Italian Socialists held in Lugano on September 27, 1914. 
 Many of the ideas contained in the theses were incorporated in the conference’s resolution. 
 On learning of the approval of the theses in Russia, Lenin used them as a basis for writing the manifesto of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Central Committee “The War and Russian Social-Democracy” (see this volume, pp. 
 25-34). 
 The introduction to the theses (“The Russian Social-Democrats on the European War”, which was written on a separate sheet) was discovered only later, and was first published in the 4th Russian edition of Lenin’s Collected Works . 
 p. 
 15 Among those who joined the bourgeois government of Belgium was Vandervelde, and in France Jules Guesde, Marcel Sembat and Albert Thomas. 
 p. 
 16 Sozialistische Monatshefte (Socialist Monthly)—the principal organ of the German opportunists, and one of the organs of interna-tional opportunism. 
 It was published in Berlin from 1897 to 1933. 
 During the First World War it took a social-chauvinist stand. 
 p. 
 17 The Black Hundreds —monarchist gangs formed by the tsarist police to fight the revolutionary movement. 
 They murdered revolu-tionaries, assaulted progressive intellectuals and organised pog-roms. 
 p. 
 17 Cadets —members of the Constitutional-Democratic Party, the leading party of the liberal-monarchist bourgeoisie in Russia. 
 Founded in 1905, the party represented the bourgeoisie, Zemstvo landowner leaders and bourgeois intellectuals. 
 Prominent among its members were Milyukov, Muromtsev, Maklakov, Shingaryov, Struve, and Rodichev. 
 The Cadets were active in Russia’s war preparations. 
 They stood solidly behind the tsarist government’s predatory designs, hoping to batten on war contracts, strengthen the bourgeoisie’s positions, and suppress the revolutionary movement in the country. 
 With the outbreak of the war the Cadets advanced the slogan of “War to the victorious end!” When, in 1915, the tsarist forces suffered a defeat at the front, which led to the aggravation of the revolutionary crisis, the Cadet members of the State Duma, headed by Milyukov, and the other representatives of the bourgeoisie and the landowners formed a “Progressist” bloc aimed at checking the revolution, preserving the monarchy and bringing the war to a “victorious end”. 
 The Cadets actively helped to set up war-industries committees. 
 p. 
 18 See Lenin’s articles “On the Slogan for a United States of Europe” and “On the Slogan for a United States of Europe. 
 Editorial Com-ment by Sotsial-Demokrat on the Manifesto on War Issued by the Central Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
” (see this volume, pp. 
 339-43, 344). 
 p. 
 18 Avanti! —a daily and central organ of the Italian Socialist Party, was founded in December 1896. 
 During the First World War its policy was not consistently internationalist, and it failed to break with the reformists. 
 At present Avanti! is the central organ of the Italian Communist Party. 
 p. 
 20 Südekum , Albert —a German Social-Democrat, who was an extreme social-chauvinist during the First World War. 
 His name has come to denote social-chauvinism. 
 p. 
 20 Volksrecht (The People’s Right)—a Swiss Social-Democratic daily, published in Zurich since 1898. 
 During the First World War it published articles by Left Zimmerwaldists, including Lenin’s articles “Twelve Brief Theses on H. 
 Greulich’s Defence of Father-land Defence”, “The Tasks of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party in the Russian Revolution” and “Tricks of the Republican Chauvinists”. 
 p. 
 21 Bremer Bürger-Zeitung —a daily published by the Bremen Social-Democrats from 1890 to 1919. 
 In 1914-15 it was actually the organ of the Left Social-Democrats, and in 1916 it was taken over by the social-chauvinists. 
 p. 
 21 Vorwärts —a daily, central organ of the German Social-Democrats, published in Berlin from 1876 by Wilhelm Liebknecht and other editors. 
 Through this newspaper Engels fought against all manifesta-tions of opportunism. 
 In the latter half of the 1890s, following Engels’s death, the newspaper systematically published articles6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17by opportunists, who had become dominant among German Social-Democrats and in the Second International. 
 During the First World War (1914-18) the paper pursued a social-chauvinist policy, and after the October Socialist Revolution it became a mouthpiece of anti-Soviet propaganda. 
 It ceased publication in 1933. 
 p. 
 21 Wiener Arbeiter-Zeitung —a daily newspaper, central organ of the Austrian Social-Democratic Party, published in Vienna from 1889. 
 During the First World War it took a social-chauvinist stand, Lenin describing it as the newspaper of “Vienna betrayers of social-ism”. 
 Suppressed in 1934, it resumed publication in 1945 as the central organ of the Austrian Socialist Party. 
 p. 
 21 Hamburger Echo —German Social-Democratic daily newspaper published from 1887; took a social-chauvinist stand during the First World War. 
 p. 
 21 l’Humanité —a daily founded by Jean Jaurès in 1904 as the organ of the French Socialist Party. 
 During the First World War the news-paper became a mouthpiece of the extreme Right wing of the French Socialist Party, and pursued a social-chauvinist policy. 
 Shortly after the split in the Socialist Party at the Tours Congress in December 1920, and the formation of the Communist Party, it became the organ of the Communist Party. 
 p. 
 21 The reference is to the appeal addressed to the German people by the French and Belgian delegations to the International Socialist Bureau, and published in l’Humanité on September 6, 1914. 
 It accused the German Government of pursuing predatory designs and the German troops of perpetrating atrocities in the occupied areas. 
 Vorwärts of September 10, 1914 carried a protest by the German Social-Democratic Party’s Executive against this appeal. 
 This started off a press polemic between French and German social-chau-vinists, each side seeking to justify its own government’s participa-tion in the war and put the blame on the other side. 
 p. 
 21 Lenin is referring to the resolution adopted by the Bolshevik group at its meeting in Berne, August 24-26 (September 6-8) 1914 (see this volume, pp. 
 15-19). 
 p. 
 21 Ever since its foundation in 1892, a sharp ideological struggle was conducted in the Italian Socialist Party between the opportunist and revolutionary wings, which differed on the question of the Party’s policy and tactics. 
 Under pressure from the Lefts, the most outspo-ken reformists (Bonomi, Bissolati), who supported the war and advocated collaboration with the government and the bourgeoisie, were expelled from the Party at its congress in Reggio Emilia in 1912. 
 After the outbreak of the war, and before Italy’s entry into it, the Party took an anti-war stand under the slogan: “Against the war, for neutrality!” In December 1914, the Party expelled a group of renegades (Mussolini and others) who defended the imperialist 18 19policy of the bourgeoisie and favoured Italy’s participation in the war. 
 The Italian Socialists met in a joint conference with the Swiss Socialists at Lugano (1914) and took an active part in the international socialist conferences in Zimmerwald (1915) and Kienthal (1916). 
 On the whole however, the Italian Socialist Party followed a Centrist policy. 
 With Italy’s entry into the war in May 1915, the Party renounced its anti-war stand and issued a slogan “neither participate in the war, nor sabotage it”, which in practice meant support for the war. 
 p. 
 23 Die Neue Zeit (New Times)—theoretical journal of the German Social-Democratic Party published in Stuttgart from 1883 to 1923. 
 Until October 1917 it was edited by Karl Kautsky and afterwards by Heinrich Cunow. 
 Several works by Marx and Engels were first published in it. 
 Engels helped the journal with advice, frequently criticising it for its deviations from Marxism. 
 In the latter half of the nineties, following Engels’s death, it systemati-cally published articles by revisionists, including a series of Bern-stein’s articles called “Problems of Socialism”, which launched a revisionist crusade against Marxism. 
 During the First World War Die Neue Zeit held a Centrist position, which in practice supported social-chauvinists. 
 p. 
 23 The Stuttgart Congress of the Second International was held on August 18-24, 1907. 
 The R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 delegation consisted of 37 mem-bers, the Bolshevik delegates including Lenin, Lunacharsky and Litvinov. 
 The Congress conducted its main work in committees set up to draft resolutions for the plenary meetings. 
 Lenin worked on the committee which drafted a resolution on “Militarism and In-ternational Conflicts”. 
 Lenin and Rosa Luxemburg introduced into Bebel’s draft the historic amendment on the duty of the socialists to use the war-created crisis to arouse the masses for the overthrow of capitalism. 
 The amendment was adopted by the Congress (concerning the Congress, see Lenin’s articles “The Interna-tional Socialist Congress in Stuttgart” in Volume 13 of the present edition, pp. 
 75-81 and 82-93). 
 The Copenhagen Congress of the Second International was held between August 28 and September 3, 1910, the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P: being represented by Lenin, Plekhanov, Lunacharsky, Kollontai, Pokrov-sky and others. 
 The Congress appointed, several committees for preliminary discussion and drafting of resolutions on the agenda items. 
 Lenin worked on the co-operative committee. 
 The Congress’s resolution “The Struggle Against Militarism and War” confirmed the Stuttgart Congress’s resolution on “Militarism and International Conflicts” and listed the demands to be advanced by the socialist parliamentary deputies: (a) all conflicts between states to be unfailingly submitted for settlement by international courts of arbitration, (b) general disarmament; (c) abolition of se-cret diplomacy; (d) autonomy for all nations and their protection against military attacks and oppression. 
 20 21The Basle Congress of the Second International was held on November 24-25, 1912. 
 It was the extraordinary congress called in connection with the Balkan War and the imminent European war. 
 The Congress adopted a manifesto emphasising the imperialist na-ture of the approaching world war, and called on the socialists of all countries to wage a vigorous struggle against war. 
 (The Basle Manifesto is discussed on pp. 
 208-17, 307-08 in this volume. 
) p. 
 31 Socialist-Revolutionaries —a petty-bourgeois party in Russia, founded at the end of 1901 and the beginning of 1902 as a result of the union of various Narodnik groups and circles (Union of Socialist-Revolutionaries, the Socialist-Revolutionary Party, etc. 
). 
 The news-paper Revolutsionnaya Rossiya (Revolutionary Russia) (1900-05) and the journal Vestnik Russkoi Revolutsii (Herald of the Russian Revo-lution) (1901-05) became its official organs. 
 The Socialist-Revolu-tionaries did not recognise the class differences between the prole-tariat and the petty proprietors, glossed over the class contradictions within the peasantry, and rejected the proletariat’s leading role in the revolution. 
 The Socialist-Revolutionaries’ views were an eclec-tic mixture of the ideas of Narodism and revisionism; they tried, as Lenin put it, to patch up “the rents in the Narodnik ideas with bits of fashionable opportunist ‘criticism’ of Marxism” (see present edition, Vol. 
 9, p. 
 310). 
 The Bolshevik Party exposed the Socialist-Revolutionaries’ attempts to masquerade as socialists, conducted a determined struggle against the Socialist-Revolutionaries for influence over the peasantry, and showed how dangerous their tactic of individual terrorism was to the working-class movement. 
 At the same time the Bolsheviks were prepared, on definite conditions, to enter into temporary agreements with the Socialist-Revolutionaries in the struggle against tsarism. 
 As early as the first Russian revolution (1905-07), the Right wing of the Socialist-Revolutionary Party broke away and formed the legal Popular-Socialist Party, whose outlook was close to that of the Cadets, the Left wing forming the semi-anarchist league of Maximalists. 
 In the period of reaction between 1907 and 1910, the Socialist-Revolutionary Party suffered a complete ideological and organisational breakdown. 
 During the First World War most of its members took a social-chauvinist position. 
 p. 
 32 The British Socialist Party was founded in 1911, in Manchester, as a result of the Social-Democratic Federation merging with other socialist groups. 
 The B. 
S. 
P. 
 carried on its propaganda in the Marx-ist spirit, was “not opportunist, and ... was really independent of the Liberals” (see present edition, Vol. 
 19, p. 
 273). 
 Its small mem-bership, however, and its isolation from the masses gave it a somewhat sectarian character. 
 During the First World War, a sharp struggle flared up in the party between the internationalist trend (William Gallacher, Albert Inkpin, John Maclean, Thomas Rothstein and others) and the social-chauvinist trend led by Hyndman. 
 On a number of 22 23 2425questions a section of the internationalists held Centrist views. 
 In February 1916 a group of party members founded the newspaper The Call , which was instrumental in uniting the internationalist ele-ments. 
 When, at its Salford conference in April 1916, the Party denounced the social-chauvinist stand held by Hyndman and his followers, the latter broke away from the Party. 
 The British Socialist Party acclaimed the October Socialist Revolution in Russia, its members playing a prominent role in the British working people’s movement in support of Soviet Russia, and against the foreign intervention. 
 In 1919 the majority of the local Party branches (98 against 4) declared for affiliation to the Communist International. 
 The British Socialist Party and the Communist unity group played the leading part in founding the Communist Party of Great Britain. 
 At the first Unity Congress of 1920 the overwhelming majority of the B. 
S. 
P. 
 branches merged in the newly founded Communist Party. 
 p. 
 36 The Independent Labour Party —a reformist party founded by the leaders of “new trade unions” in 1893, when the strike struggle revived and there was a mounting drive for a labour movement independent of the bourgeois parties. 
 The Party included members of the “new trade unions” and a number of the old trade unions, representatives of the professions and the petty bourgeoisie, who were under Fabian influence. 
 The Party’s leader was James Keir Hardie. 
 From its early days the Independent Labour Party held a bour-geois-reformist stand, concentrating on the parliamentary forms of struggle and parliamentary deals with the Liberals. 
 Characterising this party, Lenin wrote that it was “actually an opportunist party that has always been dependent on the bourgeoisie” (V. 
 I. 
 Lenin, On Britain , Moscow, p. 
 401). 
 When the First World War broke out, the Party issued an anti-war manifesto, but shortly afterwards took a social-chauvinist stand. 
 p. 
 36 See Note 17. 
 p. 
 37For liquidators see pp. 
 333-34 of this volume. 
 p. 
 37Golos (The Voice)—a daily Menshevik-Trotskyist paper, published in Paris from September 1914 to January 1915, which followed a Centrist line. 
 In the early days of the war of 1914-18 Golos published several of Martov’s articles directed against social-chauvinists. 
 After Mar-tov’s swing to the Right, the newspaper came out in defence of the social-chauvinists, preferring “unity with the social-chauvinists to drawing closer to those who are irreconcilably hostile to social-chauvinism” (p. 
 113 in this volume). 
 In January 1915 Golos ceased publication and was replaced by Nashe Slovo (Our Word). 
 p. 
 37 26 27 28 29 30 31 32The Paris group or group for aid the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 was formed on November 5 (18), 1908. 
 It separated from the common Menshevik and Bolshevik Paris group, to unite Bolsheviks alone. 
 It was later joined by pro-Party Mensheviks and Vperyod supporters. 
 During the war the group consisted of N. 
 A. 
 Semashko, M. 
 F. 
 Vla-dimirsky, I. 
 F. 
 Armand, S. 
 I. 
 Gopner, L. 
 N. 
 Stal, V. 
 K. 
 Taratuta, A. 
 S. 
 Shapovalov and others. 
 Led by Lenin, the group took an internationalist stand and waged a vigorous struggle against the imperialist war and the opportunists. 
 p. 
 37 The notes on Lenin’s report referred to in the article were published in Vorwärts No. 
 308 of November 10 and in Wienner Arbeiter-Zeit-ung No. 
 309 of November 7, 1914. 
 On November 22, 1914, the Vorwärts editorial board published a brief note replying to Lenin’s letter, claiming that the report had criticised the stand taken by the German and Austrian Social-Democrats and gave an appraisal of the Second International’s collapse. 
 p. 
 42 Lenin began his article “Karl Marx”, which was intended for the Granat Encyclopaedic Dictionary, in Poronin (Galicia) in the spring of 1914 and finished it in Berne in November 1914. 
 In the preface to the 1918 edition of the article, which was published as a pamphlet, Lenin himself said he recollected 1913 as the year it was written in. 
 The article was published in 1915 in the Dictionary, over the signature of V. 
 I. 
 Lenin, and was followed by a supplement “Bib-liography of Marxism”. 
 Because of the censorship, the editors of the Dictionary omitted two chapters, “Socialism” and “Tactics of the Class Struggle of the Proletariat”, and made a number of changes in the text. 
 In 1918 Priboi Publishers published the original article as a separate pamphlet, with a preface written specially for it by Lenin, but without the “Bibliography of Marxism” supplement. 
 The article was first published in full according to the manu-script in 1925 in the collection “Marx-Engels-Marxism” prepared by the Lenin Institute of the Central Committee of the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks). 
 p. 
 43 These words are from Marx’s “Critique of the Hegelian Philosophy of Right. 
 Introduction”. 
 The relevant passage reads: “The weapon of criticism cannot, of course, replace criticism by weapon, material force must be overthrown by a material force; but theory, too, becomes a material force, as soon as it grips the masses. 
” p. 
 47 See Marx’s letter to Engels of April 9, 1863. 
 p. 
 75See Engels’s letter to Marx of February 5, 1851. 
 p. 
 76See Engels’s letters to Marx of December 17, 1857, and October 7, 1858. 
 p. 
 76 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42See Engels’s letter to Marx of April 8, 1863, and Marx’s letters to Engels of April 9, 1863 and April 2, 1866. 
 p. 
 76 See Engels’s letters to Marx of November 19, 1869 and August 11, 1881. 
 p. 
 76 See Marx and Engels, Selected Works , Moscow, 1962, Vol. 
 1, p. 
 69. 
 p. 
 77 See Marx’s letter to Engels of April 16, 1856. 
 p. 
 78See Engels’s letters to Marx of January 27 and February 5, 1865. 
 p. 
 78 The Anti-Socialist Law was passed by the Bismarck government in 1878 to check the working-class and socialist movement. 
 It banned all Social-Democratic and mass working-class organisations, and the workers’ press; socialist literature was confiscated and Social-Democrats were persecuted and exiled. 
 The law was repealed in 1890 under pressure from the mounting working-class movement. 
 p. 
 79 The Emancipation of Labour group was the first Russian Marxist group; it was founded by G. 
 V. 
 Plekhanov in Geneva in 1883. 
 Besides Plekhanov, its members included P. 
 B. 
 Axelrod, L. 
 G. 
 Deutsch, Vera Zasulich and V. 
 N. 
 Ignatov. 
 The group set itself the task of propaganda of scientific socialism in Russia, criticism of Narodism and theoretical analysis of developments in Russia from the standpoint of Marxism. 
 The group translated into Russian and widely circulated Marx’s and Engels’s Manifesto of the Commu-nist Party , Marx’s Wage-Labour and Capital , Engels’s Socialism : Utopian and Scientific , as well as a number of Plekhanov’s works, handbooks for generations of Russian Marxists ( Socialism and the Political Struggle , Our Differences , and others). 
 In drafting the programme of the Russian Social-Democrats the group fell into a number of errors. 
 It advocated individual terrorism, denied the revolutionary role of the peasantry, over-estimated the role of the liberal bourgeoisie, etc. 
 While he had a high opinion of Plekhanov and the Emancipation of Labour group, Lenin pointed out that it “only laid the theoretical foundations for the Social-Democratic movement and took the first step towards the working-class movement”. 
 The group existed until the Second Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 (1903). 
 p. 
 81 See Marx’s letter to F. 
 A. 
 Sorge of September 19, 1879. 
 p. 
 92This refers to the followers of the revisionist Bernstein, leader of the opportunist trend in German Social-Democracy, which arose at the end of the nineteenth century. 
 p. 
 93 In its issue of March 30, 1895, Vorwärts published a summary and several extracts from Engels’s preface to Marx’s “The Class Struggles 43 44 45 46in France, 1848 to 1850”, omitting very important propositions on the revolutionary role of the proletariat, which evoked a vehe-ment protest from Engels. 
 In his letter to Kautsky of April 1, 1895, he wrote: “To my astonishment I see in the Vorwärts today an extract from my ‘Introduction’, printed without my prior knowledge and trimmed in such a fashion that I appear as a peaceful worshipper of legality at any price” (Marx and Engels, Selected Correspond-ence , Moscow, 1955, p. 
 568). 
 Engels insisted on the “Introduction” being published in full. 
 In 1895 it was published in the journal Die Neue Zeit , but with conside-rable deletions, these at the instance of the German Social-Demo-cratic Party leadership. 
 Seeking to justify their reformist tactics, the leaders of German Social-Democracy subsequently began to in-terpret their version of the “Introduction” as Engels’s renunciation of revolution, armed uprisings and barricade fighting. 
 The original text of the “Introduction” was first published in the Soviet Union in 1955 (see Marx and Engels, Selected Works , Moscow, 1962, Vol. 
 I, pp. 
 118-38). 
 p. 
 95 Millerandism —an opportunist trend named after the French “socialist” Millerand, who in 1899 joined the reactionary bourgeois government of France and helped the bourgeoisie in conducting its policy. 
 The admissibility of socialists’ participation in bourgeois governments was discussed at the Paris Congress of the Second Inter-national in 1900. 
 The Congress adopted Kautsky’s conciliatory resolution condemning socialists’ participation in bourgeois governments but permitting it in certain “exceptional” cases. 
 The French socialists used this proviso to justify their joining the bourgeois government at the beginning of the First World War. 
 p. 
 97 See F. 
 Engels, Socialism in Germany , Section 1. 
 p. 
 97 Iskra (The Spark)—the first all-Russian illegal Marxist newspaper, founded by Lenin in 1900. 
 It played a decisive part in the establish-ment of the revolutionary Marxist party of the working class. 
 The first issue appeared in Leipzig in December 1900; it was subsequent-ly published in Munich, in London (from July 1902) and in Geneva (from the spring of 1903). 
 On Lenin’s initiative and with his direct participation, the Iskra editorial board drew up the Party programme which was published in Iskra No. 
 21, and prepared the second Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 which marked the beginning of a revo-lutionary Marxist party in Russia. 
 Soon after the Congress, the Mensheviks, helped by Plekhanov, gained control of Iskra , so that, beginning with issue No. 
 52, Iskra ceased being an organ of revolutionary Marxism. 
 p. 
 98 The Mountain (Montagne) and the Gironde —the two political groups of the bourgeoisie during the French bourgeois revolution of 1789. 
 The Montagnards, or Jacobins, was the name given to the more resolute representatives of the bourgeoisie, the revolution-47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55ary class of the time, who stood for the abolition of absolutism and the feudal system. 
 Unlike the Jacobins, the Girondists vacillated between revolution and counter-revolution, and sought agreement with the monarchy. 
 Lenin called the opportunist trend in Social-Democracy the “socialist Gironde”, and the revolutionary Social-Democrats the “proletarian Jacobins”, “the Mountain”. 
 After the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 split into Bolsheviks and Mensheviks, Lenin frequently stressed that the Mensheviks represented the Girondist trend in the working-class movement. 
 p. 
 98 Ivan Ivanovich and Ivan Nikiforovich —characters in Gogol’s Tale of How Ivan Ivanovich Quarrelled with Ivan Nikiforovich . 
 The quarrel between these two provincial landowners, whose names have become proverbial, started on a most insignificant pretext, and dragged on endlessly. 
 p. 
 99 The International Socialist Bureau —the executive body of the Second International, established by decision of the Paris Congress of 1900. 
 From 1905 Lenin was member of the I. 
S. 
B. 
 as representative of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 p. 
 100 Nicholas II (1868-1918)—tsar of Russia (1894-1917). 
 p. 
 102The Council of the United Nobility —a counter-revolutionary landowners’ organisation, which was founded in May 1906. 
 The Council exercised considerable influence over the policy of thetsarist government. 
 Lenin called it the “Council of the United Feudalists”. 
 p. 
 103 Radishchev , A. 
 N. 
 (1749-1802)—Russian writer and revolutionary. 
 In his famous work A Journey from St. 
 Petersburg to Moscow , he launched the first public attack on serfdom in Russia. 
 By order of Catherine II he was sentenced to death for the book, but the sen-tence was commuted to 10 years’ exile in Siberia. 
 He returned from exile under an amnesty, but committed suicide when faced with the threat of fresh persecution. 
 Lenin regarded Radishchev an outstand-ing representative of the Russian people. 
 p. 
 103 Decembrists —Russian revolutionary noblemen, who in December 1825 rose in revolt against the autocracy and the serf-owning system. 
 p. 
 103 Commoners (raznochintsi in Russian)—the Russian commoner-intellectuals, drawn from the petty townsfolk, the clergy, the mer-chant classes and the peasantry, as distinct from those coming from the nobility. 
 p. 
 103 A quotation from Chernyshevsky’s novel The Prologue . 
 p. 
 103 Purishkevich , V. 
 M. 
 (1870-1920)—big landowner, Black-Hundred reactionary, and monarchist. 
 p. 
 105 56 57 58 59See Marx and Engels, Selected Correspondence , Moscow, p. 
 201. 
 p. 
 105 The Bolshevik deputies to the Fourth Duma were arrested on the night of November 5-6 (18-19),1914. 
 The pretext for their arrest was their participation in a conference they convened in the village of Ozerki, near Petrograd. 
 Held on November 2-4 (15-17), the conference was attended by representatives of the Bolshevik organisations of Petrograd, Ivanovo-Voznesensk, Kharkov and Riga, as well as by the Duma Bolshevik deputies. 
 Warned by an agent provocateur the police swooped down on Ozerki when the conference had just completed its work. 
 During the search of G. 
 I. 
 Petrovsky, A. 
 Y. 
 Badayev and other Duma Bol-shevik deputies, the police found Lenin’s theses on the war and the newspaper Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 33, which carried the manifesto of the Central Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 “The War and Russian- Social-Democracy”. 
 All participants in the conference were arrested, but the Duma Bolshevik deputies, who enjoyed parliamentary immunity, escaped arrest. 
 Two days later, however, they too were arrested, tried and exiled for life to Eastern Siberia. 
 Lenin devoted to the trial of the Bolshevik deputies the article “What Has Been Revealed by the Trial of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Duma Group”, which was published in Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 40, March 29, 1915 (see this volume, pp. 
 171-77). 
 p. 
 108 The Congress of the Swedish Social-Democratic Party was held in Stockholm on November 23,1914. 
 The main item on the agenda dealt with the attitude towards the war. 
 A. 
 G. 
 Shlyapnikov, who brought the Congress a message of greetings from the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P’s Central Committee, read a declaration calling for a struggle to be waged against the imperialist war and branding the treachery of the leaders of the German Social-Democrats and the socialist parties of other countries, who had turned social-chauvinist. 
 Branting, leader of the Swedish Social-Democratic Party’s Right wing, moved that regret be expressed at the section of the declaration condemning the conduct of German Social-Democracy, asserting that “it does not befit” the Congress “to reprehend other parties”. 
 Höglund, leader of the Left Social-Democrats, came out against Branting’s proposal, and declared that many Swedish Social-Democrats shared the view expressed in the declaration of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
’s Central Committee. 
 However, Branting’s proposal was carried by a majority of votes. 
 Y. 
 Larin addressed the Congress on behalf of the Menshevik Organising Committee. 
 A report on the Congress was published in Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 36, January 9, 1915. 
 p. 
 108 The Organizing Committee —the Menshevik guiding centre, was established at a conference of the Menshevik liquidators and all anti-Party groups and trends, held in August 1912. 
 It existed until the election of the Central Committee of the Menshevik party in August 1917. 
 Belenin —A. 
 G. 
 Shlyapnikov. 
 p. 
 108 60 61 62 63 64 65 66Sotsial-Demokrat —Central Organ of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, published illegally from February 1908 to January 1917. 
 In all, 58 issues ap-peared. 
 The first issue was published in Russia, and the rest abroad, first in Paris and then in Geneva. 
 According to the decision of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
’s Central Committee, the editorial board was composed of representatives of Bolsheviks, Mensheviks and Polish Social-Democrats. 
 The newspaper published over 80 articles and items by Lenin. 
 While on the editorial board, Lenin maintained a consistent Bol-shevik stand. 
 Some editors (including Kamenev and Zinoviev) took a conciliatory attitude towards the liquidators and tried to disrupt Lenin’s line. 
 The Menshevik editors Martov and Dan sabotaged the work of the editorial board and openly defended liquidationism in their factional newspaper Golos Sotsial-Demokrata . 
 Because of Lenin’s uncompromising struggle against the liquida-tors Martov and Dan walked out of the editorial board, in June 1911. 
 Beginning with December 1911 Lenin became editor of Sotsial-Demokrat. 
 p. 
 108 Lenin is referring to the Caucasian Menshevik liquidators, the Bund (The General Jewish Workers’ Union of Lithuania, Poland and Russia), and representatives of the Social-Democratic Party of Poland and Lithuania, who supported the liquidators. 
 p. 
 108 The reference is to the reply of the St. 
 Petersburg liquidators (Potresov, Maslov, Cherevanin and others) to Vandervelde’s telegram urging Russian Social-Democrats to abstain from oppos-ing the war. 
 In their reply, the Russian liquidators approved Bel-gian, French and English socialists joining bourgeois governments, and declared that in their activities in Russia they were not oppos-ed to the war. 
 p. 
 112 Berner Tagwacht —a daily newspaper, organ of the Swiss Social-Democratic Party, founded in Berne in 1893. 
 In the early days of the First World War, it published articles by Karl Liebknecht, Franz Mehring and other Left Social-Democrats. 
 Following 1917 the newspaper openly supported social-chauvinists. 
 Today the newspaper’s line coincides on the main issues with that of the bourgeois press. 
 p. 
 112 The Menshevik Organising Committee announced the forthcoming publication of its organ Otkliki (Echoes), which, however, never appeared. 
 p. 
 113 Mysl (Thought)—a daily Socialist-Revolutionary newspaper pub-lished in Paris from November 1914 to March 1915. 
 p. 
 113 Trudoviks —a group of petty-bourgeois democrats in the State Duma consisting of peasants and intellectuals of a Narodnik trend. 
 The Trudovik group was formed in April 1906 of peasant deputies 67 68 69 70to the First Duma. 
 In the Duma the Trudoviks vacillated between the Cadets and the Social-Democrats. 
 During the First World War, most of the Socialist-Revolution-aries, Popular Socialists and Trudoviks took a social-chauvinist stand. 
 p. 
 114 Lenin is referring to the resolution “The Narodniks” which he wrote and which was adopted by the joint Conference of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Central Committee and Party officials held between September 23 and October 1 (October 6-14), 1913, in the village of Poronin (near Cracow). 
 For reasons of secrecy, the conference was called the “Summer” or “August” Conference. 
 See the resolution in Volume 19 of the present edition, pp. 
 429-31. 
 p. 
 114 Lenin wrote this article in connection with the speech delivered by the Menshevik Y. 
 Larin on November 23 (New Style), 1914, at the Congress of the Swedish Social-Democratic Party in Stockholm. 
 The fourteen conditions of unity listed by Lenin are taken from his “Report of the C. 
C. 
 of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 to the Brussels Conference and Instructions to the C. 
C. 
 Delegation” (see present edition, Vol. 
 20, pp. 
 495-535). 
 p. 
 115 The “July Third ” (Brussels ) bloc was formed at the Brussels “Unity” Conference called by the Executive Committee of the International Socialist Bureau on July 16-18, 1914, for an “exchange of opinions” on the restoration of unity within the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 The delegates represented the Central Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 (Bolshe-viks), the Organising Committee (Mensheviks), and the affiliated organisations—the Caucasian Regional Committee and the Borba group, that is, the Trotskyites, the Duma Social-Democratic group (Mensheviks), Plekhanov’s Yedinstvo group, the Vperyod group, the Bund, the Social-Democrats of the Lettish Area, the Social-Democrats of Lithuania, the Polish Social-Democrats, the Polish Social-Democratic opposition and the P. 
S. 
P. 
 (the Left wing). 
 Though the Conference had been called only for an exchange of opinions and was not intended to adopt any binding decisions, Kautsky’s resolution on the unification of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 was put to the vote. 
 Though the Bolsheviks and the Lettish Social-Demo-crats refused to vote, the resolution was carried by a majority. 
 p. 
 115 The Left wing of the petty-bourgeois nationalist Polish Socialist Party arose as an independent faction in 1906, after the split in the P. 
S. 
P. 
 Though it did not fully reject nationalism, the Left wing re-nounced a number of the P. 
S. 
P. 
 ’s nationalist demands and terror-ist methods of struggle. 
 On questions of tactics it stood close to the Russian Menshevik liquidators and joined forces with the latter against the Bolsheviks. 
 During the First World War most of the Left wingers adopted an internationalist stand and drew close to the Polish Social-Democratic Party. 
 In December 1918, the Left wing of the P. 
S. 
P. 
 and the Polish Social-Democratic Party founded the Communist Workers’ Party of Poland. 
 p. 
 115 71 7273 74 75 76 77 7879 80Nasha Zarya (Our Dawn)—a legal monthly of the Menshevik liqui-dators, published in St. 
 Petersburg from 1910 to 1914. 
 The liquida-tors in Russia centred around this journal. 
 p. 
 115 Nasha Rabochaya Gazeta (Our Workers’ Newspaper)—a daily newspaper of the Menshevik liquidators, published legally in St. 
 Petersburg from May to July 1914. 
 p. 
 115 The Menshevik liquidators came out against the legal Insurance Council, calling upon the workers to defy its decisions. 
 The Coun-cil was elected by the St. 
 Petersburg workers in March 1914 accord-ing to lists submitted by the Bolsheviks (Pravdists). 
 p. 
 116 Strakhovaniye Rabochikh (Workers’ Insurance)—a journal pub-lished by the Menshevik liquidators in St. 
 Petersburg from December 1912 to June 1918. 
 p. 
 116 The Chkheidze group —the Menshevik group in the Fourth Duma led by N. 
 S. 
 Chkheidze. 
 During the First World War the group took a Centrist stand, but actually gave full support to the policy of the Russian social-chauvinists. 
 p. 
 116 The Triple Entente —the imperialist bloc of Britain, France and tsarist Russia which took final shape in 1907, and was opposed to the Triple Alliance of Germany, Austria-Hungary and Italy. 
 The emergence of the Triple Entente was preceded by the conclusion of the Franco-Russian alliance of 1891-93 and the Anglo-French agreement of 1904. 
 The formation of the Entente was concluded by the signing of the Anglo-Russian agreement in 1907. 
 During the First World War the military and political alliance between Britain, France and Russia was joined by the United States, Japan, Italy and other countries. 
 p. 
 118 See Engels’s letter to Marx of August 15, 1870. 
 p. 
 119Lenin is referring to Engels’s work “The Po and the Rhine”. 
 p. 
 119See Karl Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy , Moscow, p. 
 227. 
 p. 
 121 Nashe Slovo (Our Word)—a Menshevik Trotskyite daily published in Paris from January 1915 to September 1916, instead of the newspaper Golos . 
 Lenin’s letter to the newspaper was written in reply to the Nashe Slovo editors’ proposal for joint action against social-patriotism, in connection with the forthcoming London conference of Entente Socialists. 
 Lenin agreed to the proposal and submitted a draft declaration addressed to the London Conference. 
 He criticised the social-chauvinist position of the Menshevik Organising Com-mittee and the Bund, whom the Nashe Slovo editors had approached with the same proposal. 
 Nashe Slovo ’s editors did not accept Lenin’s declaration, but drew up one of their own. 
 81 82 83 84 85Following the London Conference, the Nashe Slovo editors again proposed to the Central Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 that a joint conference of “internationalists” be held so as to define the attitude towards the war and the social-chauvinists. 
 In his reply to the Nashe Slovo editors dated March 10 (23), 1915 (see pp. 
 165-68 of this volume), Lenin laid down a number of fundamental conditions for a union of genuine internationalists. 
 Since the Nashe Slovo editors came out in defence of the Organising Committee and the Bund, Lenin discontinued the talks. 
 Nashe Slovo ’s attempts at unification ended in an “ideological-political fiasco”, as Lenin put it. 
 Lenin discussed this question in the following works published herein: “On the London Conference” (pp. 
 178-80), “The Question of the Unity of Internationalists” (pp. 
 188-91), “The Collapse of Platonic Internationalism” (pp. 
 194-98), “The State of Affairs in Russian Social-Democracy” (pp. 
 281-86) and “Socialism and War” (pp. 
 335-38). 
 p. 
 125 The London Conference of Socialists of the “allied countries” of the Triple Entente met on February 14, 1915. 
 Its delegates represented the social-chauvinists and the pacifist groups of the Socialist parties of Britain, France, Belgium, as well as the Russian Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries Though the Bolsheviks were not invited to the Conference, Lit-vinov (Maximovich) presented to the Conference the declaration of the Central Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, which was based on Lenin’s draft. 
 The declaration demanded the withdrawal of social-ists from bourgeois governments and a complete rupture with the imperialists; it called for an end to co-operation with the imperial-ist governments, a resolute struggle against the latter, and condem-nation of voting for war credits. 
 The chairman interrupted Litvinov as he was reading the declaration, and deprived him of the right to speak. 
 The latter handed the declaration over to the presidium and left the Conference hall. 
 See Lenin’s articles “The London Conference” and “On the Lon-don Conference” (pp. 
 132-34, 178-80 of this volume). 
 p. 
 125 On August 4, 1914, the German Social-Democratic parliamentary party voted for war credits for the Kaiser’s Government. 
 p. 
 130 J. 
 Gardenin —leader of the Socialist-Revolutionaries’ party V. 
 Chernov. 
 p. 
 131 Ropshin —the Socialist-Revolutionary B. 
 Savinkov. 
 p. 
 131 Sovremennik (The Contemporary)—a literary and political monthly published in St. 
 Petersburg in 1911-15. 
 A group of Menshevik liquidators, Socialist-Revolutionaries, Popular-Socialists, and Left liberals formed around the journal, which had no roots whatever in the working-class masses. 
 In 1914, Lenin defined its trend as a blend of Narodism and Marxism. 
 p. 
 131 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93Maximovich —M. 
 M. 
 Litvinov. 
 p. 
 132 Labour Leader —a weekly published since 1891; since 1893, organ of the Independent Labour Party of Britain. 
 As from 1922, the newspaper appeared under the name of New Leader and in 1946 it became the Socialist Leader . 
 p. 
 134 A number of changes were made in Lenin’s article “Under a False Flag” by the editors of the Collection issued in March 1917 by Priliv Publishers. 
 p. 
 135 Nashe Dyelo (Our Cause)—a monthly of the Menshevik liquidators; mouthpiece of social-chauvinists in Russia. 
 It began publication in 1915 in Petrograd to replace Nasha Zarya , which had been suppressed in October 1914. 
 p. 
 137 Obshcho Dyelo (The Common Cause) adherents (also known as Shiroki socialists)—an opportunist trend in Bulgarian Social-Democratic Party. 
 The journal Obshcho Dyelo was published from 1900 onwards. 
 After a split at the Tenth Congress of the Social-Democratic Party in 1903 in Ruse they formed a reformist Bulgarian Social-Democratic Party (of Shiroki socialists). 
 During the world imperialist war of 1914-18 the Obshcho Dyelo adherents took a chauvinist stand. 
 Tesnyaki —a revolutionary trend in the Bulgarian Social-Demo-cratic Party, which in 1903 took shape as an independent Bulgarian Workers’ Social-Democratic Party. 
 The founder and leader of Tesnyaki was D. 
 Blagoyev, his followers, Georgy Dimitrov and Vasil Kolarov, among others, later heading that Party. 
 In 1914-18 the Tesnyaki came out against the imperialist war. 
 In 1919 they joined the Communist International and formed the Communist Party of Bulgaria. 
 p. 
 155 The Daily Citizen —originally organ of the opportunist bloc—the Labour Party, Fabians and the Independent Labour Party of Britain, published in London from 1912 to 1915. 
 p. 
 156 The Daily Herald —organ of the British Socialist Party, published in London since 1912. 
 p. 
 156 The Fabians —members of the Fabian Society, a British reformist organisation founded in 1884. 
 The name is an allusion to the Roman commander Quintus Fabius Maximus (d. 
 203), called Cunctator, i. 
e. 
, the Delayer, for his tactics of harassing Hannibal’s army without risk-ing a pitched battle. 
 Most of the Society’s members were bourgeois intellectuals: scholars, writers, politicians (such as Sidney and Beat-rice Webb, Bernard Shaw, Ramsay MacDonald), who denied the need for the class struggle of the proletariat and a socialist revolution, and insisted that the transition from capitalism to socialism lay only through petty reform and a gradual transformation of society. 
 Lenin said it was “an extremely opportunist trend” (see present edition, Vol. 
 13, p. 
 358. 
 The Fabian Society, which was 94 95affiliated to the Labour Party in 1900, is one of the ideological sources of Labour Party policy. 
 During World War I, the Fabians took a social-chauvinist stand. 
 For Lenin’s description of the Fabians, see “British Pacifism and the British Dislike of Theory” (the present volume, pp. 
 260-65). 
 p. 
 156 The reference is to the Conference of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 groups abroad, held in Berne on February 27-March 4, 1915. 
 Convened on Lenin’s initiative, it was in fact a general conference of the Party, since neither a party congress nor an all-Russia conference could be con-vened during the war. 
 The Conference was attended by representatives of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Central Committee, the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Central Organ, Sotsial-Demokrat , and delegates from R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 (Bolshevik) groups in Paris, Zurich, Geneva, Berne, Lausanne and from the Baugy group. 
 Lenin was delegated by the Central Committee and the Central Organ, directed the work of the Conference, and made a report on the main item on the agenda, “The War and the Tasks of the Party”. 
 The Conference adopted resolutions on war as drafted by Lenin. 
 p. 
 158 Pravda —a legal Bolshevik daily published in St. 
 Petersburg. 
 Founded in April 1912, on the initiative of the St. 
 Petersburg workers. 
 Pravda was a popular working-class newspaper, published with money collected by the workers themselves. 
 A wide circle of worker-correspondents and worker-publicists formed around the news-paper. 
 Over eleven thousand correspondence items from workers were published in a single year. 
 Pravda had an average daily circu-lation of 40,000, with some issues running into 60,000 copies. 
 Lenin directed Pravda from abroad, where he was living. 
 He wrote for the paper almost daily, gave instructions to the editorial board, and rallied the Party’s best literary forces around the newspaper. 
 Pravda was constantly persecuted by the police. 
 During its first year of existence it was confiscated forty-one times, and thirty-six legal actions were brought against its editors, who served prison sen-tences totalling forty-seven and a half months. 
 In the course of twenty-seven months Pravda was banned eight times by the tsarist government, but reissued under the new names of Rabochaya Prav-da, Severnaya Pravda , Pravda Truda , Za Pravdu , Proletarskaya Pravda , Put Pravdy , Rabochy , and Trudovaya Pravda . 
 The paper was closed down on July 8 (21), 1914, on the eve of World War I. 
 Publication was not resumed until after the February Revolu-tion. 
 Beginning from March 5 (18), 1917, Pravda appeared as the Central Organ of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Lenin joined the editorial board on April 5 (18), on his return from abroad, and took over the paper’s management. 
 On July 5 (18), 1917, the Pravda editorial office was raided by military cadets and Cossacks. 
 In July-October 1817 Pravda frequently changed its name as a result of persecution by the Provisional Government. 
 It appeared successively under the names /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR 96 97 98 99 100 101of Listok Pravdy , Proletary , Rabochy , and Rabochy Put . 
 On October 27 (November 9) the newspaper began to appear under its formername— Pravda . 
 p. 
 164 The document has no heading. 
 The title has been provided by the Institute of Marxism-Leninism of the Central Committee, C. 
P. 
S. 
U. 
 p. 
 165 This refers to the Information Bulletin , an organ of the Bund Organisation Abroad. 
 It was published in Geneva from June 1911to June 1916. 
 In all eleven issues appeared. 
 It was succeeded by the Bulletin of the Bund Committee Abroad . 
 Only two issues appeared, in September and December 1916. 
 p. 
 166 The reference is to the Copenhagen Conference of Socialists of Neutral Countries (Sweden, Norway, Denmark and Holland),which took place on January 17-18, 1915, with the aim of restoringthe Second International. 
 The Conference resolved to appeal, throughthe socialist parties’ members of parliaments, to the respectivegovernments, offering to act as mediators between the belligerentcountries and attempt to bring about the termination of the war. 
 p. 
 167 The trial of the Bolshevik deputies to the Fourth Duma (A. 
 E. 
 Ba-dayev, M. 
 K. 
 Muranov, G. 
 I. 
 Petrovsky, F. 
 N. 
 Samoilov, N. 
 R. 
Shagov) and other Social-Democrats, who took part in the illegalParty Conference in Ozerki, took place on February 10 (23), 1915. 
The case was tried by the Special Court in Petrograd. 
 They werecharged under Article 102, i. 
e. 
, accused of participation in anorganisation aiming at the overthrow of the existing state system. 
The main circumstantial evidence against the Bolshevik deputieswas Lenin’s theses “The Tasks of Revolutionary Social-Democracyin the European War” and the C. 
C. 
 R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 manifesto “The Warand Russian Social-Democracy”, which were confiscated during thesearch. 
 (These documents are published in this volume, pp. 
 15-19,25-34. 
) The five Bolshevik deputies were exiled for life to Turukhansk Territory (Eastern Siberia). 
 p. 
 171 Dyen (Day)—a daily of a bourgeois-liberal trend, which began pub-lication in St. 
 Petersburg in 1912. 
 Among its contributors were Men-shevik liquidators, who took over complete control of the paperafter February 1917. 
 Closed down by the Revolutionary-MilitaryCommittee of the Petrograd Soviet on October 26 (November 8),1917. 
 p. 
 172 Rech (Speech)—the central daily newspaper of the Cadet Party, published in St. 
 Petersburg from February 1906 onwards. 
 It wassuppressed by the Revolutionary-Military Committee of the 102 103 104 105 106 107 108 109 110 111Petrograd Soviet on October 26 (November 8), 1917, but continued to appear under other names until August 1918. 
 p. 
 172 Severnaya Rabochaya Gazeta (Workers’ Northern Gazette)—a legal daily of the Menshevik liquidators, published in St. 
 Petersburg fromJanuary to May 1914. 
 p. 
 174 L’Echo de Paris —an extremely reactionary bourgeois daily, pub-lished in Paris from 1884 to 1938. 
 Le Temps —a bourgeois daily, published in Paris from 1861 to 1942. 
 Lenin is referring to the two articles on the London Con-ference, published in this newspaper on February 15 and 16, 1915. 
 p. 
 178 Journal des Débats politiques et littéraires —a bourgeois weekly pub-lished in Paris from 1894 to 1934. 
 Lenin is referring to the article“The London Conference of Socialists” published in its issue of Feb-uary 19, 1915. 
 p. 
 178 Izvestia of the Secretariat Abroad of the O. 
C. 
 R. 
 S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 was pub-lished in Switzerland by the Menshevik Organising Committeefrom February 1915 to March 1917. 
 p. 
 179 Tägliche Rundschau (Daily Review)—a daily of a bourgeois nation-alist trend, published in Berlin from October 1880 onwards. 
In 1922 it was sold to Deutsche Allgemeine-Zeitung . 
 From December 1924 to 1928 it appeared under the name of Neue Tägliche Rund-schau. 
 It ceased publication in 1933. 
 p. 
 181 This refers to the October all-Russia political strike and the December armed uprising in Moscow, in 1905. 
 p. 
 186 Lenin is referring to Nasha Zarya, a journal of the Menshevik liquidators. 
 p. 
 189 Voprosy Strakhovaniya (Problems of Insurance)—a Bolshevik legal journal, published at intervals in St. 
 Petersburg from Octo-ber 1913 to March 1918. 
 It worked, not only for the achievement ofworkers’ insurance, but also for the Bolshevik “uncurtailed slogans”of an eight-hour day, confiscation of the landed estates, and a demo-cratic republic. 
 The Bolsheviks A. 
 N. 
 Vinokurov, N. 
 A. 
 Skripnik,P. 
 I. 
 Stu 0ka, N. 
 M. 
 Shvernik and others contributed to the journal. 
 p. 
 191 Severny Golos (Voice of the North)—Menshevik weekly, published in Petrograd from January to March 1915. 
 p. 
 191 The Economist —a bourgeois weekly published in London since 1843. 
 p. 
 192 112 113 114 115 116 117 118 119 120 121The reference is to the Governor of the town of S. 
, a character in Turgenev’s story Virgin Soil. 
 p. 
 195 Lichtstrahlen (Rays)—a monthly, organ of the Left Social-Demo-crats in Germany (International Socialists of Germany), published at intervals from 1913 to 1921 in Berlin. 
 Its editor-in-chief was J. 
 Borhardt. 
 p. 
 195 Die Internationale —a journal founded by Rosa Luxemburg and Franz Mehring. 
 Only one issue appeared, in Berlin, April 1915. 
 It resumed publication in Munich in 1922 under the name of Futurus. 
 p. 
 195 This refers to the phrase in Saltykov-Shchedrin’s “Miscellaneous Letters”—the writing is the business of the writer; the reader’s job is to do the reading. 
 p. 
 198 This refers to the Sixth (Prague) All-Russia Conference of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, which took place in Prague on January 5-17 (18-30), 1912. 
 p. 
 198 The International Conference of Socialist Women held in Berne on March 26-28, 1915, dealt with the attitude to the war. 
 It was convened on the initiative of the women organisations attached to the C. 
C. 
 R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, with the active participation of Clara Zetkin, leader of the international women’s movement. 
 Twenty-nine dele-gates from Britain, Germany, France, Holland, Switzerland, Russia and Poland attended the Conference, the Russian delegation including N. 
 K. 
 Krupskaya and Inessa Armand. 
 The report on the International Conference of Socialist Women was published in the Supplement to Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 42 of June 1, 1915. 
 p. 
 199 The Chemnitz Congress of the German Social-Democratic Party, held on September 15-21, 1912, passed a resolution “On Imperi-alism”, which said that the imperialist states were pursuing “a policy of shameless plunder and annexations” and called upon the party “to fight imperialism with greater energy”. 
 During World War I leaders of the Second International treacherously violated the decisions of the international socialist congresses, in particular, those adopted in Chemnitz. 
 p. 
 208 On Struvism, see this volume, pp. 
 221-23. 
 p. 
 213Zhizn (Life)—a newspaper of the Socialist-Revolutionary Party, published between March 1915 and January 1916, first in Paris and later in Geneva taking the place of newspaper Mysl which was closed down in 1915. 
 p. 
 221 The man in a muffler —a character in Chekhov’s story of the same name, typifying a narrow-minded philistine who is afraid of innova-tions and any initiative. 
 p. 
 227 122 123 124 125 126 127 128 129 130 131The quotation is from Goethe. 
 p. 
 231 The Bulygin Duma —a consultative Duma, the laws for the elections and convocation of which were drafted by a commission headed by A. 
 G. 
 Bulygin, Minister of the Interior, and published on August 6 (19),1905. 
 The Bolsheviks boycotted the Bulygin Duma, and the government failed to convene it. 
 The Duma was swept away by the October general political strike. 
 p. 
 233 Le Socialisme —a journal edited and published in Paris between 1907 and June 1914 by the French socialist Jules Guesde. 
 p. 
 239 Pravdism , i. 
e. 
, Bolshevism (from the name of the Bolshevik newspaper Pravda ). 
 p. 
 245 Novo Vreme (New Times)—a scientific and theoretical journal of the revolutionary wing of the Bulgarian Social-Democratic Party (Tesnyaki), founded by Dimitr Blagoyev in 1897 in Plovdiv and later published in Sofia. 
 In 1903 the journal became the organ of the Bulgarian Workers’ Social-Democratic Party (Tesnyaki). 
 Its publication ceased in February 1916 but was resumed in 1919. 
 The editor was Dimitr Blagoyev, its contributors including Geor-giyev, Kirkov, Kabakchiev, Kolarov and Petrov. 
 In 1923 the journal was suppressed by the Bulgarian reactionary government. 
 Since 1947 Novo Vreme—the monthly theoretical organ of the Central Committee of the Bulgarian Communist Party. 
 p. 
 246 This refers to the manifesto “The Chief Enemy Is in Our Own Country”, written by Karl Liebknecht. 
 p. 
 248 Preussische Jahrbücher —a monthly of a conservative trend, organ of the German capitalists and landowners, published in Berlin from 1858 to 1935. 
 p. 
 249 Gaponade —derived from the name of Gapon, a priest of the Ortho-dox Church. 
 On the eve of the first Russian revolution he founded the Assembly of Russian Factory Workers, with the aim of distracting the workers from the revolutionary struggle. 
 In so doing he acted on instructions from the tsarist secret police. 
 On January 9, 1905, Gapon, taking advantage of the growing unrest, provoked the workers into demonstrating before the Winter Palace in St. 
 Peters-burg for the purpose of presenting a petition to the tsar. 
 By order of Nicholas II, troops fired at the unarmed demonstrators. 
 This act destroyed the naïve faith of workers throughout the country in the tsar, and served as the starting-point of the first Russian revo-lution. 
 The political consciousness of the proletariat was aroused and a wave of protest strikes swept Russia. 
 p. 
 258 On Economism, see this volume, pp. 
 331-32. 
 p. 
 258Rabochaya Mysl (Workers’ Thought)—an Economists’ paper, pub-lished from 1897 to 1902. 
 In his Iskra articles and his book 132 133 134 135 136 137 138 139 140What Is To Be Done? Lenin criticised Rabochaya Mysl views as a Russian variety of international opportunism. 
 p. 
 259 Rabocheye Dyelo (The Workers’ Cause)—a journal of the Econo-mists, organ of the Union of Russian Social-Democrats Abroad. 
 It was published at irregular intervals in Geneva from 1899 to 1902. 
Lenin criticised the views voiced by the Rabocheye Dyelo group, in a number of articles published in Iskra and in his book What Is To Be Done? p. 
 259 The New Statesman —a Fabian weekly, founded in 1913 in London. 
 Since 1931, published under the name of New Statesman and Na-tion . 
 p. 
 261 Bukvoyed —D. 
 Ryazanov. 
 p. 
 275 This refers to the tsar’s manifesto promulgated on October 17 (30), 1905. 
 It promised “civil liberties” and a “legislative Duma”. 
 Themanifesto was a concession wrested from the tsarist regime by therevolution, but that concession by no means decided the fate of therevolution as the liberals and Mensheviks claimed. 
 The Bolsheviksexposed the real meaning of the Manifesto and called upon the masses to continue the struggle and overthrow the autocracy. 
 The first Russian revolution exerted a great revolutionising influence on the working-class movement in other countries, inparticular in Austria-Hungary. 
 Lenin pointed out that the newsabout the tsar’s concession and his manifesto, with its promise of“liberties”, “played a decisive part in the final victory of universal suffrage in Austria”. 
 Mass demonstrations took place in Vienna and other industrial cities in Austria-Hungary. 
 In Prague barricades were put up. 
 As aresult, universal suffrage was introduced in Austria. 
 p. 
 277 Lenin is referring to the Menshevik liquidators expelled from the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 at the Prague Conference, in January 1912. 
 p. 
 282 The allusion is to Krylov’s fable “The Quartet”. 
 p. 
 283 The reference is to the Conference of socialists of Germany and Austria-Hungary, held in Vienna in April 1915. 
 The Conference ap-proved of the social-chauvinist stand taken by the leadership of the German and Austrian socialist parties, which justified the war andstated, in their resolutions, that this did not run counter to prole-tarian unity and to the workers’ international solidarity in thestruggle for peace. 
 p. 
 289 A. 
 P. 
 —Anton Pannekoek, the Dutch Left socialist. 
 p. 
 290 Lenin decided to write the pamphlet Socialism and War (The Atti-tude of the R. 
 S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Towards the War ) in connection with the preparations for the First International Socialist Conference. 
 141 142 143 144 145 146G. 
 Y. 
 Zinoviev helped write the pamphlet though most of it was drawn up by Lenin, who, moreover, edited the entire text. 
 The pamphlet was published in German in September 1915 and distributed among delegates to the Zimmerwald Socialist Conference. 
 In 1916 it was published in French. 
 p. 
 295 The International Socialist Conference , held in Zimmerwald on September 5-8,1915, was the first conference of internationalists inwartime. 
 Attended by 38 delegates from 11 European countries theConference discussed the following questions: (1) reports of dele-gates from the various countries, (2) the joint declaration of delegates from Germany and France, (3) the motion tabled by the ZimmerwaldLeft that a resolution be adopted on basic principles, (4) theManifesto, (5) the election of the International Socialist Committee(I. 
S. 
C. 
), (6) a resolution of sympathy with war victims and thepersecuted. 
 A struggle flared up at the Conference between the revolutionary internationalists headed by Lenin, and the Kautskyite majority. 
Lenin formed the Left group at the Conference, in which the Bol-sheviks alone adhered to the only correct and consistently interna-tionalist stand against the war. 
 For Lenin’s appraisal of the Con-ference, see his articles “The First Step” and “Revolutionary Marx-ists at the International Conference, September 5-8, 1915” (in the present volume, pp. 
 383-88, 389-93). 
 p. 
 298 See Karl von Clausewitz, Vom Kriege , Bd. 
 1, S. 
 28, Berlin, 1902. 
 p. 
 304 The Quadruple Entente —an imperialist alliance of Britain, France, Russia and Italy. 
 The latter joined the Triple Entente after break-ing away from the Triple Alliance. 
 p. 
 305 Brentanoism —a bourgeois reformist teaching of the German econo-mist Lujo Brentano, a variety of the bourgeois distortion of Marxism. 
 Brentano advocated a “class truce” in capitalist society, insisted on the possibility of the social contradictions of capitalismbeing overcome without resorting to class struggle, and maintainedthat the solution of the working-class problem lay in the organisa-tion of reformist trade unions and the introduction of factory legis-lation and that the interests of workers and capitalists could be reconciled. 
 Under the guise of Marxist phrases, Brentano and his followers tried to subordinate the working-class movement to the interests ofthe bourgeoisie. 
 p. 
 311 Novosti (News)—a Socialist-Revolutionary daily published in Paris between August 1914 and May 1915. 
 p. 
 318 Proletarsky Golos (The Proletarian Voice)—an illegal paper pub-lished by the St. 
 Petersburg Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, between 147 148 149 150 151 152 153 154February 1915 and December 1916. 
 Four issues appeared, the Mani-festo of the C. 
C. 
 R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, “The War and Russian Social-Democracy”, being published in Issue No. 
 1. 
 p. 
 320 See Note 98. 
 p. 
 325This refers to the International Socialist Youth Conference on the attitude towards the war, held on April 4-6, 1915, in Berne. 
 The Conference was attended by representatives of youth organisation from ten countries: Russia, Norway, Holland, Switzerland, Bulgaria Germany, Poland, Italy, Denmark and Sweden. 
 The Conference passed a decision to celebrate International Youth Day annually, and elected the International Bureau of Socialist Youth, which began publication of Jugend-Internationale (The Youth Interna-tional) in compliance with Conference decisions. 
 V. 
 I. 
 Lenin and Karl Liebknecht contributed to this journal. 
 p. 
 325 The Tribunists —members of the Social-Democratic Party of Holland, whose mouthpiece was the newspaper De Tribune . 
 Their leaders were D. 
 Wijnkoop, Anton Pannekoek, Herman Gorter and Hen-riette Roland-Holst. 
 Though not a consistent revolutionary party, the Tribunists formed the Left wing of the labour movement in Holland, and during the world imperialist war (1914-18) they adhered to internationalist principles . 
 In 1918 the Tribunists founded the Dutch Communist Party. 
 p. 
 328 Luch (Ray)—a legal daily of the Menshevik liquidators, published in St. 
 Petersburg from September 1912 to July 1913. 
 The newspaper was maintained chiefly by contributions from the liberals. 
 p. 
 333 Marxism and Liquidationism. 
 A Symposium of Articles on the Fundamental Issues of the Modern Labour Movement . 
 Part II was published in July 1914, by Priboi, the Party’s publishing house. 
 A number of articles by Lenin directed against liquidators were published in this symposium. 
 Lenin is referring to the following articles in the symposium: “The Working Class and Its Press”, and “How the Workers Responded to the Formation of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
 Group in the Duma” (see present edition, Vol. 
 20, pp. 
 363-71 and 536-43). 
 p. 
 334 Leipziger Volkszeitung —a daily of the Left German Social-Demo-crats, published from 1894 to 1933. 
 For many years Franz Mehr-ing and Rosa Luxemburg were its editors. 
 From 1917 to 1922 it was the organ of the German Independents. 
 After 1922 it became the organ of the Right-wing Social-Democrats. 
 p. 
 334 An—leader of the Caucasian Mensheviks N. 
 N. 
 Jordania. 
 p. 
 336 Internationale Korrespondentz —a weekly of a social-chauvinist trend dealing with problems of world politics and the working-class movement, published in Berlin from 1914 to 1917. 
 p. 
 337 Sovremenny Mir (The Contemporary World)—a literary, scientific and political journal published in St. 
 Petersburg from 1906 to 1918. 
 Its chief contributors were Mensheviks, including Plekhanov. 
 Bolsheviks contributed to the journal during the bloc with the Plekhanovites, and in early 1914. 
 During World War I (1914-18) it became the organ of the social-chauvinists. 
 p. 
 337 Petrova —Inessa Armand. 
 p. 
 372 La Sentinelle —organ of the Social-Democratic organisation of Neuchâtel Canton, French-speaking Switzerland, published at Chaux-de-Fonds from 1890 onwards. 
 Pursued an internationalist policy in the first years of World War I (1914-18) and its November 13, 1914 issue (No. 
 265) carried an abridged version of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Central Committee Manifesto, “The War and Russian Social-Democracy” (see pp. 
 27-34 of this volume). 
 p. 
 375 Lenin is referring to Karl Liebknecht’s letter of September 2, 1915, addressed to the Zimmerwald International Socialist Conference, which was not published at the time. 
 Liebknecht was unable to take part in the Conference because he was called to the colours as a private, early in 1915. 
 In his letter, Liebknecht called upon the delegates to strive, not for a “class truce” but for civil war, the international unity of socialists of all belligerent countries, a struggle against the imperialist war and a break with the social-chauvinists. 
 The letter was welcomed by most of the delegates. 
 p. 
 375 Lenin is referring to the Bulletin of the International Socialist Com-mittee in Berne (“ Bulletin ” Internationale sozialistische Kommission zu Bern ), the Executive of the Zimmerwald organisation. 
 The Bulletin was published from September 1915 to January 1917 in English, French and German. 
 Six issues appeared. 
 p. 
 377 This refers to the period of the Stolypin reaction ushered in by the coup d’état of June 3. 
 On June 3 (16), 1907, the tsar issued a manifesto dissolving the Second Duma and modifying the electoral law. 
 The new law con-siderably increased the Duma representation of the landowners and of the trade and industrial bourgeoisie, and greatly reduced the number of peasants’ and workers’ representatives, which was small enough as it was. 
 This was a gross violation of the Manifesto of October 17, 1905 and the Fundamental Law of 1906 by which no laws could be passed by the government without approval by the Duma. 
 The Third Duma, which was elected on the basis of this law and convened on November 1 (14), 1907, was a Black-Hundred-Octobrist Duma. 
 p. 
 381 The Conference of the Popular Socialists and the Socialist-Revolu-tionaries in Russia met in July 1915 in Petrograd. 
 The Conference discussed the question of the attitude towards the war and adopted a resolution which called for active participation in the war on the side of tsarism. 
 p. 
 387155 156 157 158 159 160 161 The French General Confederation of Labour (Conféderation Général du Travail) was founded in 1895 and strongly influenced by anarcho-syndicalists and reformists. 
 Its leaders recognised only the economic struggle, and opposed the proletarian Party’s leadership of the trade union movement. 
 During World War I its leaders sided with the imperialist bourgeoisie. 
 p. 
 391 See Note 129. 
 p. 
 392War industries committees were established in Russia in 1915 by the imperialist bourgeoisie. 
 In an attempt to bring the workers under their influence and inculcate defencist sentiments, the bour-geoisie decided to organise “workers’ groups” in these committees. 
 It was to the bourgeoisie’s advantage to have workers’ representatives in these groups, who would call upon the workers to raise labour productivity in the war industries. 
 The Mensheviks took an active part in this pseudo-patriotic measure initiated by the bourgeoisie. 
 The Bolsheviks’ boycott of the committees was supported by the majority of workers. 
 At a worker delegates’ meeting in Petrograd on September 27 (October 10), 1915, the Bolshevik resolution calling for a boycott and for a revolutionary way out of the war obtained 95 votes to the Mensheviks’ 81. 
 Only at a second meeting, held without the pro-Bolshevik delegates, were the Mensheviks, led by Gvozdev and an agent provocateur Abrosimov, able to elect a “work-ers’ group” of ten. 
 As a result of Bolshevik propaganda, elections to the “workers’ groups” were held in only 70 areas out of a total of 239, and workers representatives were actually elected only in 36 areas. 
 p. 
 401 Markov , N. 
 E. 
 — a reactionary politician of tsarist Russia, big landowner and Deputy from Kursk Gubernia to the Third and Fourth Dumas. 
 p. 
 402 The programme of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 adopted at the Second Congress of the Party in 1903 consisted of two parts: a minimum programme calling for the overthrow of tsarism, for a democratic republic, the eight-hour day and other demands attainable under capitalism and a maximum programme, formulating the ultimate goal of the working class, viz. 
, socialist revolution, dictatorship of the prole-tariat, the building of a socialist society. 
 p. 
 404 Parabellum —K. 
 Radek. 
 p. 
 407 See Marx’s letters to Engels of June 7 and 20, 1866 and of Novem-ber 2, 1867. 
 p. 
 410 Prizyv (The Call)—a weekly published in Paris by the Mensheviks and the Socialist-Revolutionaries, from October 1915 to March 1917. 
 The reference is to Plekhanov’s article “Two Lines in the Revolu-tion”, published in this newspaper on October 17, 1915. 
 p. 
 415 Die Glocke (The Bell)—a fortnightly journal published in Munich and later in Berlin 1915-25 by Parvus (Alexander Gelfand), a social-162 163 164 165 166 167 168 169 170 chauvinist member of the German Social-Democratic Party and an agent of German imperialism. 
 p. 
 421 Volksstimme (The People’s Voice)—an organ of the German Social-Democratic Party, published in Chemnitz from 1891 onwards. 
 p. 
 422 The letter is a reply to the league’s leaflet received by Lenin in November 1915. 
 The letter is published in full for the first time. 
 p. 
 423 The Socialist Party of America was formed in July 1901 at the congress in Indianapolis as a result of a merger of groups that had broken away from the Socialist Labour Party and the Social-Demo-cratic Party in the U. 
S. 
A. 
, among whose founders was Eugene Debs, the popular American labour leader. 
 He was one of the founders of the new party. 
 The social composition of the party was motley: native-born and immigrant workers, small farmers, and people with a petty-bourgeois background. 
 The Centrist and Right-opportunist leaders of the party (V. 
 -L. 
 Berger, Morris Hillquit and others) denied the necessity of the dictatorship of the proletariat, refrained from revolutionary methods of struggle and confined the Party’s activities to participation in elections. 
 During World War I three trends formed within the Socialist Party: the social-chauvinists, who supported the government’s imperialist policy, the Centrists, who opposed the imperialist war only in word, and the revolu-tionary minority, who held an internationalist stand and fought against the war. 
 Led by Charles Ruthenberg, William Foster, Bill Haywood and others and with the support of proletarian elements, the Left wing of the Socialist Party waged a struggle against the opportunist leadership of the party, for the workers’ independent political activity, and for the formation of industrial trade unions based on the principles of the class struggle. 
 In 1919 the Left-wing split away from the S. 
P. 
, initiated the formation of the American Communist Party, and became its core. 
 At present the Socialist Party is a small sectarian organisation. 
 The Socialist Labour Party of America was formed in 1876 at a congress in Philadelphia, as a result of a merger of the American Sections of the First International and other socialist organisations. 
 The work of the congress was guided by F. 
 A. 
 Sorge, an associate of Marx and Engels. 
 Most of the Party’s members were immigrants who had weak links with the American workers. 
 During the first years its leadership was dominated by Lassalleans, who made mistakes of a sectarian and dogmatic nature. 
 Some of the party’s leaders considered parliamentary activity the main party task, and underestimated the significance of party guidance of the economic struggle of the masses, while others fell into trade-unionism and anarchism. 
 The ideological and tactical vacillations of its leader-ship resulted in a number of groups splitting away from the party. 
 Marx and Engels severely criticised the sectarian tactics of Ameri-can socialists. 
171 172173 In the nineties the leadership of the S. 
L. 
P. 
 was taken over by its Left wing under D. 
 De Leon who committed anarcho-syndicalist errors. 
 The S. 
L. 
P. 
 refused to fight for working-class partial demands, refused to work in the reformist trade unions, and continued losing its ties with the mass working-class movement, weak as they were. 
 During World War I the Socialist Labour Party inclined towards internationalism. 
 Under the influence of the Great October Social-ist Revolution its more revolutionary section actively participated in forming the Communist Party of the U. 
S. 
A. 
 At present the S. 
L. 
P. 
 is a small organisation without any influence on the U. 
S. 
 labour movement in the U. 
S. 
A. 
 p. 
 427 Rabocheye Utro (The Workers’ Morning)—a Menshevik legal daily published in Petrograd from October to December 1915. 
 p. 
 430 Petrushka —a character in Gogol’s novel, Dead Souls, who enjoy the process of reading printed matter, without troubling to under-stand the meaning of what he reads. 
 He keeps on marvelling at the way letters make up words. 
 p. 
 430 This refers to Trotsky, who in 1910 contributed an anonymous and slanderous article on the state of affairs in the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 to the German Social-Democratic Vorwärts . 
 At the Copenhagen Congress of the Second International Lenin, Plekhanov and a representative of Polish Social-Democrats exposed this slander in a special statement and protested to the Executive of the German Social-Democratic Party against its publication. 
 p. 
 430 K. 
 Oransky —the Menshevik liquidator G. 
 D. 
 Kuchin, a contributor to Nasha Zarya . 
 p. 
 430 Repetilov —a character in Griboyedov’s comedy Wit Works Woe . 
 p. 
 432 A. 
 M. 
 —A. 
 S. 
 Martynov. 
 p. 
 433 The August bloc —an anti-Party bloc of liquidators, Trotskyists and other opportunists directed against the Bolsheviks. 
 It was founded by Trotsky at a conference of anti-Party groups and trends held in Vienna in August 1912. 
 The overwhelming majority of delegates were resident abroad and out of touch with the working class in Russia; they had no direct links with the Party work in Russia. 
 The conference passed anti-Party liquidationist decisions on all questions of Social-Democratic tactics, and declared against the existence of an illegal Party. 
 The August bloc, which consisted of ill-assorted elements, soon fell apart at the impact of the Bolsheviks, who defended the illegal workers’ party. 
 p. 
 433 See Note 90. 
 p. 
 443See Engels’s letters to F. 
 A. 
 Sorge of January 18 and November 11, 1893. 
 p. 
 448174 175 176 177 178 179 180 181 182 THE LIFE AND WORK OF V. 
 I. 
 LENIN Outstanding Dates (Augu st 1914-December 1915 ) August 23 (September 5 ) August 24-26 (September 6-8 ) Late August-September August-November 1 September 1 (27) Prior to Sep-tember 27 (October 10 ) September 27 (October 10 ) Prior to Sep-tember 28 (October 11 ) September 28 (October 11 )1914 Lenin arrives in Berne (Switzerland) from Poronin (Galicia). 
 Lenin reports on the attitude towards the war at a conference of the Bolsheviks, in Berne. 
 His theses on the war are adopted as a resolution of the Social-Democratic group. 
 Lenin writes the draft of the article “The European War and International Socialism”. 
 The article was not completed. 
 Lenin sends his theses on the war to Bolshevik groups abroad and to Russia for discussion by the Russian section of the Central Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, Party organisations and the Duma group. 
 Lenin continues writing the article “Karl Marx” for the Granat Encyclopaedia. 
 The article was not completed. 
 Lenin’s theses on the war are discussed at the Conference of Italian and Swiss Socialists in Lu-gano (Switzerland). 
 A number of the propositions contained in the theses are incorporated in the Conference resolution. 
 Lenin delivers a lecture on the war, in Berne. 
 In Berne, Lenin takes part in the discussion on V. 
 Kosovsky’s report “The War and Social-Democ-racy”. 
 Lenin draws up the manifesto of the Central Com-mittee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, “The War and Russian Social-Democracy”, and instructs the Geneva Bolshevik group to publish it as a pamphlet. 
 In Lausanne, Lenin takes part in the discus-sion on Plekhanov’s report “The Attitude of the September-October October 1 (14) October 2 (15) October 3 (16) October 4 (17) October 13 (26) Not earlier than October14 (27) October 19 (November 1 ) Between October 29 and Novem-ber 8 (Novem-ber 11-21 ) October 31 (November 13 ) November 4 (17) Not later than November 5 (18)Socialists Towards the War”, and criticises his chauvinist stand. 
 Lenin works on his pamphlet “The European War and European Socialism”, collects material, makes extracts from books and articles in the Russian and foreign press, makes notes, draws up a conspec-tus and plan of the pamphlet. 
 It was not written. 
 Lenin delivers a lecture on “The Proletariat and the War” in Lausanne. 
 Lenin makes a report “The European War and Socialism”, in Geneva. 
 Lenin returns to Berne where he learns that the Russian section of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Central Com-mittee supports his theses on the war. 
 Lenin decides to resume publication of the news-paper Sotsial-Demokrat , Central Organ of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, and gives the Bolshevik group in Geneva practical instructions for its publication. 
 At Clarens, near Montreux (Switzerland), Lenin delivers a lecture on the war. 
 Lenin delivers a lecture “The War and Social-Democracy”, in Zurich. 
 After one year’s interval, publication of Sotsial-Demokrat is resumed under Lenin’s editorship. 
 No. 
 33 of the newspaper carries the manifesto of the Central Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 “The War and Russian Social-Democracy” and the article “The Position and Tasks of the Socialist Inter-national”. 
 Lenin writes a letter to the editors of Vorwärts and the Vienna Arbeiter-Zeitung protesting against the distorted reports of his Zurich lecture on the war. 
 The manifesto of the Central Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 “The War and Russian Social-Democ-racy” is published in abridged form in the Swiss newspaper La Sentinelle . 
 Lenin sends the “Karl Marx” manuscript to the publishers of the Granat Encyclopaedia in Russia. 
 Lenin sends the manifesto of the Central Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 “The War and Russian Social-Democracy” to French, English and German Social-Democratic newspapers. 
 November 8 (21) November 22 (December 5 ) After Novem-ber 23 (Decem-ber 6 ) November 29 (December 12 ) December 3 (16) December 25 (January 7 1915 ) December 27 (January 9, 1915 ) September 1914-May 1915 January 19 (February 1 ) January 27 (February 9 ) February 10 (23)Lenin instructs the Bolshevik group in Geneva to arrange for Inessa Armand’s lecture in French: “Various Trends Among Russian Socialists on the Question of the War”. 
 Lenin’s article “A German Voice on the War” is published in Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 34. 
 Lenin replies to a question from the British Inde-pendent Labour Party concerning the Bolsheviks’ attitude towards the war and the peace programme. 
 Lenin’s articles “Dead Chauvinism and Living Socialism (How the International Can be Re-stored?)” and “On the National Pride of the Great Russians” appear in Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 35. 
 Lenin criticises Martov’s report “The War and the Crisis of Socialism” in Berne. 
 Lenin writes a letter on behalf of the Bureau Abroad of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Central Committee condemning the separatist actions of the anti-Party Baugy group of Bukharin and Pyatakov, who intended pub-lishing their own newspaper without a decision by the Central Committee. 
 Lenin’s article “What Next? (On the Tasks Con-fronting the Workers’ Parties with Regard to Op-portunism and Social-Chauvinism)” appears in Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 36. 
 At the Berne Library, Lenin studies the works of Feuerbach, Hegel, Aristotle and other philosophers, collects material for his “Notebooks on Philosophy”, draws up conspectuses, and writes notes on mate-rialist dialectics. 
 1915 Lenin’s articles “The Kind of ‘Unity’ Larin Pro-claimed at the Swedish Congress” and “The Russian Brand of Südekum” appear in Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 37. 
 Lenin writes a letter to the Nashe Slovo editors, and a draft declaration of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Central Committee for the London Conference of the Social-ists of the Entente countries. 
 He sends to M. 
 M. 
 Litvinov, the Russian representative on the In-ternational Socialist Bureau, a copy of the decla-ration to be read at the Conference. 
 Lenin addresses a joint protest meeting held in Berne by the Social-Democrats and trade union February 14-19 (February 27-March 4 ) February 18 (March 3 ) Not earlier than February March 10 (23) March 13-15 (26-28 ) March 16 (29) March 22-24 (April 4-6 ) Not earlier than April 1 (27) April 18 (May 1 ) Prior to April 19 (May 2 ) April 22 (May 5 )members, denouncing the arrest of the Bolshevik Duma deputies in Russia. 
 Lenin directs the Conference of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Groups Abroad held in Berne, makes a report on the central item of the agenda: “The War and the Tasks of the Party”, and drafts the Conference reso-lutions. 
 Lenin’s articles “How the Police and the Reac-tionaries Protect the Unity of German Social-Democracy” and “On the London Conference” are published in Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 39. 
 Lenin writes the article “Under a False Flag”, which is first published in 1917 in the Collection of the Priliv Publishers in Moscow. 
 Lenin sends a letter to the editors of Nashe Slovo exposing the social-chauvinist views of the Men-shevik Organising Committee and the Bund. 
 Lenin directs the work of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Central Committee’s delegation to the International Social-ist Women’s Conference in Berne. 
 Lenin’s articles “The Conference of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Groups Abroad”, “What Has Been Revealed by the Trial of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Group?”, “On the London Conference” and “The Slogan of Civil War Illustrated” appear in Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 40. 
 Lenin directs the work of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Central Committee’s delegation to the International Socialist Youth Conference in Berne. 
 Lenin writes a conspectus of the report “May Day and the War”. 
 Lenin’s articles “The Social-Chauvinists’ Sophisms”, “The Question of the Unity of Internationalists” and “Bourgeois Philanthropists and Revolutionary Social-Democracy” appear in Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 41. 
 Lenin gives directives to the Paris Bolshevik group on setting up a club of internationalist Social-Democrats to fight social-chauvinism. 
 Lenin approves the Dutch Socialists’ plan to bring out an international socialist magazine and gives practical advice concerning the publication, in foreign languages, of pamphlets against interna-tional social-chauvinism. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR May 8 (21) Prior to May 9 (22) May 12 (25) May 19 (June 1 ) Prior to May 24 (June 6 ) Second half of May-first half of June June-July July 13 (26) July-August August 7 (20)Lenin’s article “The Collapse of Platonic Interna-tionalism” appears in Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 42. 
 Lenin takes part in preparations for the publication of the magazine Kommunist . 
 The Committee Abroad of Social-Democracy of the Lettish Area invites Lenin to represent Let-tish Social-Democrats at a conference of socialist parties of neutral countries. 
 Lenin’s article “On the Struggle Against Social-Chauvinism” appears in the Supplement to Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 42. 
 Lenin leaves Berne and goes to the mountain village of Sörenberg (Switzerland). 
 Lenin writes the article “The Collapse of the Second International”. 
 Lenin writes the articles “British Pacifism and the British Dislike of Theory” and “How Servility to Reaction Is Blended with Playing at Democracy”. 
 Lenin writes the article “The Main German Opportunist Works on the War”. 
 Lenin’s articles “The Defeat of One’s Own Govern-ment in the Imperialist War” and “The State of Affairs in Russian Social-Democracy” appear in Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 43. 
 Lenin establishes contacts, by correspondence, with Left internationalists and Social-Democrats in different countries with a view to uniting them for the forthcoming International Socialist Conference and instructs Bolshevik groups to get in touch with internationalists in different countries; he issues directives on the translation and publication of the Party’s main documents—the manifesto of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Central Committee on the war, Berne Conference resolutions, etc. 
; he forwards to Scandi-navia his “Draft Declaration of the Zimmerwald Left” for translation into the Swedish and Norwe-gian languages and subsequent distribution among Left Social-Democrats in Sweden and Norway; he writes the articles “The ‘Peace’ Slogan Appraised” and “The Question of Peace”, and the pamphlet “Socialism and War”. 
 Lenin receives his mandate as the Lettish Social-Democratic Party’s delegate to the Zimmerwald Socialist Conference. 
 August 10 (23) Prior to August 20 (September 2 ) August 20-22 (September 2-4 ) August 22 (September 4 ) August 23-26 (September 5-8 ) Between August 23 and 26 (September 5-8 ) August 29-30 (September 11-12) August Summer Not earlier than September 12 (25) Second half of September Between Sep-tember 18 and 23 (October 1-6 ) September 28 (October 11 ) Autumn, not earlier than September 28 (October 11 )Lenin’s article “On the Slogan for a United States of Europe” is published in Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 44. 
 Lenin arranges for the publication of the pamphlet “Socialism and War” in German, and writes the “Draft Declaration of the Zimmerwald Left”. 
 Lenin comes to Zimmerwald to attend the Inter-national Socialist Conference. 
 Lenin directs a private conference of the Left Social-Democratic delegates to the Zimmerwald Socialist Conference, and speaks at the Conference on the character of the war and the tactics of international Social-Democracy. 
 Lenin takes part in the work of the Zimmerwald Conference, and organises and rallies its Left wing, Lenin’s pamphlet “Socialism and War” comes out in German, and is circulated among delegates to the Zimmerwald Conference. 
 Kommunist No. 
 1-2 carries Lenin’s articles “The Collapse of the Second International”, “The Voice of an Honest French Socialist” and “Imperialism and Socialism in Italy (A Note)”. 
 Lenin writes “An Appeal on the War”. 
Lenin writes the article “We Are Thankful for Such Frankness”. 
 Lenin sends a letter to the International So-cialist Committee. 
 Lenin writes the article “The Defeat of Russia and the Revolutionary Crisis”. 
 Lenin returns to Berne from Sörenberg. 
 Lenin’s articles “The First Step” and “Revolu-tionary Marxists at the International Socialist Con-ference, September 5-8, 1915” appear in Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 45-46. 
 Lenin writes the article “Kautsky, Axelrod, and Martov—True Internationalists”. 
 September 30 (October 13 ) September Not earlier than October 16 (29) Late October November 2 (15) November 7 (20) Prior to No-vember 9 (22) December 8 (21) 1915 End of 1915Lenin’s article “Several Theses. 
 Proposed by the Editors” appears in Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 47. 
 Lenin draws up a plan for the publication of a se-ries of anti-war leaflets; edits Alexandra Kollon-tai’s pamphlet “Who Needs the War”, sends 500 copies of “Socialism and War” in German to Kollontai in Scandinavia for distribution there and instructs her to arrange for the English-language publication of the pamphlet in America. 
 Lenin writes the article “The Revolutionary Pro-letariat and the Right of Nations to Self-Determi-nation”. 
 Lenin arranges for the publication of the draft reso-lution and the Manifesto of the Zimmerwald Left in German and French, and instructs Kollontai to get them published in America in English. 
 Lenin is invited to attend the meeting of the Executive of the Swiss Social-Democratic Party, held on November 20, 1915. 
 Lenin’s articles “On the Two Lines in the Revolu-tion” and “At the Uttermost Limit” appear in Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 48. 
 Lenin sends a letter to the secretary of the Socialist Propaganda League in the U. 
S. 
A. 
 Lenin’s article “Social-Chauvinist Policy Behind a Cover of Internationalist Phrases” appears in Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 49. 
 Lenin writes the book “New Data on the Laws Governing the Development of Capitalism in Agri-culture. 
 Part One. 
 Capitalism and Agriculture in the United States of America”. 
 Lenin writes the article “Opportunism and the Col-lapse of the Second International”. 
 Printed in the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics B. 
 n. 
 leHnH coЧnHeHnr TOM 21 На английскот языке