L E N I N cOLLEcTED WORKS 2 / IN ACCORDANCE WITH A DECISION OF THE NINTH CONGRESS OF THE R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
) AND THE SECOND CONGRESS OF SOVIETS OF THE U. 
S. 
S. 
R. 
 B. 
 n. 
 l d H n H С О Ч И Н E Н И Я И з д a н u е ч е m в е p m o e ГОСУДАРСТВ ЕНН ОЕ ИЗ ДАТ ЕЛЬ СТВО ПОЛИТИЧЕ СКОЙ ЛИ ТЕРАТУ РЫ M О С К В А V. 
 I. 
 L E N I N cOLLEcTED WORKS VOLUME 2 !89% – !897 PROGRESS PUBLISHERS MOSCOW 1972 TRANSLATED THE RUSSIAN EDITED BY GEORGE HANNA First printing 1960 Second printing 1963 Third printing 1972 Printed in the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics From Marx to Mao M L © Digital Reprints 2008 www. 
marx 2mao. 
com C O N T E N T S Preface ............................ 
. 
 13 1895 FREDERICK ENGELS ...................... 
. 
 15 EXPLANATION OF THE LAW ON FINES IMPOSED ON FACTORY WORKERS ............................ 
 29 I What Are Fines? ..................... 33 II How Were Fines Imposed Formerly and What Gave Rise to the New Legislation on Fines? ............. 
. 
 35 III On What Grounds May the Factory Owner Impose Fines? ... 40 IV How Big May Fines Be? ................ 
 47 V What Is the Procedure for Imposing Fines? ...... 50 VI What, According to the Law, Should the Fines Be Spent On? 55 VII Do the Fine Laws Apply to All Workers? ....... 
 66 VIII Con clusion ........................ 69 GYMNASIUM FARMS AND CORRECTIVE GYMNASIA (Russkoye Bogatstvo )...................... 
 73 TO THE WORKING MEN AND WOMEN OF THE THORNTON FACTORY 81 WHAT ARE OUR MINISTERS THINKING ABOUT? .......... 
 87 DRAFT AND EXPLANATION OF A PROGRAMME FOR THE SOCIAL-DEMOCRATIC PARTY ...................... 
. 
 93 Draft Programme ..................... 95 Explanation of the Programme ............. 
. 
 98 1896 TO THE TSARIST GOVERNMENT ................ 
. 
 122 1897 A CHARACTERISATION OF ECONOMIC ROMANTICISM (Sismondi and Our Native Sismondists )............. 
 129 Chapter I The Economic Theories of Romanticism .... 
. 
 134 I Does the Home Market Shrink Because of the Ruination of the Small Producers? ............... 135 II Sismondi’s Views on National Revenue and Capital . 
. 
 140 III Sismondi’s Conclusions from the Fallacious Theory of Two Parts of the Annual Product in Capitalist Soci-ety........................... 146 IV Wherein Lies the Errors of Adam Smith’s and Sismon-di’s Theories of National Revenue? .......... 
 150 V Accumulation in Capitalist Society .......... 
 154 VI The Foreign Market as the “Way out of the Difficul-ty of Realizing Surplus-Value ............ 161 VII Crisis ......................... 
 166 VIII Capitalist Rent and Capitalist Overpopulation .... 
 174 IX Machines in Capitalist Society ............ 184 X Protection ...................... 
. 
 192 XI Sismondi’s Place in the History of Political Economy 199 Postscript ...................... 
. 
 207 Chapter II The Character of the Romanticists’ Criticism of Capitalism ...................... 
. 
 208 I The Sentimental Criticism of Capitalism ...... 209 II The Petty-Bourgeois Character of Romanticism ... 220 III The Problem of the Growth of the Industrial Population at the Expense of the Agricultural Population ... 225 IV Practical Proposals of Romanticism ......... 232 V The Reactionary Character of Romanticism .... 
. 
 239 VICorn Tariffs in England as Appraised by Romanti-cism and by Scientific Theory ............ 252 THE NEW FACTORY LAW ..................... 267 I Why Was the New Factory Law Passed? ...... 271 II What Should Be Considered Working Time? .... 
 274 III To What Extent Does the New Law Reduce Working Hours? ........................ 276 IVWhat Does the Law Consider “Night-Time” for the Workers? ...................... 
. 
 278 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR V How Does the Ministry of Finance Try to Prove That to Restrict Overtime Would be “Unfair” to the W ork-er? ......................... 
. 
 281 VIWhat Power Does the New Law Grant the Ministers? 286 VII How Our “Christian” Government Curtails the Work-ers’ Holidays ..................... 290 VIII How Is the Observance of the New Law Guaranteed? 295 IX Will the New Law Improve the Workers’ Condition? 298 X What Is the Significance of the New Law? .... 
. 
 302 Appendix ........................... 304 I............................ 
 304 II............................ 
 305 III ............................ 
 307 IV ............................ 
 307 V............................ 
 310 VI ............................ 
 311 VII ............................ 
 314 ABOUT A CERTAIN NEWSPAPER ARTICLE ............. 
 316 THE TASKS OF THE RUSSIAN SOCIAL-DEMOCRATS ....... 
. 
 323 To the Workers and Socialists of St. 
 Petersburg from the League of Struggle .................. 348 THE HANDICRAFT CENSUS OF 1894-95 IN PERM GUBERNIA AND GENERAL PROBLEMS OF “HANDICRAFT” INDUSTRY ....... 
 355 Article One . 
 ......................... 
 357 I General Data ..................... 358 II The “Handicraftsmen” and Wage-Labour ...... 369 III “Communal-Labour Continuity” ............ 381 Article Two ......................... 
 387 IV The Agriculture of “Handicraftsmen” ....... 
. 
 387 V Large and Small Establishments . 
—The Incomes of the Handicraftsmen ................ 
. 
 403 Article Three ......................... 
 422 VI What Is a Buyer-Up? ................ 
 422 VII “Gratifying Features” of Handicraft Industry .... 
 439 VIII The Narodnik Programme of Industrial Policy ... 445 GEMS OF NARODNIK PROJECT -MONGERING (S. 
 N. 
 Yuzhakov , Edu-cational Problems . 
 Journalistic Essays . 
—Secondary-School Reform . 
 —Systems and Aims of Higher Education . 
—Gymnasium Text-books . 
—The Problem of Universal Education . 
—Women and Educa-tion. 
 St. 
 Petersburg , 1897 , pp. 
 VIII # 283. 
 Price 1 ruble 50 kopeks . 
) 459 I............................ 
 461 II............................ 
 462 III ............................ 
 469 IV ............................ 
 472 V............................ 
 476 VI ............................ 
 480 VII ............................ 
 486 THE HERITAGE WE RENOUNCE .................. 491 I II Narodism’s Addition to the “Heritage” ....... 
. 
 506 III Has the “Heritage” Gained from Association with Narodism? ...................... 
. 
 513 IV The “Enlighteners,” the Narodniks, and the “Disci-ples” ......................... 
 525 VMr. 
 Mikhailovsky on the “Disciples’” Renunciation of the Heritage ................... 
. 
 527 Notes .............................. 535 The Life and Work of V. 
 I. 
 Lenin. 
 Outstanding Dates ....... 
 567One Representative of the “Heritage” ......... 494 ILLUSTRATIONS V. 
 I. 
 Lenin, 1897 ........................ 16-17 The title-page of the Rabotnik miscellany in which Lenin’s obitu-ary, Frederick Engels , was first published . 
 1896. 
 ....... 
 17 The title-page of Lenin’s pamphlet Explanation of the Law on Fines Imposed on Factory Workers . 
 1895 .......... 
 31 The cover of Novoye Slovo in which Lenin’s Characterisation of Economic Romanticism and About a Certain Newspaper Article were first printed . 
 1897 .................. 131 Cover of Lenin’s pamphlet The New Factory Law. 
 1899 .... 
 269 Cover of the second edition of Lenin’s Tasks of the Russian Social-Democrats . 
 1902 ...................... 
. 
 325 Cover of Economic Studies and Essays by V . 
 Ilyin (V . 
 I. 
 Lenin) 353 The house in Shushenskoye village in which Lenin lived in exile ........................... 466-468 PREFACE Volume two contains Lenin’s works of the 1895-97 period. 
 The first group of works in the volume, namely, Fred-erick Engels , Draft and Explanation of a Programme for the Social-Democratic Party , The Tasks of the Russian Social-Democrats , and The Heritage We Renounce —is de-voted to an elaboration of the tasks of the Russian Marx-ists as far as their programme, tactics and organisation are concerned. 
 A considerable part of the present volume is made up of Lenin’s economic writings directed against the Narod-niks: A Characterisation of Economic Romanticism , The Handicraft Census of 1894-95 in Perm Gubernia and Gen-eral Problems of “Handicraft ” Industry , Gems of Na-rodnik Project-Mongering , etc. 
 The third group contains agitational works by Lenin— the pamphlets Explanation of the Law on Fines Imposed on Factory Workers , and The New Factory Law , the leaflets To the Working Men and Women of the Thornton Factory and To the Tsarist Government , and the article What Are Our Ministers Thinking About? In 1897 and 1898, when preparing the legally published editions of A Characterisation of Economic Romanticism , Lenin was compelled, because of the censorship, to replacethe words “Marxist theory” by “modern theory”; to replace“Marx” by “a well-known German economist,” and “this socialism” by “this doctrine,” etc. 
 For the 1908 edition, Lenin either corrected a considerable number of these ex-pressions in the text or explained them in footnotes. 
 In the second and third Russian editions of the Collected Works these corrections of Lenin’s were given as footnotes. 
 In the present edition they have been included in the text itself. 
 In the previous editions of V. 
 I. 
 Lenin’s Collected Works the text of The Tasks of the Russian Social-Democrats was taken from a copy of Lenin’s manuscript. 
 The copycontains slips of the pen and other mistakes by the copier. 
In the present edition the text of the pamphlet published in 1902, which was read and corrected by Lenin, has been used. 
 FREDERICK ENGELS Written in autumn 1895 First published in 1896 Published according in the miscellany Rabotnik ,1 to the text in Rabotnik No. 
 1-2 What a torch of reason ceased to burn, What a heart has ceased to beat!2 On August 5 (new style), 1895, Frederick Engels died in London. 
 After his friend Karl Marx (who died in 1883),Engels was the finest scholar and teacher of the modern pro-letariat in the whole civilised world. 
 From the time thatfate brought Karl Marx and Frederick Engels together, the two friends devoted their life’s work to a common cause. 
 And so to understand what Frederick Engels has done for the proletar-iat, one must have a clear idea of the significance of Marx’steaching and work for the development of the contemporaryworking-class movement. 
 Marx and Engels were the first toshow that the working class and its demands are a necessary outcome of the present economic system, which together with the bourgeoisie inevitably creates and organises the prole-tariat. 
 They showed that it is not the well-meaning efforts ofable-minded individuals, but the class struggle of the organ-ised proletariat that will deliver humanity from the evilswhich now oppress it. 
 In their scientific works, Marx and Engels were the first to explain that socialism is not the invention of dreamers, but the final aim and necessary re-sult of the development of the productive forces in modernsociety. 
 All recorded history hitherto has been a history ofclass struggle, of the succession of the rule and victory ofcertain social classes over others. 
 And this will continue until the foundations of class struggle and of class domina-tion—private property and anarchic social production—disappear. 
 The interests of the proletariat demand the de-struction of these foundations, and therefore the consciousclass struggle of the organised workers must be directedagainst them. 
 And every class struggle is a political struggle. 
 These views of Marx and Engels have now been adopted by all proletarians who are fighting for their emancipation. 
 But when in the forties the two friends took part in the so-cialist literature and the social movements of their time, they were absolutely novel. 
 There were then many people, talented and without talent, honest and dishonest, who,absorbed in the struggle for political freedom, in thestruggle against the despotism of kings, police and priests,failed to observe the antagonism between the interests ofthe bourgeoisie and those of the proletariat. 
 These people would not entertain the idea of the workers acting as an independent social force. 
 On the other hand, there weremany dreamers, some of them geniuses, who thought thatit was only necessary to convince the rulers and the govern-ing classes of the injustice of the contemporary socialorder, and it would then be easy to establish peace and gen-eral well-being on earth. 
 They dreamt of a socialism with-out struggle. 
 Lastly, nearly all the socialists of that timeand the friends of the working class generally regarded theproletariat only as an ulcer , and observed with horror how it grew with the growth of industry. 
 They all, therefore,sought for a means to stop the development of industry and of the proletariat, to stop the “wheel of history. 
” Marx and Engels did not share the general fear of the develop-ment of the proletariat; on the contrary, they placed alltheir hopes on its continued growth. 
 The more proletariansthere are, the greater is their strength as a revolutionaryclass, and the nearer and more possible does socialism be-come. 
 The services rendered by Marx and Engels to the work-ing class may be expressed in a few words thus: they taughtthe working class to know itself and be conscious of itself,and they substituted science for dreams. 
 That is why the name and life of Engels should be known to every worker. 
 That is why in this collection of articles, the aim of which, as of all our publications, is to awaken class-consciousness in the Russian workers, we must givea sketch of the life and work of Frederick Engels, one of thetwo great teachers of the modern proletariat. 
 Engels was born in 1820 in Barmen, in the Rhine Province of the kingdom of Prussia. 
 His father was a manufacturer. 
 In 1838 Engels, without having completed his high-school studies, was forced by family circumstances to enter a com-mercial house in Bremen as a clerk. 
 Commercial affairs did not prevent Engels from pursuing his scientific and politi-cal education. 
 He had come to hate autocracy and the tyr-anny of bureaucrats while still at high school. 
 The study of philosophy led him further. 
 At that time Hegel’s teachingdominated German philosophy, and Engels became hisfollower. 
 Although Hegel himself was an admirer of the au-tocratic Prussian state, in whose service he was as a profes-sor at Berlin University, Hegel’s teachings were revolution-ary. 
 Hegel’s faith in human reason and its rights, and the fundamental thesis of Hegelian philosophy that the uni-verse is undergoing a constant process of change and de-velopment, led some of the disciples of the Berlin philos-opher—those who refused to accept the existing situation—to the idea that the struggle against this situation, the struggle against existing wrong and prevalent evil, is also rooted in the universal law of eternal development. 
If all things develop, if institutions of one kind give placeto others, why should the autocracy of the Prussian king or ofthe Russian tsar, the enrichment of an insignificant minorityat the expense of the vast majority, or the domination of the bourgeoisie over the people, continue for ever? Hegel’s philosophy spoke of the development of the mind and ofideas; it was idealistic . 
 From the development of the mind it deduced the development of nature, of man, and of hu-man, social relations. 
 While retaining Hegel’s idea of theeternal process of development, * Marx and Engels rejected the preconceived idealist view; turning to life, they saw that it is not the development of mind that explains the de-velopment of nature but that, on the contrary, the expla-nation of mind must be derived from nature, from matter.... 
Unlike Hegel and the other Hegelians, Marx and Engelswere materialists. 
 Regarding the world and humanity ma-terialistically, they perceived that just as material causes underlie all natural phenomena, so the development ofhuman society is conditioned by the development of ma-terial forces, the productive forces. 
 On the developmentof the productive forces depend the relations into which *Marx and Engels frequently pointed out that in their intellectual development they were much indebted to the great German philoso-phers, particularly to Hegel. 
 “Without German philosophy,” Engelssays, “scientific socialism would never have come into being. 
” 3 men enter with one another in the production of the things required for the satisfaction of human needs. 
 And in these relations lies the explanation of all the phenomena of social life, human aspirations, ideas and laws. 
 The develop-ment of the productive forces creates social relations basedupon private property, but now we see that this same de-velopment of the productive forces deprives the majorityof their property and concentrates it in the hands of an insignificant minority. 
 It abolishes property, the basis of the modern social order, it itself strives towards the veryaim which the socialists have set themselves. 
 All the social-ists have to do is to realise which social force, owing toits position in modern society, is interested in bringing so-cialism about, and to impart to this force the consciousness of its interests and of its historical task. 
 This force is the proletariat. 
 Engels got to know the proletariat in England,in the centre of English industry, Manchester, where hesettled in 1842, entering the service of a commercial firmof which his father was a shareholder. 
 Here Engels not onlysat in the factory office but wandered about the slums in which the workers were cooped up, and saw their poverty and misery with his own eyes. 
 But he did not confine him-self to personal observations. 
 He read all that had beenrevealed before him about the condition of the Britishworking class and carefully studied all the official docu-ments he could lay his hands on. 
 The fruit of these studies and observations was the book which appeared in 1845: The Condition of the Working Class in England . 
 We have already mentioned what was the chief service rendered byEngels in writing The Condition of the Working Class in England . 
 Even before Engels, many people had described the sufferings of the proletariat and had pointed to the ne-cessity of helping it. 
 Engels was the first to say that the pro-letariat is not only a suffering class; that it is, in fact, the disgraceful economic condition of the proletariat that drivesit irresistibly forward and compels it to fight for its ulti-mate emancipation. 
 And the fighting proletariat will help itself . 
 The political movement of the working class will inev-itably lead the workers to realise that their only salvation lies in socialism. 
 On the other hand, socialism will becomea force only when it becomes the aim of the political struggle of the working class . 
 Such are the main ideas of Engels’ book on the condition of the working class in England, ideas which have now been adopted by all thinking and fighting proletarians, but which at that time were entirely new. 
These ideas were set out in a book written in absorbing styleand filled with most authentic and shocking pictures ofthe misery of the English proletariat. 
 The book was a ter-rible indictment of capitalism and the bourgeoisie and created a profound impression. 
 Engels’ book began to be quoted everywhere as presenting the best picture of the condi-tion of the modern proletariat. 
 And, in fact, neither before1845 nor after has there appeared so striking and truthfula picture of the misery of the working class. 
 It was not until he came to England that Engels became a socialist. 
 In Manchester he established contacts with peo-ple active in the English labour movement at the time andbegan to write for English socialist publications. 
 In 1844,while on his way back to Germany, he became acquaintedin Paris with Marx, with whom he had already started tocorrespond. 
 In Paris, under the influence of the French socialists and French life, Marx had also become a social-ist. 
 Here the friends jointly wrote a book entitled The Holy Family, or Critique of Critical Critique . 
 This book, which appeared a year before The Condition of the Working Class in England , and the greater part of which was written by Marx, contains the foundations of revolutionary material-ist socialism, the main ideas of which we have expounded above. 
 “The holy family” is a facetious nickname for theBauer brothers, the philosophers, and their followers. 
These gentlemen preached a criticism which stood aboveall reality, above parties and politics, which rejected allpractical activity, and which only “critically” contemplat-ed the surrounding world and the events going on within it. 
 These gentlemen, the Bauers, looked down on the pro-letariat as an uncritical mass. 
 Marx and Engels vigorouslyopposed this absurd and harmful tendency. 
 In the nameof a real, human person—the worker, trampled down by theruling classes and the state—they demanded, not contempla-tion, but a struggle for a better order of society. 
 They, of course, regarded the proletariat as the force that is capable ofwaging this struggle and that is interested in it. 
 Even before /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR the appearance of The Holy Family , Engels had published in Marx’s and Ruge’s Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher4 his “Critical Essays on Political Economy,”5 in which he exam-ined the principal phenomena of the contemporary economicorder from a socialist standpoint, regarding them as necessaryconsequences of the rule of private property. 
 Contact withEngels was undoubtedly a factor in Marx’s decision to studypolitical economy, the science in which his works have pro-duced a veritable revolution. 
 From 1845 to 1847 Engels lived in Brussels and Paris, combining scientific work with practical activities amongthe German workers in Brussels and Paris. 
 Here Marx andEngels established contact with the secret German Commu-nist League, 6 which commissioned them to expound the main principles of the socialism they had worked out. 
 Thus arose the famous Manifesto of the Communist Party of Marx and Engels, published in 1848. 
 This little bookletis worth whole volumes: to this day its spirit inspires andguides the entire organised and fighting proletariat ofthe civilised world. 
 The revolution of 1848, which broke out first in France and then spread to other West-European countries, broughtMarx and Engels back to their native country. 
 Here, inRhenish Prussia, they took charge of the democratic Neue Rheinische Zeitung 7 published in Cologne. 
 The two friends were the heart and soul of all revolutionary-democratic aspirations in Rhenish Prussia. 
 They fought to the last ditch in defence of freedom and of the interests of the peopleagainst the forces of reaction. 
 The latter, as we know,gained the upper hand. 
 The Neue Rheinische Zeitung was suppressed. 
 Marx, who during his exile had lost hisPrussian citizenship, was deported; Engels took part in the armed popular uprising, fought for liberty in three bat-tles, and after the defeat of the rebels fled, via Switzer-land, to London. 
 Marx also settled in London. 
 Engels soon became a clerk again, and then a shareholder, in the Manchester commercialfirm in which he had worked in the forties. 
 Until 1870 he lived in Manchester, while Marx lived in London, but this did not prevent their maintaining a most lively interchangeof ideas: they corresponded almost daily. 
 In this correspond-ence the two friends exchanged views and discoveries and con-tinued to collaborate in working out scientific socialism. 
 In 1870 Engels moved to London, and their joint intellectu-al life, of the most strenuous nature, continued until 1883,when Marx died. 
 Its fruit was, on Marx’s side, Capital , the greatest work on political economy of our age, and onEngels’ side, a number of works both large and small. 
Marx worked on the analysis of the complex phenomena of capitalist economy. 
 Engels, in simply written works, often of a polemical character, dealt with more general scientificproblems and with diverse phenomena of the past and pres-ent in the spirit of the materialist conception of history andMarx’s economic theory. 
 Of Engels’ works we shall mention:the polemical work against Dühring (analysing highly important problems in the domain of philosophy, natural science and the social sciences), * The Origin of the Family , Private Property and the State (translated into Russian, published in St. 
 Petersburg, 3rd ed. 
, 1895),10 Ludwig Feuerbach (Russian translation and notes by G. 
 Plekhanov, Geneva, 1892),11 an article on the foreign policy of the Russian Government (translated into Russian in the Geneva Sotsial-Demokrat , Nos. 
 1 and 2),12 splendid articles on the housing question,13 and finally, two small but very valuable articles on Russia’s economic development ( Frederick Engels on Russia , translated into Russian by Zasulich, Geneva, 1894). 
14 Marx died before he could put the final touches to his vast work on capital. 
 The draft, however, was already finished, and after the death of his friend, Engels undertookthe onerous task of preparing and publishing the second andthe third volumes of Capital . 
 He published Volume II in 1885 and Volume III in 1894 (his death prevented the prep-aration of Volume IV). 
 15 These two volumes entailed a vast amount of labour. 
 Adler, the Austrian Social-Democrat, has rightly remarked that by publishing volumes II and III ofCapital Engels erected a majestic monument to the genius who had been his friend, a monument on which, withoutintending it, he indelibly carved his own name. 
 Indeed *This is a wonderfully rich and instructive book. 
8 Unfortunately, only a small portion of it, containing a historical outline of the de-velopment of socialism, has been translated into Russian ( The De-velopment of Scientific Socialism , 2nd ed. 
, Geneva, 1892). 
9 these two volumes of Capital are the work of two men: Marx and Engels. 
 Old legends contain various moving instances of friendship. 
 The European proletariat may say that its science was created by two scholars and fighters,whose relationship to each other surpasses the most movingstories of the ancients about human friendship. 
 Engelsalways—and, on the whole, quite justly—placed himselfafter Marx. 
 “In Marx’s lifetime,” he wrote to an old friend, “I played second fiddle. 
” 16 His love for the living Marx, and his reverence for the memory of the dead Marx wereboundless. 
 This stern fighter and austere thinker possesseda deeply loving soul. 
 After the movement of 1848-49, Marx and Engels in exile did not confine themselves to scientific research. 
 In 1864 Marx founded the International Working Men’s Association, 17 and led this society for a whole decade. 
 Engels also took an active part in its affairs. 
 The work of the In-ternational Association, which, in accordance with Marx’sidea, united proletarians of all countries, was of tremendoussignificance in the development of the working-class move-ment. 
 But even with the closing down of the International Association in the seventies, the unifying role of Marx andEngels did not cease. 
 On the contrary, it may be said thattheir importance as the spiritual leaders of the working-class movement grew continuously, because the movementitself grew uninterruptedly. 
 After the death of Marx, En-gels continued alone as the counsellor and leader of the European socialists. 
 His advice and directions were soughtfor equally by the German socialists, whose strength, de-spite government persecution, grew rapidly and steadily,and by representatives of backward countries, such as theSpaniards, Rumanians and Russians, who were obliged to ponder and weigh their first steps. 
 They all drew on the rich store of knowledge and experience of Engels in his old age. 
 Marx and Engels, who both knew Russian and read Rus-sian books, took a lively interest in the country, followedthe Russian revolutionary movement with sympathy andmaintained contact with Russian revolutionaries. 
 They both became socialists after being democrats , and the demo-cratic feeling of hatred for political despotism was exceed-ingly strong in them. 
 This direct political feeling, combined the a profound theoretical understanding of the con-nection between political despotism and economic oppres-sion, and also their rich experience of life, made Marx and Engels uncommonly responsive politically . 
 That is why the heroic struggle of the handful of Russian revolutionariesagainst the mighty tsarist government evoked a most sym-thetic echo in the hearts of these tried revolutionaries. 
On the other hand, the tendency, for the sake of illusory eco-nomic advantages, to turn away from the most immediate and important task of the Russian socialists, namely, thewinning of political freedom, naturally appeared suspiciousto them and was even regarded by them as a direct betrayalof the great cause of the social revolution. 
 “The emancipa-tion of the workers must be the act of the working class itself”—Marx and Engels constantly taught. 
 18 But in order to fight for its economic emancipation, the proletariat mustwin itself certain political rights. 
 Moreover, Marx and En-gels clearly saw that a political revolution in Russia wouldbe of tremendous significance to the West-European working-class movement as well. 
 Autocratic Russia had always been a bulwark of European reaction in general. 
 The extraordi-narily favourable international position enjoyed by Russiaas a result of the war of 1870, which for a long time soweddiscord between Germany and France, of course only en-hanced the importance of autocratic Russia as a reactionaryforce. 
 Only a free Russia, a Russia that had no need either to oppress the Poles, Finns, Germans, Armenians or any oth-er small nations, or constantly to set France and Germanyat loggerheads, would enable modern Europe, rid of the bur-den of war, to breathe freely, would weaken all the reac-tionary elements in Europe and strengthen the Europeanworking class. 
 That was why Engels ardently desired the establishment of political freedom in Russia for the sake of the progress of the working-class movement in the Westas well. 
 In him the Russian revolutionaries have losttheir best friend. 
 Let us always honour the memory of Frederick Engels, a great fighter and teacher of the proletariat! Written in autumn 1895 First published in pamphlet form, St. 
 Petersburg, 1895Published according to the 1895 edition checked with the 1897 editionEXPLANATION OF THE LAW ON FINES IMPOSED ON FACTORY WORKERS19 I WHAT ARE FINES? If we were to ask a worker whether he knows what fines are, the question would very likely astonish him. 
 How can he not know what fines are, when he constantly has to pay them? What is there to ask about? However, it only seems that there is nothing to ask about. 
 Actually, most workers do not properly understand fines. 
 It is usually thought that a fine is a payment made to the employer for damage done to him by the worker. 
 That is not true. 
 A fine and compensation for damage are two different things. 
 If a worker does some damage to anotherworker, the latter may demand compensation for the damage(e. 
g. 
, for a piece of cloth which has been spoiled), but can-not fine him. 
 Similarly, if one factory owner does damage toanother (e. 
g. 
, fails to deliver goods on time), the latter can demand compensation, but he cannot fine the first factory owner. 
 Compensation for damage is demanded of an equal,whereas a fine can only be imposed on a subordinate. 
 Hence,compensation for damage must be claimed in court, whereasa fine is imposed by the employer out of court. 
 A fine issometimes imposed when the employer has suffered no damage (e. 
g. 
, a fine for smoking. 
 A fine is a penalty, and not compensation for damage. 
 If a worker, let us say, iscareless while smoking and burns the employer’s cloth,the employer not only fines him for smoking, but inaddition makes a deduction for the burnt cloth. 
 Thisexample clearly shows the difference between a fine and com-pensation for damage. 
 Fines are not imposed to compensate for damage but to establish discipline, i. 
e. 
, to secure subordination of the workers to the employer, to force the worker to ful-fil the employer’s orders, to obey him during working hours. 
 The law on fines in fact says that a fine is a “monetary pen-alty imposed by the factory management on its own authoritywith a view to the maintenance of order. 
” And the amountof the fine depends, therefore, not on the amount of thedamage, but on the extent of the worker’s misdemeanour:the greater the misdemeanour, the greater the disobedience to the employer or departure from the employer’s demands, the greater the fine. 
 If anybody goes to work for an em-ployer, it is clear that he loses his freedom; he must obeyhis employer, and the employer may punish him. 
 The peas-ant serfs worked for landlords, and the landlords punishedthem. 
 The workers work for capitalists, and the capitalists punish them. 
 The only difference is that formerly it was a man’s back that suffered, whereas now it is his purse. 
 It will perhaps be objected that joint work by a mass of workers at a mill or factory is impossible without dis-cipline: order is needed on the job, somebody has to seethat order is kept and that those who violate it are pun-ished. 
 Hence—we shall be told—fines are imposed not be-cause the workers are not free, but because joint work re-quires order. 
 The objection is quite groundless, although at first sight people may be misled by it. 
 It is only put forwardby people who wish to conceal from the workers that they are not free agents. 
 Order is certainly necessary wherever work is done jointly. 
 But is it necessary that people whowork should be subordinated to the tyranny of the factoryowners, i. 
e. 
, of people who do not work themselves and whoare only strong because they have taken hold of all the ma-chines, instruments and materials? Joint work cannot be done unless there is order, unless all submit to it; but work can be done in common without subordinating the workersto the factory owners. 
 Joint work does, indeed, requirethat there is supervision to ensure the maintenance of order,but it does not at all require that the power to superviseothers should always be vested in the one who does not work himself, but lives on the labour of others. 
 Hence it can be seen that fines are imposed not because people work togeth-er, but because, under the present capitalist system, all working folk possess no property: all the machines, instru-ments, raw materials, land, and bread belong to the rich. 
 The workers have to sell themselves to them so as not to starve. 
 Once, however, they have sold themselves, they areof course obliged to subordinate themselves to them and suf-fer punishment at their hands. 
 Every worker desirous of understanding what fines are should be clear on this point. 
 He must know this so as to refute the usual (and very mistaken) argument that fines are necessary since without them joint work is impossible. 
He must know this, so as to be able to explain to every work-er the difference between a fine and compensation for dam-age, and why fines mean that the workers are not free,that they are subordinated to the capitalists. 
 II HOW WERE FINES IMPOSED FORMERLY AND WHAT GAVE RISE TO THE NEW LEGISLATION ON FINES? The fines laws were introduced recently, only nine years ago. 
 Before 1886 there were no such laws at all. 
 Factoryowners were able to impose fines for what they pleased andto any extent they wished. 
 They did so on a monstrous scaleand collected enormous sums for themselves out of it. 
 Fines were sometimes imposed simply “at the employer’s discretion,” without the reason for the fine being given. 
Fines occasionally amounted to as much as half the earnings of the worker, so that the latter gave up to the employerfifty kopeks out of every ruble earned in the shape of fines. 
There were cases when extra fines, over and above the ordi-nary ones, were imposed; for example, 10 rubles for leaving the factory. 
 Whenever the employer’s affairs were in abad way, he would have no scruple about reducing wages,despite the existence of a contract. 
 He would compel theforemen to be stricter in fining and in rejecting work donewhich had just the same effect as reducing the worker’s wages. 
 The workers long tolerated all this oppression, but as more and more big mills and factories, particularly weaving mills, were built, forcing out the small establishments and hand weavers, the workers’ indignation at the tyranny and oppression mounted. 
 Some ten years ago there was a hitch in the affairs of the merchants and factory owners, what iscalled a crisis: goods were left on their hands; the factoryowners suffered losses and began to increase fines with stillgreater energy. 
 The workers, whose earnings were smallenough as it was, could not bear the additional oppression, with the result that workers’ revolts took place in the Mos-cow, Vladimir and Yaroslavl gubernias. 
 That was in 1885-86. 
 Their patience exhausted, the workers stopped workand wreaked terrible vengeance on their oppressors, wreckingfactory premises and machinery, sometimes setting fireto them, attacking managerial personnel, etc. 
 One of the most remarkable of these strikes was at the well-known Nikolskoye Mill belonging to Timofei SavvichMorozov (in the township of Nikolskoye, near Orekhovo Sta-tion on the Moscow-Nizhni Novgorod Railway). 
 From 1882onwards Morozov started reducing wages, and by 1884there had been five reductions. 
 At the same time fines were imposed with increasing severity, amounting in the whole mill to almost a quarter of the earnings (24 kopeks in finesfor every ruble earned), and in the case of some workers to ahalf their earnings. 
 To cover up these disgraceful fines, themill office in the year preceding the outbreak did the follow-ing: workers who had been fined to the extent of half their earnings were discharged, but were given their jobs back again sometimes on the same day, together withnew pay-books. 
 In this way books that contained records ofoutrageous fines were destroyed. 
 Where workers were absentwithout leave, deductions were made at the rate of 3 days’pay for each day’s absence; for smoking, the fine amounted to 3, 4 or 5 rubles each time. 
 Their patience exhausted, the workers struck work on January 7, 1885, and over severaldays wrecked the factory foodstore, foreman Shorin’s homeand several other factory buildings. 
 This terrific outbreakof some ten thousand workers (up to 11,000 were affected)greatly frightened the government, and was immediately followed by the appearance on the scene in Orekhovo-Zuyevo of troops, the Governor, a prosecutor from Vladimir, andone from Moscow. 
 During negotiations with the strikers, the crowd presented the management with “conditions drawn up by the workers themselves. 
” In these the workers demanded that fines imposed from Easter 1884 onwards be refunded, that thenceforward fines should not exceed 5%of earnings, i. 
e. 
, should not amount to more than 5 kopeksper ruble earned, and that for one day’s absence withoutpermission the fine should not exceed one ruble. 
 Further,the workers demanded a return to the wage rates of 1881-82, they demanded that the employer pay for idle days for which he was to blame, that 15 days’ clear notice be given beforedismissal, and that goods produced be accepted by the man-agement in the presence of witnesses from among the workers,etc. 
 This huge strike made a very great impression on the gov-ernment, which saw that when the workers act in unison they constitute a dangerous force, particularly when themass of the workers, acting in concert, advance their de-mands directly. 
 The employers also sensed the workers’strength and became more careful. 
 The newspaper Novoye Vremya , 20 for example, published the following report from Orekhovo-Zuyevo: “The significance of last year’s outbreak” (i. 
e. 
, the outbreak at Morozov’s in January 1885) “is that itimmediately changed the old order in the factories, bothin Orekhovo-Zuyevo and its environs. 
” That is to say,not only the owners of the Morozov mill had to changethe abominable system when the workers jointly demanded its abolition, but even the neighbouring mill owners agreed to concessions, out of fear of outbreaks taking place at theirfactories, too. 
 “The main thing,” stated the same newspa-per, “is that a more human attitude to the workers has nowbeen established, something that previously distinguishedfew of the factory managers. 
” Even Moskovskiye Vedomosti 21 (this newspaper always supports the employers and blames the workers them-selves for everything) understood the impossibility of re-taining the old system and had to admit that arbitraryfining is an “evil that leads to disgraceful abuses,” that “fac-tory stores are downright robbery,” that therefore a law and regulations concerning fines must be introduced. 
 The tremendous impression created by this strike was fur-ther heightened as a result of the trial of several workers. 
 For violent behaviour during the strike, for attacking a military patrol (some of the workers were arrested during the strike and locked in a building, but they broke down the door and made off), 33 workers were brought to trial. 
 This took placein Vladimir in May 1886. 
 The jury found all the accused notguilty, since the testimony of the witnesses, including theowner of the mill, T. 
 S. 
 Morozov, manager Dianov and manyof the weavers, shed light on all the abominable oppression to which the workers had been subjected. 
 This verdict of the court was a direct condemnation not only of Morozovand his managers but of the old factory system as awhole. 
 The alarm and fury of the supporters of the mill owners was thoroughly aroused. 
 The very same Moskovskiye Vedo-mosti , which after the outbreak had admitted the iniquity of the old system, now took a very different line. 
 “TheNikolskoye Mill,” it asserted, “is one of the best mills. 
 Theworkers’ relation to the factory is not a feudal or a compul-sory one at all; they come voluntarily and leave withouthindrance. 
 Fines—but fines are essential in the mills; without them the workers would get out of hand, and you might as well close the mill. 
” All the blame, it asserted,lay with the workers themselves, who were “profligate, drunk-en and careless. 
” The verdict of the court could only “corruptthe masses of the people. 
” * “But it is dangerous to joke with the masses of the people,” ejaculated Moskovskiye Vedomosti . 
 “What must the workers think, following the not-guilty verdict of the Vladimir court? The news of thisdecision spread like lightning through the whole of this man-ufacturing area. 
 Our correspondent, who left Vladimirimmediately after the announcement of the verdict, heardof it at all the stations.... 
” Thus, the employers tried to scare the government by saying that if one concession were made to the workers,the next day they would demand another. 
 *The employers and their supporters have always considered that if the workers begin to think about their conditions, begin to work for their rights and join forces in resisting the abominationsand oppression of the employers, it is all nothing but “corruption. 
”It is, of course, an advantage to the employers if the workers give nothought to their conditions and have no understanding of their rights. 
 But the workers’ outbreaks were even more frightening, and so the government had to make concessions. 
 In June 1886 a new fines law appeared, which indicated in what cases the imposition of fines was permissible, spec-ified the maximum fines, and laid it down that the finesmust not go into the employer’s pocket, but must go to coverthe needs of the workers themselves. 
 Many workers are not aware of this law, while those who are, imagine that the relief gained in the matter of fines is the handiwork of the government, and that thanksfor this relief should be accorded to the authorities. 
 We haveseen that this is wrong. 
 Despite the iniquity of the oldfactory system, the authorities did absolutely nothingto bring relief to the workers until the latter began to re-volt against it, until the workers in their fury went so far as to start wrecking the factories and machinery, settingfire to goods and materials, and attacking managers andmill owners. 
 Only then did the government get scared and make concessions . 
 For the easing of their lot the workers should thank not the authorities but their comrades who worked for and secured the abolition of this disgraceful treatment. 
 The history of the outbreaks of 1885 shows us what a co-lossal force is the workers’ united protest. 
 All that is requiredis to ensure that this force is used more consciously, that itis not wasted on wreaking vengeance on some particular factory owner, on wrecking some hated factory, that the whole force of this indignation and this hatred is directedagainst all factory owners combined, against the entireclass of them, that it is expended on regular and persistent struggle against them. 
 Let us now make a detailed examination of our fines leg-islation. 
 To acquaint ourselves with it, we must examine the following questions: 1) In what cases or on what groundsdoes the law permit the imposition of fines? 2) What, accord-ing to the law, should be the size of the fines? 3) Whatprocedure for imposing fines is laid down in the law?i. 
e. 
, who, according to the law, may fix the fine? May an appeal be lodged against it? What arrangements must be made to acquaint the worker in advance with the list of fines?How must the fines be recorded? 4) On what must fines be expended according to the law? Where is the money kept? How is it expended on the workers’ needs, and on what needs? Finally, the last question, 5) Does the fines law cover all workers? When we have examined all these questions, we shall know not only what a fine is, but also all the particular rulesand detailed regulations of Russian legislation on fines. 
And the workers need to know this, so that their reaction to each case of unjust fining may be an informed one, so that they may be able to explain to their comrades why there isinjustice of one kind or another—whether because the fac-tory management are violating the law, or because the lawitself contains such unjust regulations—and so that theymay be able accordingly to choose a suitable form of strug-gle against oppression. 
 III ON WHAT GROUNDS MAY THE FACTORY OWNER IMPOSE FINES? The law says that the grounds for imposing fines, i. 
e. 
, the misdemeanours for which the factory owner is entitledto fine workers may be the following: 1) defective work; 2) absenteeism; 3) offences against good order. 
 “No penalties,” says the law, “may be imposed on other grounds. 
” * Let us examine more closely each of these three groundsseparately. 
 The first ground is defective work. 
 The law states that “defective work is considered to be the production by the worker, through negligence, of defective articles and dam-age done by him when working to materials, machinery orother instruments of production. 
” The words “through neg-ligence” should be remembered. 
 They are very important. 
A fine may be imposed, accordingly, only for negligence. 
If the article proves to be of low quality not because of the worker’s negligence, but because, for example, the em-*The law that we are speaking of is Rules for Industry, which is included in Part Two, Volume II of the Russian Code of Laws. 
 The law is stated in various articles, which are numbered. 
 Fines are dealt with in articles 143, 144, 145, 146, 147, 148, 149, 150, 151and 152. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR ployer has supplied poor material, then the employer has no right to impose a fine. 
 It is necessary that the workers should well understand this, and, if a fine is imposed for defective work, where the defect is due not to the worker’sfault, or his negligence, they must lodge a protest, becauseto impose a fine in that case is a direct violation of thelaw. 
 Let us take another example: the worker is doing hisjob at a lathe near an electric bulb. 
 A piece of iron flies off, hits the bulb and smashes it. 
 The employer imposes a fine “for damage of materials. 
” Has he the right to do so? No,he has not, because it was not through negligence that theworker smashed the bulb: the worker is not to blame thatthe bulb was not protected at all against bits of iron, whichare always flying off when work is in progress. 
 * The question now arises, does this law adequately pro-tect the worker? Does it protect him against the employer’sarbitrary conduct and the unjust imposition of fines? Ofcourse not, because the employer decides at his discretionwhether the article is of good or bad quality; fault-findingis always possible, it is always possible for the employer to increase fines for defective work and through their medi-um get more work done for the same pay. 
 The law leavesthe worker unprotected, and gives the employer a loopholefor oppressing him. 
 Clearly the law is partial, has been drawnup to the employers’ advantage and is unjust. 
 How should the worker be protected? The workers have shown that long ago: during the 1885 strike the weavers at Morozov’s Nikolskoye Mill advanced, among other demands,the following: “that the good or bad quality of articles be es-tablished when they are handed in, in case of disagreement,with witnesses from among the operatives working close athand, all this to be recorded in the goods receipt book. 
” (This demand was recorded in an exercise-book filled up “by general agreement of the workers” and handed in from thecrowd to the prosecutor during the strike. 
 The contentsof the exercise-book were read out in court. 
) This demand is *There was a case of that sort in St. 
 Petersburg, in the port (New Admiralty), where the Harbourmaster, Verkhovsky, is well known for hisoppression of the workers. 
 After a strike he replaced fines for breakingbulbs by deductions for broken bulbs from all the workers in theshop. 
 Obviously, these deductions are just as illegal as the fines. 
 quite a fair one, because there can be no other way of avert-ing the employer’s arbitrary conduct than to bring in witnesses when a dispute arises about quality, the witnesses without fail having to come from the workers’ ranks: fore-men or clerks would never dare to oppose the employer. 
 The second ground for the imposition of fines is absen-teeism. 
 What does the law call absenteeism. 
 “Absenteeism,”states the law, “as distinct from unpunctuality or unauthor-ised quitting of work, is failure to appear at work for not less than one half of the working day. 
” The law considers thatunpunctuality or unauthorised quitting of work is, as we shallsoon see, an “offence against good order,” and the fine, there-fore, is a smaller one. 
 If the worker is several hours latecoming to the factory, but arrives before midday, this will not be absenteeism, but merely an offence against good or-der; if, however, he only arrives at midday, then it is ab-senteeism. 
 Similarly, if the worker quits work without per-mission after midday, i. 
e. 
, is away for several hours, thiswill be an offence against good order, but if he leaves for afull half-day it is absenteeism. 
 The law states that if the worker is absent for more than three days consecutively or for more than six days all told in a month, the employer isentitled to discharge him. 
 The question arises, is absence forhalf or the whole of a day always to be considered absenteeism?No. 
 Only when there are no valid reasons for non-appear-ance at work. 
 Valid reasons for non-appearance are enu-merated in the law. 
 They are as follows: 1) “loss of liberty by the worker. 
” That is to say, if the worker, for example,is arrested (on orders of the police or by sentence of a magis-trate), the employer is not entitled when dismissing the workerto fine him for absenteeism, 2) “unexpected loss of property dueto a serious accident,” 3) “fire,” 4) “flood. 
” E. 
g. 
, if a worker during the spring thaws cannot get across the river, the employ-er is not entitled to fine him, 5) “sickness which makes itimpossible for the worker to leave home” and 6) “death orsevere illness of parents, husband, wife or children. 
” In allthese six cases the worker is considered to have a valid excusefor non-appearance. 
 But to avoid being fined for absenteeism, the worker has to produce evidence: they will not take his word for it in the office that he had a valid excuse for notappearing at work. 
 A certificate should be secured from the doctor (in case of sickness, for example) or from the police (in case of fire, etc. 
). 
 If a certificate cannot be obtained at once, it should be submitted later, and a demand made that no fine be imposed, and if it already has been, that itbe cancelled. 
 Regarding these rules about valid reasons for non-appear-ance, it should be noted that they are as severe as if theyapplied to soldiers in barracks, and not to free men. 
 They have been copied from those governing non-appearance in court: if anybody is accused of a crime, he is summonedby the investigator, and, as the accused, he is obliged toappear. 
 Non-appearance is only permitted in preciselythe same cases as those in which workers are permitted toabsent themselves. 
 * That is to say, the attitude of the law is just as strict to workers as it is to all sorts of swindlers, thieves, etc. 
 Everybody understands why the rules aboutappearance in court are so strict; it is because the prosecu-tion of crime concerns the whole of society. 
 The failure,however, of a worker to appear at his place of work doesnot concern the whole of society, but only a single employer, and what is more, one worker can easily be replaced by anoth-er to prevent a stoppage of work. 
 Which means that therewas no need for the laws to have the strictness of militarylaw. 
 The capitalists, however, do not confine themselvesto depriving the worker of all his time, so that he may workin the factory; they also want to deprive him of his will, of all interests and thoughts other than those connected with the factory. 
 The worker is treated as though he were not afree man. 
 That is why such fault-finding, bureaucratic rules,reminiscent of barrack life, are drawn up. 
 For example,we have just seen that the law recognises the “death or se-vere sickness of parents, husband, wife or children” to be a valid reason for non-appearance. 
 It says that in the law on appearance in court. 
 Exactly the same is said in thelaw about the worker’s appearance at work. 
 That is to say,if, for example, the worker’s sister, and not his wife, dies,he must not dare to miss a day’s work, must not dare tospend time on funeral arrangements: his time belongs not to *Except in the one case of “fire,” which is not mentioned in the law about the summoning of accused persons. 
 himself, but to the employer. 
 As to burial, the police may deal with it—no need to bother about that. 
 According to the law on appearance in court, the interests of the family must yield place to the interests of society, for which theprosecution of criminals is necessary. 
 According to the lawon appearance at work, the interests of the worker’s familymust yield place to the interests of the employer, who musthave his profits. 
 And after this, the fine gentlemen who draw up, execute and support such laws, dare to accuse the workers of not valuing family life!... Let us see whether the law on fines for absenteeism is a fair one. 
 If the worker stays away from work for a day ortwo, that is considered absenteeism, and he is punishedaccordingly, and if he is away for more than three consecu-tive days he may be dismissed. 
 Well, and if the employer stops the job (e. 
g. 
, for lack of orders) or provides workonly five days a week, instead of the established six? Ifthe workers really possessed rights equal to those of theemployers, then the law should be the same for the employeras for the worker. 
 If the worker stops work, he loses his pay and pays a fine. 
 So then, if the employer arbitrar-ily stops the job, he should, firstly, have to pay the workerhis full wage for the whole period that the factory is ata standstill, and, secondly, he should be liable to be fined. 
But neither is laid down in the law. 
 This example clearlyconfirms what we said previously about fines, namely that they signify the enslavement of the workers by the capital-ist, they signify that the workers constitute a lower classwithout rights, condemned throughout their lives to workfor the capitalists and to create their wealth, receivingin return a mere pittance that is insufficient to make lifeeven tolerable. 
 There can be no question of the employers paying fines for arbitrarily stopping jobs. 
 But they do not even pay the workers their wages when workis stopped through no fault of theirs. 
 That is a most out-rageous injustice. 
 The law only contains the rule that the contract between the employer and the worker ceases“where there is a stoppage of work at the factory for more than 7 days, due to fire, flood, boiler explosion, or similar cause. 
” The workers should strive to get a rule adoptedmaking it obligatory on the factory owners to pay them wages during stoppages of work. 
 This demand was publicly ad-vanced by the Russian workers on January 11, 1885, during the well-known strike at T. 
 S. 
 Morozov’s mill. 
 * The exer-cise-book of workers’ demands contained the followingpoint: “that the deduction for absenteeism shall not exceedone ruble, and the employer shall pay for days idle throughhis fault, e. 
g. 
, when machinery is stopped or undergoingrepairs, in which connection each idle day to be recorded in the pay-book. 
” The workers’ first demand (that the fine for absenteeism shall not exceed one ruble) was imple-mented, becoming part of the fines law of 1886. 
 The seconddemand (that the employer pay for days idle through hisfault) was not implemented and the workers still have tofight for its adoption. 
 To ensure that the struggle for this demand is a success, all workers should clearly understand the injustice of the law, should clearly understandwhat must be demanded. 
 In each separate case when somefactory is at a standstill and the workers get no wages,they should raise the question of the injustice of it,they should insist that so long as the contract with the employer has not been annulled, the latter is obliged to pay for each day, they should report the matter to the in-spector, whose explanation will confirm to the workers thepoint that in fact the law does not deal with this matterand will give rise to discussion of the law by the workers. 
They should appeal to the courts when the possibility exists, requesting the exaction of payment of wages from the employer, and, finally, advance general demands for pay-ment for idle days. 
 The third ground for the imposition of a fine is “offences against good order. 
” According to the law, such offencesinclude the following 8 cases: 1) “unpunctuality or unauthor-ised quitting of work” (we have already indicated the dif-*It should be noted that at that time (1884-85) cases of factory stoppages through no fault of the workers were quite frequent, asthere was a commercial and industrial crisis: the mill owners couldnot dispose of their stocks, and they tried to cut down production. 
For example, in December 1884 the big Voznesenskoye Mill (Moscow Gubernia, near Talitsa Station on the Moscow-Yaroslavl Railway) cut down the working week to 4 days. 
 The workers, who were onpiece rates, met this with a strike that ended at the beginning ofJanuary 1885 in a concession from the owner. 
 ference between this and absenteeism); 2) “failure to ob-serve on the factory premises the established rules regar-ding fire precautions, in those cases where the factory management, by virtue of Note 1 to Article 105, do notconsider it necessary to annul the contract of hire con-cluded with the workers. 
” This means that where theworker violates the rules regarding fire precautions, the lawgives the employer the choice of either fining the worker or of dismissing him (“to annul the contract of hire,” as the law says); 3) “failure to observe cleanliness and tidinesson the factory premises”; 4) “breaking of silence whilework is in progress by noisiness, shouting, bawling, quar-relling, or fighting”; 5) “disobedience. 
” It should be noted ofthis point that the employer has the right to fine the worker for “disobedience” only when the latter has not fulfilled a legitimate request, i. 
e. 
, one based on the contract. 
 Ifsome arbitrary demand is made, not based on the contractbetween the worker and the employer, then no fine may beimposed for “disobedience. 
” Suppose the worker is doing ajob at piece rates. 
 The foreman tells him to drop the job and do another one. 
 The worker refuses. 
 In that case, to fine the worker for disobedience would be wrong since he con-tracted to do one particular job and, since he is on piecerates, for him to transfer to another would mean workingfor nothing; 6) “appearance at work drunk”; 7) “organisationof unauthorised games for money (cards, pitch and toss, etc. 
)” and 8) “failure to observe factory regulations. 
” These regulations are drawn up by the owner of each factory ormill and are confirmed by the factory inspector. 
 Extractsfrom them are printed in the pay-books. 
 The workers shouldread these regulations and know them, so as to check wheth-er fines imposed on them for violation of factory regula-tions are legitimate or not. 
 These regulations must be dis-tinguished from the law, which is the same for all millsand factories; internal regulations differ for each factory. 
The law is endorsed or annulled on the authority of thetsar; factory regulations, by the factory inspector. 
 Hence,if these regulations prove to be oppressive to the workers their annulment may be secured by appeal to the inspector (should he refuse to take action, an appeal may belodged with the Factory Board). 
 To show the need for distinguishing between the law and factory regulations, let us take an example. 
 Suppose a worker is fined for failure to put in an appearance on a holiday or to work overtime at the demand of the foreman. 
 Is such a fine proper ornot? To answer this question we have to know the factoryregulations. 
 If they say nothing about the worker’s beingobliged, on demand, to work overtime, then the fine isunlawful. 
 If, however, the regulations state that the worker is obliged, on demand of the management, to appear on holidays or to work overtime, then the fine will be a legit-imate one. 
 To secure the annulment of this obligation,the workers must not direct their complaint against thefines, but demand that the factory regulations be amended. 
All the workers must be unanimous in this, and then, if they act together, they will be able to get the above regu-lations cancelled. 
 IV HOW BIG MAY FINES BE? We now know all the cases in which the law permits the fining of workers. 
 Let us see what the law says about thesize of the fines. 
 The law does not fix one level for all factories. 
 It only sets a maximum. 
 This maximum is indicated separately for each of the three cases where finesmay be imposed (defective work, absenteeism and offencesagainst good order). 
 For absenteeism the maximum finesare the following: under time rates, not more than six days’earnings (reckoning fines for the whole month), that is to say, in the course of one month fines for absenteeism cannot be imposed to the amount of more than six days’ earnings. 
 * If, however, payment is by the piece, then the maximumfine for absenteeism is 1 ruble per day and not more thana total of 3 rubles per month. 
 Moreover, where the workerdoes not put in an appearance, he forfeits his pay for all the time missed. 
 Further, the maximum fine for offences against good order is one ruble for each separate violation. 
 *The maximum fine for one day’s absenteeism under time rates is not indicated. 
 All that is said is: “corresponding to the worker’swages. 
” The exact size of the fines, as we shall soon see, is displayedin each factory in a table of penalties. 
 Finally, as regards fines for defective work, no maximum is indicated in the law at all. 
 One more maximum is indicated, a general one embracing all fines: for non-appearance, of-fences against good order, and defective work combined. 
All these penalties combined “shall not exceed one-third o f the earnings to which the worker is actually entitled on pay-day. 
” In other words, if, say, 15 rubles are due to the workerfines may not, according to the law, amount to more than 5 rubles—for all violations, absenteeism and defects com-bined. 
 If more than that amount in fines has accumulated,the employer must reduce them accordingly. 
 In that case,however, the law gives the owner another right, namely,that of cancelling the contract where the fines total morethan one-third of the worker’s earnings. 
 * These regulations concerning maximum fines are, it must be said, too severe on the worker, and protect the employerat his expense. 
 Firstly, the law permits too high a level offines, amounting to as much as one-third of earnings. 
 Thisis a disgracefully high level. 
 Let us compare this maximumwith well-known cases of particularly big fines. 
 The factory inspector of Vladimir Gubernia, Mr. 
 Mikulin (who has written a book about the new law of 1886), speaks of thehigh level of factory fines before the law was adopted. 
Fines were heaviest in the weaving industry, and the heav-iest fines at a weaving mill amounted to 10%, i. 
e. 
, one-tenth of the workers ’ earnings . 
 The factory inspector of Vladimir Gubernia, Mr. 
 Peskov, in his report ** cites the following examples of particularly heavy fines. 
 The heaviestof them was one of 5 rubles 31 kopeks, out of earnings to-talling 32 rubles 31 kopeks. 
 This equals 16. 
4% (16 kopeksper ruble), i. 
e. 
, just less than a sixth of the earnings . 
 That fine was called a heavy one, and not by the worker, but by the inspector. 
 Yet our law permits fines to be twice as heavy, to amount to one-third of earnings , or 33 3 kopeks per *The worker who considers this cancellation of the contract to be wrong, may appeal to the courts, but the period during whichsuch an appeal may be lodged is a very short one—one month (count-ing, of course, from the day of dismissal). 
 **The first report for 1885. 
 Only the first reports of factory inspec-tors were printed, the government having immediately stopped further printing. 
 The state of affairs in the factories must have been wonder-ful, if they were afraid of a description of it being published. 
 ruble! Evidently, no more or less decent factory has imposed such fines as are permitted by our laws. 
 Let us take the data on fines at T. 
 S. 
 Morozov’s Nikolskoye Mill before the strike of January 7, 1885. 
 The fines at this mill were heavier,according to witnesses, than at the surrounding mills. 
They were so outrageous that 11,000 workers completelylost their patience. 
 We shall very likely not err if we takethis mill as an example of one where fines were outrageous. 
 But how heavy were the fines there? Foreman weaver Shorin testified in court, as we have already stated, that finesamounted to anything up to half the earnings, and, generallyspeaking, ran from 30% to 50%, from 30 to 50 kopeks perruble. 
 But in the first place, this testimony was not con-firmed by precise data; and, secondly, it relates either to spe-cific cases or to one workshop. 
 When the strikers were tried, some data on fines were read out in court. 
 The earnings(monthly) and fines of 17 workers were cited: the earningstotalled 179 rubles 6 kopeks, while the fines totalled 29rubles 65 kopeks. 
 This means 16 kopeks in fines per rubleearned. 
 The biggest fine of all these 17 cases was 3 rubles 85 kopeks out of 12 rubles 40 kopeks earnings. 
 This equals 31 2 kopeks per ruble, and is at any rate less than what is permitted by our law. 
 It is better, however, to take the datafor the whole factory. 
 Fines imposed in the year 1884 wereheavier than in previous years and amounted to 23 4 kopeks per ruble (this was the highest figure: the fines constituting from 20 w to 23 4 per cent of earnings). 
 So then, at a factory which became notorious for its abominably high fines, thesewere at any rate lower than those permitted by Russian law!...There’s no gainsaying that the workers are well protected bysuch a law! The strikers at Morozov’s demanded that “finesshould not exceed 5% of earnings; furthermore, the worker must be warned about bad work and be called in not more than twice a month. 
” The fines permitted by our legisla-tion can only be compared with the interest drawn by usu-rers. 
 It is hardly likely that any employer will dare to pileup fines to that extent; the law allows it, but the workerswill not permit it. 
 * *One cannot but note in this regard that Mr. 
 Mikhailovsky, formerly Chief Factory Inspector of the St. 
 Petersburg area, con-siders it quite proper to call this law “a truly philanthropic reform, What distinguishes our laws on the size of fines is not only their abominable oppressiveness but also their gross injus-tice. 
 If the fine is too big (more than one-third), the em-ployer may cancel the contract; the worker, however,is not given a similar right, i. 
e. 
, the right to leave the fac-tory if fines are imposed on him to such an amount thatthey exceed a third of his earnings. 
 It is clear that the lawis only concerned about the factory owner, as though fines are due only to the fault of the workers. 
 Actually, however, everybody knows that the factory owners frequentlyimpose fines without the workers being to blame at all, e. 
g. 
,in order to speed up the workers. 
 The law only protectsthe factory owner against the bad worker, but does notprotect the worker against the all too oppressive employer. 
 In the latter case, therefore, the workers have nobody to turn to for protection. 
 They must take thought for them-selves and for the struggle against the employers. 
 V WHAT IS THE PROCEDURE FOR IMPOSING FINES? We have already stated that by law fines are imposed “on the authority” of factory managements “themselves. 
”Regarding appeals against their instructions the law saysthat “there is no appeal against fines imposed on the workers by factory managers. 
 If, however, on visit-ing a factory, officials of the Factory Inspectoratediscover from the statements of workers that fines havebeen imposed on them in contravention to the require-ments of the law, the manager shall be prosecuted. 
” Thisprovision, as you see, is very unclear and contradictory. 
 which does supreme honour to the Russian Imperial Government’s concern for the working classes. 
” (This view is expressed in the bookon Russian manufacturing industry published by the Russian Govern-ment for the Chicago World Fair of 1893. 
) Such is the concern ofthe Russian Government!!! Before the law was adopted, when there was no law at all, there were avaricious employers who robbed the workers of 23 kopeks per ruble. 
 Yet the law in its concern for theworkers says: do not retain more than 33 3 (thirty-three and a third) kopeks per ruble! But thirty-three kopeks without the third can beretained now by law. 
 “A truly philanthropic reform” indeed! On the one hand, the worker is told that there can be no ap-peal against a fine imposed. 
 Yet on the other hand he is told that the workers may “make statements” to the inspec-tor about fines imposed “in contravention to the law. 
”Anybody who has not had occasion to acquaint himselfwith Russian laws may ask what is the difference between“to make a statement about unlawful action” and “to appealagainst unlawful action”? There is none, but the purpose of this pettifogging provision of the law is very clear: the law is meant to curtail the worker’s right to appealagainst unfair and unlawful fining by factory owners. 
Now if a worker should complain to an inspector about afine unlawfully imposed, the inspector could reply that “thelaw does not permit appeals against fining. 
” Are there many workers acquainted with this tricky law who could reply in turn: “I am not appealing, I am merely making a state-ment”? Inspectors are appointed for the express purpose ofensuring the observance of the laws regulating the relationsbetween workers and employers. 
 It is the duty of inspec-tors to accept all statements concerning the non-observ-ance of the law. 
 The inspector, according to regulations (see Instructions to Factory Inspectorate Officials, 22 en-dorsed by the Minister of Finance), must have receptiondays, not less than one a week, on which to give oral ex-planations to persons requiring them; furthermore, an an-nouncement of these days must be displayed in each factory. 
 Thus, if the workers know the law and are determined not to permit any departures from it, then the trickery of thelaw now referred to will be in vain, and the workers willbe able to secure the observance of the law. 
 Are they entitledto the return of fines paid, if these were wrongly imposed?The common-sense answer should, of course, be “yes. 
” The employer must surely not be allowed to fine the worker wrongly and to refuse to return money wrongly exacted. 
It turns out, however, that when the law was discussed inthe Council of State, 23 it was deliberately decided to be silent on this point. 
 The members of the Council of State foundthat to afford the workers the right to demand the return of wrongly exacted money “will lower in the workers’ eyes the importance with which it is intended to endow the fac-tory manager, with a view to maintaining order among the workers. 
” That is how statesmen judge the workers! If a factory owner has wrongly penalised a worker, the latter should not be given the right to demand the return of his money. 
 But why deprive the worker of his money? Becausecomplaints “will lower the importance of the managers”!That is to say, “the importance of the managers” and “themaintenance of order in the factories” are only based on theworkers not knowing their rights and “not daring” to com-plain against those in charge, even if they violate the law! So the statesmen are positively afraid lest the workers takeit into their heads to see to the proper imposition of fines!The workers should thank the members of the Council ofState for their forthrightness in showing them what theworkers may expect of the government. 
 The workers must show that they consider themselves human beings just as much as the factory owners do, and that they have no intentionof allowing themselves to be treated as dumb cattle. 
 There-fore the workers must make it their duty not to let a singlecase of wrongful fining pass without appeal, and unfailinglypresent a demand for the return of their money—either to the inspector, or, in case of his refusal, to the courts. 
 Even if the workers achieve nothing, either from the inspectors,or from the courts, their efforts will still not be in vain,but will open the eyes of the workers, and will showthem how our laws treat the workers’ rights. 
 So then, we now know that fines are imposed on the man-agers’ “own authority. 
” But at each factory the fines may be of different amounts (since the law merely indicates themaximum above which fines may not be imposed) and theremay be different factory regulations. 
 That is why the lawrequires that all violations liable to fines, and the measureof the fine for each violation be indicated in advance in the table of penalties . 
 This table is drawn up by each factory owner separately, and is endorsed by the factoryinspector. 
 It must be displayed, according to law, in eachworkshop. 
 To render possible a check on whether fines are being im-posed properly, and in what number, it is necessary that all the fines without exception be properly recorded. 
 The law requires that fines must be recorded in the worker’spay-book “ not later than three days following the date of imposition. 
” This record must indicate, first, the grounds for the imposition of the fine (i. 
e. 
, for what the fine has been imposed—for defective work and for exactly what work, for absenteeism, or for violating regulations, and exact-ly which), and, secondly, the amount of the penalty. 
 Theregistration of fines in the pay-book is necessary to enablethe workers to check whether fines are properly imposedand to enter an appeal in good time in case of any illegal action. 
 Further, the fines must all be recorded in a special book with numbered pages which has to be kept in eachfactory to make it possible for all fines to be checked by theInspectorate. 
 In this regard it may not be superfluous to say a couple of words about appeals against factory owners and inspectors, since the bulk of the workers do not know how to appeal and to whom. 
 According to the law, appeals against anyviolations of the law at a factory should be addressedto the factory inspector. 
 He is obliged to accept ver-bal and written complaints. 
 Should the factory inspectorfail to meet the request, a statement may be addressed to a senior inspector, who is also obliged to have reception days for hearing statements. 
 In addition, the senior inspec-tor’s office must be open daily for persons who need to make inquiries or to receive explanations or to make statements(see Instructions to Factory Inspectorate Officials, p. 
 18). 
Appeals against the inspector’s decision may be addressed to the Gubernia Factory Affairs Board. 
 * The time limit for these appeals, as provided by law, is one month countingfrom the day the inspector announces his decision. 
 Further,appeals against decisions of the Factory Board may be madeto the Minister of Finance, the time limit being the same. 
 As you see, the law contains the names of many people to whom appeals may be addressed. 
 And the right to appeal belongs alike to the factory owner and the worker. 
 The onlytrouble is that this protection is merely a paper one. 
 The *Who constitute the Factory Board? The Governor, the Prose-cutor, the Chief of the Police Administration, the Factory Inspector and two factory owners . 
 If we were to add the prison governor and the officer commanding the Cossacks, we would have all the officials whogive effect to “the concern of the Russian Imperial Government forthe working classes. 
” /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR factory owner is fully able to present his appeals—he has time to spare, funds to get a lawyer’s services, etc. 
, and that is why the factory owners really present appeals against the inspectors, go all the way to the minister and havealready secured preferential treatment of various kinds. 
As far as the worker is concerned, however, this right topresent appeals is merely a paper one. 
 First of all, he hasno time to make the round of the inspectors and offices. 
 He works and is fined for “absenteeism. 
” He lacks the money to obtain a lawyer’s services. 
 He does not know the laws,and therefore cannot stand up for his rights. 
 The author-ities, on the other hand, not only do nothing to acquaintthe workers with the laws, but on the contrary try to hidethem from the workers. 
 To anybody who refuses to believe this we shall cite the following regulation from the Instruc-tions to Factory Inspectorate Officials (these instructionswere endorsed by the minister and explain the rights andduties of factory inspectors): “All explanations to the ownerof an industrial establishment, or to the manager of same,relating to cases of violation of the law and to obligatory regulations published in pursuance of it are made by the factory inspector, but only in the absence of the worker. 
” * There you have it. 
 If the factory owner violates the law,the inspector must not dare speak to him of it in the presence of the workers —the minister forbids it! Otherwise the workers may perhaps really get to know the law and start demanding that it be put into effect! Small wonder that Moskov-skiye Vedomosti wrote that that would be nothing but “cor-ruption”! Every worker knows that appeals, especially against the inspector, are almost completely beyond his reach. 
 Of course,we do not wish to say that the workers should not appeal: on the contrary, whenever any possibility at all exists, they should certainly lodge appeals, because only in that waywill the workers get to know their rights and learn to under-stand in whose interests the factory laws are written. 
 All wewish to say is that appeals cannot secure any serious and gen-eral improvement in the workers’ conditions. 
 To achieve that *Note to Article 26 of the Instructions. 
 only one way exists, namely, that the workers unite to up-hold their rights, to combat oppression by the employers, and to win more decent earnings and shorter working hours. 
 VI WHAT, ACCORDING TO LAW, SHOULD THE FINES BE SPENT ON? Let us now turn to the last question concerning fines. 
 How are the fines spent? We have already said that before1886 the money went into the pockets of the factoryowners. 
 But this system resulted in such a mass ofabuses, and exasperated the workers to such a degree that the employers themselves began to appreciate the need for abolishing it. 
 At some factories the practice arose sponta-neously of using the fines to pay benefits to the workers. 
For example, at that same Morozov mill the established prac-tice even before the 1885 strike was that fines for smokingand for bringing vodka on the premises should go towards benefits for the crippled and fines for defective work, to the employer. 
 The new law of 1886 laid down the general rule that fines must not go into the employer’s pocket. 
 It states that“penalties imposed on the workers go in each factory to forma special fund in the charge of the factory management. 
 This fund may be used, by permission of the inspector, only for the needs of the workers themselves, according toregulations published by the Minister of Finance in agreementwith the Minister of Internal Affairs. 
” So then, fines, accord-ing to law, must only go to meet the needs of the workersthemselves. 
 The fines are the workers’ own money, deduc-tions from their earnings. 
 The regulations for the expenditure of the fines fund mentioned in the law were only issued in 1890 (December 4),i. 
e. 
, a total of 3 2 years after the promulgation of the law. 
 The regulations state that the fines are expended, in the main , on the following needs of the workers: “a) on grants to workers who have become totally incapacitated or who have temporarily lost the ability to work because of illness. 
”At the present time workers who have been injured are usu-ally without any means of subsistence. 
 In order to take the factory owner to court they usually live at the expense of the lawyers who are in charge of their case and who, in return for the sops they give to the workers, get the bulk of the com-pensation awards. 
 And if the worker is only likely to get asmall compensation through the court, he will not even finda lawyer. 
 In such cases use should always be made ofthe fines money; if the worker gets a grant from the fines fund he will manage somehow for a time and will be able to secure the services of a lawyer to conduct his case againstthe employer, without his poverty driving him out of theclutches of the employer into those of the lawyer. 
 Workerswho lose their jobs through sickness should also secure grantsfrom their fines fund. 
 * In interpretation of this first point of the regulations, the St. 
 Petersburg Factory Board decided that grants shouldbe made on the basis of a doctor’s certificate, to the extentof not more than half the previous earnings. 
 Let us note inparenthesis that the St. 
 Petersburg Factory Board adoptedthis decision at its session of April 26, 1895. 
 The interpre-tation was accordingly given 4 2 years after the issue of the regulations, while the regulations were made 3 2 years after issue of the law. 
 Consequently, eight years in all were required merely for the law to be adequately interpreted !! How many years will now be required for the law to becomegenerally known, and to be actually applied? Secondly, disbursements from the fines fund are made “b) for grants to working women in the last period of preg-nancy and who have ceased work 2 weeks before confinement. 
”According to the interpretation of the St. 
 Petersburg Fac-tory Board, disbursements must only be made during a pe-riod of 4 weeks (two before and two after confinement) and to the extent of half the previous earnings. 
 Thirdly, grants are made “c) where property is lost or damaged due to fire or other misfortune. 
” According to theinterpretation of the St. 
 Petersburg Board, a police certificateis presented as evidence in such cases and the size of the *It stands to reason that the fact of securing a grant from the fines fund does not deprive the worker of the right to demand compen-sation from the employer in case, for example, of injury. 
 grant must not exceed two-thirds of a half-year’s earnings (i. 
e. 
, four months’ earnings). 
 Fourthly, and finally, grants are made “d) for burial. 
” According to the interpretation of the St. 
 Petersburg Board,these grants are made only in the case of workers who wereemployed and died at the factory in question, or of theirparents and children. 
 The amount of the grants is from 10to 20 rubles. 
 Such are the four cases mentioned in the regulations in which grants are made. 
 But the workers have the right toreceive grants in other cases, too: the regulations state thatgrants are made “in the main” in those 4 cases. 
 The workersare entitled to receive grants for all sorts of requirements,and not only for those enumerated. 
 The St. 
 Petersburg Board in its interpretation of the regulations concern-ing fines (this interpretation is hung up in factories)also says that “the allocation of grants in all other cases ismade by permission of the Inspectorate,” and the Boardadded that grants should under no circumstances reducethe factory’s disbursements on various institutions (e. 
g. 
, schools, hospitals, etc. 
) and compulsory expenditures (e. 
g. 
, on keeping premises occupied by the workers in prop-er repair, on medical aid, etc. 
). 
 This means that the makingof grants from the fines fund does not entitle the factoryowner to consider this an expenditure of his own; it is nothis expenditure but that of the workers themselves. 
 The factory owner’s disbursements must remain as before. 
 The St. 
 Petersburg Board laid down one more regulation— “the total regular grants made must not exceed one half ofthe annual receipts from fines. 
” Here a distinction is madebetween regular grants (which are made over a definiteperiod, for example, to a sick or injured person) and lump-sum grants (which are made once, e. 
g. 
, for burial or in case of fire). 
 In order to leave funds for lump-sum grants,the regular grants must not exceed half the total fines. 
 How can grants be got from the fines fund? The workers must, according to the regulations, apply for grants to theemployer, who makes them by permission of the inspector. 
 If the employer refuses, an appeal should be made to the inspector, who may award a grant on his own author-ity. 
 The Factory Board may allow reliable employers to make small grants (of up to 15 rubles) without requesting the in-spector’s permission. 
 Fines to a total of 100 rubles are kept in the employer’s possession, while larger sums are placed in a savings bank. 
 Should any factory close down, the fines fund is trans-ferred to the gubernia general workers’ fund. 
 It is not stated in the regulations how this “workers’ fund” (about which the workers do not and cannot know anything) isexpended. 
 It should, we are told, be kept in the State Bank “pending further instructions. 
” If even in the capital it required 8 years for regulations to be made about the dis-bursement of the fines funds at the different factories, more than a dozen years will very likely be required before regu-lations are devised for the disbursement of the “guberniageneral workers’ fund. 
” Such are the regulations concerning the disbursement of the fines money. 
 As you see, they are distinguished bytheir extreme complexity and intricacy; no wonder, there-fore, that to this day the workers are almost totally unaware of their existence. 
 This year (1895) notices about these reg-ulations are being put up at the factories of St. 
 Peters-burg. 
 * The workers themselves must now try to make these regulations generally known, must ensure that theworkers learn to view grants from the fines fund properly— not as sops from the owners, not as charity, but as their own money made up of deductions from their earnings anddisbursed only to meet their needs. 
 The workers have every right to demand that this money be distributed to them. 
 Regarding these regulations we must speak, firstly, of how they are applied, and of what inconveniences and what abuses arise. 
 Secondly, we must see whether they have been drawn up fairly, and whether they adequately uphold theinterests of the workers. 
 *Thus, in St. 
 Petersburg it was only in 1895 that steps were taken to implement the fines law of 1886. 
 Yet Mr. 
 Mikhailovsky, the Chief Inspector, whom we mentioned above, said in 1893 that the law of 1886 “is now being scrupulously put into effect. 
” This littleexample shows us what an impudent lie is contained in the ChiefFactory Inspector’s book, intended as it is to acquaint the Americanswith the Russian factory system. 
 As to the application of the regulations we must point first of all to the following interpretation given by the St. 
 Petersburg Factory Board: “If at any particular momentno fines money is available ... the workers may not present any claims to the factory managements. 
” The question, how-ever, arises: how will the workers know whether or not finesmoney is available, and if it is, how much there is of it? The Factory Board argues as though the workers know this— yet it has taken no trouble to let the workers knowthe state of the fines fund, nor has it obliged the fac-tory owners to hang up notices about the fines money. 
 Does the Factory Board really imagine that it is sufficientfor the workers to learn about it from the employer, who will drive applicants away when there is no fines money in hand? That would be disgraceful because the employerswould then treat workers desirous of receiving grants as though they were beggars. 
 The workers must ensure that at each factory an announcement is displayed month-ly about the state of the fines fund, indicating how much cash is in hand, how much has been received in the past month, and how much has been expended and “on whatitems. 
” Otherwise the workers will not know how much they can get; they will not know whether the fines fund can meet all their requirements or only part of them, in whichcase it would be fairest to choose the most urgent items. 
 Some of the best organised factories have themselves intro-duced such announcements: in St. 
 Petersburg, I think,it is done at the Siemens and Halske works and at the gov-ernment cartridge factory. 
 If every time the worker has a discussion with the inspector, he insistently draws atten-tion to this and urges the need for displaying a notice, the workers as a whole will certainly secure the adoption of it everywhere. 
 Further, it would be very convenient for theworkers if printed forms * were available at facto-ries for applications for grants from the fines fund. 
 Suchforms have been introduced, for example, in Vladimir Gu-bernia. 
 It is not easy for the worker himself to put the whole *That is to say, forms on which the application is already printed, blank spaces being left in which to write the name of the factory,the grounds for the application, address, signature, etc. 
 application in writing, and what is more he won’t know how to write all that is required, whereas the form contains all items, and all he has to do is to fill in a few words in the blank spaces. 
 If forms are not introduced, many workerswill have to get clerks to write their applications for them, andthis involves expenditure. 
 Of course, the applications may,according to the regulations, be oral; but, firstly, the workerhas in any case to get the police or doctor’s certificate re-quired by the regulations (where an application form is used, the certifying statement is recorded on the form itself),and, secondly, where the application is oral, some employerwill perhaps refuse to reply, whereas he is obliged to replyto one made in writing. 
 Applications made to the factoryoffice on printed forms will deprive them of the men-dicant character which the employers try to attach to them. 
 Many factory owners are particularly dissatisfied withthe fact that the fines money—according to the law—goes not into their pockets, but to serve the needs of theworkers. 
 That is why many dodges and devices have beeninvented for bamboozling the workers and inspectors and evading the law. 
 As a warning to the workers we shall mention a few such devices. 
 Some factory owners have not recorded fines as such but as money issued to the worker. 
 The worker is fined a ruble, butthe record made in the book says that he has been issueda ruble. 
 When deducted from the pay this ruble remains in the employer’s pocket. 
 That is not just evasion of the law, it is downright cheating, fraud. 
 Other factory owners do not record fines for absenteeism; instead they do not credit the worker with all his daysworked, i. 
e. 
, if, say, the worker absents himself one dayin the week, he is not credited with five days’ work, but with four, the wage of one day (which should have been a fine for absenteeism and should have gone to the fines fund)going to the employer. 
 This again is sheer fraud. 
 Inciden-tally let us note that the workers are quite helpless againstsuch fraud, * because they are not told of the state of the fines fund. 
 Only if detailed monthly notices are posted (in-*That such fraud is practised is related by none other than Mr. 
 Mikulin, the Factory Inspector of Vladimir Gubernia, in his book about the new law of 1886. 
 dicating the number of fines imposed each week in each separate workshop) can the workers see to it that the fines really go to the fines fund. 
 Indeed, who will see to it that all these records are correct, if not the workers themselves?The factory inspectors? But how is the inspector to discoverthat such and such a figure has been fraudulently enteredinto the book? Mr. 
 Mikulin, a factory inspector, in dealingwith such fraud, remarks: “In all such cases it was exceedingly difficult to discover the abuses, if there was no direct reference to same in theshape of workers’ complaints. 
” The inspector himself admitshis inability to discover fraud if the workers do not pointit out. 
 And the workers cannot do so if the factory ownersare not obliged to put up notices about fines imposed. 
 Still other factory owners have invented more convenient methods of duping the workers and evading the law, methodsso cunning and underhanded as to make it difficult to findfault with them. 
 Many cotton mill owners in Vladimir Gu-bernia applied for the inspector’s endorsement of two oreven three rates instead of only one for each kind of cotton cloth; in a footnote to the list it was stated that weavers producing cloth that is faultless are paid the top rate, thoseproducing cloth that is faulty are paid rate No. 
 2, whilecloth that is considered damaged is paid for at the lowestrate. 
 * It is clear why this cunning arrangement was invent-ed: the difference between the top and bottom rates went into the owner’s pocket, while the difference actually meant a penalty for defective work and therefore should have goneinto the fines fund. 
 This was clearly a gross evasion of thelaw, and not only of the fines law, but also of the law on rateendorsement; the rate is endorsed so as to prevent the employ-er arbitrarily altering the wages, whereas if not one, but several rates exist, he obviously is given the fullest license. 
 The factory inspectors saw that such rates were “ evidently aimed at evading the law” (all this is related by the self-same Mr. 
 Mikulin in the above-mentioned books; neverthe-less, they “ considered they had no right ” to oppose the respect-ed factory-owning “gentlemen. 
” *Such rates are in operation in some St. 
 Petersburg mills; for example, it is stated that for such and such a quantity of cloth theworker gets from 20 to 50 kopeks. 
 Why, of course. 
 It is no easy matter opposing the owners (not one, but several employers simultaneously hit on this way of doing things!). 
 But suppose the workers, and not “Messrs. 
” the Mill Owners, tried to evade the law?It would be interesting to know whether there would be asingle factory inspector throughout the Russian Empirewho would “ consider he had no right ” to oppose the workers in an attempt to evade the law. 
 Thus, these two-and three-storey rates were endorsed by the Factory Inspectorate and put into operation. 
 It turnedout, however, that Messrs. 
 the Mill Owners, who inventways of evading the law, and Messrs. 
 the Inspectors, whodo not consider they have the right to hinder the ownersin their good intention, are not alone in their interest in the rate problem ... the workers, too, are interested. 
 The workers proved to lack that gentle tolerance of the millowners’ knavish tricks, and “considered they had the right”to prevent these mill owners from swindling them. 
 These rates, Mr. 
 Inspector Mikulin tells us, “aroused such dissatisfaction among the workers that it was one of the chief causes of the violent disorders which broke out and required the intervention of armed force. 
” That’s the sort of thing which is going on! At first they “considered they had no right” to prevent Messrs. 
 theMill Owners from violating the law and bamboozling theworkers—but when the workers, indignant at these iniq-uities, revolted, armed force was “required”! But why was this armed force “required” against the workers, who wereupholding their lawful rights, and not against the mill owners, who were obviously violating the law? At all events,it was only after the workers revolted that “rates of thiskind were abolished by order of the Governor. 
” The work-ers stood their ground. 
 The law was not introduced by Messrs. 
 the Factory Inspectors, but by the workers them-selves, who had shown that they would not permit anybody toslight them and would stand up for their rights. 
 “Subsequent-ly,” relates Mr. 
 Mikulin, “the Factory Inspectorate refusedto endorse such rates. 
” Thus the workers taught the inspec-tors to give effect to the law. 
 It was, however, only the Vladimir mill owners who were taught that lesson. 
 Yet factory owners are the same every-where, whether they are in Vladimir, Moscow, or St. 
 Peters-burg. 
 The attempt of the Vladimir mill owners to circumvent the law was a failure, but the method they devised not onlyremained, but was even improved on by a certain St. 
 Pe-tersburg factory owner of genius. 
 What was the method of the Vladimir mill owners? It was that of not using the word fine, but of replacing it by other words. 
 If I say that the worker, in case of defective work, gets a ruble less, that will be a fine, and it willhave to go into the fines fund. 
 But if I say that, in case of defective work, the worker is paid at a lower rate, then that will not be a fine, and the ruble will land in my pocket. 
That was how the Vladimir mill owners argued, but the workers rebuffed them. 
 One can argue in a slightly differ-ent way, too. 
 One can say: where work is defective the work-er will be paid without bonus; then again this will not be a fine, and the ruble will land in the employer’s pocket. 
 That is the line of argument devised by Yakovlev, the art-ful owner of a St. 
 Petersburg engineering works. 
 He says the following: you will get a ruble a day, but if you are not guilty of any misdemeanours, absenteeism, incivility, ordefective work, you will get a “bonus” of 20 kopeks. 
 If, however, a misdemeanour does take place, the employer deducts twenty kopeks, and, of course, puts them in hispocket—because, after all, it is “bonus” money and not a fine. 
 All laws indicating what are the misdemeanours for which penalties may be imposed, and in what measure,and how they should be spent on the workers’ needs, are non-existent so far as Mr. 
 Yakovlev is concerned. 
 The laws refer to “fines,” and he is dealing with “bonuses. 
” The astutefactory owner continues to this day to swindle the workers by his pettifogging tricks. 
 The St. 
 Petersburg Factory In-spector very likely also did “ not consider he had the right ” to prevent this evasion of the law. 
 Let us hope that the work-ers of St. 
 Petersburg will not lag behind those of Vladimir and will teach the inspector and the factory owner howto observe the law. 
 To show what huge sums of money are collected out of the fines, let us quote reports on the size of fines funds inVladimir Gubernia. 
 Grants began to be distributed there in February 1891. 
 By October 1891, grants had been made to 3,665 persons to a total of 25,458 rubles 59 kopeks. 
 By October 1, 1891, the fines fund totalled 470,052 rubles 45 kopeks. 
 Incidentally,reference should be made to another of the uses to whichthe fines fund is put. 
 At a certain factory the fines fundamounted to 8,242 rubles 46 kopeks. 
 The factory went bank-rupt, and the workers were left to face the winter without food or work. 
 Then grants totalling 5,820 rubles of this fund were distributed among the workers, of whom therewere as many as 800. 
 From October 1, 1891, to October 1, 1892, fines total-ling 94,055 rubles 47 kopeks, were imposed, while grantsmade to 6,312 persons amounted to only 45,200 rubles 52 kopeks. 
 The grants were distributed as follows: 208 per-sons were given monthly disability pensions to a totalof 6,198 rubles 20 kopeks, that is to say an average annualgrant of 30 rubles per person (these beggarly grants are madewhile tens of thousands of rubles, fines money, are lying un-used!). 
 Further, in connection with loss of property 1,037 per-sons were given a total of 17,827 rubles 12 kopeks, an average of 18 rubles per person. 
 Expectant mothers received 10,641 ru-bles 81 kopeks, in 2,669 cases, an average of 4 rubles (thatis, for three weeks, one before confinement and two after). 
Sickness grants were made to 877 workers to a total of 5,380rubles 68 kopeks, an average of 6 rubles. 
 Funeral grants totalled 4,620 rubles—to 1,506 workers (3 rubles each), and miscellaneous—532 rubles 71 kopeks to 15 persons. 
 Now we have fully acquainted ourselves with the fines regulations and with the way these regulations are applied. 
Let us see whether the regulations are fair, and whetherthe workers’ rights are adequately protected. 
 We know that the law states that the fines money does not belong to the employer, and that it can only go to servethe workers’ needs. 
 Regulations dealing with the expendi-ture of the money had to be endorsed by the ministers. 
 What, however, came of the regulations? The money is collected from the workers and is expended on their needs—but the regulations do not even state that the em-ployers are obliged to inform the workers of the state ofthe fines fund. 
 The workers do not possess the right to elect representatives, who will see to the proper flow of money into the fines fund, and who will accept applications from workers and distribute grants. 
 The law states that grants are made “by permission of the inspector,” but accordingto the regulations issued by the ministers, it turns out thatapplications for grants have to be addressed to the employer . 
 But why should applications be made to the employer?Surely the money is not the employer’s, but the workers’, made up of deductions from their earnings. 
 The employer himself has no right to touch this money: if he spends it,he is responsible for doing so, as for misappropriation andembezzlement, just as if he has spent somebody else’s mon-ey. 
 The reason the ministers issued these regulationsis apparently because they wanted to do a service to the employers: now the workers have to ask the employer for grants, just as if they were asking for doles. 
 True, if theemployer refuses, the inspector may allocate the grant him-self. 
 But then the inspector himself does not know thefacts—and he will be told by the owner that the worker issuch and such a kind of person, that he does not deserve a grant, and the inspector will believe the owner. 
 * And then, are there many workers who will bother to address com-plaints to the inspector, losing working time to visit him,and writing applications and so forth? Actually, thanks tothe ministerial regulations, we only get a new form of work-ers’ dependence on the employers. 
 The employers are en-abled to victimise those workers with whom they are dissat-isfied, maybe for refusing to take things lying down: byrejecting a worker’s application the employer will certainlycause him lots of extra trouble, and maybe succeed in de-priving him of a grant altogether. 
 On the other hand, the *In the printed application for grants which, as we have said, was circulated to the factories by the Vladimir Factory Boardand which constitutes the implementation of the “regulations” thatis most suitable for the workers, we read: “the factory officetestifies to the signature and the contents of the application, and addsthat in its opinion, the applicant deserves a grant of such and such a sum. 
” That is to say, the office can always write, without giving any explanation, that “in its opinion” the applicant does not deserve a grant. 
 Grants will not be got by those who are in need of them, but by those who, “in the employers’ opinion, deserve them. 
” employer may allow quite big grants to be made to those workers who curry favour with him and kowtow to him, and who act as informers on their workmates even in cases where other applications would be rejected. 
 Instead of abolishing theworkers’ dependence on the employers in the matter of fines,we get a new dependence, which splits the workers and createsthe servile and the go-getter types. 
 And then, take noteof the awful red tape that, according to the regulations, sur-rounds the receipt of grants: on each occasion the worker requiring a certificate has to approach a doctor, who willvery likely give him a rough reception, or the police, whodo nothing without bribes. 
 Let us repeat, the law says noth-ing about that; it has been established by the ministerialregulations, which have obviously been drawn up to suit the factory owners, and which are clearly aimed at supple-menting dependence on the employers with the dependenceof the workers on officials, at barring the workers from allparticipation in the expenditure on their needs of the finesmoney taken from themselves, and at weaving a web ofsenseless formalities that stupefies and demoralises * the workers. 
 To give the employer the right to authorise the making of grants from the fines money is a crying injustice. 
 Theworkers must strive for the legal right to choose deputieswho shall see that the fines go into the fines fund, receiveand check workers’ applications for grants, and report to the workers about the state of the fines fund and its expen-diture. 
 At those factories where deputies now exist, theyshould pay attention to the fines money and demand thatthey be given all data relating to the fines, and that theyshould accept workers’ applications and deliver them to themanagement. 
 VII DO THE FINES LAWS APPLY TO ALL WORKERS? The fines laws, like most other Russian laws, do not apply to all factories, do not apply to all workers. 
 When it issuesa law, the Russian Government is always afraid that *Splits, creates servility, and develops bad habits. 
 it will hurt the gentlemen who own the factories, is afraid that the network of cunning office regulations and officials’ rights and duties will clash with some other office regula-tions (and we have countless numbers of them), with therights and duties of some other officials, who will be terriblyhurt if some new official bursts into their domain, andwill consume barrels of official ink and mounds of paperon correspondence about “departmental delimitation. 
” For that reason a law is rarely introduced in this country for the whole of Russia at once, without exceptions, withoutcowardly delays, without ministers and other officials beingpermitted to depart from the law. 
 All this particularly affected the fines law, which, as we have seen, aroused such dissatisfaction among the cap-italist gentlemen, and was only adopted under the pres-sure of portentous workers’ revolts. 
 Firstly, the fines law only covers a small part of Russia. 
 * This law was issued, as we have said, on June 3, 1886, andbecame operative as from October 1, 1886, in only three gubernias , those of St. 
 Petersburg, Moscow, and Vladimir. 
 Five years later the law was extended to Warsaw and Petrokov gubernias (June 11, 1891). 
 Then, three years still later it was extended to 13 more gubernias (of the Centralgubernias—Tver, Kostroma, Yaroslavl, Nizhni-Novgo-rod, and Ryazan; of the Ostsee gubernias 24—Estland and Lifland; of the Western gubernias—Grodno and Kiev; and of the Southern gubernias—Volhynia, Podolsk, Kharkov and Kherson)—according to the law of March 14,1894. 
 In 1892 the fines regulations were extended to coverprivate ironworks and mines. 
 The rapid development of capitalism in the south of Rus-sia, and the tremendous development of mining is bringing together masses of workers there, and compelling the government to hurry. 
 The government is evidently very slow in abandoning the old factory system. 
 And it should be noted that it is *This law is part of the so-called “special regulations concern-ing the relations between factory owners and workers. 
” These “spe-cial regulations” only cover “localities marked by a considerabledevelopment of factory industry,” to which we shall refer below inthe text. 
 abandoning that system only under the pressure of the workers: the growth of the working-class movement and the strikes in Poland caused the extension of the law to the Warsaw and Petrokov gubernias (the town of Lodzis in Petrokov Gubernia). 
 The huge strike at the KhludovMill, Yegoryevsk Uyezd, Ryazan Gubernia, immediatelyresulted in the law being extended to Ryazan Gubernia. 
The government evidently also does “not consider it has the right” to deprive Messrs. 
 the Capitalists of the right to un-controlled (arbitrary) fining until the workers themselvesinterfere. 
 Secondly, the fines law, like all the factory inspection regulations, does not cover crown and government establish-ments. 
 Government factories have their own chiefs “con-cerned with the welfare” of the workers, people whom the law does not wish to bother with fines regulations. 
 Indeed,why supervise government factories, when the factory chiefis an official himself? The workers can complain about himto himself. 
 Small wonder that among these chiefs of govern-ment factories one can find such mischief-makers as, for example, the St. 
 Petersburg Harbourmaster, Mr. 
 Verkhovsky. 
 Thirdly, the regulations concerning fines funds spent on the workers themselves do not cover workers employedin the shops of those railways which have pensions or savingsand mutual benefit funds. 
 The fines are paid into thesefunds. 
 All these exceptions still seemed insufficient and so the law contains the decision that the ministers (of Finance andof Internal Affairs) have the right, on the one hand, “toremove unimportant factories from subordination” to theseregulations “where really necessary” and, on the otherhand, to extend the operation of these regulations to “im-portant” artisan establishments. 
 Thus, not only did the law instruct the minister to draw up the fines money regulations—it also gave the min-isters the right to free some factory owners from subordina-tion to the law! Such is the extent of our law’s kindnessto the factory-owning gentry! In one of his interpretations the minister states that he only frees such factory owners regarding whom the Factory Board “ is certain that the owner of the establishment will not transgress the workers ’ inter-ests. 
” The factory owners and inspectors are such close boon companions that they take each other’s word. 
 Why burden the factory owner with regulations, when he “gives the assurance” that he will not transgress the workers’interests? Now, what if the worker should try to requireof the minister or the inspector that he be released from theregulations, after “giving the assurance” that he will nottransgress the factory owner’s interests? Such a worker would very likely be considered insane. 
 That is called “the possession of equal rights” by the workers and the factory owners. 
 As to the extension of the fines regulations to important artisan establishments, these regulations, so far as is known,have hitherto (in 1893) only been applied to distribution offices which supply warp to home-working weavers. 
 The ministers are in no hurry to extend the operation of the finesregulations. 
 The entire mass of workers doing jobs at homefor employers, big stores, etc. 
, continue under the old con-ditions, totally subordinate to the tyranny of the employ-ers. 
 It is more difficult for these workers to join forces, to arrive at agreement as to their needs, to undertake a common struggle against oppression by the employers—that is why no attention is paid to them. 
 VIII CONCLUSION We have now acquainted ourselves with our fines laws and regulations, with all this exceptionally complicatedsystem that frightens the worker away with its drynessand unattractive official language. 
 We can now return to the question raised at the out-set, to that of fines being a product of capitalism, i. 
e. 
, of such a social order under which the people are divided intotwo classes, the owners of the land, machines, mills andfactories, materials and supplies—and those who haveno property, and who therefore have to sell themselves tothe capitalists and work for them. 
 Has it always been the case that workers in the service of an employer have had to pay him fines for all sorts ofdetects? In small establishments—for example, among the urban artisans or workers—no fines are imposed. 
 There is no complete alienation of the worker from the master, they live and work together. 
 The master does not dream of in-troducing fines, because he himself keeps an eye on the joband can always force the correction of what he does not like. 
 But such small establishments and trades are gradually disappearing. 
 The handicraftsmen and artisans, and also the small peasants, cannot withstand the competition of the big factories and big employers who use improved instru-ments and machines and combine the labour of massesof workers. 
 That is why we see that handicraftsmen, arti-sans and peasants are increasingly being ruined, and arebecoming workers in factories, are abandoning their villages and migrating to the towns. 
 At the big factories the relations between the employ-er and the workers are quite unlike those in thesmall workshops. 
 The employer is so far above theworker in wealth and social status that a veritable abysslies between them, and frequently they do not even know one another and have nothing in common. 
 The worker has no opportunity of making his way into the employers’ranks: he is doomed to remain impoverished for all time,working for rich men whom he does not know. 
 Instead ofthe two or three workers employed by the small master thereare now masses of workers, who come from various locali-ties and constantly replace one another. 
 Instead of separate instructions from the master, general regulations appearthat are made obligatory for all workers. 
 The former con-stancy of the relations between master and worker disap-pears: the master sets no great store by the worker at all,because he can always easily find another one among the crowd of unemployed ready to hire themselves to anybody. 
 Thus, the power of the employer over the workers increases,and the employer makes use of this power, resorting to finesin order to drive the worker into the narrow confines offactory work. 
 The worker has to submit to this new limita-tion of his rights and of his earnings, because he is now help-less against the employer. 
 And so fines appeared on earth not very long ago— together with the big factories, together with large-scale /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR capitalism, together with the complete split between the rich masters and the ragged workers. 
 Fines are the result of the complete development of capitalism and the complete enslavement of the worker. 
 However, this development of the big factories and in-tensification of pressure by the employers brought still otherconsequences in their train. 
 The workers, totally helplessas against the factory owners, began to understand that utter disaster and poverty awaited them if they continued to be divided. 
 The workers began to understand that there wasonly one means of saving themselves from the starvationand degeneration that capitalism held in store for them—and that was to join forces in order to fight the factory ownersfor higher wages and better living conditions. 
 We have seen what disgraceful oppression of the workers our factory owners resorted to in the eighties, how they turnedfines into a means of lowering the workers’ wages and didnot confine themselves to just reducing rates. 
 The oppres-sion of the workers by the capitalists reached its apex. 
 But this oppression evoked the workers’ resistance. 
 The workers rose up against their oppressors and were victo-rious. 
 The terrified government conceded their demandsand hastened to issue a law regulating fines. 
 That was a concession to the workers. 
 The government imagined that by issuing the fines laws and regulations,by introducing grants from the fines money it would imme-diately satisfy the workers and make them forget their com-mon workers’ cause, their struggle against the factory owners. 
 However, such hopes of the government, which poses as the protector of the workers, will not be justified. 
We have seen how unjust the new law is to the workers, howsmall are the concessions to the workers by comparison with even the demands advanced by the Morozov strikers; we have seen how loopholes were left everywhere for mill own-ers anxious to violate the law, how grants regulations thatsupplement the employers’ tyranny with that of the officialswere drawn up in the employers’ interests. 
 When this law and these regulations are put into effect, when the workers acquaint themselves with them and begin to learn from their clashes with the managements how thelaw oppresses them, then they will begin steadily to realise that they are in a position of dependence. 
 They will under-stand that only poverty has compelled them to work for the rich and to be content with crumbs for their heavy labour. 
 They will understand that the government and itsofficials are on the side of the factory owners, and that thelaws are drawn up in such a way as to make it easier forthe employer to oppress the worker. 
 And the workers will appreciate, finally, the point that the law does nothing to improve their status, so long as the workers’ dependence on the capitalists continues toexist, because the law will always be partial to the capi-talist employers, because the latter will always succeedin devising ruses for evading the law. 
 Once they have understood this, the workers will see that only one means remains for defending themselves, namely, to join forces for the struggle against the factoryowners and the unjust practices established by the law. 
 GYMNASIUM FARMS AND CORRECTIVE GYMNASIA25 (RUSSKOYE BOGATSTVO)26 The solution to the problem of capitalism in Russia pro-posed by the Narodniks and represented latterly most strik-ingly by Russkoye Bogatstvo has long been known. 
 While not denying the existence of capitalism, for theyare compelled to admit its development, the Narodniks con-sider our capitalism not to be a natural and necessaryprocess crowning the age-long development of commodity economy in Russia, but an accident, a phenomenon not firmly rooted and merely indicative of a departure from thepath prescribed by the nation’s entire historical life. 
 “Wemust,” say the Narodniks, “choose different paths for the fa-therland,” leave the capitalist path and “communalise”production, making use of the existing forces of the “whole” of “society,” which, so they say, is already beginning to be convinced that there is no basis for capitalism. 
 Obviously, if a different path may be chosen for the fa-therland, if the whole of society is beginning to understandthe need for this, then the “communalising” of productionpresents no great difficulties and requires no preparatory historical period. 
 One has only to draw up a plan of such communalisation and to convince the appropriate personsof its feasibility—and the “fatherland” will turn from themistaken path of capitalism to the road of socialisation. 
 Everybody understands how tremendously interesting a plan must be that promises such radiant perspectives; that is why the Russian public should be very thankful to Mr. 
 Yuzhakov, one of the regular contributors of Russkoye Bogatstvo , for having undertaken the job of drawing up such a plan. 
 In the May issue of Russkoye Bogatstvo we find his article “Educational Utopia,” with the sub-heading What connection has this with the “communalising” of production?—the reader will ask. 
 The most direct connec-tion, since Mr. 
 Yuzhakov’s plan is a very broad one. 
 Theauthor plans to set up in every volost a gymnasium embrac-ing the entire male and female population of school age (from 8 to 20 years, and to a maximum of 25 years). 
 Such gymnasia should be productive associations that engage infarming and moral undertakings, that by their labour notonly maintain the population of the gymnasia (which, accord-ing to Mr. 
 Yuzhakov, constitutes a fifth of the entire popu-lation), but additionally provide resources for the main-tenance of the entire child population . 
 The detailed ac-count made by the author for a typical volost gymnasium (or “gymnasium farm,” or “agricultural gymnasium”) showsthat all in all the gymnasium will maintain over a half of the entire local population . 
 If we bear in mind that each such gymnasium (20,000 dual, i. 
e. 
, 20,000 male and 20,000 female gymnasia, are projected for Russia) is provided with land and means of production (it is intended to issue42 per cent government-guaranteed Zemstvo 27 bonds with 2 per cent redemption per annum)—then we shall understand how truly “enormous” the “plan” is. 
 Production is socialised fora total of half the population. 
 At one blow, then, a different path is chosen for the fatherland! And that is achieved “with-out any expenditure (sic!) on the part of the government,Zemstvo, or people. 
” It “may seem a utopia only at first sight,”but actually it is “far more feasible than nation-wide ele-mentary education. 
” Mr. 
 Yuzhakov testifies that the finan-cial operation required for this “is no chimera or utopia,” and is achieved not only, as we have seen, without expen-diture, without any expenditure, but even without any changein the “established educational plans”!! Mr. 
 Yuzhakovquite justly remarks that “all this is of no little importancewhen one wishes not to confine oneself to an experiment,but to achieve really nation-wide education. 
” He says, it is true, that “I have not set myself the aim of drawing up a working plan,” but he does give us the proposed number ofmale and female pupils per gymnasium, an estimate of the“Plan for Natio n-Wide Compulsory Secondary Education. 
 ” manpower required to maintain the entire population of the gymnasia and enumerations of the pedagogical and ad-ministrative staffs, and indicates both the rations in kind for gymnasia members and the salaries in cash for tutors,doctors, technicians and craftsmen. 
 The author makes adetailed calculation of the number of working days requiredfor agricultural pursuits, the amount of land needed foreach gymnasium, and the financial resources needed to get them installed. 
 He provides, on the one hand, for members of national minorities and sects who cannot enjoy the bless-ings of nation-wide secondary education, and, on the otherhand, for persons excluded from the gymnasia because ofbad conduct. 
 The author’s calculations are not confinedto one typical gymnasium. 
 Not at all. 
 He raises the issue of establishing all the 20,000 dual gymnasia and indicates how to get the land required for this and how to secure a“satisfactory contingent of tutors, administrators and man-agers. 
” One can understand the enthralling interest of such a plan, an interest that is not only theoretical (evidently, the plan for communalising production drawn up so concretely is intended to finally convince all sceptics and to demolishall who deny the feasibility of such plans), but also genu-inely practical. 
 It would be strange if the supreme govern-ment paid no attention to the project for organising nation-wide compulsory secondary education, particularly when the author of the proposal definitely asserts that the thing can be done “without any expenditure” and “will meet withobstacles not so much from the financial and economic cir-cumstances of the task, as from the cultural circumstances,”which, however, are “not insuperable. 
” Such a project di-rectly concerns not only the Ministry of Public Education, but equally the Ministry of Internal Affairs, the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Agriculture, and even, as weshall see below, the War Ministry. 
 The projected “correctivegymnasia” will, most likely, have to go to the Ministryof Justice. 
 There can be no doubt that the rest of the minis-tries will also be interested in the project, which, in Mr. 
 Yuzhakov’s words, “will answer all the above-enumerated re-quirements (i. 
e. 
, of education and maintenance) and, verylikely, many others too. 
” We are therefore certain that the reader will not complain if we set about a detailed examination of this very striking project. 
 Mr. 
 Yuzhakov’s chief thought is the following: no studies whatever take place in the summer time, which isdevoted to agricultural work. 
 Further, pupils, on graduat-ing the gymnasium, are left to work there for some time;they do winter work and are used for industrial jobs that supplement agricultural work and enable each gymnasium by its own labours to maintain all the pupils and workers,the entire teaching and administrative staff and to coverexpenditure on education. 
 Such gymnasia, Mr. 
 Yuzhakovjustly remarks, would be large agricultural artels. 
 Thislast expression does not, by the way, leave the slightest doubt about our being right in regarding Mr. 
 Yuzhakov’s plan as the first steps in the Narodnik “communalisation”of production, as part of the new path that Russia is tochoose so as to avoid the vicissitudes of capitalism. 
 “At the present time,” argues Mr. 
 Yuzhakov, “the pupils are graduated from the gymnasium at the age of 18 to 20, and occasionally there is a delay of one or two years. 
 Under compulsory education ... the delay will become still morewidespread. 
 People will be graduated later, while the threesenior classes will be made up of the 16-to 25-year agegroups, if 25 years becomes the age limit, after reachingwhich they must leave without finishing the course. 
 Thus, if we bear in mind the additional contingent of adult fifth-class pupils one may boldly consider about one-third of thepupils in the gymnasium to be ... of working age. 
” Even ifthe proportion is reduced to one quarter, the author calculatesfurther, by adding to the eight gymnasium classes the twoclasses for preparatory elementary school (illiterate eight-year-old children would be admitted), we would still get a very large number of workers who, assisted by semi-workers,could cope with the summer work. 
 But the “ten-class gymna-sium farm,” Mr. 
 Yuzhakov remarks justly, “necessarilyrequires a certain contingent of winter workers. 
” Where arethey to be got? The author proposes two solutions: 1) the hire of workers (“some of the more deserving of whom might be given a share in the proceeds”). 
 The gymnasium farmshould be a profitable undertaking and be able to pay for such hire. 
 But the author “considers another solution of greater im-portance”: 2) those who have finished the gymnasium course will be obliged to work to cover the expenditure on their tuition and their keep while in the junior classes. 
 That istheir “direct duty,” adds Mr. 
 Yuzhakov—a duty, of course,only for those who cannot pay the cost of tuition. 
 It is theywho will constitute the necessary contingent of winter work-ers and the supplementary contingent of summer workers. 
 Such is the first feature of the projected organisation that is to “communalise” one-fifth of the population intoagricultural artels. 
 It already enables us to see what sortof different path for the fatherland will be chosen. 
 Wage-labour, which at the present time serves as the only sourceof livelihood for people who “cannot pay the cost of tuition” and living, is replaced by compulsory unpaid labour. 
 But we must not be disturbed by that: it should not be forgottenthat in return the population will enjoy the blessings ofuniversal secondary education. 
 To proceed. 
 The author projects separate male and female gymnasia, intending to adopt the prejudice prevalent on the European continent against co-education, which ac-tually would be more rational. 
 “Fifty pupils per class or500 for all the ten classes, or 1,000 per gymnasium farm(500 boys and 500 girls) will be quite a normal composition”for an average gymnasium. 
 It will have 125 “pairs of work-ers” and a corresponding number of semi-workers. 
 “If I mention,” says Yuzhakov, “that this number of workers is capable of cultivating the 2,500 dessiatines of land undercultivation in Malorossiya * for example, everybody will understand what a tremendous force is provided by thelabour of the gymnasium”!... But in addition to these workers there will be “regular workers,” who “work off” their education and keep. 
 How many of them will there be? The number graduated annuallywill be 45 pupils, male and female. 
 A third of the pupilswill undergo military service for a period of three years (now aquarter do so. 
 The author raises this number to one-thirdby cutting down the length of service to three years). 
 “It will only be fair to place the remaining two-thirds in *The Ukraine. 
— Ed. 
 similar conditions, i. 
e. 
, in keeping them at the gymnasium to work off the cost of their education, and of the education of their comrades who have been called to the colours. 
 All the girls may also be retained for the same purpose. 
” The pattern of the new system, arranged for the father-land that has chosen a different path, is assuming increas-ingly clear outlines. 
 Now all Russian citizens are obligedto undergo military service and, since the number of persons of military age is larger than the number of soldiers required, the latter are chosen by lot. 
 In com-munalised production the recruits will also be select-ed by lot, but as for the rest, it is proposed “to place themin the same conditions,” i. 
e. 
, to make it obligatory for themto spend three years in service, not military, it is true, but doing work in the gymnasium. 
 They have to work off the cost of keeping their comrades who have been called to thecolours. 
 Have all to do so? No. 
 Only those who cannot paythe cost of the tuition. 
 The author has already advancedthis proviso above, and below we shall see that for peoplewho are able to pay for tuition, he plans separate gymnasia altogether, of the old type. 
 Why, the question arises, does the keep of comrades called to the colours have to be workedoff by those who cannot pay the cost of tuition? and not bythose who can? The reason is very understandable. 
 If thegymnasium pupils are divided into paying and non-paying,it is evident that the contemporary structure of society will not be affected by the Reform; that is quite well understood by Mr. 
 Yuzhakov himself. 
 In that case, it is understand-able that the state’s general expenditure (on the soldiers)will be borne by those who are without the means of liveli-hood, * just as they bear it now in the shape, for example, of indirect taxes, etc. 
 In what way is the new system differ-ent? In the fact that nowadays those who have no resources can sell their labour-power, while under the new systemthey will be obliged to work gratis (i. 
e. 
, for their keep alone). 
 There cannot be the slightest doubt that Russia willthus avoid all the vicissitudes of the capitalist system. 
Hired labour, which contains the threat of the “ulcer of the *Otherwise the domination of the former over the latter would not be maintained. 
 proletariat” is driven out and makes way for ... unpaid com-pulsory labour. 
 And there is nothing surprising in the fact that people placed in relationships in which labour is compulsory andunpaid should find themselves in conditions correspondingto these relationships. 
 Just listen to what we are told bythe Narodnik (“friend of the people”) immediately afterthe foregoing: “If marriages are allowed between young people who have finished the course and remain at the gymnasium forthree years; if separate premises are arranged for the familyworkers; and if the profits of the gymnasium allow them tobe given at least a modest allowance in cash and kindwhen they leave it, then such a three years’ stay there will be far less burdensome than military service.... 
” Is it not obvious that such advantageous conditions will impel the population to bend every effort to gain admittanceto the gymnasia? Judge for yourselves: firstly, they will bepermitted to marry. 
 True, according to the now existingcivil legislation such permission (from the authorities) is not required at all. 
 But bear in mind that these will be gymnasium pupils , male and female , true, as old as 25 years, but still gymnasium pupils. 
 If university students are notpermitted to marry, could gymnasium pupils be permitted todo so? And what is more, the permission will depend on theschool authorities, consequently, on people with a higher education: obviously, there are no grounds for fearing abuses. 
 Those who graduate the gymnasium and remain asregular workers there, are, however, no longer pupils. 
 Never-theless, they too, people between 21 and 27 years of age,have to obtain permission to marry. 
 We cannot but recog-nise that the new path selected by the fatherland involves some curtailment of the civil rights of Russian citizens, but, after all, it must be admitted that the blessings of universalsecondary education cannot be acquired without sacrifices. 
Secondly, separate premises will be provided for family work-ers, probably no worse than the cubicles now inhabited byfactory workers. 
 And thirdly, the regular workers get a “modest allowance” for this. 
 Undoubtedly, the population will prefer the advantages of a quiet life under the wing ofthe authorities to the turmoils of capitalism, will prefer them to such a degree that some worker’s will stay perma-nently at the gymnasium (very likely out of gratitude for being allowed to marry): “The small contingent of regular workers, who remain at the gymnasium altogether andassociate (sic!!) themselves with it, supplements these la-bour forces of the gymnasium farm. 
 Such are the possible andby no means utopian labour forces of our agricultural gymna-sium. 
” Have mercy on us! What is there “utopian” in all this? Regular unpaid workers, who have “associated themselves”with their masters, by whom they are permitted to marry—just ask any old peasant, and he will tell you from his ownexperience that all this is quite feasible. 
 ( To be continued . 
)* Written in autumn 1895 Published in the newspaper Published according Samarsky Vestnik , to the text in No. 
 254, November 25, 1895. 
 Samarsky Vestnik Signed: K. 
 T—n *No continuation followed in the newspaper Samarsky Vestnik . 
— Ed. 
 TO THE WORKING MEN AND WOMEN OF THE THORNTON FACTORY28 Working men and women of the Thornton Factory! November 6th and 7th should be memorable days for all of us.... 
 The weavers, by their solid resistance to the em-ployer’s pressure have proved that at a difficult moment there are still people in our midst who can uphold our com-mon interests as workers, that our worthy employers havenot yet succeeded in turning us for all time into the miser-able slaves of their bottomless purses. 
 Let us, then, com-rades, stand firm and steadfast and carry on to the veryend, let us remember that we can improve our conditions only by our common and concerted efforts. 
 Above all, comrades, don’t fall into the trap so cunningly preparedfor you by Messrs. 
 Thornton. 
 They reason as follows:“There is a hitch now in disposing of our goods, so thatif we keep to our previous working conditions we shall notget the profits we got previously.... 
 And we are not ready to take anything less.... 
 So then, we’ll have to tighten up on the workers, let them shoulder the cost of the bad priceson the market.... 
 But the job has to be done cleverly andnot in any old way, so that the worker, in the simplicityof his mind, will not understand what sort of a titbit weare preparing for him.... 
 If we tackle all of them at once, they will all rise up at once, and we shan’t be able to handle them, so we shall first dupe those mis-erable weavers, and then the others won’t get away.... 
 Weare not accustomed to restrain ourselves in dealing with thesecreatures, and what for, anyhow? New brooms sweep clean-er here.... 
” So then, the employers, who are so full of con-cern for the worker’s well-being, want to quietly and steadily impose on the workers of all departments what they have already imposed on the weavers.... 
 That is why, if we all remain indifferent to the fate of the weaving sheds, we shalldig with our own hands a pit into which we, too, shall soonbe thrown, Latterly the weavers have been earning, inround figures, 3 rubles 50 kopeks a fortnight, and duringthe same period families of seven have contrived somehow to live on 5 rubles, and families consisting of husband, wife and child on 2 rubles in all. 
 They have sold the last of theirclothes and used up the last coppers they earned by theirhellish labour at a time when their benefactors, the Thorn-tons, were adding millions to the millions they alreadyhad. 
 To crown it all ever-new victims of the employers’ avarice have been thrown out on the streets before their eyes, and the pressure has been regularly increased with the mostheartless cruelty.... 
 Without any explanation, they havestarted mixing noils 29 and clippings with the wool, which slows the job down terribly; delays in getting the warp haveincreased as though inadvertently; finally, they have begun without ado to introduce short time, and now the pieces have to be five instead of nine schmitz 30 long, so that the weaver has to fuss around longer and oftener in obtaining and fixingthe warps, for which, as is known, not a kopek is paid. 
 Theywant to wear our weavers down, and the earnings of 1 ruble62 kopeks per fortnight, which have already begun to appear in the pay-books of some of the weavers, may, in the near future, become general in the weaving sheds.... 
 Comrades,do you, too, want to see the day when you get this sortof kindness from the employers? If not, if, finally, yourhearts have not entirely turned to stone in face of the suffer-ing of poor folks like yourselves, rally solidly round our weavers, let us put forward our common demands, and on every suitable occasion let us wrest better conditions fromour oppressors. 
 Workers of the spinning sheds, don’t deludeyourselves about the stability and slight increase in yourearnings.... 
 After all, almost two-thirds of your numberhave already been dismissed, and your better earnings have been purchased at the cost of the starvation of your own spinners who have been thrown out of work. 
 This again isa cunning trick of the employers and is not difficult to understand if you only count how much was earned by the entire mule-spinning department previously, and how much now. 
 Workers of the new dyeing department! Twelve rubles a month, all told, is what you now earn, at the costof 14 4 hours’ daily work, saturated from head to foot with the murderous fumes of dyes! Pay attention to our demands:we also want to end the illegal deductions made from youdue to your foreman’s inefficiency. 
 Labourers, and all un-skilled workers generally! Do you really expect to retain your 60-80 kopeks a day, when the skilled weaver has tocontent himself with 20 kopeks a day? Comrades, don’tbe blind, don’t swallow the employers’ bait, stand up for oneanother more firmly, otherwise it will go badly for all ofus this winter. 
 We must all keep a most watchful eye on the employers’ manoeuvres aimed at reducing rates, and with all our strength resist every tendency in this directionfor it spells ruin for us.... 
 Turn a deaf ear to all theirpleadings about business being bad: for them it only meansless profit on their capital, for us it means starvation andsuffering for our families who are deprived of their last crust of stale bread. 
 Can there be any comparison between the two things? They are now putting pressure on the weavers firstof all, and we must secure: 1) an increase in weavers’ rates to their spring level, i. 
e. 
, by about 6 kopeks per schmitz; 2) that the weavers, too, be brought under the law which says that the worker must be told how much he can earn on a job before he begins it. 
 Let the rates list, bearing thefactory inspector’s signature, exist not only on paper, butin reality, as required by law. 
 For weaving, for example,the existing rates should be accompanied by informationabout the quality of the wool, the quantity of noils and clippings in it, and there should be an estimate of the time required for preparatory work; 3) that the working time be so distributed that we do not stand idle through no fault of our own; now, forexample, things are so arranged that on each piece the weav-er loses a day waiting for warp, and since the piece is be-coming almost half its former size, the weaver will suffer a double loss, regardless of the rates list. 
 If the boss wantsto rifle our earnings this way, let him do so outright, in such a /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR manner that we definitely know what he wants to squeeze out of us; 4) that the factory inspector sees to it that there is no trickery about the rates, that there are no double rates. 
That means, for example, that the rates list should not con-tain two different rates for one and the same kind of article,only with different names. 
 For example, we got 4 rubles32 kopeks a piece for weaving Bieber, and only 4 rubles 14 kopeks for Ural, 31—yet as far as work goes isn’t it one and the same thing? A still more impudent piece of trickery isthe double price given for goods of one denomination. 
 Thatway Messrs. 
 Thornton dodged the fines laws, which statethat a fine may only be imposed for such damage as resultsfrom the worker’s carelessness and that the deduction has to be recorded in his pay-book under the heading “fines” not later than three days after it is imposed. 
 A strict record hasto be kept of all the fines, the total sum of which is not togo into the employer’s pocket, but must be used to cover theneeds of the workers of the factory concerned. 
 With us, how-ever—we have but to look at our books—there are empty spaces, there are no fines, and one might think our employers are the most kind-hearted of all. 
 Actually, how-ever, due to our lack of knowledge, they dodge the law andeasily fix things to suit themselves.... 
 We are not fined, yousee, yet deductions are made from us, the smaller rate beingpaid and as long as two rates have existed, a smaller and a bigger one, there has been nothing at all to cavil at, they have kept on deducting the money and putting it into their ownpockets; 5) that in addition to introducing a single rate, let each deduction be registered in the fines column, with an indica-tion of why it is made. 
 Then wrong fining will be obvious, less of our work will be done for nothing, and there will be a drop in thenumber of disgraceful things being done now, as, for exam-ple, in the dyeing department, where the workers’ earningsare lower on account of the foreman’s inefficiency, whichcannot, according to law, be a reason for non-payment of labour, since there can be no question here of the worker’s carelessness. 
 And haven’t all of us had deductions for whichwe are not in the least to blame? 6) we demand that the payment we make for lodgings be on the pre-1891 level, that is to say, one ruble per person per month, because our earnings being what they are we posi-tively have nothing to pay the two rubles with, and in anycase, what for?... For the filthy, smelly, crowded kennelalways in danger of fire? Don’t forget, comrades, that allover St. 
 Petersburg it is considered enough to pay a ruble amonth, and that only our considerate bosses are not satis-fied with that—so we must force them here, too, to cut down their greed. 
 In defending these demands, comrades, weare not rebelling at all; we are merely demanding that webe given what all the workers of other factories now enjoyby law, the return of what has been taken from us bythose who placed all their hopes on our inability to uphold our own rights. 
 Let us, then, show on this occasion that our “benefactors” are mistaken. 
 Written and first published Published according in a mimeographed edition to the text of the leaflet, in November 1895 checked with the text in the miscellany Rabotnik, No. 
 1-2 (1896) WHAT ARE OUR MINISTERS THINKING ABOUT?32 Written at the end of 1895 Published according to a copy for the newspaper Rabocheye Dyelo found in the archives First published in 1924 of the Police Department Minister of Internal Affairs Durnovo wrote a letter to Procurator General of the Holy Synod Pobedonostsev. 
 The letter, numbered 2603, was written on March 18, 1895,and bears the inscription “strictly confidential. 
” The minis-ter, therefore, wanted the letter to remain a strict secret. 
But there proved to be people who do not share the minis-ter’s views that Russian citizens should not know the gov-ernment’s intentions, with the result that a handwritten copy of this letter is now circulating everywhere. 
 What did Mr. 
 Durnovo write to Mr. 
 Pobedonostsev about?He wrote to him about the Sunday schools. 
 The letter reads: “Information secured during recent years goes toshow that, following the example of the sixties, politically unreliable individuals and also a section of the student youth of a certain trend, are endeavouring to enter theSunday schools as teachers, lecturers, librarians, etc. 
 Thisconcerted attempt, which cannot be inspired by a desire toearn money since the duties in such schools are undertakengratis, proves that the activity above indicated, on the part of anti-government elements, constitutes a legal means of struggle against the system of state and public orderexisting in Russia. 
” That is how the minister argues. 
 Among educated people there are those who want to share their knowledge with theworkers, who want their knowledge to be of benefit not to themselves alone, but to the people—and the minister immediately decides that there are “anti-government ele-ments” here, i. 
e. 
, that it is conspirators of some kind who are inciting people to enter the Sunday schools. 
 Could not the desire to teach others really arise in the minds of some educated people without incitement? But the minister isdisturbed because the Sunday-school teachers get no salaries. 
 He is accustomed to the spies and officials in his service only working for their salaries, working forwhoever pays them best, whereas all of a sudden people work, render services, teach, and all ... gratis. 
 Suspi-cious! thinks the minister, and sends spies to explore thematter. 
 The letter goes on to say: “It is established from the following information” (received from spies, whose exist-ence is justified by the receipt of salaries) “that not only dopersons of a dangerous trend find their way into the teach-ers’ ranks, but often the schools themselves are under the unofficial direction of a whole group of unreliable persons,who have no connection at all with the official personnel, who deliver lectures in the evenings and give lessons to the pupils on the invitation of the men and women teachers theythemselves have installed there.... 
 The fact that outside people are allowed to give lectures offers full scope for the infiltration of persons from frankly revolutionary circlesas lecturers. 
” So then, if “outside people,” who have not been endorsed and examined by priests and spies, want to give lessons toworkers—that is downright revolution! The minister re-gards the workers as gunpowder, and knowledge and educa-tion as a spark; the minister is convinced that if the sparkfalls into the gunpowder, the explosion will be directed first and foremost against the government. 
 We cannot deny ourselves the pleasure of noting that in this rare instance we totally and unconditionally agree with the views of His Excellency. 
 Further in his letter the minister cites “proofs” of the cor-rectness of his “information. 
” Fine proofs they are! Firstly, “a letter of a Sunday-school teacher whose name has still not been ascertained. 
” The letter was confiscatedduring a search. 
 It refers to a programme of history lec-tures, to the idea of the enslaving and emancipation of the social estates, and reference is made to the revolt of Razinand of Pugachov. 
 33 Evidently these latter names scared the good minister so much that he very likely had a nightmare of peasants armed with pitchforks. 
 The second proof:“The Ministry of Internal Affairs is in possession of a programme, privately received, for public lectures in aMoscow Sunday school on the following points: ‘The originof society. 
 Primitive society. 
 The development of social organisation. 
 The state and what it is needed for. 
 Order. 
 Liberty. 
 Justice. 
 Forms of political structure. 
 Absoluteand constitutional monarchy. 
 Labour—the basis of thegeneral welfare. 
 Usefulness and wealth. 
 Production, ex-change and capital. 
 How wealth is distributed. 
 The pursuit ofprivate interest. 
 Property and the need for it. 
 Emancipa-tion of the peasants together with the land. 
 Rent, profit, wages. 
 What do wages and their various forms depend on?Thrift. 
’ “The lectures in this programme, which is undoubt-edly unfit for an elementary school, give the lecturerevery opportunity gradually to acquaint his pupils with the theories of Karl Marx, Engels, etc. 
, while the person pres-ent on behalf of the diocesan authorities will hardly be ina position to detect the elements of Social-Democratic prop-aganda in the lectures. 
” The minister is evidently very much afraid of the “theo-ries of Marx and Engels,” if he notices “elements” of them even in the sort of programme where not a trace of them is to be seen. 
 What did the minister find “unfit” in it? Verylikely the problem of the forms of political structure and theconstitution. 
 Just take any geography textbook, Mr. 
 Minister, and you will find those problems dealt with there! May adult workers not know the things that children are taught? But the minister places no reliance on persons from the Diocesan Department: “They will very likely fail to under-stand what is said. 
” The letter ends with an enumeration of the “unreliable” teachers at the parish Sunday school of the Moscow mill of the Prokhorov Textile Company, the Sunday school in the town of Yelets and the proposed school in Tiflis. 
 Mr. 
 Durnovoadvises Mr. 
 Pobedonostsev to undertake “a detailed check of the individuals permitted to take classes in the schools. 
” Now, when you read the list of teachers, your hair stands on end: all you get is ex-student, again an ex-student, and still again an ex-student of Courses for Ladies. 
 The mini-ister would like the tutors to be ex-drill sergeants. 
 It is with particular horror that the minister says that the school in Yelets “is situated beyond the river Sosna,where the population is mainly the common” (o horror!) “and working people, and where the railway workshops are. 
” The schools must be kept as far away as possible from the “common and working people. 
” Workers! You see how mortally terrified are our ministers at the working people acquiring knowledge! Show every-body, then, that no power will succeed in depriving the workers of class-consciousness! Without knowledge the work-ers are defenceless, with knowledge they are a force! Written in prison in 1895 -96 First published in 1924The Draft Programme is published according to the manuscript written in invisible ink between the lines ofNauchnoye Obozreniye ,35No. 
 5, 1900 and the Explanation of the Programme , according to a hecto-graphed notebookDRAFT AND EXPLANATION OF A PROGRAMME FOR THE SOCIAL-DEMOCRATIC PARTY34 DRAFT PROGRAMME A. 
 1. 
 Big factories are developing in Russia with ever-growing rapidity, ruining the small handicraftsmen and peasants, turning them into propertyless workers,and driving ever-increasing numbers of the people to thecities, factory and industrial villages and townlets. 
 2. 
 This growth of capitalism signifies an enormous growth of wealth and luxury among a handful of factory owners, mer-chants and landowners, and a still more rapid growth of the poverty and oppression of the workers. 
 The improve-ments in production and the machinery introduced in thebig factories, while facilitating a rise in the productivity ofsocial labour, serve to strengthen the power of the capital-ists over the workers, to increase unemployment and with it to accentuate the defenceless position of the workers. 
 3. 
 But while carrying the oppression of labour by capi-tal to the highest pitch, the big factories are creating a spe-cial class of workers which is enabled to wage a struggleagainst capital, because their very conditions of life aredestroying all their ties with their own petty production, and, by uniting the workers through their common labour and transferring them from factory to factory, are welding massesof working folk together. 
 The workers are beginning a struggleagainst the capitalists, and an intense urge for unity is ap-pearing among them. 
 Out of the isolated revolts of the work-ers is growing the struggle of the Russian working class. 
 4. 
 This struggle of the working class against the capital-ist class is a struggle against all classes who live by the la-bour of others, and against all exploitation. 
 It can only end in the passage of political power into the hands of the work-ing class, the transfer of all the land, instruments, facto-ries, machines, and mines to the whole of society for the organisation of socialist production, under which all that isproduced by the workers and all improvements in productionmust benefit the working people themselves. 
 5. 
 The movement of the Russian working class is, accord-ing to its character and aims, part of the international (Social-Democratic) movement of the working class of all countries. 
 6. 
 The main obstacle in the struggle of the Russian work-ing class for its emancipation is the absolutely autocraticgovernment and its irresponsible officials. 
 Basing itself onthe privileges of the landowners and capitalists and on subservience to their interests, it denies the lower classes any rights whatever and thus fetters the workers’ movementand retards the development of the entire people. 
 That iswhy the struggle of the Russian working class for its eman-cipation necessarily gives rise to the struggle against theabsolute power of the autocratic government. 
 B. 
 1. 
The Russian Social-Democratic Party declares that its aim is to assist this struggle of the Russian working classby developing the class-consciousness of the workers, bypromoting their organisation, and by indicating the aimsand objects of the struggle. 
 2. 
 The struggle of the Russian working class for its emancipation is a political struggle, and its first aim is to achieve political liberty. 
 3. 
 That is why the Russian Social-Democratic Party will, without separating itself from the working-class move-ment, support every social movement against the absolutepower of the autocratic government, against the class of privileged landed nobility and against all the vestiges of serfdom and the social-estate system which hinder freecompetition. 
 4. 
 On the other hand, the Russian Social-Democratic workers’ party will wage war against all endeavours to pa-tronise the labouring classes with the guardianship of the absolute government and its officials, all endeavours to retard the development of capitalism, and consequently thedevelopment of the working class. 
 5. 
 The emancipation of the workers must be the act of the working class itself. 
 6. 
 What the Russian people need is not the help of the absolute government and its officials, but emancipationfrom oppression by it. 
 C. 
 Making these views its starting-point, the Russian Social-Democratic Party demands first and foremost: 1. 
 The convening of a Zemsky Sobor made up of rep-resentatives of all citizens so as to draw up a constitu-tion. 
 2. 
 Universal and direct suffrage for all citizens of Russia who have reached 21 years of age, irrespective of religion ornationality. 
 3. 
 Freedom of assembly and organisation, and the right to strike. 
 4. 
 Freedom of the press. 
 5. 
 Abolition of social estates, and complete equality of all citizens before the law. 
 6. 
 Freedom of religion and equality of all nationalities. 
 Transfer of the registration of births, marriages and deaths to independent civic officials, independent, that is, of the police. 
 7. 
 Every citizen to have the right to prosecute any offi-cial, without having to complain to the latter’s superiors. 
 8. 
 Abolition of passports, full freedom of movement and residence. 
 9. 
 Freedom of trades and occupations and abolition of guilds. 
 D. 
 For the workers, the Russian Social-Democratic Party demands: 1. 
 Establishment of industrial courts in all industries, with elected judges from the capitalists and workers, inequal numbers. 
 2. 
 Legislative limitation of the working day to 8 hours. 
 3. 
 Legislative prohibition of night work and shifts. 
 Pro-hibition of work by children under 15 years of age. 
 4. 
 Legislative enactment of national holidays. 
 5. 
 Application of factory laws and factory inspection to all industries throughout Russia, and to government fac-tories, and also to handicraftsmen who work at home. 
 6. 
 The Factory Inspectorate must be independent and not be under the Ministry of Finance. 
 Members of industrial courts must enjoy equal rights with the Factory Inspectorate in ensuring the observance of factory laws. 
 7. 
 Absolute prohibition everywhere of the truck system. 
 8. 
 Supervision, by workers’ elected representatives, of the proper fixing of rates, the rejection of goods, the expen-diture of accumulated fines and the factory-owned workers’quarters. 
 A law that all deductions from workers’ wages, whatever the reason for their imposition (fines, rejects, etc. 
), shall not exceed the sum of 10 kopeks per ruble all told. 
 9. 
 A law making the employers responsible for inju-ries to workers, the employer being required to provethat the worker is to blame. 
 10. 
 A law making the employers responsible for main-taining schools and providing medical aid to the workers. 
 E. 
 For the peasants, the Russian Social-Democratic Party demands: 1. 
 Abolition of land redemption payments 36 and com-pensation to the peasants for redemption payments made. 
Return to the peasants of excess payments made to the Treas-ury. 
 2. 
 Return to the peasants of their lands cut off in 1861. 
3. 
 Complete equality of taxation of the peasants’ and landlords’ lands. 
 4. 
 Abolition of collective responsibility 37 and of all laws that prevent the peasants from doing as they will with their lands. 
 EXPLANATION OF THE PROGRAMME The programme is divided into three main parts. 
 Part one sets forth all the tenets from which the remaining parts of the programme follow. 
 This part indicates the position occupied by the working class in contemporary society, themeaning and significance of their struggle against the em-ployers and the political position of the working class in theRussian state. 
 Part two sets forth the Party ’s aim , and indicates the Party’s relation to other political trends in Russia. 
 It deals with what should be the activity of the Party andof all class-conscious workers, and what should be their /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR attitude to the interests and strivings of the other classes in Russian society. 
 Part three contains the Party’s practical demands. 
 This part is divided into three sections. 
 The first section con-tains demands for nation-wide reforms. 
 The second sectionstates the demands and programme of the working class. 
The third section contains demands in the interests of thepeasants. 
 Some preliminary explanations of the sections are given below, before proceeding to the practical part of the programme. 
 A 1. 
 The programme deals first of all with the rapid growth of big factories, because this is the main thingin contemporary Russia that is completely changingall the old conditions of life, particularly the living con-ditions of the labouring class. 
 Under the old conditions practically all the country’s wealth was produced by pettyproprietors, who constituted the overwhelming majorityof the population. 
 The population lived an immobile lifein the villages, the greater part of their produce being ei-ther for their own consumption, or for the small market of neighbouring villages which had little contact with other nearby markets. 
 These very same petty proprietors workedfor the landlords, who compelled them to produce mainlyfor their consumption. 
 Domestic produce was handed overfor processing to artisans, who also lived in the villages ortravelled in the neighbouring areas to get work. 
 But after the peasants were emancipated, these living conditions of the mass of the people underwent a completechange: the small artisan establishments began to be re-placed by big factories, which grew with extraordinary ra-pidity; they ousted the petty proprietors, turning them intowage-workers, and compelled hundreds and thousands of workers to work together, producing tremendous quanti-ties of goods that are being sold all over Russia. 
 The emancipation of the peasants destroyed the immo-bility of the population and placed the peasants in condi-tions under which they could no longer get a livelihood fromthe patches of land that remained in their possession. 
 Masses of people left home to seek a livelihood, making for the factories or for jobs on the construction of the railways whichconnect the different corners of Russia and carry the output of the big factories everywhere. 
 Masses of people went to jobs in the towns, took part in building factory and com-mercial premises, in delivering fuel to factories, and inpreparing raw materials for them. 
 Finally, many people were occupied at home, doing jobs for merchants and factory owners who could not expand their establishments fastenough. 
 Similar changes took place in agriculture; the land-lords began to produce grain for sale, big cultivators from among the peasants and merchants came on the scene, andgrain in hundreds of millions of poods began to be sold abroad. 
 Production required wage-workers, and hundreds of thousands and millions of peasants, giving up their tinyallotments, went to work as regular or day labourers for the new masters engaged in producing grain for sale. 
 Now it is these changes in the old way of life that are described by theprogramme, which says that the big factories are ruining the small handicraftsmen and peasants, turning them into wage-workers. 
 Small-scale production is being replacedeverywhere by large-scale, and in this large-scale production the masses of the workers are just hirelings employed for wages by the capitalist, who possesses enormous capital,builds enormous workshops, buys up huge quantities of materials and fills his pockets with all the profit from this mass-scale production by the combined workers. 
 Productionhas become capitalist, and it exerts merciless and ruthless pressure on all the petty proprietors, destroying their immo-bile life in the villages, compelling them to travel from oneend of the country to the other as ordinary unskilled labour-ers, selling their labour-power to capital. 
 An ever-increas-ing part of the population is being separated once and forall from the countryside and from agriculture, and is con-centrating in the towns, factory and industrial villages and townlets, forming a special propertyless class of people, aclass of hired proletarian workers, who live only by the sale of their labour-power. 
 These are what constitute the tremendous changes in the country’s life brought about by the big factories— small-scale production is being replaced by large-scale, the petty proprietors are turning into wage-workers. 
What, then, does this change mean for the whole of the work-ing population, and where is it leading? This is dealt with further in the programme. 
 A 2. 
 Accompanying the replacement of small-by large-scale production is the replacement of small financial re-sources in the hands of the individual proprietor byenormous sums employed as capital, the replacement ofsmall, insignificant profits by profits running into millions. 
That is why the growth of capitalism is leading everywhere to the growth of luxury and riches. 
 A whole class of big finan-cial magnates, factory owners, railway owners, merchants,and bankers has arisen in Russia, a whole class of peoplewho live off income derived from money capital loaned oninterest to industrialists has arisen; the big landowners havebecome enriched, drawing large sums from the peasants by way of land redemption payments, taking advantage of their need of land to raise the price of the land leased to them,and setting up large beet-sugar refineries and distilleries ontheir estates. 
 The luxury and extravagance of all thesewealthy classes have reached unparalleled dimensions,and the main streets of the big cities are lined with their princely mansions and luxurious palaces. 
 But as cap-italism grew, the workers’ conditions became steadilyworse. 
 If earnings increased in some places followingthe peasants’ emancipation, they did so very slightly and notfor long, because the mass of hungry people swarming infrom the villages forced rates down, while the cost of food-stuffs and necessities continued to go up, so that even with their increased wages the workers got fewer means ofsubsistence; it became increasingly difficult to find jobs, andside by side with the luxurious mansions of the rich (or oncity outskirts) there grew up the slums where the workerswere forced to live in cellars, in overcrowded, damp and cold dwellings, and even in dug-outs near the new industrial estab-lishments. 
 As capital grew bigger it increased its pressureon the workers, turning them into paupers, compelling themto devote all their time to the factory, and forcing the work-ers’ wives and children to go to work. 
 This, therefore, isthe first change towards which the growth of capitalism is leading: tremendous wealth is accumulating in the coffers of a small handful of capitalists, while the masses of thepeople are being turned into paupers. 
 The second change consists in the fact that the replace-ment of small-by large-scale production has led to many improvements in production. 
 First of all, work done singly, separately in each little workshop, in each isolated littlehousehold, has been replaced by the work of combined la-bourers working together at one factory, for one landowner,for one contractor. 
 Joint labour is far more effective (pro-ductive) than individual, and renders it possible to pro-duce goods with far greater ease and rapidity. 
 But all these improvements are enjoyed by the capitalist alone, who paysthe workers next to nothing and appropriates all the profitderiving from the workers’ combined labour. 
 The capita-list gets still stronger and the worker gets still weakerbecause he becomes accustomed to doing some one kind of work and it is more difficult for him to transfer to another job, to change his occupation. 
 Another, far more important, improvement in production is the introduction of machines by the capitalist. 
 The effect-iveness of labour is increased manifold by the use ofmachines; but the capitalist turns all this benefit against the worker: taking advantage of the fact that machines require less physical labour, he assigns women and childrento them, and pays them less. 
 Taking advantage of the factthat where machines are used far fewer workers are wanted,he throws them out of the factory in masses and then takesadvantage of this unemployment to enslave the worker still further, to increase the working day, to deprive the worker of his night’s rest and to turn him into a simple appendage tothe machine. 
 Unemployment, created by machinery andconstantly on the increase, now makes the workerutterly defenceless. 
 His skill loses its worth, he is easilyreplaced by a plain unskilled labourer, who quickly becomes accustomed to the machine and gladly undertakes the job for lower wages. 
 Any attempt to resist increased oppressionby the capitalist leads to dismissal. 
 On his own the workeris quite helpless against capital, and the machine threatensto crush him. 
 A 3. 
 In explaining the previous point, we showed that on his own the worker is helpless and defenceless against the capitalist who introduces machines. 
 The worker has atall costs to seek means of resisting the capitalist, in order to defend himself. 
 And he finds such means in organisation . 
 Helpless on his own, the worker becomes a force when organ-ised with his comrades, and is enabled to fight the capital-ist and resist his onslaught. 
 Organisation becomes a necessity for the worker, now faced by big capital. 
 But is it possible to organise a motleymass of people who are strangers to one another, even ifthey work in one factory? The programme indicates the conditions that prepare the workers for unity and develop in them the capacity and ability to organise. 
 These conditionsare as follows: 1) the large factory, with machine productionthat requires regular work the whole year round, completelybreaks the tie between the worker and the land and his ownfarm, turning him into an absolute proletarian. 
 The fact of each farming for himself on a patch of land divided the workers and gave each one of them a certain specific inter-est, separate from that of his fellow worker, and was thusan obstacle to organisation. 
 The worker’s break with theland destroys these obstacles. 
 2) Further, the joint work ofhundreds and thousands of workers in itself accustoms the workers to discuss their needs jointly, to take joint action, and clearly shows them the identity of the position and in-terests of the entire mass of workers. 
 3) Finally, constanttransfers of workers from factory to factory accustom themto compare the conditions and practices in the differentfactories and enable them to convince themselves of the identical nature of the exploitation in all factories, to acquire the experience of other workers in their clasheswith the capitalist, and thus enhance the solidarity of theworkers. 
 Now it is because of these conditions, taken togeth-er, that the appearance of big factories has given rise tothe organisation of the workers. 
 Among the Russian workers unity is expressed mainly and most frequently in strikes (we shall deal further with the reason why organisationin the shape of unions or mutual benefit societies isbeyond the reach of our workers). 
 The more the bigfactories develop, the more frequent, powerful and stub-born become the workers’ strikes; the greater the oppression of capitalism and the greater the need for joint resis-tance by the workers. 
 Strikes and isolated revolts of theworkers, as the programme states, now constitute the most widespread phenomenon in Russian factories. 
 But, with the further growth of capitalism and the increasing frequency of strikes, they prove inadequate. 
 The employers take joint action against them: they conclude agreementsamong themselves, bring in workers from other areas, andturn for assistance to those who run the machinery of state,who help them crush the workers’ resistance. 
 Instead of beingfaced by the one individual owner of each separate factory, the workers are now faced by the entire capitalist class and the government that assists it. 
 The entire capitalist class under-takes a struggle against the entire working class ; it devises common measures against the strikes, presses the govern-ment to adopt anti-working-class legislation, transfersfactories to more out-of-the-way localities, and resorts to the distribution of jobs among people working at home and to a thousand and one other ruses and devices againstthe workers. 
 The organisation of the workers of a separatefactory, even of a separate industry, proves inadequate forresisting the entire capitalist class, and joint action by theentire working class becomes absolutely necessary. 
 Thus, out of the isolated revolts of the workers grows the struggle of the entire working class. 
 The struggle of the workers againstthe employers turns into a class struggle . 
 All the em-ployers are united by the one interest of keeping the workersin a state of subordination and of paying them the minimumwages possible. 
 And the employers see that the only way they can safeguard their interests is by joint action on the part of the entire employing class, by acquiring influenceover the machinery of state. 
 The workers are likewise boundtogether by a common interest, that of preventing themselvesbeing crushed by capital, of upholding their right to lifeand to a human existence. 
 And the workers likewise become convinced that they, too, need unity, joint action by the entire class, the working class, and that to that end theymust secure influence over the machinery of state. 
 A 4. 
 We have explained how and why the struggle be-tween the factory workers and the employers becomes aclass struggle, a struggle of the working class—the pro-letarians—against the capitalist class—the bourgeoisie. 
 The question arises, what significance has this struggle forthe entire people and for all working people? Under the contemporary conditions, of which we have already spoken in the explanation of point 1, production by wage-workers increasingly ousts petty economy. 
 The number of people who live by wage-labour grows rapidly, and not only does the number of regular factory workers increase, but there is astill greater increase in the number of peasants who alsohave to search for work as wage-labourers, in order to live. 
At the present time, work for hire, work for the capitalist, has already become the most widespread form of labour. 
 The domination of capital over labour embraces the bulk ofthe population not only in industry, but also in agriculture. 
Now it is this exploitation of wage-labour underlying con-temporary society that the big factories develop to the ut-most. 
 All the methods of exploitation used by all capitalists in all industries, and which the entire mass of Russia’s working-class population suffers from, are concentrated,intensified, made the regular rule right in the factory andspread to all aspects of the worker’s labour and life, theycreate a whole routine, a whole system whereby the capi-talist sweats the worker. 
 Let us illustrate this with an exam-ple: at all times and places, anybody who undertakes work for hire, rests, leaves his work on a holiday if it is celebratedin the neighbourhood: It is quite different in the factory. 
Once the factory management has engaged a worker, it dis-poses of his services just as it likes, paying no attention to theworker’s habits, to his customary way of life, to his family position, to his intellectual requirements. 
 The factory drives the employee to work when it needs his labour, compellinghim to fit in his entire life with its requirements, to tear hisrest hours to pieces, and, if he is on shifts, to work atnight and on holidays. 
 All the imaginable abuses relatingto working time are set into motion by the factory and at the same time it introduces its “rules,” its “practices,” which are obligatory for every worker. 
 The order of things in thefactory is deliberately adapted to squeezing out of the hiredworker all the labour he is capable of yielding, to squeezingit out at top speed and then to throwing him out! Anotherexample. 
 Everybody who takes a job, undertakes, of course, to submit to the employer, to do everything he is ordered. 
 But when anybody hires himself out on a temporary job,he does not surrender his will at all; if he finds his employer’s demands wrong or excessive, he leaves him. 
 The factory, on the other hand, demands that the worker surrender his will altogether; it introduces discipline within its walls, compels the worker to start or to stop work when the bell rings,assumes the right itself to punish the worker, and subjectshim to a fine or a deduction for every violation of rules whichit has itself drawn up. 
 The worker becomes part of a hugeaggregate of machinery. 
 He must be just as obedient, en-slaved, and without a will of his own, as the machine itself. 
 Yet another example. 
 Anybody who takes a job has fre-quent occasion to be dissatisfied with his employer, and com-plains about him to the court or a government official. 
 Boththe official and the court usually settle the dispute in the employer’s favour, support him, but this promotion of the employer’s interests is not based on a general regula-tion or a law, but on the subservience of individual offi-cials, who at different times protect him to a greater orlesser degree, and who settle matters unjustly in the em-ployer’s favour, either because they are acquaintances of his, or because they are uninformed about working conditions and cannot understand the worker. 
 Each separate case ofsuch injustice depends on each separate clash between theworker and the employer, on each separate official. 
 Thefactory, on the other hand, gathers together such a mass ofworkers, carries oppression to such a pitch, that it becomes impossible to examine every separate case. 
 General regu-lations are established, a law is drawn up on relations be-tween the workers and the employers, a law that is oblig-atory for all. 
 In this law the promotion of the employer’sinterests is backed up by the authority of the state. 
 Theinjustice of individual officials is replaced by the injustice of the law itself. 
 Regulations appear, for example, of the following type: if the worker is absent from work, he notonly loses wages, but has to pay a fine in addition, whereasthe employer pays nothing if he sends the workers home forlack of work; the employer may dismiss the worker for usingstrong language, whereas the worker cannot leave the job if he is similarly treated; the employer is entitled on his own authority to impose fines, make deductions or demand thatovertime be worked, etc. 
 All these examples show us how the factory intensifies the exploitation of the workers and makes this exploitation universal, makes a whole “ system ” of it. 
 The worker now has to deal, willy-nilly, not with an individual employerand his will and oppression, but with the arbitrary treat-ment and oppression he suffers from the entire employingclass. 
 The worker sees that his oppressors are not some onecapitalist, but the entire capitalist class, because the system of exploitation is the same in all establishments. 
 The indi-vidual capitalist cannot even depart from this system: if,for example, he were to take it into his head to reduce work-ing hours, his goods would cost him more than those producedby his neighbour, another factory owner, who makes hisemployees work longer for the same wage. 
 To secure an im-provement in his conditions, the worker now has to deal with the entire social system aimed at the exploitation of labour bycapital. 
 The worker is now confronted not by the individualinjustice of an individual official, but by the injustice ofthe state authority itself, which takes the entire capitalistclass under its protection and issues laws, obligatory for all, that serve the interests of that class. 
 Thus, the struggle of the factory workers against the employers inevitably turnsinto a struggle against the entire capitalist class, againstthe entire social order based on the exploitation of labourby capital. 
 That is why the workers’ struggle acquires asocial significance, becomes a struggle on behalf of all work-ing people against all classes that live by the labour of others. 
 That is why the workers’ struggle opens up a newera in Russian history and is the dawn of the workers’ eman-cipation. 
 What, however, is the domination of the capitalist class over the entire mass of working folk based on? It is based on the fact that all the factories, mills, mines, machines, and instruments of labour are in the hands of the capitalists,are their private property; on the fact that they possessenormous quantities of land (of all the land in EuropeanRussia, more than one-third belongs to landed proprietors, whodo not number half a million). 
 The workers possess no instru-ments of labour or materials, and so they have to sell their labour-power to the capitalists, who only pay the workerswhat is necessary for their keep, and place all the surplus produced by labour in their pockets; thus they pay for only part of the working time they use, and appropriate the rest. 
 The entire increase in wealth resulting from the combined labour of the masses of workers or from improvements inproduction goes to the capitalist class, while the workers,who toil from generation to generation, remain property-less proletarians. 
 That is why there is only one way ofending the exploitation of labour by capital, and that is to abolish the private ownership of the instruments of la-bour, to hand over all the factories, mills, mines, and alsoall the big estates, etc. 
, to the whole of society and to con-duct socialist production in common, directed by the workersthemselves. 
 The articles produced by labour in common willthen go to benefit the working people themselves, while the surplus they produce over and above their keep will serve to satisfy the needs of the workers themselves, tosecure the full development of all their capabilities andequal rights to enjoy all the achievements of science and art. 
That is why the programme states that the struggle betweenthe working class and the capitalists can end only in this way. 
 To achieve that, however, it is necessary that political power, i. 
e. 
, the power to govern the state, should pass fromthe hands of a government which is under the influence ofthe capitalists and landowners, or from the hands of a govern-ment directly made up of elected representatives of the cap-italists, into the hands of the working class. 
 Such is the ultimate aim of the struggle of the working class, such is the condition for its complete emancipation. 
This is the ultimate aim for which class-conscious, organ-ised workers should strive; here in Russia, however, theystill meet with tremendous obstacles, which hinder themin their struggle for emancipation. 
 A 5. 
 The fight against the domination of the capitalist class is now being waged by the workers of all Europeancountries and also by the workers of America and Australia. 
Working-class organisation and solidarity is not confinedto one country or one nationality: the workers’ parties ofdifferent countries proclaim aloud the complete identity (solidarity) of interests and aims of the workers of the whole world. 
 They come together at joint congresses, put forwardcommon demands to the capitalist class of all countries, have established an international holiday of the entire organised proletariat striving for emancipation (May Day), thus welding the working class of all nationalities and of all countries into one great workers’ army. 
 The unity of the workers of allcountries is a necessity arising out of the fact that the capita-list class, which rules over the workers, does not limit its ruleto one country. 
 Commercial ties between the different coun-tries are becoming closer and more extensive; capital con-stantly passes from one country to another. 
 The banks, those huge depositories that gather capital together and distrib-ute it on loan to capitalists, begin as national institutionsand then become international, gather capital from allcountries, and distribute it among the capitalists of Europeand America. 
 Enormous joint-stock companies are now being organised to set up capitalist enterprises not in one coun-try, but in several at once; international associations of cap-italists make their appearance. 
 Capitalist domination isinternational. 
 That is why the workers’ struggle in all coun-tries for their emancipation is only successful if the workersfight jointly against international capital. 
 That is why the Russian worker’s comrade in the fight against the capital-ist class is the German worker, the Polish worker, and theFrench worker, just as his enemy is the Russian, the Pol-ish, and the French capitalists. 
 Thus, in the recent periodforeign capitalists have been very eagerly transferringtheir capital to Russia, where they are building branch factories and founding companies for running new enter-prises They are flinging themselves greedily on thisyoung country in which the government is more favourableand obsequious to capital than anywhere else, in which theyfind workers who are less organised and less capable offighting back than in the West, and in which the workers’ standard of living, and hence their wages, are much lower, so that the foreign capitalists are able to draw enormousprofits, on a scale unparalleled in their own countries. 
International capital has already stretched out its hand toRussia. 
 The Russian workers are stretching out theirhands to the international labour movement. 
 A 6. 
 We have already spoken of how the big factories carry capital’s oppression of labour to the highest pitch,how they establish a whole system of methods of exploitation; how the workers, in their revolt against cap-ital, inevitably arrive at the need to unite all workers, at the need for joint struggle by the entire working class. 
 Inthis struggle against the capitalist class, the workers come up against the general laws of the state, which protect the capitalists and their interests. 
 But then, if the workers are strong enough to force conces-sions from the capitalists, to resist their attacks by joint action, they could also, by their unity, influence thelaws of the state, and secure their alteration. 
 That is what the workers of all other countries are doing. 
 The Russian workers, however, cannot exert direct influence on thestate. 
 The conditions of the Russian workers are such that they are deprived of the most elementary civil rights. 
 They must not dare to gather together, to discuss their affairstogether, to organise unions, to publish statements; in oth-er words, the laws of the state have not only been drawn up in the interests of the capitalist class, but they frankly de-prive the workers of all possibility of influencing these laws and of securing their alteration. 
 The reason this happens is that in Russia (and in Russia alone of all European coun-tries) the absolute power of an autocratic government con-tinues to this day, that is, a system of state exists under which laws that are obligatory for the entire people may beissued by the tsar alone, at his discretion, while only offi-cials appointed by him may give effect to them. 
 The citi-zens are not allowed to take any part in issuing laws, indiscussing them, in proposing new or in demanding the re-peal of old laws. 
 They have no right to demand of officials an account of their activity, to check their activity, and toprosecute them. 
 Citizens do not even possess the right to discuss affairs of state: they must not dare to organise meet-ings or unions without the permission of those same offi-cials. 
 The officials are thus irresponsible in the full sense of the term; they constitute a special caste, as it were, placed above the citizens. 
 The irresponsibility and arbitrary con-duct of the officials, and the fact that the population itself is inarticulate, give rise to such scandalous abuse of power by officials and such a violation of the rights of the commonpeople as are hardly possible in any European country, Thus, according to law, the Russian Government has absolute authority, and is considered to be quite independ-ent, as it were, of the people, standing above all social estates and classes. 
 If, however, that were really the case,why should the law and the government in all conflictsbetween the workers and the capitalists take the side ofthe capitalists? Why should the capitalists meet with ever-growing support as their numbers and their wealth grow, whereas the workers meet with ever-increasing resistance and restriction? Actually the government does not stand above classes, it protects one class against the other, protects the proper-tied class against the propertyless, the capitalists against theworkers. 
 An absolute government could not rule such a huge country if it did not give all sorts of privileges and favours to the propertied classes. 
 Although the government, according to law, possesses absolute and independent power, actually the capitalistsand landowners possess thousands of means of influencingthe government and affairs of state. 
 They have their own social-estate associations—noblemen’s and merchants’ societies, chambers of trade and manufactures, etc. 
—recog-nised by law. 
 Their elected representatives either becomeofficials outright, and take part in governing the state (forexample, marshals of the nobility), or are given postsin government institutions of every kind: for example, the law provides for factory owners to participate in factory courts (the chief authority over the FactoryInspectorate), to which they elect their representatives. 
But they do not confine themselves to this direct partici-pation in ruling the state. 
 In their societies they discusslaws of state, draft bills, and the government usually con-sults them on each issue, submits draft bills to them with a request for their views. 
 The capitalists and landed proprietors organise all-Russian congresses, where they discuss their affairs and devise variousmeasures of benefit to their class, and on behalf of all thelanded nobility, or of the “merchants of all Russia,” pe-tition for the adoption of new laws and for the amendment of old ones. 
 They can discuss their affairs in the newspapers,for however much the government hampers the press with /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR its censorship, it would never dare think of depriving the propertied classes of the right to discuss their affairs. 
 They have all sorts of ways and means of approaching the top representatives of the governmental authorities, they canmore easily discuss the arbitrary conduct of lower officials,and can easily secure the repeal of particularly oppressivelaws and regulations. 
 And while there is no country in theworld where there are so many laws and regulations, such unexampled police supervision by the government, a supervision that extends to all sorts of petty details androbs every undertaking of its individuality, there is nocountry in the world where these bourgeois regulations areso easily violated and where these police laws are circum-vented so easily by just the gracious assent of the supreme authorities. 
 And this gracious assent is never refused. 
 38 B 1. 
 This is the most important, the paramount, point of the programme, because it indicates what should consti-tute the activity of the Party in defending the interests ofthe working class, the activity of all class-conscious workers. 
It indicates how the striving for socialism, the striving for the abolition of the age-old exploitation of man by man, should be linked up with the popular movement engenderedby the living conditions created by the large-scale facto-ries. 
 The Party’s activity must consist in promoting the work-ers’ class struggle. 
 The Party’s task is not to concoct some fashionable means of helping the workers, but to join up with the workers’ movement, to bring light into it, to assistthe workers in the struggle they themselves have already be-gun to wage. 
 The Party’s task is to uphold the interests ofthe workers and to represent those of the entire working-class movement. 
 Now, what must this assistance to the work-ers in their struggle consist of? The programme says that this assistance must consist, firstly, in developing the workers’ class-consciousness. 
We have already spoken of how the workers’ struggle againstthe employers becomes the class struggle of the proletariatagainst the bourgeoisie. 
 What is meant by workers’ class-consciousness follows from what we have said on the subject. 
 The workers’class-consciousness means the workers’ understanding that the only way to improve their conditions and to achieve their emancipation is to conduct a struggle against the capitalist and factory-owner class created by the big factories. 
 Further, the workers’ class-consciousness meanstheir understanding that the interests of all the work-ers of any particular country are identical, that theyall constitute one class, separate from all the other classesin society. 
 Finally, the class-consciousness of the workers means the workers’ understanding that to achieve their aims they have to work to influence affairs of state, just as thelandlords and the capitalists did, and are continuing todo now. 
 By what means do the workers reach an understanding of all this? They do so by constantly gaining experience from the very struggle that they begin to wage against the employers and that increasingly develops, becomes sharper, and in-volves larger numbers of workers as big factories grow. 
There was a time when the workers’ enmity against capi-tal only found expression in a hazy sense of hatred oftheir exploiters, in a hazy consciousness of their oppres-sion and enslavement, and in the desire to wreak vengeance on the capitalists. 
 The struggle at that time found expres-sion in isolated revolts of the workers, who wrecked build-ings, smashed machines, attacked members of the factorymanagement, etc. 
 That was the first , the initial, form of the working-class movement, and it was a necessary one, be-cause hatred of the capitalist has always and everywhere been the first impulse towards arousing in the workers thedesire to defend themselves. 
 The Russian working-classmovement has, however, already outgrown this original form. 
Instead of having a hazy hatred of the capitalist, the workershave already begun to understand the antagonism between the interests of the working class and of the capitalist class. 
 Instead of having a confused sense of oppression, they havebegun to distinguish the ways and means by which capital oppresses them, and are revolting against various forms ofoppression, placing limits to capitalist oppression, and pro-tecting themselves against the capitalist’s greed. 
 Instead of wreaking vengeance on the capitalists they are now turning to the fight for concessions, they are beginning to face thecapitalist class with one demand after another, and are demanding improved working conditions, increased wages, and shorter working hours. 
 Every strike concentrates all the attention and all the efforts of the workers on some par-ticular aspect of the conditions under which the workingclass lives. 
 Every strike gives rise to discussions about theseconditions, helps the workers to appraise them, to under-stand what capitalist oppression consists in in the particu-lar case, and what means can be employed to combat this oppression. 
 Every strike enriches the experience of the en-tire working class. 
 If the strike is successful it shows themwhat a strong force working-class unity is, and impels othersto make use of their comrades’ success. 
 If it is not success-ful, it gives rise to discussions about the causes of the fail-ure and to the search for better methods of struggle. 
 This transition of the workers to the steadfast struggle for their vital needs, the fight for concessions, for improved liv-ing conditions, wages and working hours, now begun allover Russia, means that the Russian workers are makingtremendous progress, and that is why the attention of theSocial-Democratic Party and all class-conscious workers should be concentrated mainly on this struggle, on its pro-motion. 
 Assistance to the workers should consist in showingthem those most vital needs for the satisfaction of whichthey should fight, should consist in analysing thefactors particularly responsible for worsening the condi-tions of different categories of workers, in explaining factory laws and regulations the violation of which (added to the deceptive tricks of the capitalists) so often subject the work-ers to double robbery. 
 Assistance should consist in givingmore precise and definite expression to the workers’ demands,and in making them public, in choosing the best time forresistance, in choosing the method of struggle, in discussing the position and the strength of the two opposing sides, in discussing whether a still better choice can be made of themethod of fighting (a method, perhaps, like addressing aletter to the factory owner, or approaching the inspector, orthe doctor, according to circumstances, where direct strikeaction is not advisable, etc. 
). 
 We have said that the Russian workers’ transition to such struggle is indicative of the tremendous progress theyhave made. 
 This struggle places (leads) the working-class movement on to the high road, and is the certain guaran-tee of its further success. 
 The mass of working folk learn from this struggle, firstly, how to recognise and to examine one by one the methods of capitalist exploitation, to comparethem with the law, with their living conditions, and withthe interests of the capitalist class. 
 By examining the differ-ent forms and cases of exploitation, the workers learn tounderstand the significance and the essence of exploitation as a whole, learn to understand the social system based on the exploitation of labour by capital. 
 Secondly, in the proc-ess of this struggle the workers test their strength, learn toorganise, learn to understand the need for and the signif-icance of organisation. 
 The extension of this struggle andthe increasing frequency of clashes inevitably lead to a further extension of the struggle, to the development of a sense of unity, a sense of solidarity—at first among theworkers of a particular locality, and then among the workersof the entire country, among the entire working class. 
 Third-ly, this struggle develops the workers’ political conscious-ness. 
 The living condition of the mass of working folk places them in such a position that they do not (cannot) possess either the leisure or the opportunity to ponder over prob-lems of state. 
 On the other hand, the workers’ struggleagainst the factory owners for their daily needs automaticallyand inevitably spurs the workers on to think of state,political questions, questions of how the Russian state is governed, how laws and regulations are issued, and whose interests they serve. 
 Each clash in the factory neces-sarily brings the workers into conflict with the laws andrepresentatives of state authority. 
 In this connection theworkers hear “political speeches” for the first time. 
 At firstfrom, say, the factory inspectors, who explain to them that the trick employed by the factory owner to defraud them is based on the exact meaning of the regulations, which havebeen endorsed by the appropriate authority and give theemployer a free hand to defraud the workers, or that thefactory owner’s oppressive measures are quite lawful, sincehe is merely availing himself of his rights, giving effect to such and such a law, that has been endorsed by the state authority that sees to its implementation. 
 The politicalexplanations of Messrs. 
 the Inspectors are occasionally supplemented by the still more beneficial “political ex-planations” of the minister,39 who reminds the workers of the feelings of “Christian love” that they owe to the factory owners for their making millions out of the workers’ labour. 
Later, these explanations of the representatives of the stateauthority, and the workers’ direct acquaintance with thefacts showing for whose benefit this authority operates, arestill further supplemented by leaflets or other explanations given by socialists, so that the workers get their political education in full from such a strike. 
 They learn to under-stand not only the specific interests of the working class,but also the specific place occupied by the working class inthe state. 
 And so the assistance which the Social-Democrat-ic Party can render to the class struggle of the workers should be: to develop the workers’ class-consciousness by assisting them in the fight for their most vitalneeds. 
 The second type of assistance should consist, as the pro-gramme states, in promoting the organisation of the workers. 
The struggle we have just described necessarily requires that the workers be organised. 
 Organisation becomes neces-sary for strikes, to ensure that they are conducted withgreat success, for collections in support of strikers, forsetting up workers’ mutual benefit societies, and forpropaganda among the workers, the distribution amongthem of leaflets, announcements, manifestoes, etc. 
 Organi-sation is still more necessary to enable the workers to defend themselves against persecution by the police and the gen-darmerie, to conceal from them all the workers’ contactsand associations and to arrange the delivery of books,pamphlets, newspapers, etc. 
 To assist in all this—such isthe Party’s second task. 
 The third consists in indicating the real aims of the strug-gle, i. 
e. 
, in explaining to the workers what the exploita-tion of labour by capital consists in, what it is based on,how the private ownership of the land and the instrumentsof labour leads to the poverty of the working masses, com-pels them to sell their labour to the capitalists and to yield up gratis the entire surplus produced by the worker’s labour over and above his keep, in explaining, furthermore, howthis exploitation inevitably leads to the class struggle be-tween the workers and the capitalists, what the conditions of this struggle and its ultimate aims are—in a word, in explaining what is briefly stated in the programme. 
 B 2. 
 What is meant by these words: the struggle of the working class is a political struggle? They mean that the working class cannot fight for its emancipation without se-curing influence over affairs of state, over the administration of the state, over the issue of laws. 
 The need for such influence has long been understood by the Russian capitalists, and wehave shown how they have been able, despite all sorts of prohibitions contained in the police laws, to find thousands of ways of influencing the state authority, and how this au-thority serves the interests of the capitalist class. 
 Hence it naturally follows that the working class, too, cannot wage its struggle, cannot even secure a lasting improvementof its lot unless it influences state authority. 
 We have already said that the workers’ struggle against the capitalists will inevitably lead to a clash with the gov-ernment, and the government itself is exerting every effort to prove to the workers that only by struggle and by joint resistance can they influence state authority. 
 Thiswas shown with particular clarity by the big strikes that took place in Russia in 1885-86. 
 The government immediately set about drawing up regulations concerning workers, at onceissued new laws about factory practices, yielded to the work-ers’ insistent demands (for example, regulations were intro-duced limiting fines and ensuring proper wage payment); inthe same way the present strikes (in 1896) have again caused the government’s immediate intervention, and the government has already understood that it cannot confineitself to arrests and deportations, that it is ridiculous to regale the workers with stupid sermons about the noble conduct of the factory owners (see the circular issued by Fi-nance Minister Witte to factory inspectors. 
 Spring 1896). 
 The government has realised that “organised workers con-stitute a force to be reckoned with” and so it already has thefactory legislation under review and is convening in St. 
 Pe-tersburg a Congress of Senior Factory Inspectors to discuss the question of reducing working hours and other inevitableconcessions to the workers. 
 Thus we see that the struggle of the working class against the capitalist class must necessarily be a political struggle. 
 Indeed, this struggle is already exerting influence on the state authority, is acquiring political significance. 
 But theworkers’ utter lack of political rights, about which wehave already spoken, and the absolute impossibility of theworkers openly and directly influencing state authoritybecome more clearly and sharply exposed and felt as the working-class movement develops. 
 That is why the most urgent demand of the workers, the primary objectiveof the working-class influence on affairs of state mustbe the achievement of political freedom , i. 
e. 
, the direct participation, guaranteed by law (by a constitution), of allcitizens in the government of the state, the guaranteed right of all citizens freely to assemble, discuss their affairs, influ-ence affairs of state through their associations and the press. 
The achievement of political freedom becomes the “ vital task of the workers ” because without it the workers do not and cannot have any influence over affairs of state, and thusinevitably remain a rightless, humiliated and inarticulate class. 
 And if even now, when the workers are only just be-ginning to fight and to close their ranks, the government isalready hastening to make concessions to the workers, inorder to check the further growth of the movement, therecan be no doubt that when the workers fully close their ranksand unite under the leadership of one political party, they will be able to compel the government to surrender, they will be able to win political freedom for themselves and theentire Russian people! The preceding parts of the programme indicated the place occupied by the working class in contemporary so-ciety and the contemporary state, what is the aim of the struggle of the working class, and what constitutes the task of the Party that represents the workers’ interests. 
Under the absolute rule of the government there are not, norcan there be openly functioning political parties in Russia,but there are political trends which express the interests ofother classes and which exert influence over public opinion and the government. 
 Hence, in order to make clear the po-sition of the Social-Democratic Party, it is necessary now toindicate its attitude towards the remaining political trends in Russian society, so as to enable the workers to determine who may be their ally and to what extent, and who their enemy. 
 That is indicated in the two following points of the programme. 
 B 3. 
 The programme declares that the workers’ allies are, firstly, all those social strata which oppose the absolutepower of the autocratic government. 
 Since this absolute ruleis the main obstacle to the workers’ fight for their emanci-pation, it naturally follows that it is in the direct interest of the workers to support every social movement againstabsolutism (absolute means unlimited; absolutism is theunlimited rule of the government). 
 The stronger the devel-opment of capitalism, the deeper become the contradictionsbetween this bureaucratic administration and the interests of the propertied classes themselves, the interests of the bourgeoisie. 
 And the Social-Democratic Party proclaimsthat it will support all strata and grades of the bourgeoisiewho oppose the absolute government. 
 It is infinitely more to the workers’ advantage for the bourgeoisie to influence affairs of state directly , than for their influence to be exerted, as is the case now, through a crowd of venal and despotic officials. 
 It is far moreadvantageous to the workers for the bourgeoisie to openly in-fluence policy than, as is the case now, to exert a concealed i n-fluence, concealed by the supposedly all-powerful “independ-ent” government, which is called a government “by the grace of God,” and hands out “its graces” to the suffering and indus-trious landlords and the poverty-stricken and oppressedfactory owners. 
 The workers need open struggle against the capitalist class, in order that the entire Russian proletariatmay see for whose interests the workers are waging thestruggle, and may learn how to wage the struggle properly; in order that the intrigues and aspirations of the bourgeoi-sie may not be hidden in the ante-rooms of grand dukes, inthe saloons of senators and ministers, and in departmentaloffices barred to the public, and in order that they may cometo the surface and open the eyes of all and sundry as to whoreally inspires government policy and what the capitalists and landlords are striving for. 
 And so, down with every-thing that hides the present influence of the capitalist class,and our support for any representative of the bourgeoisie who comes out against the bureaucracy, the bureaucratic administration, against the absolute government! But, while proclaiming its support for every social movement against absolutism, the Social-Democratic Party recognises that itdoes not separate itself from the working-class movement,because the working class has its specific interests, whichare opposed to the interests of all other classes. 
 While ren-dering support to all representatives of the bourgeoisie in the fight for political freedom, the workers should remember that the propertied classes can only be their allies for atime, that the interests of the workers and the capitalistscannot be reconciled, that the workers need the abolition ofthe government’s absolute rule only in order to wage anopen and extensive struggle against the capitalist class. 
 Further the Social-Democratic Party proclaims that it will render support to all who rise up against the class ofthe privileged landed nobility. 
 The landed nobility inRussia are considered to be the first estate in the land. 
 Theremnants of their feudal power over the peasants weigh downthe masses of the people to this day. 
 The peasants continue to make land redemption payments for emancipation from the power of the landlords. 
 The peasants are still tied tothe land, in order that the landed gentry may not sufferany shortage of cheap and submissive farm labourers. 
 Right-less and treated as juveniles, the peasants to this day areat the mercy of officials who look after their own pockets and interfere in peasant life so as to ensure that the peasants make their redemption payments or pay quit-rent to thefeudal landlords “punctually,” that they do not dare to “shirk”working for the landlords, do not dare, for example, to leavethe district and so perhaps compel the landlords to hireoutside workers, who are not so cheap or so oppressed by want. 
 The landlords keep millions, tens of millions of peasants in their service, enslaving them and keeping them without rights,and in return for their display of prowess in this sphere enjoythe highest privileges of state. 
 The landed nobility are theprincipal holders of the highest posts in the state (what ismore, by law the nobility, as a social estate, enjoy priority in the civil service); the aristocratic landlords are closest to the Court and more directly and easily than anybody elseinfluence government policy in their own direction. 
 They utilise their close connections with the government to plun-der the state coffers and to secure out of public funds gifts and grants that run into millions of rubles, sometimes in the shape of huge estates distributed for services, at othertimes in the shape of “concessions. 
” * *The hectographed text in the notebook in the possession of the Institute of Marxism-Leninism, Central Committee of the C. 
P. 
S. 
U. 
breaks off here. 
— Ed. 
 TO THE TSARIST GOVERNMENT40 This year, 1896, the Russian Government has already made two announcements to the public on the workers’ struggle against the factory owners. 
 In other countries such announce-ments are no rarity—there they do not hide what is goingon in the country, and the press freely publishes items aboutstrikes. 
 In Russia, however, the government fears morethan the plague publicity for factory practices and inci-dents. 
 It banned the publication of strike news in the press, it forbade factory inspectors to publish their reports, andit even put a stop to the hearing of strike cases in the ordi-nary courts open to the public; in a word, it took all meas-ures to make a strict secret of all that was going on in thefactories and among the workers. 
 And of a sudden, all the devices of the police burst like soap bubbles, and the govern-ment itself was compelled to speak out openly of the factthat the workers were engaged in a struggle against the fac-tory owners. 
 What caused this change? In 1895 workers’strikes were particularly numerous. 
 Yes, that is quite true, butstrikes also took place previous to this, yet the government succeeded in preventing the secret becoming known, and the mass of the workers as a whole were kept in the dark about thestrikes. 
 The present strikes are much bigger than the previousones and are concentrated in one area. 
 Yes, that is quite true,but strikes as big as these also took place previously, in1885-86, for example, in Moscow and Vladimir gubernias. 
 Yet the government held out and refused to say a word about the workers’ struggle against the employers. 
 What, then, hasmade it talk this time? The fact is that this time the social-ists have assisted the workers, have helped them to explain their case, to spread the news about it everywhere, both among the workers and among the public, to formulate the workers’ demands exactly, to show everybody how dishon-est the government is, and what brute violence it employs. 
When the government saw that it was becoming quite ridic-ulous to keep silent, since the strikes were common knowl-edge, it also fell into line behind the rest. 
 The socialist leaf-lets called the government to account, and the government appeared and gave its account. 
 Let us see what sort of an account it was. 
 At first the government tried to avoid doing so openly and publicly. 
 One of the ministers, Minister of Finance Witte, sent out a circular to the factory inspectors, in which he called the workers and the socialists “the worst enemies of public order,” advised the factory inspectors to try toscare the workers, to assure them that the government wouldforbid the employers to make concessions, to tell them ofthe employers’ good motives and noble intentions, of howconcerned the employers are about the workers and their needs, and of how full the employers are of “good sentiments. 
” Of the strikes themselves the government said nothing, itsaid not one word about the cause of the strikes, about thefacts of abominable oppression and violation of the law bythe employers, and about the aims of the workers; in aword, it simply misrepresented all the strikes that took place in the summer and autumn of 1895, tried to get awaywith hackneyed stock phrases about violent and “illegal”actions by the workers, although the workers committed noviolence. 
 It was only the police who resorted to violence. 
The minister wanted to keep the circular a secret, but thevery officials to whom he entrusted it failed to keep the secret, and so the circular made the rounds of the public. 
 Then it was printed by the socialists. 
 Whereupon the gov-ernment, seeing that as usual it had been made a foolof with its “open secrets,” had it published in the press. 
That, as we have already stated, was the government’sanswer to the summer and autumn strikes of 1895. 
 In the spring of 1896, however, strikes broke out again, on a much bigger scale. 
 41 The rumours about them were supplement-ed by socialist leaflets. 
 At first the government maintained a cowardly silence, waiting to see how the matter would end, and then, when the workers’ revolt had died down, it belatedly made public its bureaucratic wisdom, as it would a delayed police protocol. 
 On this occasion it had tospeak out openly, and what is more, to do so collectively. 
Its announcement appeared in issue No. 
 158 of Pravi-telstvenny Vestnik . 
 42 On this occasion it could not misrep-resent the workers’ strikes as previously. 
 It had to tell the full story, to give the facts of the employers’ oppressive measures and make known the workers’ demands; it had to admitthat the workers had behaved “decently. 
” Thus the workerstaught the government to give up lying in the vile manner ofthe police; when they rose up en masse, when they employedleaflets to make their case public, they compelled it to admit the truth. 
 That was a great success. 
 The workers will now know what is their only means of getting a publicstatement of their needs, of letting the workers throughoutRussia know of their struggle. 
 The workers will know nowthat the government’s lies are only refuted by the unitedstruggle of the workers themselves to secure their rights and by their class-consciousness. 
 When the ministers had spoken about the events they started inventing excuses, they pro-ceeded to assert in their statement that the strikes were onlycaused by “the peculiarities of cotton-spinning and threadproduction. 
” Indeed! And not by the peculiarities of thewhole of Russian production , not by the peculiarities of the Russian political system, which permits the police to hound and to seize peaceful workers who are defending themselvesagainst oppression? Why, then, good ministers, did theworkers snatch up, read and ask for more leaflets which didnot deal with cotton and threads at all, but with the right-less position of Russian citizens and the arbitrary and bru-tal conduct of a government which fawns on the capital-ists. 
 No, this new excuse is perhaps worse, viler than theone with which Finance Minister Witte tried to settle mattersin his circular by placing all the blame on “agitators. 
”Minister Witte argues about the strike just like any policeofficial who has had his palm greased by the factory owners: agitators came, runs the explanation, and a strike broke out. 
 Now, when all the ministers saw a strike of 30,000workers, they began to think, and finally came to the con-clusion that strikes do not break out because socialist agi-tators come on the scene, but that socialist agitators come on the scene because strikes break out, because the workers’ struggle breaks out against the capitalists. 
 The ministers nowassert that the socialists subsequently “joined” the strikes. 
That is a good lesson for Finance Minister Witte. 
 Be care-ful, Mr. 
 Witte, learn the lesson well! Learn to get clear inadvance about the cause of the strike, learn to examine the workers’ demands and not the reports of your police rats, whom you yourself have not a bit of faith in. 
 The ministerstell the public that it was only “ill-intentioned persons”who tried to give the strikes a “criminally political charac-ter,” or as they say in one passage, a “social character” (theministers wanted to say a socialist character, but, whether from ignorance or from bureaucratic cowardice, said social, the result being an absurdity: socialist means that whichsupports the workers in the struggle against capital, where-as social simply means public. 
 How can a strike be given asocial character? Why, it’s just the same as giving minis-ters ministerial rank!). 
 That is amusing! The socialists give strikes a political character! Why, before any socialists did, the government itself took all possible measures to give thestrikes a political character. 
 Did it not set about seizingpeaceful workers, just as though they were criminals? Did itnot arrest and deport them? Did it not send spies and pro-vocateurs all over? Did it not arrest all who fell into its hands? Did it not promise to help the factory owners in or-der that they might not yield? Did it not persecute work-ers for simply collecting money in aid of the strikers? Thegovernment itself was ahead of everybody else in explainingto the workers that the war they were waging against thefactory owners must inevitably be a war against the govern-ment. 
 All that the socialists had to do was to confirm this and publish it in leaflet form. 
 That is all. 
 The Russian Gov-ernment, however, had already had an extensive experience inthe art of dissembling, and the ministers tried to keep silentabout the methods by which our government “gave the strikesa political character”; it told the public the dates of the socialists’ leaflets. 
 But why did it not tell the dates of the orders issued by the City Governor and other bashi-bazouksfor the arrest of peaceful workers, putting the troops under arms, the dispatch of spies and provocateurs? They gave details to the public about the number of leaflets issued by the socialists; why did they give no details about the number of workers and socialists seized, about the number of ruinedfamilies, the number deported or imprisoned without trial?Why? Because even the Russian ministers, devoid as theyare of all shame, are wary of telling the public about suchbandit exploits. 
 Peaceful workers who stood up for their rights and defended themselves against the factory owners’ tyranny had the entire strength of the state power, withpolice and troops, gendarmes and public prosecutors, hurledagainst them; workers who held out on their own coppersand those of their comrades, the British, Polish, German andAustrian workers—had aimed against them the entire strength of the state treasury, which promised assistance to the poor factory owners. 
 The workers were not united. 
 They were unable to arrange collections, to enlist the help of other cities and oth-er workers, they were hounded everywhere, they had toyield to the entire strength of state authority. 
 The mini-sterial gentlemen are rejoicing that the government has achieved victory. 
 A fine victory! The entire strength of the government, the entire wealth of the capitalists—against thirty thous-and peaceful, penniless workers! The ministers would bewiser if they waited before boasting of such a victory; their boasting really reminds one very much of that of the police-man, who brags about having got away from the strikeunhurt. 
 The “incitements” of the socialists were ineffective, trium-phantly declares the government to soothe the capitalists. 
Why, is our reply to this, no incitements could have creat-ed one-hundredth part of the impression created on all St. 
 Petersburg, all Russian workers by the government’sconduct in this affair! The workers saw through thegovernment’s policy of keeping silent about the workers’strikes and of misrepresenting them. 
 The workers saw howtheir united struggle forced the abandonment of hypocritical police lies. 
 They saw whose interests were safeguarded by the government, which promised assistance to the factory owners. 
They understood who was their real foe when they, who were /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR not violating law and order, had the troops and police sent against them, just as though they were the country’s enemies. 
 However much ministers may talk of the struggle being a failure, the workers see how the factory owners everywherehave quietened down, and know that the government isalready calling the factory inspectors together to discusswhat concessions should be made to the workers, for it seesthat concessions are necessary. 
 The strikes of 1895-96 have not been in vain. 
 They have been of tremendous service to the Russian workers, they have shown them how to wage thestruggle for their interests. 
 They have taught them to under-stand the political situation and the political needs of the working class . 
 November 1896. 
 The League of Struggle for the Emancipation of the Working Class . 
 43 Written in prison in summer 1896 Published according Mimeographed in November 1896 to the text of the leaflet Written in the spring 1897 First published in the magazine Novoye Slovo ,45 issues 7-10, April -July 1897 . 
 Signed: K. 
 T—n Reprinted in the miscellany Economic Studies and Essays by Vladimir Ilyin, 1898Published according to the text of the miscellany Economic Studies and Essays, checked with the text in Novoye Slovo and that in the miscellany The Agrarian Question by Vl. 
 Ilyin, 1908OF ECONOMIC ROMANTICISM (SISMONDI AND OUR NATIVE SISMONDISTS)44 The Swiss economist Sismondi (J. 
-C. 
-L. 
 Simonde de Sis-mondi), who wrote at the beginning of the present century, is of particular interest in considering a solution of thegeneral economic problems which are now coming to theforefront with particular force in Russia. 
 If we add to thisthat Sismondi occupies a special place in the history of po-litical economy, in that he stands apart from the main trends, being an ardent advocate of small-scale production and an opponent of the supporters and ideologists of large-scale enterprise (just like the present-day Russian Narod-niks), the reader will understand our desire to outline themain features of Sismondi’s doctrine and its relation toother trends—both contemporary and subsequent—in eco-nomic science. 
 A study of Sismondi is today all the more interesting because last year (1896) an article in Russkoye Bogatstvo also expounded his doctrine (B. 
 Ephrucy: “The Social and Economic Views of Simonde de Sismondi,”Russkoye Bogatstvo , 1896, Nos. 
 7 and 8). 
 * The contributor to Russkoye Bogatstvo states at the very outset that no writer has been “so wrongly appraised” as Sismondi, who, he alleges, has been “unjustly” repre-sented, now as a reactionary, then as a utopian. 
 The veryopposite is true. 
 Precisely this appraisal of Sismondi is quitecorrect. 
 The article in Russkoye Bogatstvo , while it gives an accurate and detailed account of Sismondi’s views, pro-*Ephrucy died in 1897. 
 An obituary was published in Russkoye Bogatstvo , March 1897. 
 vides a completely incorrect picture of his theory, * ideal-ises the very points of it in which he comes closest to the Narodniks, and ignores and misrepresents his attitude to subsequent trends in economic science. 
 Hence, our expositionand analysis of Sismondi’s doctrine will at the same timebe a criticism of Ephrucy’s article. 
 CHAPTER I THE ECONOMIC THEORIES OF ROMANTICISM The distinguishing feature of Sismondi’s theory is his doctrine of revenue, of the relation of revenue to productionand to the population. 
 The title of Sismondi’s chief work is:Nouveaux principes d ’économie politique ou de la richesse dans ses rapports avec la population (Seconde édition. 
 Paris, 1827, 2 vol. 
 The first edition was published in 1819)— New Principles of Political Economy , or Wealth in Rela-tion to Population . 
 This subject is almost identical with the problem known in Russian Narodnik literature as the“problem of the home market for capitalism. 
” Sismondiasserted that as a result of the development of large-scale enterprise and wage-labour in industry and agriculture, production inevitably outruns consumption and is facedwith the insoluble task of finding consumers; that it cannotfind consumers within the country because it convertsthe bulk of the population into day labourers, plain workers,and creates unemployment, while the search for a foreign market becomes increasingly difficult owing to the entry of new capitalist countries into the world arena. 
 The readerwill see that these are the very same problems that occupythe minds of the Narodnik economists headed by Messrs. 
V. 
 V. 
 and N. 
 —on. 
46 Let us, then, take a closer look at the various points of Sismondi’s argument and at its scien-tific significance. 
 *It is quite true that Sismondi was not a socialist, as Ephrucy states at the beginning of his article, repeating what was said byLippert (see Handwörterbuch der Staatswissenschaften , V. 
 Band, Arti-kel “Sismondi” von Lippert, Seite 678) ( Dictionary of Political Science , Vol. 
 V, article by Lippert entitled “Sismondi,” p. 
 678. 
— Ed. 
). 
 I DOES THE HOME MARKET SHRINK BECAUSE OF THE RUINATION OF THE SMALL PRODUCERS? Unlike the classical economists, who in their arguments had in mind the already established capitalist system and took the existence of the working class as a matter of course and self-evident, Sismondi particularly emphasises the ruina-tion of the small producer—the process which led tothe formation of the working class. 
 That Sismondi deservescredit for pointing to this contradiction in the capitalistsystem is beyond dispute; but the point is that as an econo-mist he failed to understand this phenomenon and covered up his inability to make a consistent analysis of it with“pious wishes. 
” In Sismondi’s opinion, the ruination ofthe small producer proves that the home market shrinks. 
 “If the manufacturer sells at a cheaper price,” says Sis-mondi in the chapter on “How Does the Seller Enlarge His Market?” (ch. 
 III, livre IV, t. 
 1, p. 
 342 et suiv. 
), * “he will sell more, because the others will sell less. 
 Hence,the manufacturer always strives to save something onlabour, or on raw materials, so as to be able to sell at alower price than his fellow manufacturers. 
 As the materialsthemselves are products of past labour, his saving, in the long run, always amounts to the expenditure of a smaller quantity of labour in the production of the same product. 
”“True, the individual manufacturer tries to expand produc-tion and not to reduce the number of his workers. 
 Let usassume that he succeeds, that he wins customers awayfrom his competitors by reducing the price of his commod-ity. 
 What will be the ‘national result’ of this?... The other manufacturers will introduce the same methodsof production as he employs. 
 Then some of them will, ofcourse, have to discharge some of their workers to theextent that the new machine increases the productive powerof labour. 
 If consumption remains at the same level, and if the same amount of labour is performed by one-tenth of the former number of hands, then the income of this section *All subsequent quotations, unless otherwise stated, are taken from the above-mentioned edition of Nouveaux Principes . 
 of the working class will be curtailed by nine-tenths, and all forms of its consumption will be reduced to the same extent.... 
 The result of the invention—if the nation has no foreign trade, and if consumption remains at the same level—will consequently be a loss for all, a decline in the nation-al revenue, which will lead to a decline in general consump-tion in the following year” (I, 344). 
 “Nor can it be other-wise: labour itself is an important part of the revenue” (Sismondi has wages in mind), “and therefore the demand for labour cannot be reduced without making the nation poorer. 
Hence, the expected gain from the invention of new methodsof production is nearly always obtained from foreign trade”(I, 345). 
 The reader will see that in these words he already has before him all that so-familiar “theory” of “the shrinkage of the home market” as a consequence of the development ofcapitalism, and of the consequent need for a foreign market. 
Sismondi very frequently reverts to this idea, linking itwith his theory of crises and his population “theory”; itis as much the key point of his doctrine as it is of the doctrine of the Russian Narodniks. 
 Sismondi did not, of course, forget that under the new relationships, ruination and unemployment are accompaniedby an increase in “commercial wealth” that the point atissue was the development of large-scale production, ofcapitalism. 
 This he understood perfectly well and, in fact, asserted that it was the growth of capitalism that caused the home market to shrink: “Just as it is not amatter of indifference from the standpoint of the citizens’welfare whether the sufficiency and consumption of alltend to be equal, or whether a small minority has asuperabundance of all things, while the masses are reduced to bare necessities, so these two forms of the distribution of revenue are not a matter of indifference from the view-point of the development of commercial wealth (richesse commerciale). 
 * Equality in consumption must always lead to the expansion of the producers’ market, and inequality,to the shrinking of the market ” (de le [le marché] resserrer toujours davantage) (I, 357). 
 *Italics here and elsewhere are ours, unless otherwise stated. 
 Thus, Sismondi asserts that the home market shrinks owing to the inequality of distribution inherent in capi-talism, that the market must be created by equal distribu-tion. 
 But how can this take place when there is commercial wealth , to which Sismondi imperceptibly passed (and he could not do otherwise, for if he had done he could nothave argued about the market )? This is something he does not investigate. 
 How does he prove that it is possible to preserve equality among the producers if commercial wealth exists, i. 
e. 
, competition between the individual producers? He does not prove it at all. 
 He simply decrees that thatis what must occur . 
 Instead of further analysing the con-tradiction he rightly pointed to, he begins to talk aboutthe undesirability of contradictions in general. 
 “It is pos-sible that when small-scale agriculture is superseded by large-scale and more capital is invested in the land a largeramount of wealth is distributed among the entire massof agriculturists than previously” ... (i. 
e. 
, “it is possible”that the home market, the dimension of which is determinedafter all by the absolute quantity of commercial wealth, has expanded—expanded along with the development of capitalism?).... 
 “But for the nation, the consumptionof one family of rich farmers plus that of fifty familiesof poor day labourers is not equal to the consumption offifty families of peasants, not one of which is rich but, onthe other hand, not one of which lacks (a moderate) a decent degree of prosperity” (une honnête aisance) (I, 358). 
 In other words: perhaps the development of capitalist farmingdoes create a home market for capitalism. 
 Sismondi was afar too knowledgeable and conscientious economist to denythis fact; but—but here the author drops his investiga-tion, and for the “nation” of commercial wealth directly substitutes a “nation” of peasants. 
 Evading the unpleasant fact that refutes his petty-bourgeois point of view, he evenforgets what he himself had said a little earlier, namely,that the “peasants” became “farmers” thanks to the develop-ment of commercial wealth, “The first farmers,” he said,“were simple labourers.... 
 They did not cease to be peasants.... 
 They hardly ever employed day labourers to work with them, they employed only servants (des domestiques), alwayschosen from among their equals, whom they treated as equals, ate with them at the same table ... constituted one class of peasants” (I, 221). 
 So then, it all amounts to this, that these patriarchal muzhiks, with their patriarchal servants, are much more to the author’s liking, and hesimply turns his back on the changes which the growth of“commercial wealth” brought about in these patriarchalrelationships. 
 But Sismondi does not in the least intend to admit this. 
 He continues to think that he is investigating the laws of commercial wealth and, forgetting the reservationshe has made, bluntly asserts: “Thus, as a result of wealth being concentrated in the hands of a small number of proprietors, the home market shrinks increasingly (!), and industry is increasingly com-pelled to look for foreign markets, where great revolu-tions (des grandes révolutions) await it” (1, 361). 
 “Thus,the home market cannot expand except through nationalprosperity” (I, 362). 
 Sismondi has in mind the prosperity ofthe people, for he had only just admitted the possibilityof “national” prosperity under capitalist farming. 
 As the reader sees, our Narodnik economists say the same thing word for word. 
 Sismondi reverts to this question again at the end of his work, in Book VII On the Population , chapter VII; “On the Population Which Has Become Superfluous Owing tothe Invention of Machines. 
” “The introduction of large-scale farming in the coun-tryside has in Great Britain led to the disappearance ofthe class of peasant farmers (fermiers paysans), who workedthemselves and nevertheless enjoyed a moderate prosperity;the population declined considerably, but its consumptiondeclined more than its numbers. 
 The day labourers who do all the field work, receiving only bare necessities, do not by any means give the same encouragement to urbanindustry as the rich peasants gave previously” (II, 327). 
“Similar changes also took place among the urban popula-tion.... 
 The small tradesmen, the small manufacturers dis-appear, and one big entrepreneur replaces hundreds of them who, taken all together, were perhaps not as rich as he. 
 Never-theless, taken together they were bigger consumers than he. 
The luxury he indulges in encourages industry far less than the moderate prosperity of the hundred households he has superseded” (ibid. 
). 
 The question is: what does Sismondi’s theory that the home market shrinks with the development of capitalismamount to? To the fact that its author, who had hardlyattempted to look at the matter squarely, avoided analys-ing the conditions that belong to capitalism (“commercialwealth” plus large-scale enterprise in industry and agricul-ture, for Sismondi does not know the word “capitalism. 
” Identity of concepts makes this use of the term quitecorrect, and in future we shall simply say “capitalism”),and replaced an analysis by his own petty-bourgeois pointof view and his own petty-bourgeois utopia. 
 The de-velopment of commercial wealth and, consequently, of competition, he says, should leave intact the average, uniform peasantry, with its “moderate prosperity” and itspatriarchal relations with its farm servants. 
 It goes without saying that this innocent desire remained the exclusive possession of Sismondi and the other roman-ticists among the “intelligentsia”; and that day after day it came into increasing conflict with the reality that was developing the contradictions of which Sismondi was notyet able to gauge the depth. 
 It goes without saying that theoretical political econ-omy, which in its further development * joined that of the classical economists, established precisely what Sismondi wanted to deny—that the development of capitalism in gen-eral, and of capitalist farming in particular, does not re-strict the home market, but creates it. 
 The development of capitalism proceeds simultaneously with the developmentof commodity economy, and to the extent that domesticproduction gives way to production for sale, while the handi-craftsman is superseded by the factory, a market is created for capital . 
 The “day labourers” who are pushed out of agri-culture by the conversion of the “peasants” into “farmers”provide labour-power for capital, and the farmers are pur-chasers of the products of industry, not only of articlesof consumption (which were formerly produced by the peas-*This refers to Marxism. 
 (Author’s footnote to the 1908 edition. 
— Ed. 
) ants at home, or by village artisans), but also of instruments of production, which could not remain of the old type after small farming had been superseded by large-scale farming. 
 * The last point is worth emphasising, for it is the one that Sismondi particularly ignored when, in the passage we havequoted, he talked about “consumption” by peasants andfarmers as if only personal consumption (the consumption of bread, clothing, etc. 
) existed and as if the purchase of machines, implements, etc. 
, the erection of buildings, warehouses, factories, etc. 
, were not also consumption, exceptthat it is of a different kind, i. 
e. 
, productive consumption , consumption by capital and not by people. 
 And again we mustnote that it is precisely this mistake, which, as we shallsoon see, Sismondi borrowed from Adam Smith, that our Narodnik economists took over in toto. 
 ** II SISMONDI’S VIEWS ON NATIONAL REVENUE AND CAPITAL The arguments adduced by Sismondi to prove that capi-talism is impossible and that it cannot develop are notconfined to this. 
 He also drew the same conclusions fromhis revenue theory. 
 It must be said that Sismondi tookover in its entirety Adam Smith’s labour theory of valueand three forms-of revenue: rent, profit and wages. 
 Here and there he even attempts to group together the first two forms of revenue and contrast them to the third: thus,he sometimes combines them and opposes them to wages (I,104-05); sometimes he even uses the term mieux-value(surplus-value) to describe them (I, 103). 
 We must not,however, exaggerate the importance of this terminology as, we think, Ephrucy does when he says that “Sismondi’s theory *Thus, simultaneously the elements of both variable capital (the “free” worker) and constant capital are formed; the means ofproduction from which the small producer is freed pertain to thelatter. 
 **Ephrucy says nothing at all concerning this part of Sismondi’s doctrine—the shrinking of the home market as a result of the develop-ment of capitalism. 
 We shall see again and again that he left out whatis most typical of Sismondi’s viewpoint and of the attitude of Narodism towards his doctrine. 
 stands close to the theory of surplus-value” ( Russkoye Bogatstvo , No. 
 8, p. 
 41). 
 Properly speaking, Sismondi did not advance a single step beyond Adam Smith, who also said that rent and profit are “deductions from the produceof labour,” the share of the value which the workeradds to the product (see An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations , Russian translation by Bibikov, Vol. 
 I, chap. 
 VIII: “Of the Wages of Labour,” and chap. 
 VI: “Of the Component Parts of the Price of Commodi-ties”). 
 Nor did Sismondi go further than this. 
 But he triedto link up this division of the newly-created product intosurplus-value and wages with the theory of the social revenue,the home market and the realisation of the product in capi-talist society. 
 These attempts are extremely important for an appraisal of Sismondi’s scientific significance, and for an understanding of the connection between his doctrine andthat of the Russian Narodniks. 
 It is therefore worth whileanalysing them in greater detail. 
 In everywhere pushing into the forefront the question of revenue, of its relation to production, to consumption and to the population, Sismondi was also naturally obliged to analyse the theoretical basis of the concept “revenue. 
”And so at the very beginning of his work we find threechapters devoted to the question of revenue (l. 
 II, ch. 
IV-VI). 
 Chapter IV, entitled “How Revenue Originatesfrom Capital,” deals with the difference between capital and revenue. 
 Sismondi begins straight away to deal with this subject in relation to the whole of society. 
 “Inasmuch aseach works for all,” he says, “what is produced by all mustbe consumed by all.... 
 The difference between capital andrevenue is material for society” (I, 83). 
 But Sismondi hasa feeling that this “material” difference is not as simple for society as it is for the individual entrepreneur, “We are approaching,” he makes the reservation, “the mostabstract and most difficult problem of political economy. 
The nature of capital and that of revenue are constantlyinterwoven in our minds: we see that what is revenue for one becomes capital for another , and the same object, in passing from hand to hand, successively acquires different names” (I, 84), i. 
e. 
, is called “capital” at one momentand “revenue” at another. 
 “But to confuse them,” asserts Sismondi, “is ruinous” (leur confusion est ruineuse, p. 
 477). 
 “The task of distinguishing between the capital and rev-enue of society is as important as it is difficult” (I, 84). 
 The reader has probably noticed wherein lies the diffi-culty which Sismondi speaks of: if the revenue of the in-dividual entrepreneur is his profit, which he spends on var-ious kinds of articles of consumption, * and if the revenue of the individual worker is his wages, can these two forms of revenue be added together to form the “revenue of so-ciety”? What, then, about those capitalists and workerswho produce machines, for example? Their product existsin a form that cannot be consumed (i. 
e. 
, consumed person-ally). 
 It cannot be added to articles of consumption. 
These products are meant to serve as capital. 
 Hence, while being the revenue of their producers (that is, that part which is the source of profit and wages) they become the capital of their purchasers. 
 How can we straighten out this con-fusion, which prevents us from defining the concept of so-cial revenue? As we have seen, Sismondi merely approached the ques-tion and at once shrank from it, limiting himself to stating the “difficulty. 
” He says plainly that “usually, three kindsof revenue are recognised: rent, profit and wages” (I, 85),and then goes on to expound Adam Smith’s doctrine con-cerning each. 
 The question of the difference between thecapital and the revenue of society remained unanswered. 
 The exposition now proceeds without any strict division between social revenue and individual revenue. 
 But Sis-mondi reverts once again to the question he abandoned. 
He says that, as there are different kinds of revenue, sothere are “different kinds of wealth” (1, 93), namely, fixed capital —machines, implements, etc. 
, circulating capital — which, unlike the former, is consumed quickly and changes its form (seed, raw materials, wages) and, lastly, revenue from capital , which is consumed without being reproduced. 
 Here it is not important to us that Sismondi repeats all themistakes Adam Smith made in the theory of fixed andcirculating capital, that he confuses these categories, which *To be more exact: that part of profit which is not used for accumulation. 
 belong to the process of circulation, with the categories which spring from the process of production (constant and variable capital). 
 What interests us is Sismondi’s theory of revenue. 
 And on this question, he draws the followingconclusion from the division of wealth into three kindsthat has just been made. 
 “It is important to note that these three kinds of wealth go similarly into consumption; for everything that has been produced is of value to man only insofar as it serves his needs, and these needs are satisfied only by consump-tion. 
 But fixed capital serves this purpose indirectly (d’unemanière indirecte); it is consumed slowly, helping manto reproduce what serves for his consumption” (I, 94-95),whereas circulating capital (Sismondi already identifies it with variable capital) is converted into the “ worker ’s consumption fund ” (I, 95). 
 It follows, therefore, that, as distinct from individual consumption, there are two kindsof social consumption . 
 These two kinds differ very greatly. 
 What matters, of course, is not that fixed capital is consumedslowly, but that it is consumed without forming revenue (a consumption fund) for any class of society, that it is not used personally, but productively. 
 But Sismondi fails tosee this, and realising that he has again strayed from thepath * in quest of the difference between social capital and revenue, he helplessly exclaims: “This movement of wealthis so abstract, it requires such considerable attention to grasp it fully (pour le bien saisir), that we deem it useful to take the simplest example” (I, 95). 
 And indeed, he doestake the “simplest” example: a single farmer (un fermiersolitaire) harvested a hundred sacks of wheat; part of thewheat he consumed himself, part went for sowing, andpart was consumed by the workers he hired. 
 Next year he harvested two hundred sacks. 
 Who is to consume them? The farmer’s family cannot grow so quickly. 
 Using thisextremely ill-chosen example to show the difference between *Sismondi had only just separated capital from revenue . 
 The first goes to production, the second to consumption. 
 But we aretalking about society, and society also “consumes” fixed capital. 
The distinction drawn falls to the ground, and the social-economic process which transforms “capital for one” into “revenue for another” remains unexplained. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR fixed capital (seed), circulating capital (wages) and the farmer’s consumption fund, Sismondi says: “We have seen three kinds of wealth in an individual family; let us now examine each kind in relation to thewhole nation and see how the national revenue can resultfrom this distribution” (I, 97). 
 But all he says after thisis that in society, too, it is necessary to reproduce thesame three kinds of wealth: fixed capital (and Sismondi emphasises that a certain amount of labour has to be expended on it, but he does not explain how fixed capitalwill exchange for the articles of consumption required byboth the capitalists and the workers engaged in this pro-duction); then come raw materials (Sismondi isolates theseespecially); then the workers’ maintenance and the cap-italists’ profit. 
 This is all we get from chapter IV. 
 Ob-viously, the question of the national revenue remainedopen, and Sismondi failed to analyse, not only distribution,but even the concept of revenue. 
 He immediately forgets the theoretically extremely important reference to the need toreproduce also the fixed capital of society; and in his next chapter, in speaking of the “distribution of the nation-al revenue among the different classes of citizens” (ch. 
 V),he goes straight on to speak of three kinds of revenue and,combining rent and profit, he says that the national reve-nue consists of two parts: profit from wealth (i. 
e. 
, rentand profit in the proper sense) and the workers’ means of subsistence (I, 104-05). 
 He says, moreover, that: “Similarly, the annual product, or the result of all the work done by the nation during the year, consists of twoparts: one is ... the profit that comes from wealth; the otheris the capacity to work (la puissance de travailler) whichis assumed to equal the part of wealth for which it is ex-changed, or the means of subsistence of those who work.... 
 Thus, the national revenue and the annual product balanceeach other and represent equal magnitudes. 
 The entireannual product is consumed in the course of the year, butpartly by the workers, who, giving their labour in exchange,turn the product into capital and reproduce it, and partly by the capitalists, who, giving their revenue in exchange, destroy it” (I, 105). 
 Thus, Sismondi simply thrusts aside the question of distinguishing between national capital and revenue, which he himself so definitely considered to be extremely im-portant and difficult, and forgets entirely what he had said a few pages previously! And then he does not see that by thrusting this question aside, he reduced the problemto utter absurdity: how can the annual product be to-tally consumed by the workers and capitalists in the shape of revenue, if production needs capital, or, to be moreexact, means and instruments of production? They have to be produced, and they are produced every year (as Sis-mondi himself has only just admitted). 
 And now all theseinstruments of production, raw materials, etc. 
, are suddenly discarded and the “difficult” problem of the difference between capital and revenue is settled by the absolutelyincongruous assertion that the annual product equals the national revenue. 
 This theory, that the entire product of capitalist so-ciety consists of two parts—the workers’ part (wages, or variable capital, to use modern terminology) and the capitalists’ part (surplus-value), is not peculiar to Sis-mondi. 
 It does not belong to him. 
 He borrowed it in its entirety from Adam Smith, and even took a step backward from it. 
 The whole of subsequent political economy (Ri-cardo, Mill, Proudhon and Rodbertus) repeated this mis-take, which was disclosed only by the author of Capital , in Part III of Volume II. 
 We shall expound the principlesunderlying his views later on. 
 At present let us observe that this mistake is repeated by our Narodnik economists. 
 It is of special interest to compare them with Sismondi,because they draw from this fallacious theory the very same conclusions that Sismondi himself drew *: the con-clusion that surplus-value cannot be realised in capitalistsociety; that social wealth cannot be expanded; that the foreign market must be resorted to because surplus-value cannot be realised within the country; and lastly, that crisesoccur because the product, it is alleged, cannot be realised through consumption by the workers and the capitalists. 
 *And which were prudently avoided by the other economists who repeated Adam Smith’s mistake. 
 III SISMONDI’S CONCLUSIONS THE FALLACIOUS THEORY OF TWO PARTS OF THE ANNUAL PRODUCT IN CAPITALIST SOCIETY To give the reader an idea of Sismondi’s doctrine as a whole, we shall first state the most important conclusions which he draws from this theory, and then deal with themanner in which his chief error is rectified in Marx’s Cap-ital. 
 First of all, Sismondi draws from Adam Smith’s fallacious theory the conclusion that production must correspond to consumption, that production is determined by revenue. 
 He goes on reiterating this “truth” (which proves his com-plete inability to understand the nature of capitalist pro-duction) throughout the whole of his next chapter, chapterVI: “The Mutual Determination of Production by Consump-tion, and Expenditure by Revenue. 
” Sismondi directly applies the ethics of the frugal peasant to capitalist society, and sincerely believes that in this way he has correctedAdam Smith’s doctrine. 
 At the very beginning of his work,when speaking about Adam Smith in the introductory part(Book I, History of Science ), he says that he “supplements” Smith with the proposition that “consumption is the sole aim of accumulation” (I, 51). 
 “Consumption,” he says, “de-termines reproduction” (I, 119-20), “the national expen-diture must regulate the national revenue” (I, 113), andthe whole of the work is replete with similar assertions. 
Two more characteristic features of Sismondi’s doctrine aredirectly connected with this: firstly, disbelief in the de-velopment of capitalism, failure to understand that it causes an ever-increasing growth of the productive forcesand denial that such growth is possible—in exactly thesame way as the Russian romanticists “teach” that capitalismleads to a waste of labour, and so forth. 
 “Those who urge unlimited production are mistaken,” says Sismondi (I, 121). 
 Excess of production over revenue causes over-production (I, 106). 
 An increase in wealth isbeneficial only “when it is gradual, when it is propor-tionate to itself, when none of its parts develops withexcessive rapidity” (I, 409). 
 The good Sismondi thinks that “disproportionate” development is not development (as our Narodniks also do); that this disproportion is not a law of the present system of social economy, and of its devel-opment, but a “mistake” of the legislator, etc. 
; that inthis the European governments are artificially imitating England, a country that has taken the wrong path. 
 * Sis-mondi wholly denies the proposition which the classical economists advanced, and which Marx’s theory wholly ac-cepted, namely, that capitalism develops the productiveforces. 
 In fact, he goes to the length of regarding all accu-mulation as being possible only “little by little,” and isquite unable to explain the process of accumulation. 
 This is the second highly characteristic feature of his views. 
 The way he argues about accumulation is extremely amusing: “In the long run, the total product of a given year always exchanges only for the total product of the preceding year”(I, 121). 
 Here accumulation is wholly denied: it followsthat the growth of social wealth is impossible under cap-italism. 
 The Russian reader will not be very much surprised by this assertion, because he has heard the same thingfrom Mr. 
 V. 
 V. 
 and from Mr. 
 N. 
 —on. 
 But Sismondi, was, after all, a disciple of Adam Smith. 
 He has a feelingthat he is saying something utterly incongruous, and hewants to correct himself: “If production grows gradually,” he continues, “then annual exchange causes only a slight loss (une petite perte)each year, while at the same time improving the conditionsfor the future (en même temps qu’elle bonifie la conditionfuture). 
 If this loss is slight and well distributed, every-body will bear it without complaint.... 
 If, however, the discrepancy between the new production and the preceding one is great, capital perishes (sont entamés), suffering iscaused, and the nation retrogresses instead of progressing”(I, 121). 
 It would be difficult to formulate the fundamentalthesis of romanticism and of the petty-bourgeois view ofcapitalism more vividly and more plainly than is done in *See for example, II, 456-57, and many other passages. 
 Later we shall quote specimens of them, and the reader will see that even in their mode of expression our romanticists, like Mr. 
 N. 
 —on, differ in no way from Sismondi. 
 the above tirade. 
 The more rapid the process of accumu-lation, i. 
e. 
, the excess of production over consumption, the better, taught the classical economists, who, though they were not clear about the process of the social produc-tion of capital, and though they were unable to free them-selves from Adam Smith’s mistaken view that the socialproduct consists of two parts, nevertheless advanced theperfectly correct idea that production creates a market for itself and itself determines consumption. 
 And we know also that Marx’s theory, which recognised that the morerapid the growth of wealth, the fuller the developmentof the productive forces of labour and its socialisation,and the better the position of the worker , or as much better as it can be under the present system of social economy, took over this view of accumulation from the classical economists. 
 The romanticists assert the very opposite, andbase all their hopes on the feeble development of capital-ism; they call for its retardation . 
 Further, the failure to understand that production creates a market for itself leads to the doctrine that surplus-val-ue cannot be realised. 
 “From reproduction comes revenue, but production in itself is not yet revenue : it acquires this name” (ce nom! Thus the difference between production,i. 
e. 
, the product, and revenue lies only in the word!) “andfunctions as such (elle n’opère comme telle ) only after it isrealised, after each article produced finds a consumer who has the need or the desire for it” (qui en avait le besoin ou le désir) (I, 121). 
 Thus, the identification of revenue with“production” (i. 
e. 
, with all that is produced) leads to theidentification of realisation with personal consumption. 
 Sismondi has already forgotten that the realisation of suchproducts as, for example, iron, coal, machines, etc. 
, the realisation of means of production in general, takes place in a different way, although he had been very close tothis idea earlier. 
 The identification of realisation withpersonal consumption naturally leads to the doctrine that it is surplus-value that the capitalists cannot realise, be-cause, of the two parts of the social product, wages are real-ised through workers’ consumption. 
 And indeed, Sismondi reached this conclusion (subsequently amplified in greaterdetail by Proudhon and constantly repeated by our Narodniks). 
 In controversy with MacCulloch, Sismondi makes the allegation that the latter (in expounding Ri-cardo’s views) does not explain the realisation of profit. 
 MacCulloch had said that, with the division of social la-bour, one branch of production provides a market for another:the producers of bread realise their commodities in the prod-uct of the producers of clothing and vice versa. 
 * “The author,” says Sismondi, “presupposes labour without profit (un travail sans bénéfice), reproduction which only replaces the workers ’ consumption” (II, 384, Sismondi’s italics) ... “he leaves nothing for the master ... we are investigatingwhat becomes of the excess of the workers’ productionover their consumption” (ibid. 
). 
 Thus, we find that thisfirst romanticist already makes the very definite statement that the capitalists cannot realise surplus-value . 
 From this proposition Sismondi draws the further conclusion—againthe very same as that drawn by the Narodniks—thatthe very conditions of realisation make it necessary for capitalism to have a foreign market . 
 “As labour itself is an important component of revenue, the demand for labour cannot be reduced without making the nation poorer. 
 Hence, the expected gain from the invention of new methods ofproduction nearly always relates to foreign trade ” (I, 345). 
 “The nation which is the first to make some discovery is able,for a considerable time, to expand its market in proportionto the number of hands that are released by each new in-vention It employs them forthwith to produce that larger quantity of products which its invention enables it toproduce more cheaply. 
 But at last the time will come whenthe whole civilised world forms a single market, and itwill no longer be possible to acquire new purchasers inany new nation. 
 Demand in the world market will then be a constant (précise) quantity, for which the different *See supplement to Nouveaux Principes , 2nd ed. 
, Vol. 
 II: “Ec-laircissements relatifs à la balance des consommations avec les pro-ductions” (“Explanations Relative to the Balance of Consumption and Production. 
”— Ed. 
), where Sismondi translates and disputes the essay by Ricardo’s disciple (MacCulloch) published in the Edin-burgh Review entitled “An Inquiry into the Question as to Whether the Power to Consume Always Grows in Society Simultaneously with the Power to Produce. 
”47 industrial nations will compete against each other. 
 If one nation supplies a larger quantity of products, it will do so to the detriment of another. 
 The total sales cannot be increased except by an increase in general prosperity,or by the transfer of commodities, formerly the exclusivepossession of the rich, to the sphere of consumption bythe poor” (II, 316). 
 The reader will see that Sismondi pre-sents the very doctrine that our romanticists have learned so well, namely, that the foreign market provides the way out of the difficulty of realising the product in general, and surplus-value in particular. 
 Lastly, this same doctrine that national revenue and national production are identical led to Sismondi’s theoryof crises. 
 After what has been said above, we need scarce-ly quote from the numerous passages in Sismondi’s work which deal with this subject. 
 His theory that productionmust conform to revenue naturally led to the view thatcrises are the result of the disturbance of this balance,the result of an excess of production over consumption. 
 Itis evident from the passage just quoted that it is this dis-crepancy between production and consumption that Sismon-di regarded as the main cause of crises; and in the forefronthe placed the underconsumption of the masses of the people,the workers. 
 This explains why Sismondi’s theory ofcrises (which Rodbertus also adopted) is known in eco-nomic science as an example of the theories which ascribe crises to underconsumption (Unterkonsumption). 
 IV WHEREIN LIES THE ERROR OF ADAM SMITH’S AND SISMONDI’S THEORIES OF NATIONAL REVENUE? What is the fundamental error that led Sismondi, to all these conclusions? Sismondi took over his theory of national revenue and of its division into two parts (the workers’ and the capi-talists’) bodily from Adam Smith. 
 Far from adding anything to Adam Smith’s theses, he even took a step backward and omitted Adam Smith’s attempt (albeit unsuccessful) tosubstantiate this proposition theoretically. 
 Sismondi ap-pears not to notice how this theory contradicts that of production in general. 
 Indeed, according to the theory which deduces value from labour, the value of a product consists of three components: the part which replacesthe raw materials and instruments of labour (constant cap-ital), the part which replaces wages, or the maintenanceof the workers (variable capital), and “surplus-value” (Sis-mondi calls it mieux-value). 
 Such is the analysis of the individual product in terms of value made by Adam Smith and repeated by Sismondi. 
 The question is: how can thesocial product, which is the sum-total of individual prod-ucts, consist only of the two latter parts? What has be-come of the first part—constant capital? As we haveseen, Sismondi merely beat about the bush on this question, but Adam Smith gave an answer to it. 
 He asserted that this part exists independently only in the individual product. 
If, however, we take the aggregate social product, this part,in its turn, resolves itself into wages and surplus-value—of precisely those capitalists who produce this constantcapital. 
 But in giving this answer Adam Smith did not explain why, when resolving the value of constant capital, say ofmachines, he again leaves out the constant capital, i. 
e. 
,in our example, the iron out of which the machines are made,or the instruments used up in the process, etc. 
? If the val-ue of each product includes the part which replaces con-stant capital (and all economists agree that it does) then the exclusion of that part from any sphere of social pro-duction whatever is quite arbitrary. 
 As the author of Cap-ital pointed out, “when Adam Smith says that the instru-ments of labour resolve themselves into wages and profit,he forgets to add: and into that constant capital which is used up in their production. 
 Adam Smith simply sends us from Pontius to Pilate, from one line of productionto another, from another to a third,” 48 failing to notice that this shifting about does not alter the problem in theleast. 
 Smith’s answer (accepted by all the subsequentpolitical economists prior to Marx) is simply an evasion of the problem, avoidance of the difficulty. 
 And there is in-deed a difficulty here. 
 It lies in that the concepts of cap-ital and revenue cannot be directly transferred from the individual product to the social product. 
 The economists admit this when they say that from the social point of view what is “capital for one becomes revenue for another” (see Sismondi, as quoted above). 
 This phrase, however, for-mulates the difficulty but does not solve it. 
 * The solution is that when examining this question from the social point of view, we must no longer speak ofproducts in general, irrespective of their material forms. 
 Indeed, we are discussing the social revenue, i. 
e. 
, the product which becomes available for consumption. 
 But sure-ly not all products can be consumed through personal con-sumption : machines, coal, iron, and similar articles are not consumed personally, but productively. 
 From the in-dividual entrepreneur’s point of view this distinction was superfluous: when we said that the workers would con-sume variable capital, we assumed that on the market theywould acquire articles of consumption with the money thecapitalist had paid them, the money which he, the cap-italist, had received for the machines made by the workers. 
Here the exchange of machines for bread does not interest us. 
 But from the social point of view, this exchange cannot be assumed : we cannot say that the entire capitalist class which produces machines, iron, etc. 
, sells these things, andin this way realises them. 
 The whole question is how realisation takes place— that is , the replacement of all parts of the social product. 
 Hence, the point of departure in discussing social capital and revenue—or, what is the same thing, the realisation of the product in capitalist society—must be the distinction between two entirely different typesof social product: means of production and articles of consumption . 
 The former can be consumed only productively, the latter only personally. 
 The former can serve only as capi-tal, the latter must become revenue, i. 
e. 
, must be destroyed in consumption by the workers and capitalists. 
 The formergo entirely to the capitalists, the latter are shared betweenthe workers and the capitalists. 
 *We give here only the gist of the new theory which provides this solution, leaving ourselves free to present it in greater detailelsewhere. 
 See Das Kapital , II. 
 Band, III, Abschnitt. 
 49 (For a more detailed exposition, see The Development of Capitalism , chap. 
 I. 
)50 Once this difference is understood and we rectify the error made by Adam Smith, who left its constant part (i. 
e. 
, the part which replaces constant capital) out of the social product, the question of the realisation of the prod-uct in capitalist society becomes clear. 
 Obviously, wecannot speak of wages being realised through consumptionby the workers, and surplus-value through consumptionby the capitalists, and nothing more . 
 * The workers can con-sume wages and capitalists surplus-value only when the product consists of articles of consumption, i. 
e. 
, onlyin one department of social production. 
 They cannot “con-sume” the product which consists of means of production:this must be exchanged for articles of consumption . 
 But for which part (in terms of value) of the articles of con-sumption can they exchange their product? Obviously, only for the constant part (constant capital), since the other two parts constitute the consumption fund of the workersand capitalists who produce articles of consumption. 
 Byrealising the surplus-value and wages in the industrieswhich produce means of production, this exchange thereby re-alises the constant capital in the industries which produce articles of consumption. 
 Indeed, for the capitalist whomanufactures, say, sugar, that part of the product whichis to replace constant capital (i. 
e. 
, raw materials, auxil-iary materials, machines, premises, etc. 
) exists in theshape of sugar . 
 To realise this part, he must receive cor-responding means of production in return for it. 
 The re-alisation of this part will therefore consist in exchangingthe article of consumption for products which serve as means of production . 
 Now the realisation of only one part of the social product, namely, the constant capital in the *That is just how our Narodnik economists Messrs. 
 V. 
 V. 
 and N. 
 —on reason. 
 Above we deliberately dealt in great detail with Sismondi’s wandering around the question of productive and person-al consumption, of articles of consumption and means of production(Adam Smith came even closer to distinguishing between them thanSismondi did). 
 We wanted to show the reader that the classical rep-resentatives of this fallacious theory felt that it was unsatisfactory, saw the contradiction in it, and made attempts to extricate them-selves. 
 But our “original” theoreticians not only see nothing and feel nothing, but know nothing about either the theory or the history ofthe question they prate about so zealously. 
 department which manufactures means of production, re-mains unexplained. 
 This is partially realised by part of the product going back again into production in its natural form (for example, part of the coal produced by a mining firmis used to produce more coal; the grain obtained by farmersis used for seed, and so forth); and partly it is realised byexchange between individual capitalists in the same de-partment: for example, coal is needed for the production of iron, and iron is needed for the production of coal. 
 The capitalists who produce these two products realise by mutualexchange that part of their respective products which re-places their constant capital. 
 This analysis (which, we repeat, we have summarised in the most condensed form for the reason given above) solved the difficulty which all the economists felt when they formulated it in the phrase: “capital for one becomesrevenue for another. 
” This analysis revealed the utter fallacyof reducing social production solely to personal consumption. 
 We can now proceed to examine the conclusions drawn by Sismondi (and the other romanticists) from his fallacious theory. 
 But first let us quote the opinion of Sis-mondi expressed by the author of the above analysis, aftera most detailed and comprehensive examination of AdamSmith’s theory, to which Sismondi added absolutely nothing,merely leaving out Adam Smith’s attempt to justify hiscontradiction: “Sismondi, who occupies himself particularly with the relation of capital to revenue, and in actual fact makesthe peculiar formulation of this relation the differentiaspecifica of his Nouveaux Principes , did not say one scien-tific word” (author’s italics), “did not contribute one iotato the clarification of the problem” ( Das Kapital , II, S. 
 385, 1-te Auflage). 
 51 V ACCUMULATION IN CAPITALIST SOCIETY The first erroneous conclusion from the fallacious theory relates to accumulation. 
 Sismondi did not in the leastunderstand capitalist accumulation, and in his heated controversy on this subject with Ricardo truth was really on the side of the latter. 
 Ricardo asserted that production creates a market for itself, whereas Sismondi denied this, and based his theory of crises on this denial. 
 True, Ri-cardo was also unable to correct the above-mentioned fun-damental mistake of Adam Smith, and, therefore, was un-able to solve the problem of the relation between socialcapital and revenue and of the realisation of the product (nor did Ricardo set himself these problems); but he in-stinctively characterised the quintessence of the bourgeoismode of production by noting the absolutely indisputablefact that accumulation is the excess of production overrevenue. 
 From the viewpoint of the modern analysis thatis how matters stand. 
 Production does indeed create a market for itself: production needs means of production, and they constitute a special department of social produc-tion, which occupies a certain section of the workers, andproduces a special product, realised partly within thissame department and partly by exchange with the otherdepartment, which produces articles of consumption. 
 Accu-mulation is indeed the excess of production over revenue (articles of consumption). 
 To expand production (to “accu-mulate” in the categorical meaning of the term) it is firstof all necessary to produce means of production, * and for this it is consequently necessary to expand that departmentof social production which manufactures means of produc-tion, it is necessary to draw into it workers who immediately present a demand for articles of consumption , too . 
 Hence, “consumption” develops after “accumulation,” or after “pro-duction”; strange though it may seem, it cannot be other-wise in capitalist society. 
 Hence, the rates of developmentof these two departments of capitalist production do not have to be proportionate, on the contrary, they must inevitably be disproportionate. 
 It is well known that the lawof development of capital is that constant capital grows faster *We would remind the reader how Sismondi approached this; he distinctly singled out these means of production for an individual family and tried to do the same for society, too. 
 Properly speaking it was Smith who “approached,” and not Sismondi, who only related what Smith had said. 
 than variable capital, that is to say, an ever larger share of newly-formed capital is turned into that department of the social economy which produces means of production. 
 Hence, this department necessarily grows faster than the departmentwhich manufactures articles of consumption, i. 
e. 
, whattakes place is exactly that which Sismondi declared to be“impossible,” “dangerous,” etc. 
 Hence, products for person-al consumption occupy an ever-diminishing place in the total mass of capitalist output. 
 And this fully corresponds to the historical “mission” of capitalism and to its spe-cific social structure: the former is to develop the productiveforces of society (production for production); the latterprecludes their utilisation by the mass of the population. 
 We can now fully appraise Sismondi’s view of accumula-tion. 
 His assertion that rapid accumulation leads to dis-aster is absolutely wrong and is solely the result of hisfailure to understand accumulation, as are his repeatedstatements and demands that production must not outstripconsumption, because consumption determines production. 
Actually, the very opposite is the case, and Sismondi sim-ply turns his back on reality in its specific, historically determined form and substitutes petty-bourgeois moralisingfor an analysis. 
 Particularly amusing are Sismondi’s at-tempts to clothe this moralising in a “scientific” formula. 
“Messrs. 
 Say and Ricardo,” he says in his preface to the secondedition of Nouveaux Principes , “came to believe ... that consumption had no other limits than those of production, whereas actually it is limited by revenue.... 
 They shouldhave warned producers that they must count only on con-sumers who have a revenue” (I, XIII). 
 * Nowadays, such naïveté only raises a smile. 
 But are not the writings ofour contemporary romanticists, like Messrs. 
 V. 
 V. 
 and N. 
 —on, replete with the same sort of thing? “Let the banking entrepreneurs ponder well” ... over whether theywill find a market for their commodities (II, 101-02). 
 *As we know, on this question (as to whether production creates a market for itself) the modern theory fully agrees with the classical economists, who answered this question in the affirmative, in oppo-sition to romanticism, which answered it in the negative. 
 “ The real barrier of capitalist production is capital itself ” (Das Kapital , III, I, 231). 
52 “When it is assumed that the aim of society is to increase wealth, the aim is always sacrificed for the means” (II, 140). 
 “If, instead of expecting an impetus from the demand created by labour” (i. 
e. 
, an impetus to production fromthe workers’ demand for products), “we expect it to comefrom preceding production, we shall be doing almost the samething as we would do to a clock if, instead of turning backthe wheel that carries the chain (la roue qui porte la chain-ette), we turn back another wheel—we would thereby break the whole machine and stop it” (II, 454). 
 Sismondisays that. 
 Let us now hear what Mr. 
 Nikolai —on has to say. 
 “We have overlooked the factors due to which thisdevelopment” (i. 
e. 
, the development of capitalism) “is takingplace; we have also forgotten the aim of all production ... an extremely fatal blunder...” (N. 
 —on, Sketches on Our Post-Reform Social Economy , 298). 
 Both these authors talk about capitalism, about capitalist countries; both revealtheir complete inability to understand the essence of capi-talist accumulation. 
 But would one believe that the latteris writing seventy years after the former? An example which Sismondi quotes in chapter VIII: “The Results of the Struggle to Cheapen Production” (Book IV,Of Commercial Wealth ) vividly demonstrates how failure to understand capitalist accumulation is linked up withthe error of reducing all production to the production ofarticles of consumption. 
 Let us assume, says Sismondi, that the owner of a man-ufactory has a circulating capital of 100,000 francs, whichbrings him 15,000, of which 6,000 represent interest oncapital and are paid to the capitalist, and 9,000 consti-tute the profit obtained by the manufacturer as the entre-preneur. 
 Let us assume that he employs the labour of 100 workers, whose wages total 30,000 francs. 
 Further, let there be an increase in capital, an expansion of production(“accumulation”). 
 Instead of 100,000 francs the capitalwill be =200,000 francs invested in fixed capital and 200,000 francs in circulating capital, making a total of400,000 francs; profit and interest=32,000 # 16,000 francs, for the rate of interest has dropped from 6% to 4%. 
 The number of workers employed has doubled, but wages havedropped from 300 francs to 200 francs, hence, making a total of 40,000 francs. 
 Thus, production has grown fourfold. 
 * And Sismondi counts up the results: “revenue,” or “consump-tion,” in the first case amounted to 45,000 francs (30,000 wages # 6,000 interest # 9,000 profit); it is now 88,000 francs (40,000 wages # 16,000 interest # 32,000 profit). 
 “Pro-duction has increased fourfold,” says Sismondi, “but con-sumption has not even doubled. 
 The consumption of the workers who made the machines should not be counted. 
 It is covered by the 200 ,000 francs which have been used for this purpose; it is already included in the accounts of anothermanufactory, where the facts will be the same” (I, 405-06). 
 Sismondi’s calculation shows a diminution of revenue with an increase in production. 
 The fact is indisputable. 
But Sismondi does not notice that the example he gives de-feats his own theory of the realisation of the product in capitalist society. 
 Curious is his observation that the con-sumption of the workers who made machines “should notbe counted. 
” Why not? Because, firstly, it is covered b y the 200,000 francs. 
 Thus, capital is transferred to the de-partment which manufactures means of production—this Sismondi does not notice. 
 Hence, the “home market,” which “shrinks,” as Sismondi says, does not consist solely ofarticles of consumption, but also of means of production . 
 These means of production constitute a special productwhich is not “realised” by personal consumption ; and the more rapidly accumulation proceeds, the more intense, con-sequently, is the development of that department of capital-ist production which manufactures products not for personalbut for productive consumption. 
 Secondly, answers Sismondi,it is the workers of the other manufactory, where the factswill be the same (où les mêmes faits pourront se représent-*“The first result of competition,” says Sismondi, “is a reduction in wages and at the same time an increase in the number of workers”(I, 403). 
 We shall not dwell here on Sismondi’s wrong calculation:he calculates, for example, that profit will be 8 per cent on fixedcapital and 8% on circulating capital, that the number of workersrises in proportion to the increase of circulating capital (which he cannot properly distinguish from variable capital), and that fixed capital goes entirely into the price of the product. 
 In the presentcase all this is unimportant, because the conclusion arrived at is cor-rect: a diminution in the share of variable capital in the total cap-ital, as a necessary result of accumulation. 
 er). 
 As you see, Sismondi repeats Adam Smith in sending the reader “from Pontius to Pilate. 
” But this “other manu-factory” also consumes constant capital , and its production also provides a market for that department of capitalistproduction which manufactures means of production! How-ever much we shift the question from one capitalist to anoth-er, and then to a third—this department does not disap-pear, and the “home market” does not reduce itself just to articles of consumption. 
 Therefore, when Sismondi says that “this calculation refutes ... one of the axioms that hasbeen most insisted upon in political economy, namely,the freer competition, the more profitable the develop-ment of industry” (I, 407), he does not notice that “thiscalculation” also refutes what he himself says. 
 It is an undisputed fact that by displacing workers the introduc-tion of machines worsens their conditions; and it is indis-putably to Sismondi’s credit that he was one of the firstto point to this. 
 But this does not in the least preventhis theory of accumulation and of the home marketfrom being absolutely incorrect. 
 His own calculation clearly indicates the very phenomenon which Sismondi not only denied but even turned into an argument against capital-ism, when he said that accumulation and production mustcorrespond to consumption, otherwise a crisis will ensue. 
His calculation shows, precisely, that accumulation andproduction outstrip consumption, and that it cannot be other-wise, for accumulation takes place mainly through means of production which do not enter into “consumption. 
” Whatseemed to Sismondi to be simply an error, a contradic-tion in Ricardo’s doctrine—that accumulation is excessof production over revenue—actually corresponds in fullto reality and expresses the contradiction inherent in cap-italism. 
 This excess is necessary for all accumulation, which opens a new market for means of production without correspondingly expanding the market for articles of con-sumption, and even contracting this market . 
 * Furthermore, *From the above analysis it automatically follows that such a case is also possible, depending upon the proportion in which thenew capital is divided up into a constant and a variable part, andthe extent to which the diminution of the relative share of the va-riable capital affects the old industries. 
 in rejecting the theory of the advantages of free competition, Sismondi does not notice that, together with groundless optimism, he throws overboard the undoubted truth that free competition develops the productive forces of society , as is again evident from his own calculation. 
 (Properlyspeaking, this is only another way of expressing the samefact that a special department of industry is created whichmanufactures means of production, and that this depart-ment develops with particular rapidity. 
) This development of the productive forces of society without a correspondingdevelopment of consumption is, of course, a contradiction,but the sort of contradiction that exists in reality, thatsprings from the very nature of capitalism, and that cannotbe brushed aside by means of sentimental phrases. 
 But this is just how the romanticists try to brush it aside. 
 And to give the reader no grounds for suspectingus of levelling unsupported charges against contempo-rary economists in connection with the mistakes of such an“obsolete” author as Sismondi, let us quote a little sampleof the writings of that “modern” author Mr. 
 N. 
 —on. 
 On page 242 of his Sketches he discusses the development of capitalism in the Russian flour-milling industry. 
 Referringto the appearance of large steam flour-mills with improvedimplements of production (since the seventies about 100million rubles have been spent on reconstructing the flour-mills) and with a more than twofold increase in the produc-tivity of labour, the author describes this phenomenon as follows: “the flour-milling industry has not developed,it has merely become concentrated in large enterprises”;he then applies this description to all industries (p. 
 243) and draws the conclusion that “in all cases without excep-tion, a mass of workers are displaced and find no employ-ment” (243), and that “capitalist production has developed at the expense of the people’s consumption” (241). 
 We askthe reader: does this argument differ in any way from Sis-mondi’s argument just quoted? This “modern” authorregisters two facts, those very facts which, as we have seen,were used by Sismondi, and brushes both these facts aside with exactly the same sentimental phrase. 
 Firstly, the example he gives shows that capitalism develops through the meansof production. 
 This means that capitalism develops the /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR productive forces of society. 
 Secondly, his example shows that this development proceeds along the specific road of contradictions that is typical of capitalism: there is a development of production (an expenditure of 100 mil-lion rubles constitutes a home market for products real-ised by non-personal consumption) without a correspondingdevelopment of consumption (the people’s food deterio-rates), i. 
e. 
, what we have is production for the sake of production. 
 And Mr. 
 N. 
 —on thinks that this contradiction will vanish from life if he, with old Sismondi’s naïveté,presents it merely as a contradiction in doctrine, merelyas “a fatal blunder”: “we have forgotten the aim of pro-duction”!! What can be more characteristic than the phrase:“has not developed, it has merely become concentrated”? Evidently, Mr. 
 N. 
 —on knows of a capitalism in which development could proceed otherwise than by concentration . 
 What a pity he has not introduced us to this “original”capitalism, which was unknown to all the political econo-mists who preceded him! VI THE FOREIGN MARKET AS THE “WAY OUT OF THE DIFFICULTY” OF REALISING SURPLUS-VALUE Sismondi’s next error, which springs from his fallacious theory of social revenue and the product in capitalist so-ciety, is his doctrine that the product in general, andsurplus-value in particular, cannot possibly be realised, andthat consequently it is necessary to find a foreign market. 
As regards the realisation of the product in general, theforegoing analysis shows that the “impossibility” is due entirely to the mistaken exclusion of constant capital and means of production. 
 Once this error is corrected, the“impossibility” vanishes. 
 The same, however, must besaid in particular about surplus-value: this analysis ex-plains how it too is realised. 
 There are no reasonable groundswhatever for separating surplus-value from the total prod-uct so far as its realisation is concerned. 
 Sismondi’s (and our Narodniks’) assertion to the contrary is simply amisunderstanding of the fundamental laws of realisation in general, an inability to divide the product into three (and not two) parts in terms of value, and into two kinds in terms of material form (means of production and articles of consumption). 
 The proposition that the capitalistscannot consume surplus-value is merely a vulgarisedrepetition of Adam Smith’s perplexity regarding realisationin general. 
 Only part of the surplus-value consists of articles of consumption; the other part consists of means of produc-tion (for example, the surplus-value of the ironmaster). 
 The “consumption” of this latter surplus-value is effected by applying it to production ; the capitalists, however, who manufacture products in the shape of means of production donot consume surplus-value, but constant capital obtained by exchange with other capitalists. 
 Hence, the Narodniks too, in arguing that surplus-value cannot be realised, ought logically to admit that constant capital also cannot be realised—and in this way they would safely go back toAdam.... 
 It goes without saying that such a return to the“father of political economy” would be a gigantic step for-ward for writers who present us with old errors in the guise of truths they have “arrived at by themselves. 
”... But what about the foreign market? Do we deny that capitalism needs a foreign market? Of course not. 
 But thequestion of a foreign market has absolutely nothing to do with the question of realisation , and the attempt to link them into one whole merely expresses the romantic wish to “retard” capitalism, and the romantic inability to think logically. 
 The theory which has explained the questionof realisation has proved this up to the hilt. 
 The roman-ticist says: the capitalists cannot consume surplus-valueand therefore must dispose of it abroad. 
 The question is:do the capitalists supply foreigners with products gratis, or do they throw them into the sea? They sell them—hence, they receive an equivalent; they export certain kinds ofproducts—hence, they import other kinds. 
 If we speak ofthe realisation of the social product, we thereby excludethe circulation of money and assume only the exchange ofproducts for products, since the problem of realisation con-sists in analysing the replacement of all parts of the so-cial product in terms of value and in terms of materialform. 
 Hence, to commence the argument about realisation and to end it by saying that they “will market the product for money” is as ridiculous as answering the question about realising constant capital in the shape of articles of con-sumption by saying: “they will sell. 
” This is simply a grosslogical blunder: people wander away from the question ofthe realisation of the aggregate social product to the view-point of the individual entrepreneur, who has no otherinterest than that of “selling to the foreigner. 
” To link foreign trade, exports, with the question of realisation means evading the issue, merely shifting it to a wider field, but doing nothing towards clearing it up . 
 * The problem of realisation will not be made one iota clearer if, insteadof the market of one country, we take the market of a cer-tain group of countries. 
 When the Narodniks assert that the foreign market is “the way out of the difficulty” ** which capitalism raises for itself in the realisation of the product, they merely use this phrase to cover up the sadfact that for them “the foreign market” is “the way outof the difficulty” into which they fall owing to their failureto understand theory.... 
 Not only that. 
 The theory which links the foreign market with the problem of the realisation of the aggregate social product not only reveals a failure tounderstand this realisation, but, in addition, reveals anextremely superficial understanding of the contradictionsinherent in this realisation . 
 “The workers will consume wages, but the capitalists cannot consume surplus-value. 
” Ponder over this “theory” from the point of view of the foreign market. 
 How do we know that “the workers will consume wages”?What grounds have we for thinking that the productsintended by the entire capitalist class of a given countryfor consumption by all the workers of that country willreally equal their wages in value and will replace them, *This is so clear that even Sismondi was conscious of the need to disregard foreign trade in analysing realisation. 
 “To trace these calculations more exactly,” he says on the point about productioncorresponding to consumption “and to simplify the question, we have hitherto completely excluded foreign trade; we have presupposed an isolated nation; human society itself is such an isolated nation,and whatever relates to a nation without foreign trade is equally true of the human race” (I, 115). 
 **N. 
 —on, p. 
 205. 
 that there will be no need for a foreign market for these products? There are absolutely no grounds for thinking so, and actually it is not so at all. 
 Not only the products (or part of the products) which replace surplus-value, butalso those which replace variable capital; not only prod-ucts which replace variable capital, but also thosewhich replace constant capital (forgotten by our “economists”who also forget their kinship ... with Adam); not only prod-ucts that serve as articles of consumption but also those that serve as means of production—all these products arerealised in the same way, in the midst of “difficulties,” in themidst of continuous fluctuations, which become increasinglyviolent as capitalism grows, in the midst of fierce competition,which compels every entrepreneur to strive to expand pro-duction unlimitedly, to go beyond the bounds of the given country, to set out in quest of new markets in countries not yetdrawn into the sphere of capitalist commodity circulation. 
This brings us to the question of why a capitalist countryneeds a foreign market. 
 Certainly not because the productcannot be realised at all under the capitalist system. 
 That is nonsense. 
 A foreign market is needed because it is inherent in capitalist production to strive for unlimited expansion— unlike all the old modes of production, which were limitedto the village community, to the patriarchal estate, to thetribe, to a territorial area, or state. 
 Under all the old eco-nomic systems production was every time resumed in the same form and on the same scale as previously; under the capitalist system, however, this resumption in the same formbecomes impossible , and unlimited expansion, perpetual progress, becomes the law of production. 
 * Thus, different conceptions of realisation (more exactly, the understanding of it, on the one hand, and complete misunderstanding of it by the romanticists, on the other) lead to two diametrically opposite views on the signifi-cance of the foreign market. 
 For some (the romanticists),the foreign market is an indication of the “difficulty” whichcapitalism places in the way of social development. 
 For others, on the contrary, the foreign market shows how *Cf. 
 Sieber, David Ricardo , etc. 
 , St. 
 Petersburg, 1885, p. 
 466, footnote. 
 capitalism removes the difficulties of social development provided by history in the shape of various barriers—com-munal, tribal, territorial and national. 
 * As you see, the difference is only one of the “point of view. 
”... Yes, “only”! The difference between the roman-ticist judges of capitalism and the others is, in general,“only” one of the “point of view,”—“only” that some judgefrom the rear, and the others from the front, some from the viewpoint of a system which capitalism is destroying, the others from the viewpoint of a system which capitalismis creating. 
 ** The romanticists’ wrong understanding of the foreign market usually goes hand in hand with references to the“specific features” of the international position of capi-talism in the given country, to the impossibility of finding markets, etc. 
; the object of all these arguments is to “dis-suade” the capitalists from seeking foreign markets. 
 In-cidentally, we are not being exact in saying “references,”for the romanticist gives us no actual analysis of the coun-try’s foreign trade, of its progress in the sphere of new markets, its colonisation, etc. 
 He has no interest whatever in studying the actual process and in explaining it; allhe wants is a moral condemnation of this process . 
 So that the reader can convince himself of the complete identitybetween this moralising of contemporary Russian romanti-cists and that of the French romanticist, we shall quote some specimens of the latter’s arguments. 
 We have already seen how Sismondi warned the capitalists that they would findno market. 
 But this is not all he asserted. 
 He also claimedthat “the world market is already sufficiently supplied”(II, 328) and argued that it was impossible to proceedalong the capitalist path, that it was necessary to choose another path.... 
 He assured the British employers that capitalism would not be able to give jobs to all the agri-cultural labourers displaced by capitalist farming (I,255-56). 
 “Will those to whom the agriculturists are sacri-*Cf. 
 later: Rede über die Frage des Freihandels (Karl Marx, On Free Trade . 
—Ed. 
). 
 **I am speaking here only of the appraisal of capitalism and not of an understanding of it. 
 In the latter respect the romanticists,as we have seen, stand no higher than the classical economists. 
 ficed derive any benefit from it? Are not the agriculturists the nearest and most reliable consumers of English manu-factures? The cessation of their consumption would strike industry a blow more fatal than the closing of one of thebiggest foreign markets” (I, 256). 
 He assured English farm-ers that they would not be able to withstand the com-petition of the poor Polish peasant, whose grain costs himalmost nothing (II, 257) and that they were menaced by the even more frightful competition of Russian grain from the Black Sea ports. 
 He exclaimed: “The Americans arefollowing the new principle: to produce without calculatingthe market (produire sans calculer le marché), and to pro-duce as much as possible,” and here is “the characteristicfeature of United States’ trade, from one end of the country to the other—an excess of goods of every kind over what is needed for consumption ... constant bankruptcies arethe result of this excess of commercial capital which cannotbe exchanged for revenue” (I, 455-56). 
 Good Sismondi! Whatwould he say about present-day America—about theAmerica that has developed so enormously, thanks to the very “home market” which, according to the romanticists’ theory, should have “shrunk”! VII CRISIS Sismondi’s third mistaken conclusion, drawn from the wrong theory which he borrowed from Adam Smith, is the theory of crises. 
 Sismondi’s view that accumulation (the growth ofproduction in general) is determined by consumption, andhis incorrect explanation of the realisation of the aggregatesocial product (which he reduces to the workers’ share and thecapitalists’ share of revenue) naturally and inevitably led to the doctrine that crises are to be explained by the dis-crepancy between production and consumption. 
 Sismondifully agreed with this theory. 
 It was also adopted by Rodber-tus, who formulated it somewhat differently: he explained crisesby saying that with the growth of production the workers’share of the product diminishes, and wrongly divided the aggregate social product, as Adam Smith did, into wages and “rent ” (according to his terminology “rent” is surplus-value, i. 
e. 
, profit and ground-rent together). 
 The scientific anal-ysis of accumulation in capitalist society * and of the realisation of the product undermined the whole basis of this theory, and also indicated that it is precisely in theperiods which precede crises that the workers’ consumptionrises, that underconsumption (to which crises are allegedlydue) existed under the most diverse economic systems,whereas crises are the distinguishing feature of only one system—the capitalist system. 
 This theory explains crises by another contradiction, namely, the contradiction betweenthe social character of production (socialised by capital-ism) and the private, individual mode of appropriation. 
The profound difference between these theories would seemto be self-evident, but we must deal with it in greater detail because it is the Russian followers of Sismondi who try to obliterate this difference and to confuse the issue. 
 The two theories of which we are speaking give totallydifferent explanations of crises. 
 The first theory explainscrises by the contradiction between production andconsumption by the working class; the second explains them by the contradiction between the social character of production and the private character of appropriation. 
Consequently, the former sees the root of the phenome-non outside of production (hence, for example, Sismondi’s general attacks on the classical economists for ignoringconsumption and occupying themselves only with produc-tion); the latter sees it precisely in the conditions of pro-duction. 
 To put it more briefly, the former explains crisesby underconsumption (Unterkonsumption), the latter bythe anarchy of production. 
 Thus, while both theories ex-plain crises by a contradiction in the economic system it-self, they differ entirely on the nature of the contradiction. 
 But the question is: does the second theory deny the fact of a contradiction between production and consumption, *The mistaken conception of “accumulation of individual capital” held by Adam Smith and the economists who came after him is con-nected with the theory that the total product in capitalist economyconsists of two parts. 
 It was they who taught that the accumulated part of profit is spent entirely on wages, whereas actually it is spent on: 1) constant capital and 2) wages. 
 Sismondi repeated this mistakeof the classical economists as well. 
 does it deny the fact of underconsumption? Of course not . 
 It fully recognises this fact, but puts it in its proper, sub-ordinate, place as a fact that only relates to one depart-ment of the whole of capitalist production. 
 It teachesus that this fact cannot explain crises, which are calledforth by another and more profound contradiction that isfundamental in the present economic system, namely, thecontradiction between the social character of production and the private character of appropriation. 
 What, then, should be said of those who, while they adhere essentiallyto the first theory, cover this up with references to thepoint that the representatives of the second theory notethe existence of a contradiction between production andconsumption? Obviously, these people have not pondered over the essence of the difference between the two theories, and do not properly understand the second theory. 
 Amongthese people is, for example, Mr. 
 N. 
 —on (not to speak of Mr. 
 V. 
 V. 
). 
 That they are followers of Sismondi has alreadybeen indicated in our literature by Mr. 
 Tugan-Baranovsky(Industrial Crises , p. 
 477, with the strange reservation relative to Mr. 
 N. 
 —on: “evidently”). 
 But in talking about “the shrinking of the home market” and “the decline inthe people’s consuming capacity” (the central points of hisviews), Mr. 
 N. 
 —on, nevertheless, refers to the representa-tives of the second theory who note the fact of the contra-diction between production and consumption, the fact of underconsumption. 
 It goes without saying that such references merely reveal the ability, characteristic in generalof this author, to cite inappropriate quotations and nothingmore. 
 For example, all readers who are familiar with his Sketches will, of course, remember his “citation” of the passage where it says that “the labourers as buyers of com-modities are important for the market. 
 But as sellers of their own commodity—labour-power—capitalist societytends to keep them down to the minimum price” ( Sketches , p. 
 178), and they will also remember that Mr. 
 N. 
 —on wanted to deduce from this both “the shrinkage of the homemarket” (ibid. 
, p. 
 203 et. 
 al. 
) and crises (p. 
 298 et. 
 al. 
). 
 But while quoting this passage (which, as we have explained, proves nothing), our author, moreover, leaves out the end of the footnote from which his quotation was taken. 
 This quotation was from a note inserted in the man-uscript of Part II of Volume II of Capital . 
 It was in-serted “for future amplification” and the publisher of the manuscript put it in as a footnote. 
 After the words quoted above, the note goes on to say : “However , this pertains to the next part ,”* i. 
e. 
, to the third part. 
 What is this third part? It is precisely the part which contains a criticism ofAdam Smith’s theory of two parts of the aggregate social prod-uct (together with the above-quoted opinion about Sis-mondi), and an analysis of “the reproduction and circulationof the aggregate social capital,” i. 
e. 
, of the realisationof the product. 
 Thus, in confirmation of his views, whichare a repetition of Sismondi’s, our author quotes a notethat pertains “to the part” which refutes Sismondi: “to the part” in which it is shown that the capitalists can real-ise surplus-value, and that to introduce foreign trade inan analysis of realisation is absurd.... 
 Another attempt to obliterate the difference between the two theories and to defend the old romanticist nonsenseby referring to modern theories is contained in Ephrucy’s article. 
 Citing Sismondi’s theory of crises, Ephrucy shows that it is wrong ( Russkoye Bogatstvo , No. 
 7, p. 
 162); but he does so in an extremely hazy and contradictory way. 
On the one hand, he repeats the arguments of the oppositetheory and says that national demand is not limited toarticles of direct consumption. 
 On the other hand, he as-serts that Sismondi’s explanation of crises “points to only one of the many circumstances which hinder the distribu-tion of the national product in conformity with the demandof the population and with its purchasing power. 
” Thus,the reader is invited to think that the explanation of crisesis to be found in “distribution,” and that Sismondi’s mis-take was only that he did not give a full list of the causes which hinder this distribution! But this is not the mainthing.... 
 “Sismondi,” says Ephrucy, “did not confine him-self to the above-mentioned explanation. 
 Already in thefirst edition of Nouveaux Principes we find a highly en-lightening chapter entitled ‘De la connaissance du marché. 
’ ** *Das Kapital , II. 
 Band, S. 
 304. 
53 Russ. 
 trans. 
, p. 
 232. 
 Our italics. 
 **“About Knowledge of the Market. 
”— Ed. 
 In this chapter Sismondi reveals to us the main causes that disturb the balance between production and consumption” (note this!) “with a clarity that we find among only a few economists” (ibid. 
). 
 And quoting the passages whichsay that the manufacturer cannot know the market,Ephrucy says: “Engels says almost the same thing” (p. 
 163),and follows this up with a quotation saying that themanufacturer cannot know the demand. 
 Then, quoting some more passages about “other obstacles to the establish-ment of a balance between production and consumption”(p. 
 164), Ephrucy assures us that “these give us the veryexplanation of crises which is becoming increasingly pre-dominant”! Nay, more: Ephrucy is of the opinion that“on the question of the causes of crises in the national economy, we have every right to regard Sismondi as the founder of the views which were subsequently developedmore consistently and more clearly” (p. 
 168). 
 But by all this Ephrucy betrays a complete failure to understand the issue! What are crises? Overproduction,the production of commodities which cannot be realised, for which there is no demand. 
 If there is no demand for commodities, it shows that when the manufacturer producedthem he did not know the demand. 
 The question now arises: isthis indication of the condition which makes crises possiblean explanation of the crises? Did Ephrucy really not under-stand the difference between stating the possibility of a phenomenon and explaining its inevitability? Sismondi says: crises are possible, because the manufacturer does not knowthe demand; they are inevitable, because under capitalistproduction there can be no balance between production andconsumption (i. 
e. 
, the product cannot be realised). 
 Engelssays: crises are possible, because the manufacturer does not know the demand; they are inevitable, but certainly not because the product cannot be realised at all. 
 For it is nottrue: the product can be realised. 
 Crises are inevitable be-cause the collective character of production comes intoconflict with the individual character of appropriation. 
And yet we find an economist who assures us that Engels says “almost the same thing”; that Sismondi gives the “very same explanation of crises”! “I am therefore surprised,”writes Ephrucy, “that Mr. 
 Tugan-Baranovsky ... lost sight of this most important and valuable point in Sismondi’s doctrine” (p. 
 168). 
 But Mr. 
 Tugan-Baranovsky did not lose sight of anything. 
 * On the contrary, he pointed very exactly to the fundamental contradiction to which the newtheory reduces matters (p. 
 455 et. 
 al. 
), and explainedthe significance of Sismondi, who at an earlier stage indi-cated the contradiction which reveals itself in crises, butwas unable to give it a correct explanation (p. 
 457—Sis-mondi, before Engels, pointed to the fact that crises spring from the contemporary organisation of the economy; p. 
 491—Sismondi expounded the conditions which make crises pos-sible, but “not every possibility becomes a fact”). 
 Ephrucy,however, completely misunderstood this, and after lumpingeverything together he is “surprised” that what he gets is confusion! “True,” says the economist of Russkoye Bo-gatstvo , “we do not find Sismondi using the terms which have now received universal right of citizenship, such as‘anarchy of production,’ ‘unplanned production’ (Planlosig-keit); but the substance behind these terms is noted by himquite clearly” (p. 
 168). 
 With what ease the modern ro-manticist restores the romanticist of former days! The problem is reduced to one of a difference in terms! Actual-ly, the problem boils down to the fact that Ephrucy does notunderstand the meaning of the terms he repeats. 
 “Anarchy ofproduction,” “unplanned production”—what do these ex-pressions tell us? They tell us about the contradiction between the social character of production and the individual char-acter of appropriation. 
 And we ask every one who is famil-iar with the economic literature we are examining: didSismondi, or Rodbertus, recognise this contradiction? Didthey deduce crises from this contradiction? No, they didnot, and could not do so, because neither of them had any understanding of this contradiction . 
 The very idea that the criticism of capitalism cannot be based on phrases *In The Development of Capitalism (pp. 
 16 and 19) (see present edition, Vol. 
 3, The Development of Capitalism in Russia , chap. 
 I, section VI. 
— Ed. 
) I have already noted Mr. 
 Tugan-Baranovsky’s inexactitudes and errors which subsequently led him to go rightover to the camp of the bourgeois economists. 
 (Author’s footnote tothe 1908 edition. 
— Ed. 
) about universal prosperity, * or about the fallacy of “cir-culation left to itself,” ** but must be based on the char-acter of the evolution of production relations, was abso-lutely alien to them. 
 We fully understand why our Russian romanticists exert every effort to obliterate the difference between the twotheories of crises mentioned. 
 It is because fundamen-tally different attitudes towards capitalism are most direct-ly and most closely linked with the theories mentioned. 
 Indeed, if we explain crises by the impossibility of real-ising products, by the contradiction between production andconsumption, we are thereby led to deny reality, the sound-ness of the path along which capitalism is proceeding; weproclaim this path to be a “false one,” and go out in quest of “different paths. 
” In deducing crises from this contra-diction we are bound to think that the further it developsthe more difficult will be the way out of the contradiction. 
 And we have seen how Sismondi, with the utmost naïveté,expressed exactly this opinion when he said that if capitalaccumulated slowly it was tolerable; but if it accumulated rapidly, it would become unbearable. 
—On the other hand, if we explain crises by the contradiction between the socialcharacter of production and the individual character ofappropriation, we thereby recognise that the capitalistroad is real and progressive and reject the search for “differ-ent paths” as nonsensical romanticism. 
 We thereby rec-ognise that the further this contradiction develops the easier will be the way out of it, and that it is the develop-ment of this system which provides the way out. 
 As the reader sees, here, too, we meet with a difference in “points of view. 
”... It is quite natural that our romanticists should seek *Cf. 
 Sismondi, loc. 
 cit. 
, I, 8. 
 **Rodbertus. 
 Incidentally, let us mention that Bernstein, who in general is restoring the prejudices of bourgeois political econo-my, has introduced confusion into this problem too by asserting that Marx’s theory of crises does not differ very much from the theory of Rodbertus ( Die Voraussetzungen, etc . 
 Stuttg. 
 1899, S. 
 67) (E. 
 Bern-stein, The Premises of Socialism and the Tasks of Social-Democracy . 
 Stuttgart, 1899, p. 
 67. 
— Ed. 
), and that Marx contradicts himself by recognising the ultimate cause of crises to be the limited consumptionof the masses. 
 (Author’s footnote to the 1908 edition. 
— Ed. 
) theoretical confirmation of their views. 
 It is quite nat-ural that their search should lead them to the old rubbish which Western Europe has discarded long, long ago. 
 It is quite natural that, feeling this to be so, they should tryto renovate this rubbish, some times by actually embellishingthe romanticists of Western Europe, and at others by smug-gling in romanticism under the flag of inappropriate andgarbled citations. 
 But they are profoundly mistaken if they think that this sort of smuggling will remain unexposed. 
 With this we bring to a close our exposition of Sismondi’s basic theoretical doctrine, and of the chief theoretical conclusions he drew from it; but we must make a slightaddition, again relating to Ephrucy. 
 In his other articleabout Sismondi (a continuation of the first), he says: “Still more interesting (than the theory on revenue from cap-ital) are Sismondi’s views on the different kinds of revenue”(Russkoye Bogatstvo , No. 
 8, p. 
 42). 
 Sismondi, he says, like Rodbertus, divides the national revenue into two parts:“one goes to the owners of the land and instruments ofproduction, the other goes to the representatives of labour” (ibid. 
). 
 Then follow passages in which Sismondi speaks of such a division, not only of the national revenue, butof the aggregate product: “The annual output, or the resultof all the work done by the nation during the year, alsoconsists of two parts,” and so forth ( Nouveaux Principes , I, 105, quoted in Russkoye Bogatstvo , No. 
 8, p. 
 43). 
 “The passages we have quoted,” concludes our economist, “clearly show that Sismondi fully assimilated (!) the very sameclassification of the national revenue which plays suchan important role in the works of the modern economists,namely, the division of the national revenue into revenuefrom labour and non-labour revenue—arbeitsloses Einkom-men. 
 Although, generally speaking, Sismondi’s views on the subject of revenue are not always clear and definite,we nevertheless discern in them a consciousness of thedifference that exists between private revenue and nation-al revenue” (p. 
 43). 
 The passage quoted, say we in answer to this, clearly shows that Ephrucy has fully assimilated the wisdom of the German textbooks, but in spite of that (and, perhaps, justbecause of it), he has completely overlooked the theoreti- /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR cal difficulty of the question of national revenue as distinct from individual revenue. 
 Ephrucy expresses himself very carelessly. 
 We have seen that in the first part of his article he applied the term “modern economists” to the theoreti-cians of one definite school. 
 The reader would be right inthinking that he is referring to them this time too. 
 Actually,however, the author has something entirely different inmind. 
 It is now the German Katheder-Socialists 54 who figure as the modern economists. 
 The author’s defence of Sismondi consists in closely identifying his theory with theirs. 
 Whatis the theory of these “modern” authorities that Ephrucyquotes? That the national revenue is divided into two parts. 
 But this is the theory of Adam Smith and not of the “modern economists”! In dividing revenue into wages, prof-it and rent (Book I, chap. 
 VI of The Wealth of Nations ; Book II, chap. 
 II), Adam Smith opposed the two latter tothe former precisely as non-labour revenue; he called themboth deductions from the produce of labour (Book I, chap. 
VIII) and challenged the opinion that profit is also wagesfor a special kind of labour (Book I, chap. 
 VI). 
 Sismondi, Rodbertus and the “modern” authors of German textbooks simply repeat Smith’s doctrine. 
 The only difference betweenthem is that Adam Smith was aware that he was not quitesuccessful in his efforts to separate the national revenue fromthe national product; he was aware that by excluding con-stant capital (to use the modern term) from the national product after having included it in the individual product, he was slipping into a contradiction. 
 The “modern” econo-mists, however, in repeating Adam Smith’s mistake, havemerely clothed his doctrine in a more pompous phrase(“classification of the national revenue”) and lost the aware-ness of the contradiction which brought Adam Smith to a halt. 
 These methods may be scholarly, but they are not in the least scientific. 
 VIII CAPITALIST RENT AND CAPITALIST OVERPOPULATION We continue our survey of Sismondi’s theoretical views. 
 All his chief views, those which distinguish him from allother economists, who have already examined. 
 The others either do not play such an important role in his general theory, or are deduced from the preceding ones. 
 Let us note that Sismondi, like Rodbertus, did not agree with Ricardo’s theory of rent. 
 While not advancing atheory of his own, he tried to shake Ricardo’s theory witharguments that were, to say the least, feeble. 
 In this heacts as the pure ideologist of the small peasant; it is notso much a refutation of Ricardo as a complete rejection of the application of the categories of commodity economy and of capitalism to agriculture. 
 In both respects his pointof view is extremely characteristic of the romanticists. 
Chapter XIII of Book III * deals with “Mr. 
 Ricardo’s ground-rent theory. 
” Stating at once that Ricardo’s doctrine com-pletely contradicts his own theory, Sismondi advances the following objections: the general level of profit (on which Ricardo’s theory is based) is never established, there is nofree movement of capital in agriculture. 
 In agriculture wemust discern the intrinsic value of the product (la valeurintrinsèque), which does not depend upon market fluctua-tions and provides the-owner with a “net product” (produit net), the “labour of nature” (I, 306). 
 “The labour of na-ture is a power, the source of the net product of the landregarded intrinsically” (intrinsèquement) (I, 310). 
 “Weregarded rent (le fermage), or more correctly, the net prod-uct, as originating directly from the land for the owner’sbenefit; it takes no share either from the farmer or the *His very system of exposition is characteristic: Book III treats of “territorial wealth” (richesse territoriale), of wealth in the shape ofland, i. 
e. 
, of agriculture. 
 The next book, Book IV, treats of “com-mercial wealth” (de la richesse commerciale), of industry and com-merce. 
 As though the produce of the land, and land itself, have not also become commodities under the rule of capitalism! For this rea-son, there is no harmony between these two books. 
 Industry is dealtwith only in its capitalist form as it existed in Sismondi’s time. 
Agriculture, however, is described in the form of a motley enumera-tion of all sorts of systems of exploiting the land: patriarchal, slave,half-crop, corvée, quit-rent, capitalist farming and emphyteutic (the granting of land on a perpetual hereditary lease). 
 The result is utter confusion: the author gives us neither a history of agricul-ture, for all these “systems” are unconnected, nor an analysis of agri-culture under capitalist economy although the latter is the realsubject of his work, and though he speaks of industry only in itscapitalist form. 
 consumer” (I, 312). 
 And this repetition of the old physio-cratic prejudices concludes with the moral: “In general, in political economy, one should guard against (se défier) absolute assumptions, as well as against abstractions”(1, 312)! There is really nothing to examine in such a “theo-ry,” since Ricardo’s brief remark about the “labour ofnature” is more than enough. 
 * It is simply a refusal to analyse and a gigantic step back compared with Ricardo. 
 Here, too, the romanticism of Sismondi is quite clearly revealed, for he hastens to condemn the process, but isafraid to touch it with an analysis. 
 Note that he does notdeny the fact of agriculture developing on capitalist linesin England, of the peasants there being displaced by cap-italist farmers and day labourers, and of things devel-oping in the same direction on the Continent. 
 He simply turns his back on these facts (which he was in duty boundto examine since he was discussing capitalist economy) andprefers talking sentimentally of the advantages of the patriar-chal system of exploiting the land. 
 Our Narodniks behavein exactly the same way: none of them have attempted to deny the fact that commodity economy is penetrating into agriculture, that it must produce a radical changein the social character of agriculture; but at the same timenone of them, in discussing the capitalist economy, raisethe question of the growth of commercial farming, pre-ferring to make shift with moralising about “people’s pro-duction. 
” Since we are confining ourselves for the moment to an analysis of Sismondi’s theoretical economy, we shallpostpone a more detailed examination of this “patriarchalexploitation” to a later occasion. 
 Another theoretical point around which Sismondi’s ex-position revolves is the doctrine of population. 
 Let us *Ricardo, Works , Sieber’s (Russian) translation, p. 
 35: “Does nature do nothing for man in manufactures? Are the powers of wind and water, which move our machinery, and assist navigation, nothing?The pressure of the atmosphere and the elasticity of steam, whichenable us to work the most stupendous engines—are they not thegifts of nature? To say nothing of the effects of the matter of heatin softening and melting metals, of the decomposition of the atmos-phere in the process of dyeing and fermentation. 
 There is not a man-ufacture which can be mentioned, in which nature does not give herassistance to man, and give it too, generously and gratuitously. 
” note Sismondi’s attitude towards the Malthusian theory, and towards the surplus population created by capitalism. 
 Ephrucy assures us that Sismondi agrees with Malthus only on the point that the population can multiply withexceeding rapidity, and be the cause of terrible suffering. 
“Beyond this they are poles apart. 
 Sismondi puts the wholepopulation problem on a socio-historical basis” ( Russkoye Bogatstvo , No. 
 7, p. 
 148). 
 In this formula, too, Ephrucy completely obscures Sismondi’s characteristic (namely, pet-ty-bourgeois) point of view and his romanticism. 
 What does this mean—“to put the population problem on a socio-historical basis”? It means studying the law of pop-ulation of each historical system of economy separately, andstudying its connection and interrelation with the given system. 
 Which system did Sismondi study? The capitalist system. 
 Thus, the contributor to Russkoye Bogatstvo assumes that Sismondi studied the capitalist law of population. 
There is a grain of truth in this assertion but only a grain . 
 And as Ephrucy did not think of trying to discover what waslacking in Sismondi’s argument about population, and as Ephrucy asserts that “here Sismondi is the predecessor of the most outstanding modern economists” * (p. 
 148), the result is exactly the same sort of embellishment of thepetty-bourgeois romanticist as we saw in respect of thequestions of crises and of national revenue. 
 Wherein liesthe similarity between Sismondi’s doctrine and the new theo-ry on these problems? In that Sismondi indicated the con-tradictions inherent in capitalist accumulation. 
 This sim-ilarity Ephrucy noted. 
 Wherein lies the difference betweenSismondi’s doctrine and the new theory? Firstly, in that itdid not advance the scientific analysis of these contradictionsone iota, and in some respects even took a step back compared with the classical economists; and secondly, in that he covered up his own inability to make an analysis(partly his unwillingness to do so) with petty-bourgeoismoralising about the need for balancing national revenue *Incidentally, we make the reservation that we cannot know for certain whom Ephrucy has in mind when he speaks of “the most Outstanding modern economist,” the representative of a certain schoolwhich is absolutely alien to romanticism, or the author of the bulkiestHandbuch. 
 with expenditure, production with consumption, and so forth. 
 This difference Ephrucy did not note on a single one of the points mentioned, and thereby totally misrepresented Sismondi’s real significance and his relation to the moderntheory. 
 We see exactly the same thing on the present prob-lem. 
 Here, too, the similarity between Sismondi’s view andthe modern theory is limited to an indication of the contradiction . 
 And here, too, the difference lies in the absence of a scientific analysis and in the substitution of petty-bourgeois moralising for the analysis. 
 Let us explain this. 
 The development of capitalist machine industry since the end of the last century led to the formation of a sur-plus population, and political economy was confronted withthe task of explaining this phenomenon. 
 Malthus, as we know, tried to explain it by attributing it to natural-his-torical causes; he denied absolutely that it sprang from acertain, historically determined system of social economyand simply shut his eyes to the contradictions revealedby this fact. 
 Sismondi indicated these contradictions andthe displacement of the population by machines. 
 This is indisputably to his credit, for in the period in which he wrote this was new. 
 But let us see what his attitudetowards this fact was. 
 In Book VII ( On the Population ), chapter VII speaks particularly “on the population which has become super-fluous owing to the invention of machines. 
” Sismondi states that “machines displace men” (p. 
 315, II, VII), and at once asks whether the invention of machines is a boonor a bane to a nation. 
 It goes without saying that the “answer” to this question for all countries and all times whatever, and not for a capitalist country, is a most meaningless piece of banality: it is a boon when “consumers’ demand exceeds the population’s means of production” (les moyens de pro-duire de la population) (II, 317), and a bane “when pro-duction is quite sufficient for consumption. 
” In other words: Sismondi notes the contradiction, but this merely serves as a pretext for arguing about some abstract society in which there are no longer any contradictions, and to which the ethics of the thrifty peasant can be applied! Sismondi makes no attempt to analyse this contradiction, to examine how it arises, what it leads to, etc. 
, in the existing capitalist society. 
 On the contrary, he uses this contradiction merely as material for his moral indignation against such a con-tradiction. 
 Beyond this the chapter tells us absolutely nothing about this theoretical problem, and contains noth-ing but regrets, complaints and innocent wishes. 
 Thedisplaced workers were consumers ... the home marketshrinks ... as regards the foreign market, the world is al-ready sufficiently supplied ... if the peasants were mod-erately prosperous, this would be a better guarantee of a market ... there is no more amazing and terrible examplethan England, which is being followed by the Continentalcountries—such is the moralising we get from Sismondi,instead of an analysis of the phenomenon! His attitude to-wards the subject is exactly the same as that of our Narod-niks. 
 The Narodniks also confine themselves to stating the fact of a surplus population, and use it merely as a reasonto voice lamentations about and complaints against capital-ism (cf. 
 N. 
 —on, V. 
 V. 
, and others). 
 Sismondi makes no attempt even to analyse the relation between this surpluspopulation and the requirements of capitalist production, neither do our Narodniks ever set themselves such a problem. 
 The scientific analysis of this contradiction revealed the absolute falsity of this method. 
 The analysis showedthat surplus population, being undoubtedly a contradiction(along with surplus production and surplus consumption) and being an inevitable result of capitalist accumulation, is at the same time an indispensable component part of the capitalist machine. 
 * The further large-scale industry de-*As far as we know, this point of view about the surplus popu-lation was first expressed by Engels in Die Lage der arbeitenden Klasse in England (1845) ( The Condition of the Working Class in Eng-land . 
—Ed. 
). 
 After describing the ordinary industrial cycle of English industry the author says: “From this it is clear that English manufacture must have, at all times save the brief periods of highest prosperity, an unemployed reserve army of workers, in order to be able to produce the massesof goods required by the market in the liveliest months. 
 This reserve army is larger or smaller, according as the state of the market occa-sions the employment of a larger or smaller proportion of its members. 
And if at the moment of highest activity of the market the agricul-tural districts ... and the branches least affected by the general pros-perity temporarily supply to manufacture a number of workers, these velops the greater is the fluctuation in the demand for work-ers, depending upon whether there is a crisis or a boom in national production as a whole, or in any one branch of it. 
 This fluctuation is a law of capitalist production, whichcould not exist if there were no surplus population (i. 
e. 
, a population exceeding capitalism’s average demand for workers) ready at any given moment to provide hands forany industry, or any factory. 
 The analysis showed that a surplus population is formed in all industries into which capitalism penetrates and in agriculture as well as in indus-try—and that the surplus population exists in differentforms. 
 There are three chief forms *: Floating overpopu-lation . 
 To this category belong the unemployed workers in industry. 
 As industry develops their numbers inevitably grow. 
 2) Latent overpopulation . 
 To this category belong the rural population who lose their farms with the develop-ment of capitalism and are unable to find non-agriculturalemployment. 
 This population is always ready to providehands for any factory. 
 3) Stagnant overpopulation . 
 It has “extremely irregular” employment, under conditions below the average level. 
57 To this category belong, mainly, people who work at home for manufacturers and stores, includingboth rural and urban inhabitants. 
 The sum-total of all thesestrata of the population constitutes the relative surplus popu-lation , or reserve army . 
 The latter term distinctly shows what population is referred to. 
 They are the workers needed by capitalism for the potential expansion of enterprises, but who can never be regularly employed. 
 Thus, on this problem, too, theory arrived at a conclu-sion diametrically opposed to that of the romanticists. 
For the latter, the surplus population signifies that capi-talism is impossible, or a “mistake. 
” Actually, the oppo-are a mere minority, and these too belong to the reserve army, with the single difference that the prosperity of the moment was requiredto reveal their connection with it. 
” 55 It is important to note in the last words that the part of the agri-cultural population which turns temporarily to industry is regarded as belonging to the reserve army. 
 This is precisely what the modern theory has called the latent form of the surplus population (see Marx’s Capital ). 
56 *Cf. 
 Sieber’s David Ricardo, etc. 
 , pp. 
 552-53. 
 St. 
 Petersburg, 1885. 
 site is the case: the surplus population, being a necessary concomitant of surplus production, is an indispensable attri-bute to the capitalist economy, which could neither exist nor develop without it . 
 Here too Ephrucy totally misrepresent-ed the issue by saying nothing about this thesis of the mod-ern theory. 
 A mere comparison of these two points of view is suffi-cient to enable one to judge which of them our Narodniks adhere to. 
 The chapter from Sismondi’s work dealt with above could with every right figure in Mr. 
 N. 
 —on’s Sketches on Our Post-Reform Social Economy . 
 While noting the formation of a surplus population in post-Reform Russia, the Narodniks have never raised theissue of capitalism’s need of a reserve army of workers. 
 Could the railways have been built if a permanent surplus population had not been formed? It is surely known thatthe demand for this type of labour fluctuates greatly fromyear to year. 
 Could industry have developed without thiscondition? (In boom periods it needs large numbers of build-ing workers to erect new factories, premises, warehouses, etc. 
, and all kinds of auxiliary day labour, which consti-tutes the greater part of the so-called outside non-agricul-tural employments. 
) Could the capitalist farming of ouroutlying regions, which demands hundreds of thousands andmillions of day labourers, have been created without thiscondition? And as we know, the demand for this kind of labour fluctuates enormously. 
 Could the entrepreneur lumber merchants have hewn down the forests to meet the needs ofthe factories with such phenomenal rapidity if a surpluspopulation had not been formed? (Lumbering like othertypes of hired labour in which rural people engage isamong the occupations with the lowest wages and the worst conditions. 
) Could the system, so widespread in the so-called handicraft industries, under which mer-chants, mill owners and stores give out work to be done athome in both town and country, have developed withoutthis condition? In all these branches of labour (whichhave developed mainly since the Reform) the fluctuation in the demand for hired labour is extremely great. 
 Yet the degree of fluctuation in this demand determines the di-mensions of the surplus population needed by capitalism. 
 The Narodnik economists have nowhere shown that they are familiar with this law. 
 We do not, of course, intend to make an examination of the substance of these problems here. 
 * This does not enter into our task. 
 The subject of our article is West-European romanticism and its rela-tion to Russian Narodism. 
 In this case, too, this relationis the same as in all the preceding cases: on the subjectof surplus population, the Narodniks adhere entirely to the viewpoint of romanticism, which is diametrically opposite to that of the modern theory. 
 Capitalism givesno employment to displaced workers, they say. 
 This meansthat capitalism is impossible, a “mistake,” etc. 
 But itdoes not “mean” that at all. 
 Contradiction does not meanimpossibility (Widerspruch is not the same as Widersinn). 
 Capitalist accumulation, i. 
e. 
, real production for the sake of production, is also a contradiction. 
 But this does not pre-vent it from existing and from being the law of a definitesystem of economy. 
 The same must be said of all the othercontradictions of capitalism. 
 The Narodnik argument wehave quoted merely “means” that the Russian intelligentsia have become deeply imbued with the vice of using empty phrases to get over all these contradictions. 
 Thus, Sismondi contributed absolutely nothing to the theoretical analysis of overpopulation. 
 But how did he re-gard it? His view is a queer combination of petty-bourgeoissentiment and Malthusianism. 
 “The great vice of the present social organisation,” says Sismondi, “is that a poor man can never know what demand for labour he can count upon”(II, 261), and Sismondi sighs for the times when “the vil-lage shoemaker” and the small peasant knew the exact amountof their revenues. 
 “The more a poor man is bereft of allproperty, the more is he in danger of falling into error concerning his revenue and of contributing to the formation of a population (contribuer à accroître une population...)which, being out of proportion to the demand for labour,will not find means of subsistence” (II, 263-64). 
 You see:this ideologist of the petty bourgeoisie is not satisfiedwith wanting to retard the whole of social development for *That is why we do not deal here with the very original circum-stance that Narodnik economists, as grounds for not counting all these very numerous workers, advanced the fact that they are not registered. 
 the sake of preserving the patriarchal relationships of a semi-barbarous population. 
 He is ready to prescribe any device you please for crippling human nature, as long as it helps to preserve the petty bourgeoisie. 
 Here are sever-al more excerpts, which leave no doubt about this lastpoint: The weekly payment of wages at the factory to the semi-pauperised worker has accustomed the latter to look no further into the future than the next Saturday: “this has blunt-ed his moral qualities and sense of sympathy” (II, 266),which, as we shall see in a moment, consist of “connubialprudence”!... “The more his family becomes a burden uponsociety the more it will grow; and the nation will suffer(gémira) from the burden of a population which is out of proportion (disproportionnée) to its means of subsistence” (II, 267). 
 Preserve small property at all costs—such isSismondi’s slogan—even at the cost of reducing the stand-ard of living and of distorting human nature! And Sis-mondi, who, with the air of a statesman, has told us whenan increase in the population is “desirable,” devotes a spe-cial chapter to attacking religion for having failed to con-demn “imprudent” marriages. 
 Once his ideal—the pettybourgeois—is affected, Sismondi becomes more Malthu-sian than Malthus himself. 
 “Children who are born onlyfor poverty are also born only for vice,” says Sismondi, ad-monishing religion. 
 “Ignorance in matters concerning the social system has induced them” (the representatives of reli-gion) “to strike chastity from the list of virtues that areproper to marriage, and has been one of the constantly oper-ating causes which destroy the naturally established bal-ance between the population and its means of subsistence”(II, 294). 
 “Religious morality should teach people that having produced a family, it is their duty to live no less chastely with their wives than celibates with women who do not be-long to them” (II, 298). 
 And Sismondi, who, in general, laysclaim to the title not only of a theoretician in politicaleconomy, but also to that of wise administrator, immediate-ly proceeds to calculate that “producing a family” requires “in general, and on the average, three births,” and he ad-vises the government “not to deceive the people with thehope of an independent status which will permit them to raise a family when that illusory institution (cet établisse-ment illusoire) leaves them at the mercy of suffering, poverty and death” (II, 299). 
 “When the social organisa-tion did not separate the labouring class from the class which owned some property, public opinion alone was enough to avert the scourge (le fléau) of poverty. 
 For the agri-culturist to sell the heritage of his fathers and for the ar-tisan to squander his small capital has always been regard-ed as something shameful.... 
 But under the system at present prevailing in Europe ... people who are con-demned never to possess any property can feel no shame what-ever at being reduced to pauperism” (II, 306-07). 
 It would be difficult to express more vividly the stupidity and hard-heartedness of the small proprietor! Here Sismondi changes from the theoretician into the practical counsellor, who preaches the morals which, we know, are practised with such success by the French peasant. 
 This is not only Malthus, but Malthus deliberately cut to the measure of the petty bourgeois. 
 Reading these chapters of Sismondi’s, one cannot help recalling the passionately angry invec-tive of Proudhon, who argued that Malthusianism wasthe preaching of the connubial practice of ... a certain unnatural vice. 
 * IX MACHINES IN CAPITALIST SOCIETY Related to the problem of surplus population is that of the significance of machines in general. 
 Ephrucy dilates upon Sismondi’s “brilliant observa-tions” concerning machines, and asserts that “to regard him as an opponent of technical improvements is unjust” (No. 
 7, p. 
 155), that “Sismondi was not an enemy of machines and inventions” (p. 
 156). 
 “Sismondi repeatedly stressed the idea that machines and inventions are not in themselves harmful to the working class, but become so only because of the con-ditions of the existing system of economy, under which an *See supplement to the Russian translation of Malthus’ Essay on Population (Bibikov’s translation, St. 
 Petersburg, 1868). 
 Excerpt from Proudhon’s essay On Justice . 
 increase in the productivity of labour leads neither to an increase in working class consumption nor to a reduction of working hours” (p. 
 155). 
 All these observations are quite correct. 
 But again, this appraisal of Sismondi is a wonderfully vivid revelation of how the Narodnik absolutely failed to understand the ro-manticist , to understand the point of view on capitalism specific to romanticism, and the radical difference be-tween this point of view and that of scientific theory. 
 The Narodnik could not understand this, because Narodism itself has not gone beyond romanticism. 
 But while Sismon-di’s observations concerning the contradictory nature of the capitalist employment of machines marked a great step forward in the 1820s, it is quite unpardonable today to confine oneself to such a primitive criticism and not to see its narrow petty-bourgeois character. 
 In this respect (i. 
e. 
, in respect of the difference be-tween Sismondi’s doctrine and the modern theory) * Ephru-cy keeps firmly to his own ground. 
 He cannot even present the problem. 
 He says that Sismondi saw the contradiction, and rests content with that; as if history had not shownthe most diverse ways and means of criticising the contradic-tions of capitalism. 
 In saying that Sismondi did not re-gard machines as being harmful in themselves, but harm-ful in their operation under the present social system, Eph-rucy does not even see what a primitive, superficially sentimental point of view he expresses in this one argument alone. 
 Sismondi did indeed inquire: are machines harm-ful, or not? And he “answered” the question with the max-im: machines are useful only when production is commen-surate with consumption (cf. 
 quotations in Russkoye Bogat-stvo, No. 
 7, p. 
 156). 
 After all that has been said above, there is no need for us to prove here that such an “answer” is nothing more nor less than substituting a petty-bourgeois utopia for a scientific analysis of capitalism. 
 Sismondi cannot be blamed for not having made such an analysis. 
 Historical services are not judged by the contributions historical personalities did not make in respect of modern * We have already repeatedly seen that Ephrucy tried everywhere to draw this comparison between Sismondi and the modern theory. 
 requirements, but by the new contributions they did make as compared with their predecessors. 
 Here, however, we are judging neither Sismondi nor his primitive, sentimental point of view, but the economist of Russkoye Bogatstvo , who to this day does not understand the difference between thispoint of view and the modern one. 
 He does not understandthat to bring out this difference he should not have askedwhether Sismondi was an enemy of machines or not, but whether Sismondi understood the significance of machines un-der the capitalist system, whether he understood the roleplayed by machines as a factor of progress under this sys-tem? Had the economist of Russkoye Bogatstvo done that, he might have noted that Sismondi, owing to his petty-bour-geois , utopian point of view, could not even raise such ques-tions, and that what distinguishes the new theory is that it does raise and answer them. 
 In that case Ephrucy might haveunderstood that by substituting the question of the condi-tions under which machines can, in general, be “profitable”and “useful” for that of the historical role played by ma-chines in existing capitalist society, Sismondi naturally ar-rived at the theory that capitalism and the capitalist em-ployment of machines were “dangerous” and urged the neces-sity of “retarding,” “moderating” and “regulating” the growthof capitalism, and, as a consequence, he became a reactionary . 
 The fact that Sismondi’s doctrine fails to understand thehistorical role of machines as a factor of progress is one of the reasons for the modern theory regarding it as reactionary . 
 We shall not here, of course, expound the modern theo-ry (i. 
e. 
, Marx’s theory) of machine production. 
 We referthe reader to, say, the above-mentioned study by N. 
 Sieber,chapter X: “Machines and Large-Scale Industry,” and par-ticularly chapter XI: “An Examination of the Theory of Machine Production. 
” * We shall merely give the gist of it in briefest outline. 
 It boils down to two points: first, to ahistorical analysis, which established the place machine pro-*“To tell the truth,” says Sieber at the beginning of this chap-ter, “the theory of machines and of large-scale industry outlinedhere, represents such an inexhaustible source of new thinking andoriginal research, that if anybody took it into his head to weigh up the relative merits of this theory in full he would have to write almost a whole book on this subject alone” (p. 
 473). 
 duction occupies as one of the stages in the development of capitalism, and the relation of machine industry to the preced-ing stages (capitalist simple co-operation and capitalist man-ufacture); secondly, to an analysis of the part played by ma-chines under capitalist economy, and in particular, to ananalysis of the changes which machine industry effectsin all the conditions of life of the population. 
 On the firstpoint, the theory established that machine industry is only one stage (namely, the highest) of capitalist produc-tion, and showed how it arose out of manufacture. 
 Onthe second point, the theory established that machine in-dustry marks gigantic progress in capitalist society notonly because it increases the productive forces enormouslyand socialises labour throughout society, * but also be-cause it destroys the manufactory division of labour, com-pels the workers to go from occupations of one kind to oth-ers, completes the destruction of backward patriarchalrelationships, particularly in the rural districts, ** and gives a most powerful impetus to the progress of society,both for the reasons stated and as a consequence of the concentration of the industrial population. 
 This progress, like the progress capitalism makes in every other field, isaccompanied by the “progress” of contradictions, i. 
e. 
, bytheir intensification and expansion. 
 Perhaps the reader will ask: what interest is there in examining Sismondi’s views on such a universally known question and in such a brief reference to the modern theo-ry, with which everybody is “familiar,” and with whicheverybody “agrees”? Well, to see what this “agreement” looks like we shall take Mr. 
 N. 
 —on, the most prominent Narodnik economist, who claims that he strictly applies the modern theory. 
 In his Sketches , it will be remembered, Mr. 
 N. 
 —on sets him-self as one of his special tasks the study of the capital-*Comparing “associated labour” in the village community and in capitalist society that has machine industry, Sieber quite rightlyobserves “There is approximately the same difference between the‘component’ of a village community and the ‘component’ of societywith machine production as there is, for example, between the unit 10 and the unit 100” (p. 
 495). 
 **Sieber, op. 
 cit. 
, p. 
 467. 
 isation of the Russian textile industry, the characteristic feature of which is precisely that it employs machines on the biggest scale. 
 The question is: what is Mr. 
 N. 
 —on’s point of view on this subject: the point of view of Sismondi (whose view-point, as we have seen, he shares on very many aspectsof capitalism), or the point of view of modern theory? Ishe, on this important subject, a romanticist or ... a realist *? We have seen that the first thing that distinguishes the modern theory is that it is based on a historical analysisof the development of machine industry from capitalist man-ufacture. 
 Did Mr. 
 N. 
 —on raise the problem of the development of Russian machine industry? No. 
 True, he did say that itwas preceded by work in the home for the capitalist, and by the hand-labour “factory” **; but he not only failed to explain the relation of machine industry to the precedingstage, he even failed to “notice” that it was wrong inscientific terminology to apply the term factory to the pre-ceding stage (production by hand in the home or in the capitalist’s workshop), which should undoubtedly be de-scribed as capitalist manufacture . 
 *** Let the reader not think that this “omission” is unim-portant. 
 On the contrary, it is of enormous importance. 
Firstly, Mr. 
 N. 
 —on thereby identifies capitalism with machine industry . 
 This is a gross mistake. 
 What consti-tutes the importance of the scientific theory is that it cleared up the real place of machine industry as one of the stages of capitalism. 
 If Mr. 
 N. 
 —on shared the point of *The word “realist” was used here instead of the word Marxist exclusively for censorship reasons. 
 For the same reason, instead ofreferring to Capital , we referred to Sieber’s book, which summarised Marx’s Capital . 
 (Author’s footnote to the 1908 edition. 
— Ed. 
) **P. 
 108. 
 Quoted from Statistical Returns for Moscow Guber-nia, Vol. 
 VII, Part III, p. 
 32 (the statisticians here summarise Korsak’s Forms of Industry ): “Since 1822 the very organisation of industry has undergone a complete change—instead of beingindependent handicraft producers, the peasants are becoming merelythe performers of several operations of large-scale factory productionand only receive wages. 
” *** Sieber quite rightly indicated that the ordinary terminology (factory, works, etc. 
) is unsuitable for scientific research, and urged the need for drawing a distinction between machine industry and cap-italist manufacture: p. 
 474. 
 view of this theory , could he have depicted the growth and victory of machine industry as “the struggle between two economic forms ”: between some unknown “form based on the peasantry’s ownership of instruments of production” * and “capitalism” (pp. 
 2, 3, 66, 198 et al. 
), whereas, in fact,we see a struggle between machine industry and capitalist manufacture ? Mr. 
 N. 
 —on says not a word about this struggle ; although this replacement of one form of capitalism by another took place, on his own showing, precisely in the textile industry, the sphere of his special study(p. 
 79), Mr. 
 N. 
 —on misrepresented it, calling it the replace-ment of “people’s production” by “capitalism. 
” Is it notevident that at bottom the problem of the actual develop-ment of machine industry did not interest him in the least, and that the term “people’s production” covers up a utopia entirely to the taste of Sismondi? Secondly, if Mr. 
 N. 
 —on had raised the question of the historical developmentof Russian machine industry, could he have spoken of“implanting capitalism” (pp. 
 331, 283, 323 et al. 
), basinghis case on facts of governmental support and assistance— facts which have also occurred in Europe? The question is: is he copying Sismondi who also talked in exactly thesame way about “implanting,” or is he copying the rep-resentative of the modern theory who studied the replacementof manufacture by machine industry? Thirdly, if Mr. 
 N. 
 —on had raised the problem of the historical development of the forms of capitalism in Russia (in the textile industry), could he have ignored the existence of capitalist manufac-ture in the Russian “handicraft industries” **? And if he had really followed theory and attempted to apply a scien-tific analysis to at least a small corner of this production— *N. 
 —on, p. 
 322. 
 Does this differ even one iota from Sismondi’s idealisation of patriarchal peasant economy? **We assume that there is no need here to prove this commonly known fact. 
 It is sufficient to recall the Pavlovo metalworkers, theBogorodsk leather and the Kimry boot and shoe trade, the hat-making district of Molvitino, the Tula accordion and samovar trades,the Krasnoye Selo and Rybnaya Sloboda jewelry trade, the Semyonov spoon trade, the horn trade in “Ustyanshchina,” the felt trade in Se-myonov Uyezd, Nizhni-Novgorod Gubernia, etc. 
 We are quotingfrom memory; if we made an investigation of handicraft industries,we could prolong this list to infinity. 
 which is also “people’s production”—what would have become of this picture of Russian social economy, daubed in cheap and inartistic Suzdal style, which depicts a nebulous “peo-ple’s production” and an isolated from it “capitalism” whichembraces only a “handful” of workers (p. 
 326 et al. 
)? To sum up: On the first point which distinguishes the modern theory of machine industry from the romantic theo-ry, Mr. 
 N. 
 —on can on no account be regarded as a follower of the former , for he does not even realise the need to pre-sent the question of the rise of machine industry as a spe-cial stage of capitalism , and is silent about the existence of capitalist manufacture, the stage of capitalism whichpreceded that of the machines. 
 Instead of an historicalanalysis, he palms off the utopia of “people’s produc-tion. 
” The second point relates to the modern theory of the changes brought about in social relations by machine indus-try. 
 Mr. 
 N. 
 —on did not even attempt to examine this problem. 
 He complained a great deal about capitalism and deplored theappearance of the factory (exactly as Sismondi did), but he did not even attempt to study the change in social conditions brought about by the factory. 
 * To do that it would have been necessary to compare machine industry with the pre-ceding stages , which Mr. 
 N. 
 —on does not refer to. 
 Similar-ly, the viewpoint of the modern theory on machines as a fac-tor of progress in present-day capitalist society is also totally alien to him . 
 Here, too, he did not even present the question, ** nor could he do so , for this question can arise only out of a historical study of the replacement of one form of capitalism by another, whereas according to Mr. 
 N. 
 —on “capitalism” tout court *** replaces ... “people’s production. 
” If, on the basis of Mr. 
 N. 
 —on ’s “study ” of the capitali-sation of the textile industry in Russia , we were to ask: how does Mr. 
 N. 
 —on regard machines?—we could re-*We ask the reader not to forget that the scientific meaning of this term is not the same as the ordinary one. 
 Science limits its appli-cation exclusively to large-scale machine industry. 
 **As has been done, for example, by A. 
 Volgin, The Substantia-tion of Narodism in the Works of Mr. 
 Vorontsov (V. 
 V. 
 ). 
 St. 
 Petersburg, 1896. 
 *** Simply. 
— Ed. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR ceive no other reply than that with which we are already familiar from Sismondi’s work. 
 Mr. 
 N. 
 —on admits that ma-chines increase the productivity of labour (not to do so is more than he dare!)—just as Sismondi did. 
 Mr. 
 N. 
 —on says that it is not machines that are harmful, but the capi-talist employment of them—just as Sismondi did. 
 Mr. 
N. 
 —on believes that in introducing machines “we” have lost sight of the fact that production must correspond to “the people’s consuming capacity”—just as Sismondi did. 
 And that is all. 
 Mr. 
 N. 
 —on does not believe anything more. 
 He will not hear of the problems that have beenraised and solved by modern theory, because he did not evenattempt to examine either the historical succession ofdifferent forms of capitalist production in Russia (using, say, the example of the textile industry that he chose), or the role of machines as a factor of progress under the present capitalist system. 
 Thus, on the question of machines—this supremely important question of theoretical political economy—Mr. 
N. 
 —on also shares Sismondi’s point of view. 
 Mr. 
 N. 
 —on argues exactly like a romanticist , which, of course, does not prevent him from quoting and quoting. 
 This applies not to the example of the textile indus-try alone, but to all Mr. 
 N. 
 —on arguments. 
 Take, say, the above-mentioned example of the flour-milling industry. 
Mr. 
 N. 
 —on pointed to the introduction of machines only as an excuse for the sentimental lamentation that this in-crease in the productivity of labour did not correspond tothe “people’s consuming capacity. 
” As regards the changesin the social system which machine industry introduces ingeneral (and has actually introduced in Russia), he didnot even think of analysing them. 
 The question of whether the introduction of these machines is a progressive step in present-day capitalist society is something quite in-comprehensible to him. 
 * What we have said about Mr. 
 N. 
 —on applies a fortiori ** *The text contains an outline criticism of Mr. 
 N. 
 —on views based on Marx’s theory; this I subsequently completed in The Development of Capitalism . 
 (Author’s footnote to the 1908 edi-tion. 
— Ed. 
) **All the more. 
— Ed. 
 to the other Narodnik economists: on the question of ma-chines, Narodism to this day adheres to the viewpoint of petty-bourgeois romanticism and replaces an economic anal-ysis by sentimental wishes. 
 X PROTECTION The last theoretical problem that interests us in Sismon-di’s system of views is that of protection. 
 No little spaceis devoted to this problem in Nouveaux Principes , but there it is examined mostly from the practical aspect,in connection with the anti-Corn-Laws movement in Brit-ain. 
 We shall examine this latter problem later on, for it includes other, broader problems. 
 What interests us hereat the moment is only Sismondi’s point of view on protec-tion. 
 What is of interest in this problem is not a new eco-nomic concept of Sismondi’s, that has not been discussed,but his understanding of the relation between “economics” and the “superstructure. 
” Ephrucy assures the readers of Russkoye Bogatstvo that Sismondi was “one of the first and most talented forerunners of the modern historicalschool,” that he was “opposed to the isolation of economicphenomena from all other social factors. 
” “The view is ex-pressed in the works of Sismondi that economic phenomena must not be isolated from other social factors, that they must be studied in connection with facts of a socio-polit-ical character” ( Russkoye Bogatstvo , No. 
 8, pp. 
 38-39). 
 Well, we shall see from the example we have taken, how Sis-mondi understood the connection between economic and so-cio-political phenomena. 
 “The prohibition of imports,” says Sismondi in the chap-ter “Of Customs” (1. 
 IV, ch. 
 XI), “is as unwise and asruinous as the prohibition of exports: it was invented inorder to give the nation manufacture, something it didnot yet possess; and it cannot be denied that for nascentindustry it is on a par with the most powerful encourage-ment bonus. 
 This manufacture produces, perhaps, scarcely one-hundredth part of a certain kind of goods consumed bythe nation: one hundred buyers will have to compete with each other to obtain commodities from the sole vendor, and the ninety-nine to whom he refuses to sell will have to make shift with contraband goods. 
 In that case, the na-tion’s loss will be equal to one hundred, and its gain equalto one. 
 No matter how much the nation may gain from thisnew manufacture, there can be no doubt that this gain willbe too small to justify such great sacrifice. 
 One could al-ways find less wasteful means of stimulating such manu-facture to activity” (I, 440-41). 
 You see how simply Sismondi solves this problem: protec-tion is “unwise” because the “nation” stands to lose by it! What “nation” does our economist speak of? What eco-nomic relations does he connect the given socio-politi-cal fact with? He takes no definite relations, he argues in general , about a nation as it should be , according to his conception of what should be . 
 And as we know, this con-ception of what should be is based on the exclusion of cap-italism and on the reign of small independent production. 
 But it is utterly absurd to associate a socio-political factor which belongs to a given economic system, and to it alone, with some imaginary system. 
 Protection is a “socio-political factor” of capitalism, but Sismondi does not associateit with capitalism, he associates it with some nation in general (or with a nation of small independent producers). 
 He could,perhaps, have associated protection with, say, the Indi-an village community, and have obtained a still more strik-ing example of its “folly” and “ruination”; but this “fol-ly” would again have been that of his association andnot of protection. 
 Sismondi makes a childish calcula-tion to show that protection is profitable to a very few atthe expense of the masses. 
 There is no need to do so, forthis is already evident from the very concept protection (whether it takes the form of a direct subsidy or the form of eliminating foreign competitors makes no difference). 
That protection expresses a social contradiction is beyonddispute. 
 But are there no contradictions in the economiclife of the system which created protection? On the con-trary, it is full of contradictions, and Sismondi himself indicated these contradictions throughout his book. 
 In-stead of deducing this contradiction from those of the eco-nomic system which he himself indicated, Sismondi ignores economic contradictions and reduces his argument to totally meaningless “innocent wishes. 
” Instead of associat-ing this institution which, according to him, benefits a small group, with the position occupied by this group in thecountry’s economy, and with the interests of this group, heassociates it with the abstract principle of the “commonweal. 
” We see, therefore, that, contrary to Ephrucy’s as-sertion, Sismondi does isolate economic phenomena from the rest (by regarding protection apart from the economic sys-tem) and has no conception of the connection between eco-nomic and socio-political facts. 
 The tirade we have quotedcontains all that he, as a theoretician, could contribute to the problem of protection: all the rest is merely a paraphraseof this. 
 “It is doubtful whether governments fully real-ise what price they pay for this gain” (the development of manufacture) “and what frightful sacrifices they imposeupon the consumers” (I, 442-43). 
 “The governments of Eu-rope wanted to violate nature” (faire violence à la nature). 
Which nature? Is it the nature of capitalism that pro-tection “violates”? “The nation was forced, in a way (en quelque sorte), into false activity” (I, 448). 
 “Some govern-ments have gone to the length of paying their merchantsin order to enable them to sell more cheaply; the strangerthis sacrifice and the more it contradicts the simplest calcula-tion, the more it is ascribed to high politics.... 
 The govern-ment pays its merchants at the expense of its subjects” (I, 421), and so on and so forth. 
 This is the kind of argu-ment Sismondi treats us to! In other parts of his work, asif drawing the conclusion from these arguments, he callscapitalism “artificial” and “implanted” (I, 379, opulencefactice), “a hothouse product” (II, 456) and so forth . 
 Start-ing out by substituting innocent wishes for an analysis of the given contradictions, he reaches the point of positive-ly distorting reality to suit those wishes. 
 According to himcapitalist industry, which is so zealously “supported,”is feeble, without a basis, and so forth, it does notplay a predominant role in the country’s economy and,consequently , this predominant role is played by small-scale production, and so forth. 
 The undoubted and indis-putable fact that protection was created only by a definiteeconomic system, and by the definite contradictions of that system, that it expresses the real interests of a real class, which plays the predominant role in the national economy, is reduced to nothing, even to its opposite, by means of a few sentimental phrases! Here is another specimen (concern-ing the protection of agriculture—I, 265, chapter onthe Corn Laws): “The English would have us believe that their big farms are the only means of improving agriculture, that is to say, of providing themselves with a greater abundance of agri-cultural produce at a cheaper price—actually, however,they do the opposite, they produce at a higher price. 
”... This passage, which so strikingly reveals the roman-ticist way of arguing that the Russian Narodniks have tak-en over in its entirety, is wonderfully characteristic! The development of capitalist farming and the technical progress connected with it are depicted as a deliberatelyintroduced system: the English (i. 
e. 
, the English econo-mists) would have us believe that this system is the onlymeans of improving agriculture. 
 Sismondi wants to say that“there could be” other means of improving agriculture be-sides capitalist farming, i. 
e. 
, again “there could be” in some abstract society, but not in the real society of a def-inite historical period, in the “society” based on commod-ity production of which the English economists speak,and of which Sismondi too should have spoken. 
 “Improve-ment of agriculture, that is to say , providing themselves” (the nation?) “with a greater abundance of produce. 
” Not “that is to say,” at all. 
 Improvement of agriculture and im-proved food for the masses are by no means the same thing;that the two will not coincide, is not only possible,it is inevitable under the economic system whichSismondi so zealously wants to avoid. 
 For example, an increase in potato cultivation may signify an increase in labour productivity in agriculture (introduction of rootcrops) and an increase in surplus-value, simultaneouslywith a deterioration of the workers’ food. 
 It is anotherexample of the habit of the Narodnik—that is to say, theromanticist—to dismiss the contradictions of real life with phrases. 
 “Actually,” continues Sismondi, “these farmers, who are so rich, so intelligent and so much supported (secondés) by all scientific progress, and whose horses are so fine, whose hedges so solid and whose fields so thoroughly cleared of weeds, cannot compete against the wretched Polish peasant, ignorant, crushed by slavery, who seeks consola-tion only in drink, and whose agriculture is still in theinfant stage of the art. 
 The corn harvested in central Po-land, after paying freight for many hundreds of leaguesby river, by land and by sea, and after paying import du-ties amounting to 30 and 40 per cent ad valorem, is still cheaper than the corn of the richest counties of England”(I, 265). 
 “The English economists are amazed at this con-trast. 
” They refer to taxes and so forth. 
 But this is notthe point. 
 “The system of exploitation itself is bad, itrests on a dangerous foundation.... 
 Lately, all writers have presented this system as an object worthy of our admiration, but we, on the contrary, must study it well in order toavoid imitating it” (I, 266). 
 Really, how infinitely naïve is this romanticist, who presents English capitalism (commercial farming) as a mis-taken system of the economists, who imagines that the “amaze-ment” of the economists who shut their eyes to the con-tradictions of commercial farming is a sufficiently strongargument against the farmers! How superficial is his un-derstanding; instead of seeking an explanation ofeconomic processes in the interests of different groups,he looks for it in the errors of economists, authors and gov-ernments! Good Sismondi wants to prick the conscience of the English and also of the continental farmers and put themto shame in order to discourage them from “imitating” such“bad” systems! Do not forget, incidentally, that this was written sev-enty years ago, that Sismondi was witnessing the first steps of these, as yet, totally new phenomena. 
 His naïveté is excusable, for even the classical economists (his contem-poraries) no less naïvely regarded these new phenomena asthe product of the eternal and natural qualities of humannature. 
 But, we ask, have our Narodniks added even oneoriginal word to Sismondi’s arguments in their “objections” to capitalism developing in Russia? Thus, Sismondi’s arguments about protection show that the historical point of view was totally alien to him. 
 In-deed, he argues quite abstractly, exactly like the eigh-teenth-century philosophers and economists, differing from them only in proclaiming the society of small independent producers and not bourgeois society to be normal and natu-ral. 
 Hence, he understands nothing of the connection betweenprotection and a definite economic system; and he disposesof this contradiction in the socio-political sphere withsentimental phrases about “the false,” “the perilous,” the mistaken, the unwise, etc. 
, similar to those with which he disposed of the contradictions in economic life. 
 Hence, hedraws an extremely superficial picture of the matter andpresents the problem of protection and Free Trade as oneof the “wrong” or the “right” path (i. 
e. 
, to use his termi-nology, the problem of capitalism, or the non-capitalist path). 
 Modern theory has fully exposed these delusions, by revealing the connection between protection and a definitehistorical system of social economy, between protectionand the interests of the predominant class in that systemwhich enjoy the support of governments. 
 It showed that protection or Free Trade is an issue between entrepreneurs (sometimes between the entrepreneurs of different coun-tries, sometimes between different factions of entrepreneursin a given country). 
 Comparing these two points of view on protection with the attitude towards it adopted by the Narodnik economists, we find that here too they fully share the romanticist viewpoint and associate protection not with a capitalistcountry, but with some abstraction, with “consumers” toutcourt, and proclaim it to be the “mistaken” and “unwise”support of “hothouse” capitalism, and so forth. 
 On the sub-ject, for example, of duty-free imports of agricultural ma-chines, which cause conflict between industrial and agri-cultural entrepreneurs, the Narodniks, of course , stand sol-idly for the agricultural ... entrepreneurs. 
 We do not wantto say that they are wrong. 
 But it is a question of fact,a question concerning the present historical moment, aquestion as to which faction of the entrepreneurs expresses the more general interests of the development of cap-italism. 
 Even if the Narodniks are right, it is certain-ly not because the imposition of customs duties signifies “artificial” “support for capitalism,” whereas the lifting of such duties signifies support for an “age-old” people’sindustry, but simply because the development of agricul-tural capitalism (which needs machines), by acceleratingthe extinction of medieval relationships in the rural dis-tricts and the creation of a home market for industry, signi-fies a wider, freer and more rapid development of capitalismin general. 
 We foresee one objection to this classing of the Narod-niks with the romanticists on this question. 
 It will prob-ably be said that here it is necessary to make special men-tion of Mr. 
 N. 
 —on, who, after all, openly says that the problem of Free Trade and protection is a capitalist prob-lem, and says so more than once, and who even “quotes. 
”...Yes, yes, Mr. 
 N. 
 —on even quotes! But if we are shown this passage from his Sketches we shall cite other passages in which he proclaims that to give support to capitalismis to “implant” it (and this in his “Summary and Conclu-sions”! pp. 
 331, 323 and also 283), and states that the en-couragement of capitalism is “a fatal blunder” because“we have overlooked,” “we have forgotten,” “our minds havebeen obscured,” and so forth (p. 
 298. 
 Compare this withSismondi!). 
 How can this be reconciled with the assertionthat support for capitalism (with export bonuses) is “oneof the numerous contradictions with which our economic lifeteems *; this one, like all the rest, owes its existence to the form which all production is assuming” (p. 
 286)? Note: all production ! We ask any impartial person: what is the point of view of this author, who proclaims support of “ the form which all production is assuming ” to be a “blunder”? Is it the point of view of Sismondi, or of scientific theory? Here, too (ason the subjects we examined above), Mr. 
 N. 
 —on’s “quota-tions” turn out to be irrelevant, clumsy interpolations,which do not in the least express a real conviction thatthese “quotations” are applicable to Russian reality. 
 Mr. 
N. 
 —on’s “quotations” from modern theory are window-*In the same way as Sketches “teem” with exhortations to “us,” with the exclamations “we,” and similar phrases, which ignore these contradictions. 
 dressing and can only mislead the reader. 
 It is an awkward-ly worn “realist” costume under which the thoroughbred romanticist hides. 
 * XI SISMONDI’S PLACE IN THE HISTORY OF POLITICAL ECONOMY We are now familiar with all of Sismondi’s main propo-sitions relating to economic theory. 
 Summing up, we seethat, everywhere, Sismondi remains absolutely true to him-self, that his point of view remains unchanged. 
 On the onehand, on all points he differs from the classical economistsin that he indicates the contradictions of capitalism. 
 On the other hand, on no point is he able (or willing) to ex-tend the analysis of the classical economists, and thereforeconfines himself to a sentimental criticism of capitalismfrom the viewpoint of the petty bourgeois. 
 This substitu-tion of sentimental complaints and lamentations for a scien-tific analysis results in his conception being extremely superficial. 
 Modern theory accepted his references to the contradictions of capitalism, subjected them to a sci-entific analysis, and on all points reached conclusionswhich radically differ from Sismondi’s, and for that reasonlead to a diametrically opposite point of view concerningcapitalism. 
 In A Critique of Some of the Propositions of Political Economy (Zur Kritik , 59 Russ. 
 trans. 
, Moscow, 1896) Sis-mondi’s place in the history of the science is described asfollows: “Sismondi is no longer labouring under Boisguillebert’s idea that labour which creates exchange value is adulterated *We have a suspicion that Mr. 
 N. 
 —on regards these “quotations” as a talisman which protects him from all criticism. 
 It is difficult otherwise to explain the fact that, on hearing from Messrs. 
 Struveand Tugan-Baranovsky that his doctrine had been compared withSismondi’s, Mr. 
 N. 
 —on, in one of his articles in Russkoye Bogatstvo (1894, No. 
 6, p. 
 88), “quoted” the opinion of a representative of themodern theory who describes Sismondi as a petty-bourgeois reaction-ary and utopian. 
 58 Evidently, he is profoundly convinced that by means of such a “quotation” he “refuted” the comparison made betweenhimself and Sismondi. 
 by money; but just as Boisguillebert denounced money, so does Sismondi denounce large industrial capital” (p. 
 36). 
 The author wants to say: Just as Boisguillebert super-ficially regarded barter as a natural system and was up inarms against money, which was to him an “extraneous element”(p. 
 30, ibid. 
), so Sismondi regarded small-scale productionas a natural system and was up in arms against big capital,which he regarded as an extraneous element. 
 Boisguillebert did not understand the inseparable and natural connection between money and commodity exchange, did not understandthat he was contrasting two forms of “bourgeois labour”as extraneous elements (ibid. 
, pp. 
 30-31). 
 Sismondi failedto understand the inseparable and natural connectionbetween big capital and small independent production, failed to understand that these are two forms of com-modity economy. 
 Boisguillebert “is up in arms againstbourgeois labour in one form while, utopian-like, he praisesit in another” (ibid. 
). 
 Sismondi is up in arms againstbig capital, i. 
e. 
, against commodity economy in one form,its most developed form, while, utopian-like, he praises the small producer (especially the peasantry), i. 
e. 
, commodity economy in another form, its rudimentary form. 
 “In Ricardo,” continues the author of the Critique , “po-litical economy reached its climax, after recklessly draw-ing its ultimate conclusions, while Sismondi supplement-ed it by impersonating its doubts” (p. 
 36). 
 Thus, the author of the Critique reduces the significance of Sismondi to the fact that he raised the question o f the contradictions of capitalism, and thereby set the taskof making a further analysis. 
 The author we have quotedregards all the independent views of Sismondi, who alsowanted to answer this question, as unscientific and super-ficial, and as reflecting his reactionary petty-bourgeois point of view (see the above-quoted opinions, and one quot-ed below in connection with a “quotation” by Ephrucy). 
 Comparing Sismondi’s theory with Narodism, we find on nearly all points (except his repudiation of Ricardo’s the-ory of rent and his Malthusian admonitions to the peas-ants) an astonishing similarity, which sometimes goes as far as identity of terms. 
 The Narodnik economists fullyshare Sismondi’s point of view. 
 We shall be still more convinced of this later, when we pass from theory to Sis-mondi’s views on practical problems. 
 And lastly, as regards Ephrucy, on no point has he giv-en a correct appraisal of Sismondi. 
 Pointing to Sismon-di’s emphasis on, and condemnation of, the contradictionsof capitalism, Ephrucy was quite unable to understand ei-ther the sharp difference between his theory and the theoryof scientific materialism, or that the romanticist and scientific points of view on capitalism are diametrically opposite. 
 The fellow feeling of the Narodnik for the romanticist,their touching unanimity, prevented the author of the es-says in Russkoye Bogatstvo from correctly characterising this classical representative of romanticism in economicscience. 
 We have just quoted the opinion on Sismondi that “he- impersonated the doubts” of classical political economy. 
 But Sismondi did not think of confining himself to this role (which gives him an honourable place among the econ-omists). 
 As we have seen, he tried to solve the doubts,but did so very unsuccessfully. 
 Not only that. 
 His accu-sation against the classical economists and their science was not that they halted before an analysis of the contra-dictions, but that they employed wrong methods. 
 “The oldscience does not teach us either to understand or avert”new disasters (I, XV), says Sismondi in the preface to thesecond edition of his book, and he does not explain this fact by indicating that the analysis made by this science is incomplete and inconsistent but by claiming that it “plungedinto abstractions” (I, 55: the new disciples of Adam Smithin England plunged [se sont jetés] into abstractions, forget-ting about “man”) and was “proceeding along a wrong path”(II, 448). 
 What is the charge levelled by Sismondi against the classical economists which permits him to draw this con-clusion? “The economists, the most celebrated of them, devoted too little attention to consumption and to the market”(I, 124). 
 This accusation has been repeated innumerable times since Sismondi’s day. 
 It has been deemed necessary to separate “consumption” from “production” as a special departmentof the science; it has been said that production depends upon natural laws, whereas consumption is determined by distribu-tion, which depends upon the will of man, and so on, and so forth. 
 It is common knowledge that our Narodniks hold the same views and put distribution in the forefront. 
 * What meaning is there to this accusation? It is based solely on an extremely unscientific conception of the verysubject of political economy. 
 Its subject is not by anymeans “the production of material values,” as is often claimed (that is the subject of technology), but the social re-lations between men in production. 
 Only by interpreting“production” in the former sense can one separate “distri-bution” from it, and when that is done, the “department”of production does not contain the categories of histor-ically determined forms of social economy, but categories that relate to the labour process in general: usually, such empty banalities merely serve later to obscure histori-cal and social conditions. 
 (Take, for example, the conceptof capital. 
) If, however, we consistently regard “produc-tion” as social relations in production, then both “distribu-tion” and “consumption” lose all independent significance. 
 Once relations in production have been explained, both the share of the product taken by the different classes and,consequently, “distribution” and “consumption” are thereby explained. 
 And vice versa, if production relations remain *It goes without saying that Ephrucy did not miss the oppor-tunity to praise Sismondi for this as well. 
 “The important thing in Sismondi’s doctrine,” we read in Russkoye Bogatstvo , No. 
 8, p. 
 56, “is not so much the various special measures which he proposed, asthe general spirit which permeates the whole of his system. 
 Contraryto the classical school, he lays special emphasis on the interests ofdistribution and not on those of production. 
” In spite of his repeated“references” to the “modern” economists, Ephrucy did not under-stand their theory at all, and continued to busy himself with the sentimental nonsense which distinguishes the primitive critiqueof capitalism. 
 Here, too, our Narodnik wants to save himself bycomparing Sismondi with “many prominent representatives of thehistorical school”; and so you see, “Sismondi went further” (ibid. 
),and Ephrucy is quite content with that! “Went further—than the German professors—what more do you want? Like all the Narodniks, Ephrucy tries to lay the main emphasis on the point that Sismondicriticised capitalism. 
 The economist of Russkoye Bogatstvo evidently has no idea that capitalism can be criticised in different ways, thatit can be criticised from both the sentimental and the scientific pointof view. 
 unexplained (for example, if the process of the production of the aggregate social capital is not understood), all argu-ments about consumption and distribution turn into banal-ities, or innocent, romantic wishes. 
 Sismondi was the orig-inator of such arguments. 
 Rodbertus also talked a lot aboutthe “distribution of the national product,” and Ephrucy’s“modern” authorities even formed special “schools,” one ofthe principles of which was to pay special attention to distribution. 
 * But none of these theoreticians of “distri-bution” and “consumption” were able to solve even thefundamental problem of the difference between social capi-tal and social revenue; all continued to grope in the con-tradictions before which Adam Smith had come to a halt. 
 ** The problem was solved only by the economist who never singled out distribution, and who protested most vigorous-ly against the “vulgar” arguments about “distribution” (cf. 
Marx’s criticism of the Gotha Programme quoted byP. 
 Struve in his Critical Remarks , p. 
 129, epigraph to chapter IV). 
 60 Not only that. 
 The very solution of the problem con-sisted of an analysis of the reproduction of social capital. 
 The author did not make a special problem of either consump-tion or distribution, but both were fully explained afterthe analysis of production had been carried to its conclusion. 
 “... Scientific analysis of the capitalist mode of produc-tion demonstrates ... that the distribution relations essen-tially coincident with these production relations are their opposite side, so that both share the same historically *Ingram quite rightly likens Sismondi to the “Katheder-Social-ists” (p. 
 212, A History of Political Economy , Moscow, 1891) when he naïvely observed: “ ...We are ready (!!) to admit Sismondi’s view of the state as a power ... charged also with the mission of extending the benefits of the social union and of modern progress as widely aspossible through all classes of the community” (215). 
 What profun-dity distinguishes these “views” of Sismondi’s we have already seenin the case of protection. 
 *See, for example, R. 
 Meyer’s article “Income” in Hand-wörterbuch der Staatswissenschaft (Russian translation in the collec-tion of articles entitled Promyshlennost [Industry ]), which reveals the hopeless confusion in the arguments of the “modern” Germanprofessors on this subject. 
 It is curious that R. 
 Meyer, who refersdirectly to Adam Smith and mentions in his bibliography the very chapters of Volume II of Capital which contain a complete refutation of Smith, makes no mention of this in the text. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR transitory character. 
” “The wage presupposes wage-labour, and profit—capital. 
 These definite forms of distributionthus presuppose definite social characteristics (Charaktere)of production conditions, and definite social relations ofproduction agents. 
 The specific distribution relations arethus merely the expression of the specific historicalproduction relations. 
” ... “Every form of distributiondisappears with the specific form of production from whichit is descended and to which it corresponds. 
” “The view which regards only distribution relations as historical, but not production relations, is, on the onehand, solely the view of the initial, but still handicapped(inconsistent, befangen) criticism of bourgeois econ-omy. 
 On the other hand, it rests on the confusion and iden-tification of the process of social production with the sim-ple labour-process, such as might even be performed by anabnormally isolated human being without any social assist-ance. 
 To the extent that the labour-process is solely a proc-ess between man and Nature, its simple elements remaincommon to all social forms of development. 
 But each spe-cific historical form of this process further develops its ma-terial foundations and social forms” ( Capital , Vol. 
 III, 2, pp. 
 415, 419 and 420, German original). 
 61 Sismondi was no more fortunate in attacks of another sort against the classical economists, attacks which occupystill more space in his Nouveaux Principes . 
 “The new dis-ciples of Adam Smith in England plunged into abstractions, forgetting about man...” (I, 55). 
 For Ricardo “wealth is everything and men nothing” (II, 331). 
 “They” (the econo-mists who advocate Free Trade) “often sacrifice men and real interests to an abstract theory” (II, 457), and so forth. 
 How old these attacks are, and yet how new! I have in mind their renewal by the Narodniks, who have made such a noise over the frank admission that the capitalist devel-opment of Russia is her real, actual and inevitable develop-ment. 
 Have they not repeated the same thing in different keys when shouting about “apologetics of the money power,” about “social-bourgeois character,” and so forth? 62 The remark addressed to the sentimental critics of capitalism in general is applicable to them to an even greater extent than to Sismondi: Man schreie nicht zu sehr über den Zy-nismus! Der Zynismus liegt in der Sache, nicht in den Worten, welche die Sache bezeichnen! But do not make anoutcry at the cynicism of it. 
 The cynicism is in the factsand not in the words which express the facts. 
 63 “To an even greater extent,” we say. 
 This is because the West-European romanticists did not have before them ascientific analysis of the contradictions of capitalism,because they were the first to indicate these contradic-tions, because they denounced (in “plaintive words,” inci-dentally) the people who did not see these contradictions. 
 Sismondi violently attacked Ricardo for drawing all the conclusions from his observations and study of bourgeoissociety with ruthless frankness: he noted frankly both theexistence of production for production and the transforma-tion of labour-power into a commodity similar to any othercommodity and the fact that the net revenue, that is, theamount of profit, is the only thing of importance to “soci-ety. 
” * But Ricardo spoke the absolute truth: actually every-thing is exactly as he says . 
 If this truth seemed to Sis-mondi to be a “base truth,” he should not have sought forthe causes of this baseness in Ricardo’s theory at all, andshould not have directed his attacks at “abstractions”;the exclamations he addressed to Ricardo belong entirelyto the sphere of “the deception which exalts us. 
 ” *Ephrucy, for example, repeats with an important air Sismondi’s sentimental phrases about an increase in the net revenue of the entre-preneur not being a gain for the national economy, and so forth and reproaches him merely for having “realised” this “not quite clear-ly yet ” (p. 
 43, No. 
 8). 
 Would you not like to compare with this the results of the scien-tific analysis of capitalism: The gross income (Roheinkommen) of society consists of wages # profit # rent. 
 The net income (Reineinkommen) is surplus-value. 
 “Viewing the income of the whole society, national income con-sists of wages plus profit plus rent, thus, of the gross income. 
 Buteven this is an abstraction to the extent that the entire society, onthe basis of capitalist production bases itself on the capitalist stand-point and thereby considers only the income resolved into profit and rent as net income” (III, 2, 375-76). 
” 64 Thus, the author fully sides with Ricardo and his definition of the “net income” of “society,” sides with the very definition whichevoked Sismondi’s “celebrated objection” ( Russkoye Bogatstvo , No. 
 8, p. 
 44): “What? Wealth is everything and men nothing?” (II. 
 331). 
In modern society—yes, certainly. 
 Well, what about our modern romanticists? Do they think of denying the reality of the “money power”? Do they think of denying that this power is omnipotent not only among the industrial population, but also among the agri-cultural population of any “village community” and of anyremote village you like? Do they think of denying thatthere is a necessary connection between this fact and com-modity economy? They have not even attempted to subject this to doubt. 
 They simply try not to talk of it. 
 They are afraid of calling things by their real names. 
 We fully understand their fear: the frank admission of reality would completely cut the ground from under thesentimental (Narodnik) criticism of capitalism. 
 It is notsurprising that they so ardently rush into battle before they have had time to clean the rusty weapon of romanticism. 
 It is not surprising that they are unscrupulous in theirmethods and want to present hostility towards sentimental criticism as hostility towards criticism in general. 
 Afterall, they are fighting for their right to existence. 
 Sismondi even tried to elevate his sentimental criticism to the plane of a special method of social science . 
 We have al-ready seen that he did not reproach Ricardo with bring-ing his objective analysis to a halt when faced with thecontradictions of capitalism (such a reproach would havebeen justified), but reproached him for the objectivity o f his analysis. 
 Sismondi said that Ricardo “forgets about man. 
” In his preface to the second edition of Nouveaux Principes we find the following tirade: “I deem it necessary to protest against the customary methods, so often superficial, so often false, of judging a workrelating to the social sciences. 
 The problem which they haveto solve is incomparably more complex than all the problems of the natural sciences; at the same time it appeals as much to the heart as it does to the mind” (I, XVI). 
 How familiarto the Russian reader is this idea of contrasting the naturalsciences to the social sciences, and of the latter appealingto the “heart”! * Sismondi here expresses the very ideas *“Political economy is not simply a science of calculation (n’est pas une science de calcul) but a moral science.... 
 It achieves its objectonly when the feelings, needs, and passions of men are taken intoconsideration” (I, 313). 
 These sentimental phrases which Sismondi which were to be “newly discovered” several decades later in the far east of Europe by the “Russian school of sociol-ogists” and figure as a special “subjective method in so-ciology. 
” ... Sismondi, like our native sociologists, ofcourse appeals “to the heart as well as to the mind. 
 ” * But we have already seen that on all the most important prob-lems, the “heart” of the petty bourgeois triumphed over the“mind” of the economist theoretician. 
 POSTSCRIPT ** That the appraisal given here of the sentimental Sis-mondi in relation to scientifically “objective” Ricardo iscorrect, is fully confirmed by the opinion Marx expressedin the second volume of Theories of Surplus-Value , which appeared in 1905 ( Theorien über den Mehrwert , II. 
 B. 
, I. 
 Th. 
, S. 
 304 u. 
 ff. 
 “Bemerkungen über die Geschichte der Entdeckung des sogenannten Ricardoschen Gesetzes”). 
 *** Contrasting Malthus as a wretched plagiarist, a paid advo-cate of the rich and a shameless sycophant, to Ricardo as aman of science, Marx said: and the Russian sociologists of the subjective school who utter exactly the same exclamations regard as new conceptions of social scienceactually show that criticism of the bourgeoisie was still in an infantileprimitive state. 
 Does not a scientific analysis of contradictions, while remaining a strictly objective “calculation,” provide firm ground for understanding “the feelings, needs and passions,” and the pas-sions not of “men” in general—that abstraction to which both theromanticist and the Narodnik ascribe a specifically petty-bourgeoiscontent—but of the men of definite classes ? The point is, however, that Sismondi could not theoretically refute the economists and there-fore confined himself to sentimental phrases. 
 “Utopian dilettantism was forced to make theoretical concessions to any more or less learneddefender of the bourgeois order. 
 In order to allay the consciousnessof his own impotence that was rising within him, the utopian con-soled himself by reproaching his opponents with objectivity: let usadmit that you are more learned than I, but in return I am kinder” (Beltov, p. 
 43). 
 65 *As if the “problems” which arise from the natural sciences do not also appeal to the “heart”! **This postscript was written for the 1908 edition. 
— Ed. 
 ***Theories of Surplus-Value , Vol. 
 II, Part I, p. 
 304, et seq. 
 “Notes on the History of the Discovery of the So-called Ricardian Law. 
”66—Ed. 
 “Ricardo regards the capitalist mode of production as the most advantageous for production in general, as the most advantageous for the creation of wealth, and for his time Ricardo is quite right. 
 He wants production for the sake of production , and he is right. 
 To object to this, as Ricardo’s sentimental opponents did, by pointing to thefact that production as such is not an end in itself, meansto forget that production for the sake of production is noth-ing more nor less than the development of the produc-tive forces of mankind, i. 
e. 
, the development of the wealth of human nature as an end in itself . 
 If this end is set up in contrast to the welfare of individuals, as Sismondi did,it is tantamount to asserting that the development of thewhole human race must be retarded for the sake of ensuring the welfare of individuals, that, consequently, no war, we shall say for example, can be waged, because war causes thedeath of individuals. 
 Sismondi is right only in oppositionto those economists who obscure this antagonism, deny it” (S. 
 309). 
 From his point of view Ricardo has every rightto put the proletarians on a par with machines, with com-modities in capitalist production. 
 “Es ist dieses stoisch, objektiv, wissenschaftlich,” “this is stoicism, this is ob-jective, this is scientific” (S. 
 313). 
 It goes without sayingthat this appraisal applies only to a definite period, to thevery beginning of the nineteenth century. 
 CHAPTER II THE CHARACTER OF THE ROMANTICISTS’ CRITICISM OF CAPITALISM We have already dealt sufficiently with Sismondi’s “mind. 
” Let us now take a closer look at his “heart. 
” Let usattempt to collect all the references to his point of view (which we have studied till now only as an element touch-ing on theoretical problems), to his attitude towards capitalism, to his social sympathies, to his conception of the “socio-political” problems of the period in which hewas active. 
 I THE SENTIMENTAL CRITICISM OF CAPITALISM The distinguishing feature of the period in which Sis-mondi wrote was the rapid development of exchange (money economy, to use modern terminology), which was manifestedwith particular sharpness after the remnants of feudalism weredestroyed by the French Revolution. 
 Sismondi unambiguous-ly condemned this development and growth of exchange, denounced “fatal competition,” called upon the “govern-ment to protect the population from the consequences of com-petition” (ch. 
 VIII, I. 
 VII), and so forth. 
 “Rapid exchangescorrupt the good faith of the people. 
 Constant concern forselling at a profit cannot but lead to attempts to demand too high a price and to cheat, and the harder life becomes for the one who gains his livelihood by constant exchanges,the more he is tempted to resort to cheating” (I, 169). 
Such was the naïveté required to attack money economy inthe way our Narodniks attack it! “... Commercial wealthis only of secondary importance in the economic system; and land wealth (territoriale) which provides the means of subsistence must increase first. 
 The whole of that numer-ous class which lives by commerce must be called upon toparticipate in the fruits of the earth only to the extentthat these fruits exist; it” (this class) “must grow only tothe extent that this produce grows” (I, 322-23). 
 Has Mr. 
 N. 
 —on, who fills page after page with complaints about the growth of commerce and industry outpacing the develop-ment of agriculture, taken even one step beyond this pat-riarchal romanticist? These complaints of the romanticistand of the Narodnik merely testify to a complete misunder-standing of capitalist economy. 
 Can there be a capitalism under which the development of commerce and industry does not outpace agriculture? Why, the growth of capitalism is the growth of commodity economy, that is to say , of a social division of labour which separates from agricul-ture one branch of the processing of raw materials afteranother, breaking up the single natural economy in which the production, processing and consumption of these raw materials were combined. 
 That is why capitalismalways and everywhere signifies a more rapid development of commerce and industry than of agriculture, a more rapid growth of the commercial and industrial population, a greater weight and importance of commerce and industry in the social economic system as a whole. 
 * Nor can it be oth-erwise. 
 By repeating such complaints, Mr. 
 N. 
 —on proves again and again that in his economic views he has not gone beyond superficial, sentimental romanticism. 
 “This unwise spirit of enterprise (esprit d’entreprise), this excess of trading of every kind, which causes so many bank-ruptcies in America, is due, without a doubt, to the in-crease in the number of banks and to the ease with which illusory credit takes the place of real property” (fortune réelle) (II, 111), and so forth endlessly. 
 Why did Sismon-di attack money economy (and capitalism)? What does he offer in place of it? Small independent production, the natural economy of the peasants in the countryside, ar-tisan production in the towns. 
 Here is what he says of the former in the chapter headed “Of Patriarchal Agricul-ture” (ch. 
 III, l. 
 III, “De l’exploitation patriarcale”— the patriarchal exploitation of the land. 
 Book III treats of “territorial” or land wealth): “The first owners of land were themselves tillers, all the field work was done by the labour of their children and their servants. 
 No social organisation ** guaran-tees more happiness and more virtue to the most numerous *As capitalism develops, agriculture always and everywhere, lags behind commerce and industry, it is always subordinate to them and is exploited by them and it is always drawn by them, only later on, onto the path of capitalist production. 
 **Note that Sismondi—exactly like our Narodniks—at once transformed the peasants’ independent economy into a “social organ-isation. 
” Obvious juggling. 
 What is it that links together these peasants from different localities? The division of social labour andthe commodity economy that superseded feudal ties. 
 We at once seethe elevation of one division of the commodity-economy system toutopian heights and the failure to understand the other divisions. 
Compare this with what Mr. 
 N. 
 —on says on p. 
 322: “The form of industry based on the ownership of the instruments of production by the peasantry. 
” Mr. 
 N. 
 —on does not even suspect that this owner-ship of the instruments of production by the peasantry is—histor-ically and logically— the starting-point of that same capitalist production! class of the nation, a larger prosperity (opulence) to all, greater stability to the public order.... 
 In those countries where the farmer is the owner (où le fermier est proprié-taire) and where the produce belongs entirely (sans par-tage) to the people who perform all the work, i. 
e, in those countries whose agriculture we call patriarchal, we see at every step signs of the tiller’s love for the house in which he lives, for the land which he tills.... 
 Work itself is a pleas-ure to him.... 
 In those happy countries where agriculture is patriarchal, the particular nature of every field is studied, and this knowledge is passed on from father to son.... 
 Large-scale farming, directed by richer men, will perhaps rise above prejudice and routine. 
 But knowledge (l’intelligence, i. 
e. 
, knowledge of agriculture) will not reach the one who works and will be badly applied.... 
 Patriarchal economy improves the morals and character of that numerous sec-tion of the nation which has to do all the work in the fields. 
 Property cultivates habits of order and frugality, con-stant abundance destroys the taste for gluttony (gourman-dise) and intemperance.... 
 Entering into exchange almost exclusively with nature he” (the tiller) “has less reasonthan any industrial worker to distrust men and to resort to the weapon of dishonesty against them” (I, 165-70). 
 “The first farmers were simple labourers; they themselves performed the hulk of the agricultural work; they kept the size of their enterprises commensurate with the work-ing capacity of their families.... 
 They did not cease to be peasants: they themselves followed the plough (tien-nent eux-mêmes les cornes de leur charrue); they them-selves tended their cattle, both in the fields and in the barns, they lived in the pure air and got accustomed to constant labour and to modest food, which create sturdy citizens and stalwart soldiers. 
 * They hardly ever employed day labourers to work with them, but only servants (des domestiques), always chosen from among their equals, whom they treated as equals, who ate with them at the same table, drink the same wine and wear the same kind of *Reader, compare with these honeyed grandmother’s tales the statements of the “progressive” publicist of the late nineteenth centurywhom Mr. 
 Struve cites in his Critical Remarks , p. 
 17. 
 67 clothes as they did. 
 Thus, the farmers and their servants constituted one class of peasants, inspired by the same feelings, sharing the same pleasures, subjected to the same influences and bound to their country by the same ties”(I, 221). 
 Here, then, you have the famous “people’s production”! Let it not be said that Sismondi does not understand theneed to unite the producers: he says plainly (see below) that “he too” (like Fourier, Owen, Thompson and Muiron) “wants association” (II, 365). 
 Let it not be said that hestands for property : on the contrary, he places the weight of emphasis on small economy (cf. 
 II, 355) and not uponsmall property. 
 It goes without saying that this idealisa-tion of small peasant economy looks different under differ-ent historical and social conditions. 
 But there can be no doubt that it is small peasant economy that is glorifiedby both romanticism and Narodism. 
 Similarly, Sismondi idealises primitive artisan pro-duction and guilds. 
 “The village shoemaker, who is at once merchant, fac-tory owner and worker, will not make a single pair of shoes without an order” (II, 262), whereas capitalist manufac-ture, not knowing the demand, may suffer bankruptcy. 
 “Un-doubtedly, from both the theoretical and the factual stand-point, the institution of guilds (corps de métier) prevented, and was bound to prevent, the formation of a surplus popula-tion. 
 It is also beyond doubt that such a population exists at the present time, and that it is the necessary re-sult of the present system” (I, 431). 
 Many more excerpts of a similar nature could be quoted, but we shall postpone our examination of Sismondi’s practical recipes until later. 
Here let us confine ourselves to what we have quoted in order to probe Sismondi’s point of view. 
 The arguments we have quoted may be summed up as follows: 1) moneyeconomy is condemned for destroying the small producers’ security and the close relations among them (in the shape of the nearness of the artisan to his customers, or of thetiller to other tillers, his equals); 2) small production is extolled for ensuring the independence of the producer and eliminating the contradictions of capitalism. 
 Let us note that both these ideas constitute an essen-tial part of Narodism, * and endeavour to probe their mean-ing. 
 The criticism of money economy by the romanticists and the Narodniks amounts to the following: it points tothe fruits of that economy—individualism ** and antago-nism (competition), and also the producer’s insecurity andthe instability of the social economy. 
 *** First about “individualism. 
” Usually, the contrast is made between the association of the peasants in a given community, or of the artisans (or the handicraftsmen) ofa given craft, and capitalism, which destroys the ties thatbind them, and puts competition in their place. 
 This ar-gument is a repetition of the typical error of romanticism,namely: the conclusion that since capitalism is torn by contradictions it is not a higher form of social organisation . 
 Does not capitalism, which destroys the medieval villagecommunity, guild, artel and similar ties, substitute othersfor them? Is not commodity economy already a tie be-tween the producers, a tie established by the market ? **** The antagonistic character of this tie , which is full of fluctuations and contradictions, gives one no right to deny its existence . 
 And we know that it is the development of contradictions that with ever-growing force reveals thestrength of this tie, compels all the individual elements and classes of society to strive to unite, and to unite nolonger within the narrow limits of one village community, *On this question, too, Mr. 
 N. 
 —on is guilty of such a heap of contradictions that one can choose from them any number of prop-ositions in no way connected with each other. 
 But there can be no doubt about his idealisation of peasant economy by the use of the hazy term “people’s production. 
” A haze is a particularly suitableatmosphere in which to don all sorts of disguises. 
 **Cf. 
 N. 
 —on, p. 
 321, in f. 
 (in fine—at the end. 
— Ed. 
) and others. 
 *** ibid. 
, 335. 
 P. 
 184: capitalism “robs of stability. 
” And many others. 
 **** “In actual fact, society, association are denominations which can be given to every society, to feudal society as well as to bour-geois society, which is association founded on competition. 
 Howthen can there be writers, who, by the single word association , think they can refute competition?” (Marx, Das Elend der Philoso-phie . 
) 68 Sharply criticising the sentimental condemnation of competi-tion, the author plainly stresses its progressive aspect , its driving force, which promotes “technical progress and social progress. 
” or of one district, but to unite all the members of the giv-en class in a whole nation and even in different coun-tries. 
 Only a romanticist, with his reactionary point of view, can deny the existence of these ties and their deep-er importance, which is based on the common role playedin the national economy and not upon territorial, profes-sional, religious and other such interests. 
 If argumentsof this kind earned the name of romanticist for Sismondi, who wrote at a time when these new ties engendered by cap-italism were still in the embryo, all the more do our Na-rodniks deserve such an estimation; for today , the enormous importance of these ties can only be denied by those whoare totally blind. 
 As regards insecurity and instability, and so forth, that is the same old song we dealt with when discussing the foreign market. 
 Attacks of this kind betray the roman-ticist who fearfully condemns precisely that which scientifictheory values most in capitalism: its inherent strivingfor development, its irresistible urge onwards, its inabil-ity to halt or to reproduce the economic processes in their former, rigid dimensions. 
 Only a utopian who concocts fantastic plans for spreading medieval associations (suchas the village community) to the whole of society canignore the fact that it is the “instability” of capitalism thatis an enormously progressive factor, one which acceleratessocial development, draws larger and larger masses of the population into the whirlpool of social life, compels them to ponder over its structure, and to “forge their happiness”with their own hands. 
 Mr. 
 N. 
 —on’s phrases about the “instability” of cap-italist economy, about the lack of proportion in the devel-opment of exchange, about the disturbance of the balance between industry and agriculture, between production and consumption, about the abnormality of crises, and so forth,testify beyond all doubt to the fact that he still shares theviewpoint of romanticism to the full. 
 Hence, the criticism of European romanticism applies word for word to his theory too. 
 Here is the proof: “Let us hear what old Boisguillebert says: “’The price of commodities,’ he says, ‘must always be proportionate ; for it is such mutual understanding alone that can enable them to reciprocally give birth to one anoth-er.... 
 As wealth, then, is nothing but this continual inter-course between man and man, craft and craft, etc. 
, it is a frightful blindness to go looking for the cause of miseryelsewhere than in the cessation of such traffic broughtabout by a disturbance of proportion in prices. 
’ “Let us listen also to a modern * economist: “’The great law as necessary to be affixed to production, that is, the law of proportion , which alone can preserve the continuity of value.... 
 The equivalent must be guaran-teed.... 
 All nations have attempted, at various periods oftheir history, by instituting numerous commercial regu-lations and restrictions, to effect, in some degree, the ob-ject here explained.... 
 But the natural and inherent sel-fishness of man ... has urged him to break down all such regulations. 
 Proportionate Production is the realisationof the entire truth of the Science of Social Economy’(W. 
 Atkinson, Principles of Political Economy , London, 1840, pp. 
 170 and 195). 
 “Fuit Troja! ** This true proportion between supply and demand, which is beginning once more to be the object of so many wishes, ceased long ago to exist. 
 It has passedinto the stage of senility. 
 It was possible only at a timewhen the means of production were limited, when the move-ment of exchange took place within very restricted bounds. 
With the birth of large-scale industry this true proportion had to (musste) come to an end, and production is in-evitably compelled to pass in continuous successionthrough vicissitudes of prosperity, depression, crisis, stag-nation, renewed prosperity, and so on. 
 “Those who, like Sismondi, wish to return to the true proportion of production, while preserving the present basis of society, are reactionary, since, to be consistent, they must also wish to bring back all the other conditions ofindustry of former times. 
 “What kept production in true, or more or less true, proportions? It was demand that dominated supply, thatpreceded it. 
 Production followed close on the heels of con-*Written in 1847. 
 **Troy is no more!— Ed. 
 sumption. 
 Large-scale industry, forced by the very instru-ments at its disposal to produce on an ever-increasing scale, can no longer wait for demand. 
 Production precedes consumption, supply compels demand. 
 “In existing society, in industry based on individual exchange, anarchy of production, which is the source of somuch misery, is at the same time the source of all progress. 
 “Thus, one or the other: either you want the true propor-tions of past centuries with present-day means of production, in which case you are both reactionary and utopian. 
 “Or, you want progress without anarchy: in which case, in order to preserve the productive forces, you must abandonindividual exchange” ( Das Elend der Philosophie , S. 
 46-48). 
 69 The last words apply to Proudhon, with whom the author is polemising, thus formulating the difference between his own viewpoint and the views both of Sismondi and of Prou-dhon. 
 Mr. 
 N. 
 —on would not, of course, approximate to ei-ther one or the other in all his views. 
 * But look into the con-tent of the passage given. 
 What is the main thesis of the au-thor we have quoted, his basic idea, which brings him into ir-reconcilable opposition to his predecessors? Undoubtedly, it is that he places the question of the instability of cap-italism (which all these three authors admit) on a historical plane and regards this instability as a progressive factor . 
 In other words: he recognises, firstly, that existing cap-italist development, which proceeds through disproportion, crises, etc. 
, is necessary development , and says that the very character of the means of production (machines) givesrise to the desire for an unlimited expansion of productionand the constant anticipation of demand by supply. 
 Second-ly, he recognises elements of progress in this development, which are: the development of the productive forces, social-isation of labour within the bounds of the whole of society, increased mobility of the population and the growth ofits consciousness, and so forth. 
 These two points ex-*Although it is a big question as to why he would not do so. 
 Is it not only because these authors raised problems on a wider plane,having in mind the existing economic system in general, its placeand significance in the development of the whole of mankind, and did not limit their outlook to one country , for which one may supposed-ly invent a special theory? haust the difference between him and Sismondi and Proudhon, who agree with him in indicating the “instability” of cap-italism and the contradictions it engenders, and in their sincere desire to eliminate these contradictions Theirfailure to understand that this “instability” is a necessa-ry feature of all capitalism and commodity economy in general brought them to utopia . 
 Their failure to under-stand the elements of progress inherent in this instability makes their theories reactionary . 
 * And now we invite Messrs. 
 the Narodniks to answer this question: Does Mr. 
 N. 
 —on agree with the views of scientif-ic theory on the two points mentioned? Does he regard in-stability as a characteristic of the present system, and ofpresent-day development? Does he admit the existence of elements of progress in this instability? Everybody knows that he does not, that, on the contrary, Mr. 
 N. 
 —on pro-claims this “instability” of capitalism to be simply an ab-normality, a digression, and so forth, and regards it asdecadence, retrogression (cf. 
 above: “ robs of stability”) and idealises that very economic stagnation (recall the “age-old foundations,” “time-hallowed principles,” and so forth) whose destruction is the historical merit of “unsta-ble” capitalism. 
 It is clear, therefore, that we were quiteright in including him among the romanticists and thatno “quotations” and “references” on his part will changethis character of his own arguments. 
 We shall deal again with this “instability” later (in con-nection with the hostility of romanticism and Narodismto the diminution of the agricultural population to the ad-vantage of the industrial population); at present let usquote a passage from A Critique of Some of the Propositions of Political Economy in which the sentimental attacks on money economy are examined. 
 *This term is employed in its historico-philosophical sense, de-scribing only the error of the theoreticians who take models for their theories from obsolete forms of society. 
 It does not apply at all to the personal qualities of these theoreticians, or to their programmes. 
Everybody knows that neither Sismondi nor Proudhon were reaction-aries in the ordinary sense of the term. 
 We are explaining these ele-mentary truths because, as we shall see below, the Narodnik gentle-men have not grasped them to this day. 
 “These definite social functions” (namely, of the sell-er and buyer) “are no outgrowths of human nature, but are the products of exchange relations between men who produce their goods in the form of commodities. 
 They are so farfrom being purely individual relations between buyer andseller that both enter into these relations only to the extentthat their individual labour is disregarded and is turned in-to money as labour of no individual. 
 Therefore, just as it is childish to regard these bourgeois economic roles of buyer and seller as eternal social forms of human individuality,so it is, on the other hand, preposterous to lament overthem as the cause of the extinction of individuality. 
 “How deeply some beautiful souls are wounded by the merely superficial aspect of the antagonism which asserts itself in buying and selling may be seen from the following abstract from M. 
 Isaac Pereire’s Leçons sur l ’industrie et les finances , Paris, 1832. 
 The fact that the same Isaac in his capacity of inventor and dictator of the ‘Crédit mobi-lier’ * has acquired the reputation of the wolf of the Par-is Bourse shows what lurks behind the sentimental criti-cism of economics. 
 Says M. 
 Pereire, at the time an apostle of Saint-Simon: ‘Since individuals are isolated and separat-ed from one another both in their labours and in consump-tion, exchange takes place between them in the products oftheir respective industries. 
 From the necessity of exchangearises the necessity of determining the relative value of things. 
 The ideas of value and exchange are thus intimately connected and both express in their actual form individual-ism and antagonism.... 
 The determination of values of prod-ucts takes place only because there are sales and purchases,or, to put it differently, because there is an antagonismbetween different members of society. 
 One has to occupy him-self with price and value only where there is sale and pur-chase, that is to say, where every individual is obliged to struggle to procure for himself the objects necessary for the maintenance of his existence’” (op. 
 cit. 
, p. 
 68). 
 70 The question is: wherein lies Pereire’s sentimentality ? He talks only about the individualism, antagonism and con-*A bank which grants loans on the security of movable prop-erty. 
— Ed. 
 flict inherent in capitalism, he says the very thing our Na-rodniks say in different keys, and, moreover, they seem to be speaking the truth, because “individualism, antago-nism and conflict” are indeed necessary attributes of exchange,of commodity production. 
 His sentimentality lies inthat this Saint-Simonist, carried away by his condemnationof the contradictions of capitalism, fails to discern behind these contradictions the fact that exchange also expresses a special form of social economy , that it, consequently, not only disunites (it does that only in respect of the medieval associations, which capitalism destroys), but also unites men, compelling them to enter into intercourse with each otherthrough the medium of the market. 
 * It was this superficial understanding, caused by their eagerness to “trounce” capital-ism (from the utopian point of view) that gave the above-quoted author occasion to call Pereire’s criticism sentimental . 
 But why should we worry about Pereire, the long-for-gotten apostle of long-forgotten Saint-Simonism? Would itnot be better to take the modern “apostle” of Narodism? “Production ... was robbed of its popular character and assumed an individual, capitalist character” (Mr. 
 N. 
 —on, Sketches , pp. 
 321-22). 
 You see how this disguised romanticist argues: “people’s production became individual production. 
” And as by “peo-ple’s production” the author wants to imply the villagecommunity, 71 he points to the decline of the social charac-ter of production, to the shrinking of the social form of production. 
 But is that so? The “village community” provided ( if it did provide ; but we are ready to make any concession to the author) for organised production only in the one in-dividual community, isolated from all the other communi-ties. 
 The social character of production embraced only the members of the one village community . 
 ** Capitalism, however, *Substituting unity along the lines of social status and social interests of a whole country, and even of the whole world, for localand social-estate associations. 
 **According to the Zemstvo statistics (Blagoveshchensky’s Com-bined Returns ), the average size of a village community, for 123 uyezds in 22 gubernias, is 53 households, with a population of 323 of bothsexes. 
 gives production a social character in a whole country. 
 “Individualism” means the destruction of social ties; but these ties are destroyed by the market , which replaces them by ties between masses of individuals who are not bound together by a village community, a social estate, a giventrade, the restricted area of a given industry, etc. 
 The tiecreated by capitalism manifests itself in the form of contradic-tions and antagonism, and therefore , our romanticist refuses to see this tie (although the village community, too, as a form of organisation of production never existed without theother forms of contradictions and antagonism inherent in theold modes of production). 
 The utopian point of view transformshis criticism of capitalism, as well, into a sentimental one. 
 II THE PETTY-BOURGEOIS CHARACTER OF ROMANTICISM The idealisation of small production reveals to us anoth-er typical feature of romanticist and Narodnik criticism, namely, its petty-bourgeois character . 
 We have seen that the French and the Russian romanticists are unanimousin converting small production into a “social organisation,”into a “form of production,” and in contrasting it to capital-ism. 
 We have also seen that this contrasting of one to the other is nothing but the expression of an extremely super-ficial understanding, that it is the artificial and incor-rect singling out of one form of commodity economy (large-scale industrial capital) and condemnation of it, while uto-pianly idealising another form of the same commodity econ-omy (small production). 
 The misfortune of both the Euro-pean romanticists of the early nineteenth century and of the Russian romanticists of the late nineteenth centuryis that they invent for themselves a sort of abstract smallproduction existing outside of the social relations ofproduction, and overlook the trifling circumstance that this small production actually exists in an environment of com-modity production —this applies both to the small economy on the European continent in the 1820s and to Russian peas-ant economy in the 1890s. 
 Actually , the small producer, /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR whom the romanticists and the Narodniks place on a pedes-tal, is therefore a petty bourgeois who exists in the same antagonistic relations as every other member of capital-ist society, and who also defends his interests by meansof a struggle which, on the one hand, is constantly creatinga small minority of big bourgeois, and on the other, pushesthe majority into the ranks of the proletariat. 
 Actually,as everybody sees and knows, there are no small producers who do not stand between these two opposite classes, and this middle position necessarily determines the specificcharacter of the petty bourgeoisie, its dual character, itstwo-facedness, its gravitation towards the minority whichhas emerged from the struggle successfully, its hostilitytowards the “failures,” i. 
e. 
, the majority. 
 The more com-modity economy develops, the more strongly and sharply do these qualities stand out, and the more evident does itbecome that the idealisation of small production merelyexpresses a reactionary, petty-bourgeois point of view. 
 We must make no mistake about the meaning of these terms, which the author of A Critique of Some of the Propo-sitions of Political Economy applied specifically to Sismon-di. 
 These terms do not at all mean that Sismondi defends the backward petty bourgeois. 
 Nowhere does Sismondi defend them : he wants to take the point of view of the labouring classes in general, he expresses his sympathy for all themembers of these classes, he is pleased, for example, with factory legislation, he attacks capitalism and exposes its contradictions. 
 In a word, his point of view is exactly thesame as that of the modern Narodniks. 
 The question is: on what grounds, then, is he described as a petty bourgeois? On the grounds that he does notunderstand the connection between small production (which he idealises) and big capital (which he attacks). 
 On the grounds that he does not see that his beloved small producer, the peasant, is in reality becoming a petty bour-geois. 
 We must never forget the following explanation aboutreducing the theories of various authors to the interestsand points of view of different classes: “Only one must not form the narrow-minded notion that the petty bourgeoisie, on principle, wishes to enforce anegoistic class interest. 
 Rather, it believes that the special conditions of its emancipation are the general conditions within the frame of which alone modern society can be saved and the class struggle avoided. 
 Just as little must one imagine that the democratic representatives are in-deed all shopkeepers or enthusiastic champions of shop-keepers. 
 According to their education and their individualposition they may be as far apart as heaven from earth. 
What makes them representatives of the petty bourgeoisie is the fact that in their minds they do not get beyond the limits which the latter do not get beyond in life, that theyare consequently driven, theoretically, to the same prob-lems and solutions to which material interest and socialposition drive the latter practically. 
 This is, in general,the relationship between the political and literary repre-sentatives of a class and the class they represent” (Karl Marx, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte , trans-lated into Russian by Bazarov and Stepanov, pp. 
 179-80). 
 72 Hence, those Narodniks who think that the sole object of referring to petty-bourgeois character is to say some-thing exceptionally venomous, that it is simply a polemi-cal ruse, cut a very comical figure. 
 By this attitude they re-veal their misconception of the general views of their op-ponents, and chiefly their misconception of the basis ofthat very criticism of capitalism with which they all “ag-ree,” and of the way in which it differs from sentimental and petty-bourgeois criticism. 
 The mere fact that they strive so hard to evade the very problem of these latter forms of criticism, of their existence in Western Europe, of theirrelation to the scientific criticism, clearly shows why the Narodniks do not want to understand this difference. 
 * *For example, Ephrucy wrote two articles on the subject of “how Sismondi regarded the growth of capitalism” ( Russkoye Bogatstvo , No. 
 7, p. 
 139), and yet absolutely failed to understand exactly how Sis-mondi did regard it. 
 Russkoye Bogatstvo ’s contributor did not notice Sismondi’s petty-bourgeois point of view. 
 But since Ephrucy is un-doubtedly familiar with Sismondi; since he (as we shall see later) is familiar with that very representative of the modern theory who characterised Sismondi in that way; since he, too, wishes to “agree”with this representative of the new theory—his failure to understandacquires a quite definite significance. 
 The Narodnik could not seein the romanticist what he does not see in himself. 
 Let us explain the above with an example. 
 In the bib-liographical section of R usskaya Mysl73 for 1896, No. 
 5 (p. 
 229, et seq. 
), it is stated that among the intelligent-sia “a group has lately appeared and is growing with amaz-ing rapidity” which in principle is unreservedly hostileto Narodism. 
 The reviewer points in the briefest outlineto the causes and character of this hostility, and one can-not but note with appreciation that he gives quite cor-rectly the gist of the point of view hostile to Narodism. 
 * The reviewer does not share this point of view. 
 He does not understand that the ideas of class interests, etc. 
, shouldcompel us to deny “people’s ideals” (“simply people ’s but not Narodnik”; ibid. 
, p. 
 229), which he says, are thewelfare, freedom and consciousness of the peasantry, i. 
e. 
, of the majority of the population. 
 “We shall be told, of course, as others have been told,” says the reviewer, “that the ideals of the peasant author”(this is a reference to the wishes expressed by a certainpeasant) “are petty-bourgeois and that, therefore, to thisday our literature has represented and defended the inter-ests of the petty bourgeoisie. 
 But this is simply a bogey, and who, except those possessing the world outlook andmental habits of a Zamoskvorechye merchant’s wife, canbe frightened by such a bogey?... ” Strongly spoken! But let us hear what he has to say fur-ther: “... The basic criterion, both of the conditions of human intercourse and of deliberate social measures, is not eco-nomic categories, borrowed, moreover, from conditionsalien to the country, and formed under different circum-stances, but the happiness and welfare, material and spirit-ual, of the majority of the population. 
 And if a certain mode of life, and certain measures for maintaining and devel-oping this mode of life, lead to this happiness, call thempetty-bourgeois, or what you will, it will not alter thesituation: they—this mode of life and these measures—will *It sounds very strange, of course, to praise a man for cor-rectly conveying somebody else’s ideas!! But what would you have?Among the ordinary controversialists of Russkoye Bogatstvo and of the old Novoye Slovo , Messrs. 
 Krivenko and Vorontsov, such a method of controversy is indeed a rare exception. 
 still be essentially progressive, and for that very reason will represent the highest ideal attainable by society under existing conditions and in its present state ” (ibid. 
, pp. 
 229-30, author’s italics). 
 Does the reviewer really not see that in the heat of con-troversy he has jumped over the problem? Although the accusation that Narodism is petty-bour-geois is described by him with supreme severity as “simply a bogey,” he produces no proof of this assertion, except the following incredibly amazing proposition: “Thecriterion ... is not economic categories, but the happinessof the majority. 
” Why, this is the same as saying: the cri-terion of the weather is not meteorological observations,but the way the majority feels! What, we ask, are these “economic categories” if not the scientific formulation o f the population’s conditions of economy and life, and more-over, not of the “population” in general, but of definite groups of the population, which occupy a definite place un-der the present system of social economy? By opposing the highly abstract idea of “the happiness of the major-ity” to “economic categories,” the reviewer simply strikes out the entire development of social science since the endof the last century and reverts to naïve rationalistic specula-tion, which ignores the existence and the development ofdefinite social relationships. 
 With one stroke of the penhe wipes out all that the human mind, in its attempt to understand social phenomena, has achieved at the price of centuries of searching! And after thus relieving him-self of all scientific encumbrances, the reviewer believes the problem is solved . 
 Indeed, he bluntly concludes: “If a certain mode of life ... leads to this happiness, call itwhat you will, it will not alter the situation. 
 ” What do you think of that? But the whole question was: what mode of life? The author himself had only just said that thosewho regarded peasant economy as a special mode of life(“people’s production,” or whatever you like to call it)were opposed by others who asserted that it is not a spe-cial mode of life, but just the ordinary petty-bourgeois mode of life, similar to that of every other kind of small production in a country of commodity production andcapitalism. 
 If it automatically follows from the form-er view that “this mode of life” (“people’s production”) “leads to happiness,” then it also automatically follows from the latter view that “this mode of life” (the petty-bourgeois mode) leads to capitalism and to nothing else,leads to the “majority of the population” being forcedinto the ranks of the proletariat and to the conversion ofthe minority into a rural (or industrial) bourgeoisie. 
 Isit not obvious that the reviewer fired a shot into the air, and amidst the noise of the shot took as proven exactly what is denied by the second view, which is so unkindly declaredto be “simply a bogey”? Had he wanted to examine the second view seriously, he obviously should have proved one of two things: eitherthat “petty bourgeoisie” is a wrong scientific category, that one can conceive of capitalism and commodity economy without a petty bourgeoisie (as indeed the Narodniks actually do, and thereby completely revert to Sismondi’spoint of view), or that this category is inapplicable to Rus-sia, i. 
e. 
, that here we have neither capitalism nor theprevalence of commodity economy, that the small producers do not become commodity producers, that the above-men-tioned process of ousting the majority and of strengtheningthe “independence” of the minority is not taking place amongthem. 
 Now, however, having seen that he treats the referenceto the petty-bourgeois character of Narodism simply as adesire to “offend” the Narodniks, and having read the above-quoted phrase about the “bogey,” we involuntar-ily recall the well-known utterance: “Pray, Kit Kitych! 74 Who would offend you? You yourself can offend anybody!” III THE PROBLEM OF THE GROWTH OF THE INDUSTRIAL POPULATION AT THE EXPENSE OF THE AGRICULTURAL POPULATION Let us return to Sismondi. 
 In addition to his idealisa-tion of the petty bourgeoisie, in addition to his romanti-cist failure to understand how, under the present social system of economy, the “peasantry” is transformed into apetty bourgeoisie, he holds an extremely characteristic view about the diminution of the agricultural population to the advantage of the industrial population. 
 It is common knowledge that this phenomenon —one of the most strik-ing manifestations of a country’s capitalist development— is observed in all civilised countries, and also in Russia. 
 * Sismondi, an outstanding economist of his time, must, of course, have seen this fact. 
 He openly records it, but fails completely to understand the necessary connec-tion between it and the development of capitalism (to put it even more generally: between it and the division of social labour, the growth of commodity economy called forth by this phenomenon). 
 He simply condemns it as a defect in the “system. 
” After pointing to the enormous progress made by Eng-lish agriculture, Sismondi says: “While admiring the carefully cultivated fields, we must look at the people who cultivate them; they constitute only half the number to be seen in France on an equal area. 
 Some economists regard this as again; in my opinion it is a loss” (I, 239). 
 We can understand why the ideologists of the bour-geoisie regarded this thing as a gain (we shall soon see that such is also the view of the scientific critique of capital-ism): in this way they formulated the growth of bourgeois wealth, commerce and industry. 
 While hastening to con-demn this phenomenon, Sismondi forgets to think about its causes. 
 “In France and in Italy,” he says, “where, it is calcu-lated, four-fifths of the population belong to the agricul-tural class, four-fifths of the nation will have the nation-al bread to eat, no matter what the price of foreign grain may be” (I, 264). 
 Fuit Troja! is what can be said of this. 
 *The percentage of the urban population in European Russia has been growing in the post-Reform period. 
 Here we must confine ourselves merely to pointing to this most commonly known symptom, although it expresses the phenomenon far from completely , in that it does not include important features specific to Russia as comparedwith Western Europe. 
 This is not the place to examine these specificfeatures (the peasants’ lack of freedom of movement, the existenceof industrial and factory villages, internal colonisation of the country, and so forth). 
 There are now no countries (even the most highly agricul-tural) which are not entirely dependent upon the price of grain , i. 
e. 
, upon world capitalist production of grain. 
 “If a nation cannot increase its commercial population except by demanding from each a larger amount of work for the same pay, it must fear an increase in its industrial population” (I, 322). 
 As the reader sees, this is merely kind advice devoid of all sense and meaning, for here the concept “nation” is based on the artificial exclusion of the antagonisms between the classes which constitute this “nation. 
” As always, Sismondi simply wriggles out of these antagonisms by means of the well-meaning wish that ... there should be no antagonisms. 
 “In England, agriculture employs only 770,199 fami-lies, commerce and industry employ 959,632, the other estates in society 413,316. 
 It is truly frightful (effrayante) that such a large proportion of the population, out of a to-tal of 2,143,147 families, or 10,150,615 persons, exists on commercial wealth. 
 Happily, France is still far from having such an enormous number of workers depending upon luck in a remote market” (I, 434). 
 Here Sismondi even seems toforget that this “happiness” is due entirely to the lag in France’s capitalist development. 
 Depicting the changes in the existing system which are “desirable” from his point of view (we shall discuss these later), Sismondi says that “the result” (of reforms to suit the romantic taste) “would undoubtedly be that more than one country living merely by industry would have to succes-sively close down many workshops, and that the urban popula-tion, which had increased excessively, would rapidly decline, whereas the rural population would begin to grow” (II, 367). 
 This example brings out in particular relief the help-lessness of the sentimental criticism of capitalism and the impotent vexation of the petty bourgeois! Sismondi simply complains * that things are going one way and not another. 
 His grief at the destruction of the Eden of the rural popu-lation’s patriarchal dullness and downtrodden condition is *“Ultimately ... this form of Socialism” (namely the trend of petty-bourgeois criticism, of which Sismondi was the head) “endedin a miserable fit of the blues. 
” 75 so great that our economist does not even discern why it takes place. 
 He therefore overlooks the fact that the in-crease in the industrial population is necessarily and in-severably connected with commodity economy and capi-talism. 
 Commodity economy develops to the degree that thesocial division of labour develops. 
 And the division of la-bour means precisely that one industry after another, oneform of processing the raw product after another, separates from agriculture, becomes independent, and consequent-ly gives rise to an industrial population. 
 Therefore,to discuss commodity economy and capitalism and ignorethe law of the relative growth of the industrial population,means to have no notion whatever of the fundamental char-acteristics of the present system of social economy. 
 “It is in the nature of capitalist production to contin-ually reduce the agricultural population as comparedwith the non-agricultural, because in industry (in the strictsense) the increase of constant capital in relation to var-iable capital goes hand in hand with an absolute in-crease, though relative decrease, * in variable capital; on the other hand, in agriculture the variable capital required for the exploitation of a certain plot of land decreases ab-solutely; it can thus only increase to the extent that newland ** is taken into cultivation, but this again requires as a prerequisite a still greater growth of the non-agricul-tural population” (III, 2, 177). 
 76 On this point modern theory takes a view diametrically opposite to that of romanticism with its sentimental *From this the reader can judge the wit of Mr. 
 N. 
 —on who, in his Sketches , without ceremony transforms the relative decrease of variable capital and of the number of workers into an absolute one, and from this draws a host of the absurdest conclusions concerning the “shrinking” of the home market, and so forth. 
 **It was this condition that we had in mind when we said that the internal colonisation of Russia hindered the manifestation of the law of the greater growth of the industrial population. 
 It is enough to recall the difference between Russia’s long-settled central areas,where the industrial population grew not so much in the towns as in the factory villages and townships, and, say, Novorossiya, which has been settled in the post-Reform period, and where the townsare growing at a pace comparable with that of America. 
 We hope to deal with this problem in greater detail elsewhere. 
 complaints. 
 When we understand that something is inevi-table, we naturally adopt a totally different attitude towards it and are able to appraise its different aspects. 
 The phenome-non we are now discussing is one of the most profound andmost general of the contradictions of the capitalist system. 
The separation of town from country, their oppositeness,and the exploitation of the countryside by the town—theseuniversal concomitants of developing capitalism—are a nec-essary product of the preponderance of “commercial wealth” (to use Sismondi’s term) over “territorial wealth” (agricul-tural wealth). 
 Therefore, the predominance of the townover the countryside (economically, politically, intellectu-ally, and in all other respects) is a universal and inevitablething in all countries where there is commodity production and capitalism, including Russia: only sentimental ro-manticists can bewail this. 
 Scientific theory, on the contra-ry, points to the progressive aspect given to this contradic-tion by large-scale industrial capital. 
 “Capitalist produc-tion, by collecting the population in great centres, andcausing an ever-increasing preponderance of town popula-tion ... concentrates the historical motive-power of society” 77 (die geschichtliche Bewegungskraft der Gesellschaft). 
 * I f the predominance of the town is inevitable, only theattraction of the population to the towns can neutralise(and, as history shows, does in fact neutralise) the one-sidedcharacter of this predominance. 
 If the town necessarily gains itself a privileged position, leaving the village subor-dinate, undeveloped, helpless and downtrodden, only theinflux of the village population into the towns, only thismingling and merging of the agricultural with the non-agri-cultural population, can lift the rural population out of itshelplessness. 
 Therefore, in reply to the reactionary complaints and lamentations of the romanticists, modern theory in *Cf. 
 also the particularly striking characterisation of the pro-gressive role played by industrial centres in the intellectual devel-opment of the population in Die Lage der arbeitenden Klasse in Eng-land , 1845. 
78 That the recognition of this role did not prevent the author of The Condition of the Working Class in England from pro-foundly understanding the contradiction manifested in the separationof town from country, is proved by his polemical book against Dühring. 
 79 dicates exactly how this narrowing of the gap between the conditions of life of the agricultural and of the non-agri-cultural population creates the conditions for eliminating the antithesis between town and country. 
 The question now is: what is the point of view of our Narodnik economists on this problem? Undoubtedly, that ofthe sentimental romanticist. 
 Far from understanding thatthe growth of the industrial population is necessar y under the present system of social economy, they even try to close their eyes to the phenomenon itself, like the bird which hides its head under its wing. 
 As was to be expected,no answer was forthcoming to P. 
 Struve’s statement thatMr. 
 N. 
 —on, in his arguments about capitalism, commits a gross error when he asserts that there is an absolute diminu-tion of variable capital ( Critical Remarks , p. 
 255), and that it is absurd to contrast Russia with the West in respect ofthe former’s smaller percentage of industrial population andat the same time to ignore the growth of this percentage as a result of the development of capitalism * (Sozialpolitisches Centralblatt ,80 1893, No. 
 1). 
 While constantly harping upon the specific features of Russia, the Narodnik economists have not even been able to present the problem of the actual specific features of the formation of an industrial popula-tion in Russia, ** to which we briefly referred above. 
 Such is the Narodniks’ theoretical attitude towards this problem. 
 Actually, however, when the Narodniks, untrammelled by theoretical doubts, discuss the conditions of the peasants in the post-Reform countryside, they admit that thepeasants who are ousted from agriculture migrate to thetowns and to factory areas, but they confine themselves tobewailing this state of affairs, just as Sismondi bewailed it. 
 *** They do not notice at all either the economic *Let the reader recall that this is the mistake made by Sismondi when he said that “happily” eighty per cent of the population ofFrance were agricultural, as if this was a specific feature of some“people’s production,” and so forth, and not a reflection of lag in capitalist development. 
 **Cf. 
 Volgin, The Substantiation of Narodism in the Works of Mr. 
 Vorontsov . 
 St. 
 Petersburg, 1896, pp. 
 215-16. 
 *** In fairness, however, it must be said that Sismondi observes the growth of the industrial population in several countries, andrecognises its universal nature and reveals here and there an under-or (what is perhaps more important) the moral and education-al significance of the profound change that has taken place in the conditions of life of the masses of the popu-lation in post-Reform Russia—a process which, for thefirst time, has disturbed the peasantry’s settled life, theirposition of being tied to their localities, given themmobility, and narrowed the gap between the agriculturaland non-agricultural labourers, the rural and the urban workers. 
 * All they have derived from it is an occasion for sentimental-romanticist lamentations. 
 standing of the fact that this is not merely some “anomaly,” and so forth, but a profound change in the people’s conditions of life— a change which admittedly has something good in it. 
 At all events, the following observation of his on the harmfulness of the divisionof labour reveals views far more profound than those of Mr. 
 Mikhai-lovsky, for example, who invented a general “formula of progress,”instead of analysing the definite forms assumed by the division oflabour in different formations of social economy and at different periods of development. 
 “Although the uniformity of the operations to which all the workers’ activities in the factories are reduced must obviously harm theirmental development (intelligence), nevertheless, it must be saidin fairness that according to the observations of the best judgesthe manufactory workers in England are superior in intelligence education and morals to the agricultural workers” (ouvriers des champs) (1, 397). 
 And Sismondi indicates the cause of this: Vivant sans cesseensemble, moins épuisés par la fatigue et pouvant se livrer davantageà la conversation, les idées ont circulé plus rapidement entre eux(Living constantly together, they are less fatigued, and having greateropportunities of conversing with each other ideas have spread more rapidly among them. 
— Ed. 
). 
 But, he adds in a melancholy tone aucun attachement à l’ordre établi (they display no attachmentto the established order. 
— Ed. 
). 
 *The forms assumed by this process are also different in the central parts of European Russia as compared with the border regions. 
It is mainly agricultural workers from the central black-earth guber-nias and partly non-agricultural workers from the industrial guber-nias who migrate to the border regions , where they spread their knowl-edge of “their trades” and “implant” industry among the purely agri-cultural population. 
 The migrants from the industrial region ar e non-agricultural workers, part of whom scatter to all parts of Russia but most of whom stream into the metropolitan cities and the large industrial centres; and this industrial current, if one may so express it, is so strong, that it creates a shortage of agricultural workers, who migrate to the industrial gubernias (Moscow, Yaroslavl and other gubernias) from the central black-earth gubernias. 
 See S. 
 A. 
 Koro-lenko, Hired Labour , etc. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR IV PRACTICAL PROPOSALS OF ROMANTICISM We shall now endeavour to sum up Sismondi’s point of view on capitalism (a task which, as the reader remembers,Ephrucy, too, set himself) and examine the practical pro-gramme of romanticism. 
 We have seen that Sismondi’s merit lay in his being one of the first to point to the contradictions of capitalism. 
 But in pointing to them he not only made no attempt toanalyse them and explain their origin, development andtrend, but even regarded them as unnatural, or mistaken di-gressions from the normal. 
 He naïvely protested againstthese “digressions” with moralising phrases, denunciations, advice to eliminate them, and so forth, as if these contra-dictions did not express the real interests of real groups of the population occupying a definite place in the generalsystem of social economy of the present day. 
 This is themost outstanding feature of romanticism—to regard an-tagonism of interests (which is deeply rooted in the very system of social economy) as a contradiction or an error of doctrine, system, even of measures, and so forth. 
 Here thenarrow outlook of the Kleinbürger, * who stands aloof from developed contradictions and occupies an intermediary, tran-sitional position between the two poles, is combined witha naïve idealism—we are almost ready to say a bureaucratic outlook—which attributes the existence of a social system to the opinions of men (especially of the powers that be) andnot vice versa. 
 We shall quote examples of all Sismondi’sarguments of this kind. 
 “In forgetting men for the sake of things, has not Eng-land sacrificed the aim to the means? “The example of England is all the more striking in that this nation is free, enlightened and well governed, andthat all her misfortunes are due solely to her pursuit of awrong economic line” (I, p. 
 IX). 
 In general Sismondi uses England as an example to frighten the Continent with—just like our romanticists, who imagine that they are con-tributing something new and not the oldest kind of rubbish. 
 *Petty bourgeois. 
— Ed. 
 “In drawing my readers’ attention to England, I wanted to show ... the history of our own future, if we continue to act on the principles she has followed” (I, p. 
 XVI). 
 “... The Continental countries deem it necessary to fol-low England in her career of manufacture” (II, 330). 
 “Thereis no more astonishing, no more frightful spectacle than thatpresented by England” (II, 332). 
 * “It must not be forgotten that wealth is merely that which represents (n’est que la représentation) the pleas-ures and amenities of life” (here wealth in general is sub-stituted for bourgeois wealth!), “and to create artificialwealth and thereby doom a nation to all that which actu-ally represents poverty and suffering, means taking the namefor the thing itself” (prendre le mot pour la chose) (I, 379). 
 “... As long as nations followed only the dictates (com-mands, indications) of nature and enjoyed the advantagesprovided by climate, soil, location and the possession ofraw materials, they did not place themselves in an unnatu-ral position (une position forcée), they did not seek appar-ent wealth (une opulence apparente) which for the masses becomes real poverty” (I, 411). 
 Bourgeois wealth is only apparent wealth!! “It is dangerous for a nation to close itsdoors to foreign trade: this compels the nation to engage,in a way (en quelque sorte) in false activity , which leads to its ruin” (I, 448). 
 ** *To show clearly the relation between European and Russian romanticism we shall quote, in footnotes, passages from Mr. 
 N. 
 —on. 
 “We have refused to learn the lesson taught us by the course of economic development of Western Europe. 
 We have been so dazzled by the brilliance of the development of capitalism in England, andwe are so astonished by the immeasurably more rapid developmentof capitalism in the American States,” etc. 
 (323). 
 As you see, evenMr. 
 N. 
 —on’s expressions are not distinguished for their novelty! He is “astonished” by the same thing that “astonished” Sismondi at the beginning of the century. 
 **“... The economic path we have pursued for the past thirty years has been a wrong one” (281).... 
 “We have too long identifiedthe interests of capitalism with those of the national economy—an extremely fatal blunder.... 
 The apparent results of the protection of industry ... have obscured our vision to such a degree that we have totally lost sight of the popular-social aspect ... we have lost sight of the price paid for this development, we have forgotten the aimof all production” (298)—except capitalist production! “... Wages contain a necessary part which must sustain the life, strength and health of those who receive them.... 
 Woe to the government that encroaches upon this part—it sacrifices everything (il sacrifie tout ensemble)—men, andhope of future wealth.... 
 This difference enables us to under-stand how wrong is the policy of those governments whichhave reduced the wages of the working classes to the limitrequired to increase the net revenues of factory owners, mer-chants and property owners” (II, 169). 
 * “The time has come at last to ask: whither are we go-ing?” (où l’on veut aller) (II, 328). 
 “Their separation” (the separation of the property-owning class from the working people), “the antagonism oftheir interests, is the result of the present-day artificial organisation which we have given human society.... 
 The natural order of social progress did not by any meanstend to separate men from things, or wealth from la-bour; in the rural districts the property owner could remaina tiller of the soil; in the towns the capitalist could remainan artisan; the separation of the working class from the lei-sured class was not absolutely indispensable for the exist-ence of society, or for production; we introduced it for thegreatest benefit of all; it devolves upon us (il nous apparti-ent) to regulate it so that this benefit may be really achieved”(II, 348). 
 “Having been put in opposition to each other, the pro-ducers” (i. 
e. 
, the masters and the workers) “were compelled to proceed along a path diametrically opposed to the inter-ests of society.... 
 In this constant struggle to reduce wages,the public interest, in which, however, all participate, isforgotten by all” (II, 359-60). 
 And this too is preceded bymention of the paths bequeathed by history: “At the begin-ning of social life every man possesses capital , through which he applies his labour, and nearly all artisans live on “Disdain for one’s own past ... the implanting of capitalism” ... (283).... 
 “We ... have resorted to all means to implant capitalism”...(323).... 
 “We have overlooked” ... (ibid. 
). 
 *“...We have not hindered the development of the capitalist forms of production in spite of the fact that they are based upon the expropriation of the peasantry” (323). 
 a revenue consisting equally of profit and wages” (II, 359). 
 * Enough, it seems.... 
 We can be certain that a reader who is familiar neither with Sismondi nor with Mr. 
 N. 
 —on willfind it difficult to say which of the points of view of thetwo romanticists, the one in the footnote or the one in thetext, is the more primitive and naïve. 
 Sismondi’s practical proposals, to which he devoted so much space in his Nouveaux Principes , fully conform to this. 
 The difference between us and Adam Smith, says Sismondi in the very first book of his work, is that “we nearly alwayscall for that very governmental interference which AdamSmith rejected” (I, 52). 
 “The state does not rectify distri-bution” (I, 80).... 
 “The legislator could ensure the poor man some guarantees against universal competition” (I, 81). 
“Production must be commensurate with social revenue, andthose who encourage unlimited production without takingthe trouble to ascertain what this revenue is, are pushingthe nation to ruin, though they think they are opening to it the road to wealth (le chemin des richesses)” (I, 82). 
 “When the progress of wealth is gradual (gradué), when itis proportionate to itself, when none of its parts developswith excessive rapidity, it disseminates universal prosper-ity.... 
 Perhaps it is the duty of governments to restrain(ralentir!!) this movement in order to regulate it” (I, 409-10). 
 Of the enormous historical importance of the develop-ment of the productive forces of society, which takes placeprecisely through these contradictions and disproportions,Sismondi has not the faintest idea! “If the government exercises a regulating and moderat-ing influence upon the pursuit of wealth, it can be infinite-*“Instead of adhering firmly to our age-old traditions; instead of developing the principle of a close tie between the means of pro-duction and the direct producer ... instead of increasing the produc-tivity of its ( the peasantry ’s) labour by concentrating the means of production in its hands ... instead of that, we have taken the abso-lutely opposite path” (322-23). 
 “We have mistaken the development of capitalism for the development of the whole of people’s produc-tion ... we have overlooked the fact that the development of one ... can only proceed at the expense of the other” (323). 
 Our italics. 
 ly beneficial” (I, 413). 
 “Some of the measures to regulate trade which are nowadays condemned by public opinion, although meriting condemnation as a stimulus to industry, may, perhaps, be justified as a curb” (I, 415). 
 These arguments of Sismondi’s already reveal his aston-ishing lack of historical sense: he has not the faintest ideathat liberation from medieval regulation constituted theentire historical significance of the period contemporary to him. 
 He does not realise that his arguments bring grist to the mill of the defenders of the ancien régime, who at thattime were still so strong even in France, not to speak of theother countries of the West-European continent where theyruled. 
 * Thus, the starting-point of Sismondi’s practical propos-als is—tutelage, restraint, regulation. 
 This point of view follows quite naturally and inevi-tably from the whole of Sismondi’s range of ideas. 
 He livedat the very time when large-scale machine industry was takingits first steps on the European continent, when there beganthat sharp and abrupt change of all social relations under the influence of machines (note, under the influence of machine industry, and not of “capitalism” in general), ** a change which is known in economic science as the industrial revolution . 
*** Here is how it is described by one of the first economists able fully to appreciate the profundity of therevolution which created modern European societies in place of the patriarchal semi-medieval societies: *Ephrucy discerned “civic courage” in these regrets and longings of Sismondi (No. 
 7, p. 
 139). 
 So the expression of sentimental longings calls for civic courage!! Open any high-school textbook on historyand you will read that in the first quarter of the nineteenth centurythe West-European countries were organised on lines which the scienceof constitutional law designates by the term: Polizeistaat (policestate. 
— Ed. 
). 
 You will read that the historical task not only of that quarter, but also of the subsequent quarter of the century, was to combat it. 
 You will understand then that Sismondi’s point of viewsmacks of the dull-wittedness of the small French peasant of the Res-toration period; that Sismondi exemplifies the combination of petty-bourgeois sentimental romanticism with phenomenal civic immaturity. 
 **Capitalism in England dates not from the end of the eighteenth century but from a far earlier period. 
 *** These words are in English in the original. 
— Ed. 
 “Such, in brief, is the history of English industrial de-velopment in the past sixty years” (this was written in 1844), “a history which has no counterpart in the annals of humanity. 
 Sixty, eighty years ago, England was a countrylike every other, with small towns, few and simple indus-tries, and a thin but proportionally large agricultural pop-ulation. 
 Today it is a country like no other, with a capital of two and a half million inhabitants; with vast manufac-turing cities; with an industry that supplies the world, and produces almost everything by means of the most complexmachinery; with an industrious, intelligent, dense popula-tion, of which two-thirds are employed in trade and commerce,and composed of classes wholly different; forming, in fact,with other customs and other needs, a different nation from the England of those days. 
 The industrial revolution is of the same importance for England as the political rev-olution for France, and the philosophical revolutionfor Germany; and the difference between England in 1760and in 1844 is at least as great as that between France,under the ancien régime and during the revolution of July. 
” * This was the complete “break-up” of all the old, deep-rooted relationships, whose economic basis had been smallproduction. 
 Naturally, with his reactionary, petty-bour-geois point of view, Sismondi could not understand thesignificance of this “break-up. 
” Naturally, he first of all,and most of all, wished, urged, pleaded, demanded that this “break-up should be stopped. 
 ” ** But how should this “break-up be stopped”? First of all, of course, by supporting the people’s ... that is to say, “patriarchal production,” the peasantry and smallfarming in general. 
 Sismondi devotes a whole chapter(t. 
 II, l. 
 VII, ch. 
 VIII) to the subject of “how the government should protect the population from the consequences of competition. 
” “In relation to the agricultural population, the govern-ment’s general task is to ensure those who work (à ceux quitravaillent) a part of the property, or to support (favoriser) *Engels, Die Lage der arbeitenden Klasse in England . 
”81 **We make so bold as to hope that Mr. 
 N. 
 —on will not resent our borrowing this expression from him (p. 
 345), as we think it ex-tremely apt and characteristic. 
 what we have called patriarchal agriculture in preference to all other kinds” (II, 340). 
 “A Statute of Elizabeth, which was disregarded, pro-hibited the building of cottages * in England unless each was allotted a four-acre plot of land. 
 Had this law beenobeyed, no day labourer could have married without receivinga cottage , * and no cottager * would have been reduced to extreme poverty. 
 This would have been a step forward (c’est quelque chose), but it would not have been enough; under the English climate, the peasant population would havelived in want on four acres per family. 
 Today, most of theEnglish cottagers have only one and a half to two acres ofland, for which they pay a fairly high rent.... 
 The law shouldcompel ... the landlord, when he distributes his field among many cottagers , * to give each one enough land to live on” (II, 342-43). 
 ** The reader will see that the proposals of romanticism are absolutely identical with the proposals and programme of the Narodniks: they too ignore actual economic develop-ment, and in the epoch of large-scale machine industry, *These words are in English in the original. 
— Ed. 
 **“Adhere to our age-old traditions;” (is it not patriotism?) “... de-velop our inherited principle of close connection between the meansof production and the direct producers”... (Mr. 
 N. 
 —on, 322). 
 “We have turned from the path we have followed for many centurieswe have begun to eliminate production based on the close connectionbetween the direct producer and the means of production, on theclose connection between agriculture and manufacturing industry,and have based our economic policy on the principle of developingcapitalist production, which is based on the alienation of the meansof production from the direct producers, with all its accompanyingdisasters, from which Western Europe is now suffering” (281). 
 Letthe reader compare this with the above-quoted view of the “WestEuropeans” themselves on these “disasters from which Western Europeis suffering,” and so forth “The principle ... of allotting land to thepeasants or ... providing the producers with implements of labour”(p. 
 2) ... “the-age old foundations of the people’s life” (75).... 
 “Hence,we have in these figures” (i. 
e. 
, figures showing “the minimum amountof land needed under present economic conditions to ensure the ma-terial security of the rural population”) “one of the elements for thesolution of the economic problem, but only one of the elements” (65). 
As you see the West-European romanticists were no less fond thanthe Russian of seeking in “age-old traditions” “sanctions for people’sproduction. 
 fierce competition and conflict of interests they fatuously presume the preservation of conditions which reproduce the patriarchal conditions of the hoary past. 
 V THE REACTIONARY CHARACTER OF ROMANTICISM It goes without saying that Sismondi could not but real-ise how actual development was proceeding. 
 Therefore, indemanding “encouragement for small farming” (II, 355),he plainly said that it was necessary “to direct agriculturealong a road diametrically opposite to that which it is fol-lowing in England today” (II, 354-55). 
 * “Happily, England possesses means for doing a great deal for her rural poor by dividing among them her vastcommon lands (ses immenses communaux).... 
 If her commonlands were divided up into free allotments (en propriétésfranches) of twenty to thirty acres they” (the English) “wouldsee the revival of that proud and independent class of countrymen, the yeomanry , ** whose almost complete ex-tinction they now deplore” (II, 357-58). 
 The “plans” of romanticism are depicted as very easily realisable—precisely because they ignore real interests, and this is the essence of romanticism. 
 “Such a proposal” (to allot small plots of land to day labourers and to impose the duty of guardianship over the latter upon the landowners) “will probably rouse the indignation of the big landowners, who alone enjoy legislative power today in England; never-theless, it is a just one.... 
 The big landowners alone need the services of day labourers; they created them—let them, therefore, maintain them” (II, 357). 
 One is not surprised to read such naïve things written at the beginning of the century: the “theory” of romanti-cism conforms to the primitive state of capitalism in gener-al, which conditioned such a primitive point of view. 
 At that time there was still conformity between the actual *Cf. 
 Mr. 
 V. 
 V. 
’s Narodnik programme “to drag history along another line. 
” Cf. 
 Volgin, loc. 
 cit. 
, p. 
 181. 
 **The word is in English in the original. 
— Ed. 
 development of capitalism—the theoretical conception of it—and the attitude towards capitalism, and Sismondi, at all events, appears as a writer who is consistent and true to himself. 
 “We have already shown,” says Sismondi, “the protec-tion that this class” (i. 
e. 
, the class of artisans) “once foundin the establishment of guilds and corporations (des jurandeset des maîtrises).... 
 We are not proposing that their strange and restrictive organisation should be restored.... 
 But the legislator should set himself the aim of increasingthe reward for industrial labour, of extricating those en-gaged in industry from the precarious (précaire) position inwhich they are living and, finally, of making it easierfor them to acquire what they call a status * (un état).... 
 Today, the workers are born and die workers, whereas for-merly, the status of worker was merely the preliminary stage,the first rung to a higher status. 
 It is this ability to advance(cette faculté progressive) that it is important to restore. 
Employers must be given an incentive to promote theirworkers to a higher status; to arrange it so that a man who hires himself to work in a manufactory shall actually start by working simply for wages, but that he should alwayshave the hope, provided his conduct is good, of sharingin the profits of the enterprise” (II, 344-45). 
 It would be difficult to express the viewpoint of the petty bourgeois more strikingly! The guilds are Sismondi’s ideal, and the reservation he makes about the undesirabil-ity of restoring them obviously means only that the princi-ple, the idea of the guilds should be taken (exactly as the Narodniks want to take the principle, the idea of the vil-lage community, and not the contemporary fiscal association called the village community) and that its monstrous medi-eval features should be discarded. 
 The absurdity of Sismon-di’s plan is not his wholesale defence of the guilds, nor his wanting to restore them in their entirety—he did not set out to do that. 
 The absurdity lies in his making his model anassociation which arose out of the local artisans’ narrow, primitive need for organisation, and wanted to apply this yardstick, this model, to capitalist society, whose organis-*Author’s italics. 
 ing, socialising element is large-scale machine industry, which breaks down medieval barriers and obliterates differences of place, origin and trade. 
 Appreciating the need for association, for organisation in general, in one formor another, the romanticist takes as a model the associationwhich satisfied the narrow need for organisation in patriar-chal, immobile society, and wants to apply it to a totallytransformed society, a society with a mobile population, and with labour socialised within the bounds not of a village community, or a corporation, but of a whole country, andeven beyond the bounds of a single country. 
 * It is this mistake that quite justly earns for the romanti-cist the designation of reactionary , although this term is not used to indicate a desire simply to restore medieval institutions, but the attempt to measure the new society with the old patriarchal yardstick, the desire to find a mod-el in the old order and traditions, which are totally unsuit-ed to the changed economic conditions. 
 Ephrucy understood nothing of this circumstance. 
 He understood the characterisation of Sismondi’s theory as reac-tionary in the crude, vulgar sense. 
 Ephrucy was abashed.... 
 What do you mean? he argued, how can Sismondi becalled a reactionary when he plainly says that he does notwant to restore the guilds? And Ephrucy decided that it was *An exactly similar mistake is made by the Narodniks in rela-tion to another association ( the village community ), which satisfied the narrow need of association of local peasants linked to each other by the joint ownership of land, pastures, etc. 
 (but chiefly by the joint rule of the landlords and bureaucrats), but which does not in any waysatisfy the needs of the commodity economy and capitalism that breaksdown all local, social-estate and other such barriers and introducesa profound economic antagonism of interests within the village com-munity. 
 The need for association, for organisation, has not diminished in capitalist society; on the contrary in has grown immeasurably. 
 But it is utterly absurd to use the old yardstick for the purpose ofsatisfying this need of the new society. 
 This new society is alreadydemanding, firstly, that the association shall not be according tolocality, social estate, or other such category; secondly, that its start-ing-point shall be the difference in status and interests that has been created by capitalism and by the differentiation of the peasantry. 
 Local, social-estate association, on the other hand, which links togetherpeasants who differ sharply from each other in economic status andinterests, now, because of its compulsory nature , becomes harmful f or the peasants themselves and for social development as a whole. 
 unfair to “accuse” Sismondi of being “retrogressive,” that, on the contrary, Sismondi’s attitude “to the guild organisa-tion was correct” and that he “fully appreciated its histori-cal importance” (No. 
 7, p. 
 147), as has been proved, he says,by the historical researches of such and such professors intothe good sides of the guild organisation. 
 Quasi-scientific writers often possess an amazing ability not to see the wood for the trees! Sismondi’s point of view on the guilds is characteristic and important precisely because he links his practical proposals with them. 
 * That is why his theory is described as reactionary . 
 But Ephrucy be-gins to talk without rhyme or reason about modern his-torical works on the guilds! The result of these inappropriate and quasi-scientific ar-guments was that Ephrucy by-passed the very substance of the question, namely: is it or is it not fair to describe Sismon-di’s theory as reactionary? He overlooked the very thingthat is most important—Sismondi’s point of view . 
 “I have been accused,” says Sismondi, “of being an enemy of socialprogress in political economy, a partisan of barbarous and coercive institutions. 
 No, I do not want what has already been, but I want something better than the present. 
 I can-not judge the present otherwise than by comparing it withthe past, but I am far from wishing to restore the old ruinswhen I refer to them in order to demonstrate the eternalneeds of society” (II, 433). 
 The wishes of the romanticists are very good (as are those of the Narodniks). 
 Their recognition of the contradictions of capitalism places them above theblind optimists who deny the existence of these contradictions. 
And it is not because he wanted to return to the Middle Agesthat he was regarded as a reactionary, but because, in hispractical proposals, he “compared the present with the past” and not with the future; because he “demonstrated the eter-nal needs of society” ** by referring to “ruins” and not by referring to the trends of modern development; It was this petty-bourgeois viewpoint of Sismondi’s which sharplydistinguishes him from the other authors, who also demon-*See above, at least the title of the chapter from which we quoted the arguments about the guilds (quoted also by Ephrucy: p 147). 
 **The fact that he demonstrated the existence of these needs places him, we repeat, far above the narrow-minded bourgeois economists. 
 strated, in his time and after, the “eternal needs of society,” that Ephrucy failed to understand. 
 This mistake of Ephrucy’s was due to the very same nar-row interpretation of the terms “petty-bourgeois” doctrineand “reactionary” doctrine referred to above in connectionwith the first of these terms. 
 They by no means implythe selfish greed of the small shopkeeper, or a desireto halt social development, to turn back: they simply indi-cate the given author’s mistaken point of view, his limited understanding and narrow outlook, which prompt the choiceof means (for the achievement of very good aims) that cannotbe effective in practice, and that can satisfy only thesmall producer or be of service to the defenders of the past. 
Sismondi, for example, is not at all a fanatical advocate of small proprietorship . 
 He understands the need for organi-sation and for association no less than our contemporaryNarodniks do. 
 He expresses the wish that “half the profits”of industrial enterprises should be “distributed among theassociated workers” (II, 346). 
 He openly advocates a “sys-tem of association” under which all the “achievements of production benefit the one engaged in it” (II, 438). 
 In speak-ing of the relation between his doctrine and the doctrines,then well known, of Owen, Fourier, Thompson and Mui-ron, Sismondi says: “I, like they, want to see association in-stead of mutual opposition among those who produce a giv-en article in common. 
 But I do not think that the means which they proposed for the achievement of this object could ever lead to it” (II, 365). 
 The difference between Sismondi and these authors is precisely one of viewpoint . 
 It is quite natural, therefore, that Ephrucy, who does not understand this viewpoint,should completely misinterpret Sismondi’s attitude to these authors. 
 “That Sismondi exercised too little influence upon his contemporaries,” we read in Russkoye Bogatstvo , No. 
 8, p. 
 57, “that the social reforms he proposed were not put intoeffect, is due mainly to the fact that he was a long wayahead of his time. 
 He wrote at a time when the bourgeoisie was enjoying its honeymoon.... 
 Naturally, under these cir-cumstances, the voice of a man who was demanding socialreforms could not but remain a voice crying in the wilder-ness. 
 But we know that posterity has not treated him much better. 
 This, perhaps, is due to Sismondi’s having been, as we have already said above, an author who wrote in a tran-sitional period; although he wanted big changes, he couldnot completely discard the past. 
 Moderate people thereforethought he was too radical, whereas in the opinion of therepresentatives of more extreme trends, he was too mod-erate. 
” Firstly, to say that Sismondi was “ahead of his time” with the reforms he proposed indicates a complete misunder-standing of the very substance of the doctrine of Sismondi,who himself stated that he compared the present with thepast. 
 One must indeed be infinitely short-sighted (or in-finitely partial to romanticism) to overlook the general spirit and general significance of Sismondi’s theory only because Sismondi favoured factory legislation, * and so forth. 
 Secondly, Ephrucy thus assumes that the difference be-tween Sismondi and the other authors is only in the degree of radicalness of the reforms they proposed: they went further, but he did not entirely discard the past. 
 That is not the point. 
 The difference between Sismondi and these authors is a much deeper one—it is not that somewent further and others were timid, ** but that they regarded the very character of reforms from two diametrically oppo-site points of view. 
 Sismondi demonstrated the “eternal needs of society. 
” So, too, did these authors. 
 Sismondi was a utopian, he based his proposals on an abstract idea and not on real interests. 
 So were these authors; they also basedtheir plans on an abstract idea. 
 But it was the character of their respective plans that differed entirely, because they *But even on this subject Sismondi was not “ahead” of his day, for he merely approved of what was already being practised in Eng-land, but was unable to understand the connection that existed be-tween these changes and large-scale machine industry and the pro-gressive historical work it was doing. 
 **We do not wish to say that there is no difference in this respect between the authors referred to, but it does not explain the point and misrepresents the relation between Sismondi and the other authors:it is made to appear that they held the same point of view and differedonly in the radicalness and consistency of the conclusions they drew. 
But the point is not that Sismondi “did not go” so far , but that he “went” back , whereas the other authors referred to “went” forward . 
 regarded modern economic development, which presented the question of “eternal needs,” from diametrically opposite angles. 
 The authors referred to anticipated the future; with the foresight of genius they divined the trend that wouldbe taken by the “break-up” which the machine industry ofthat period was effecting before their eyes. 
 They looked inthe direction in which development was in fact proceeding;they, indeed, were ahead of that development. 
 Sismondi, however, turned his back on this development; his utopia did not anticipate the future, but restored the past; he didnot look forward, he looked backward, and dreamed of“stopping the break-up,” that very “break-up” from which the authors mentioned deduced their utopias. 
 * That is why Sismondi’s utopia is regarded—and quite rightly—as reac-tionary. 
 The grounds for this characterisation, we repeat once again, are merely that Sismondi did not understand the progressive significance of that “break-up” of the old semi-medieval, patriarchal social relations in the West-European countries which at the end of last centurylarge-scale machine industry began to effect. 
 This specific viewpoint of Sismondi’s can be discerned even in his arguments about “association” in general. 
 “I want,”he says, “the ownership of the manufactories (la propriétédes manufactures) to be shared among a large number ofmedium capitalists, and not concentrated in the hands ofone man who owns many millions...” (II, 365). 
 The view-point of the petty bourgeois is still more strikingly reflected in the following utterance: “Not the poor class, but the day-labourer class should be abolished; it should be brought backto the propertied class” (II, 308) To be “ brought back ” to the propertied class—these words express the sum and sub-stance of Sismondi’s doctrine! It goes without saying that Sismondi himself must have felt that his fine wishes were impracticable, he must have *“Robert Owen,” says Marx, “the father of Co-operative Fac-tories and Stores, but who ... in no way shared the illusions of hisfollowers with regard to the bearing (Tragweite) of these isolatedelements of transformation, not only practically made the factorysystem the sole foundation of his experiments, but also declaredthat system to be theoretically the starting-point of the ‘social rev-olution. 
’” 82 been conscious that they were incompatible with the contem-porary conflict of interests. 
 “The task of reuniting the interests of those who associate in the same process of production (qui concourent à la même production) ... isundoubtedly a difficult one, but I do not think this difficul-ty is as great as is supposed” (II, 450). 
 * The consciousness of this incompatibility of his desires and aspirations and theactual conditions and their development naturally stimulates the desire to prove that it is “not yet too late ... to go back,” and so forth. 
 The romanticist tries to base himself upon theundeveloped state of the contradictions of the existing system, upon the backwardness of the country. 
 “The nations have won a system of freedom into which we have entered” (this re-fers to the fall of feudalism); “but at the time they destroyed the yoke that they had borne for so long, the labourers (les hommes de peine) were not bereft of all property. 
 In therural districts they possessed land for a half share in thecrops, were chinsh peasants (censitaires), 83 and tenant farm-ers (ils se trouverent associés à la propriété du sol). 
 In thetowns, as members of corporations and trade guilds (métiers) which they formed for mutual protection, they were independ-ent tradesmen (ils se trouverent associés à la propriétéde leur industrie). 
 Only in our days, only in the most recenttimes (c’est dans ce moment même) is the progress of wealthand competition breaking up all these associations. 
 But thisbreak-up (révolution) is not yet half accomplished” (II, 437). 
 “True, only one nation is in this unnatural position today; only in one nation do we see this permanent contrast be-tween apparent wealth (richesse apparente) and the fright-ful poverty of a tenth of the population, which is forced tolive on public charity. 
 But this nation, so worthy of emula-tion in other respects, so dazzling even in its errors, has, by its example, tempted all the statesmen of the Continent. 
And if these reflections cannot now benefit her, I shall atleast, I think, render a service to mankind and to my fellow *“The task which Russian society has to fulfil is becoming more and more complicated every day. 
 Capitalism is extending its conquestsday after day...” (ibid. 
). 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR countrymen by pointing to the danger of the path she is following, and by showing from her own experience that to base political economy on the principle of unrestricted com-petition means to sacrifice the interests of mankind to thesimultaneous operation of all personal passions” (II, 368). 
 * That is how Sismondi concludes his Nouveaux Principes . 
 The general significance of Sismondi and of his theory was distinctly formulated by Marx in the following comment, which first outlines the conditions of West-European eco-nomic life that gave rise to such a theory (and did so exactlyat the time when capitalism was only just beginning to createlarge-scale machine industry there), and then gives an ap-praisal of it. 
 ** “The medieval burgesses and the small peasant proprie-tors were the precursors of the modern bourgeoisie. 
 In those countries which are but little developed, industrially andcommercially, these two classes still vegetate side by sidewith the rising bourgeoisie. 
 “In countries where modern civilisation has become fully developed, a new class of petty bourgeois has been formed, fluctuating between proletariat and bourgeoisie and ever renewing itself as a supplementary part of bourgeois society. 
The individual members of this class, however, are beingconstantly hurled down into the proletariat by the action ofcompetition, and, as modern industry develops, they evensee the moment approaching when they will completely disappear as an independent section of modern society, to be replaced, in manufactures, agriculture and commerce, byoverlookers, bailiffs and shopmen. 
 “In countries like France, where the peasants constitute far more than half of the population, it was natural thatwriters who sided with the proletariat against the bourgeoi-sie should use, in their criticism of the bourgeois regime, the standard of the peasant and petty bourgeois, and from thestandpoint of these intermediate classes should take up the *“Russian society has to fulfil a great task, one that is ex-tremely difficult but not impossible—to develop the productive forcesof the population in such a form as to benefit not an insignificantminority, but the entire people” (N. 
 —on, 343). 
 **Cf. 
 quotations in Russkoye Bogatstvo , No. 
 8, p. 
 57, and also Mr. 
 N. 
 —on ’s article in Russkoye Bogatstvo , No. 
 6, p. 
 94. 
 cudgels for the working class. 
 Thus arose petty-bourgeois Socialism. 
 Sismondi was the head of this school, not only in France but also in England. 
 “This doctrine dissected with great acuteness the contradic-tions in the conditions of modern production. 
 It laid barethe hypocritical apologies of economists. 
 It proved, incontro-vertibly, the disastrous effects of machinery and divisionof labour; the concentration of capital and land in a few hands; overproduction and crises; it pointed out the inevi-table ruin of the petty bourgeois and peasant, the misery ofthe proletariat, the anarchy in production, the crying ine-qualities in the distribution of wealth, the industrial warof extermination between nations, the dissolution of oldmoral bonds, of the old family relations, of the old national-ities. 
 * “In its positive aims, however, this form of Socialism as-pires either to restoring the old means of production and ofexchange, and with them the old property relations, and theold society, or to cramping the modern means of productionand of exchange, within the framework of the old property relations that have been, and were bound to be, exploded by those means. 
 In either case, it is both reactionary andutopian. 
 “Its last words are: corporate guilds for manufacture; patriarchal relations in agriculture. 
” ** We tried to prove that this description is correct as we examined each separate item of Sismondi’s doctrine. 
 Here let us merely note the curious trick employed by Eph-rucy to crown all the blunders he made in his exposition,criticism and appraisal of romanticism. 
 The reader willremember that at the very beginning of his article (in *Ephrucy quotes this passage in No. 
 8 of Russkoye Bogatstvo , p. 
 57 (from the beginning of this paragraph). 
 **Cf. 
 Russkoye Bogatstvo , 1894, No. 
 6, p. 
 88, article referred to. 
 In the translation of this passage Mr. 
 N. 
 —on is guilty of two mis-translations and of one omission. 
 Instead of “petty-bourgeois” and“petty-peasant” he translates “narrow-burgher and “narrow-peasant. 
”Instead of “cudgels for the workers” he translates “cudgels for thepeople,” although in the original we have the word Arbeiter. 
 (Inthe English translation of 1888, authorized by Engels, it is “working class. 
”— Ed. 
) He omitted the words: “were bound to be exploded” (gesprengt werden mussten). 
 84 Russkoye Bogatstvo , No. 
 7), Ephrucy stated that it was “unfair” and “incorrect” to include Sismondi among the reactionaries and utopians (loc. 
 cit. 
, p. 
 138). 
 To prove this thesis Ephrucy firstly contrived to say nothing at allabout the main thing—the connection between Sismondi’spoint of view and the position and interests of a special class in capitalist society, the small producers; secondly,in examining the various tenets of Sismondi’s theory Ephrucy in part presented his attitude to modern theo-ry in a totally wrong light, as we have shown above, and inpart, simply ignored the modern theory and defended Sis-mondi with references to German scholars who “went no fur-ther” than Sismondi; thirdly and lastly, Ephrucy was pleasedto sum up his appraisal of Sismondi in the following way: “Our (!) opinion of the importance of Simonde de Sismondi,” he says, “we can (!!) sum up in the following words” ofa German economist ( Russkoye Bogatstvo , No. 
 8, p. 
 57), and then follows the passage indicated above, i. 
e. 
, only a part of the characterisation given by that economist; but the part which explains the connection between Sismon-di’s theory and a special class in modern society, and the part where the final conclusion is drawn that Sismondi isreactionary and utopian, are omitted! More than that. 
Ephrucy did not confine himself to taking a fragment of the comment, which gives no idea of the comment as a whole , and thereby presenting this economist’s attitude towards Sis-mondi in a totally wrong light; he tried, further, to em-bellish Sismondi, while pretending that he was merely con-veying the opinion of that economist. 
 “Let us add to this,” says Ephrucy, “that in some of his theoretical views, Sismondi is the predecessor of the mostoutstanding modern economists~: let us recall his views on revenue from capital and on crises, his classification of na-tional revenue, and so forth” (ibid. 
). 
 Thus, instead of sup-plementing this German economist’s reference to Sismondi’s merits with the same economist’s reference to Sismondi’s petty-bourgeois point of view, and to the reactionary charac-ter of his utopia, Ephrucy supplements the list of Sismondi’s merits with precisely those parts of his theory (such as his *Such as Adolph Wagner?— K. 
 T. 
 “classification of the national revenue”) which , in the opinion of this same economist, contain not a single scientific word . 
 We may be told: Ephrucy may not in the least share the opinion that the explanation of economic doctrines mustbe sought in economic reality; he may be profoundly con-vinced that A. 
 Wagner’s theory of the “classification ofthe national revenue” is the “most outstanding” theory. 
 Weare quite willing to believe this. 
 But what right had he to flirt with the theory which the Narodnik gentlemen are so fond of saying they “agree” with, when in fact, he com-pletely misunderstood that theory’s attitude to Sismondi, anddid everything possible (and even impossible) to presentthis attitude in a totally wrong light? We would not have devoted so much space to this ques-tion had it concerned only Ephrucy—an author whose name we meet in Narodnik literature perhaps for the first time. 
It is not Ephrucy’s personality, nor even his views, thatare important for us, but the Narodniks ’ attitude in gene-al towards the theory of the famous German economist which , they claim , they agree with . 
 Ephrucy is by no means an ex-ception. 
 On the contrary, his is quite a typical case, and to prove this we have throughout drawn a parallel betweenSismondi’s viewpoint and theory and Mr. 
 N. 
 —on’s view-point and theory. 
 * The similarity proved to be complete: the theoretical views, the viewpoint regarding capitalism,and the character of the practical conclusions and propos-als of both authors proved to be identical . 
 And as Mr. 
 N. 
 —on’s views may be described as the last word in Narodism,we have a right to conclude that the economic theory of the Narodniks is but a Russian variety of European romanti-cism . 
 It goes without saying that Russia’s specific historic and economic features, on the one hand, and her incomparably greater backwardness, on the other, lend Narodism par-ticularly marked distinctive features. 
 But these distinctionsare no more than those between varieties within the same *Mr. 
 V. 
 V. 
, another Narodnik economist, is quite in accord with Mr. 
 N. 
 —on on the extremely important questions referred to above, and differs from him only in that his point of view is even more primitive. 
 species and, therefore, do not disprove the similarity between Narodism and petty-bourgeois romanticism. 
 Perhaps the most outstanding and striking distinction is the effort the Narodnik economists make to disguise theirromanticism by stating that they “agree” with modern theo-ry and by referring to it as often as possible, although this theory sharply disapproves of romanticism and has grown upin the course of a fierce struggle against petty-bourgeois doctrines of every variety. 
 The analysis of Sismondi’s theory is of special interest precisely because it provides an opportunity to examinethe general methods used in wearing this disguise. 
 We have seen that both romanticism and the modern theory indicate the same contradictions existing in contemporary social economy. 
 The Narodniks take advantage of this when they point to the fact that modern theory recognises the contradictions which manifest themselves in crises, in thequest for a foreign market, in the growth of production si-multaneously with a decline in consumption, in protective tar-iffs, in the harmful effects of machine industry, and so on, and so forth. 
 And the Narodniks are quite right: modern the-ory does indeed recognise all these contradictions, which romanticism also recognised. 
 But the question is: has asingle Narodnik ever asked wherein lies the difference be-tween the scientific analysis of these contradictions, whichreduces them to the different interests that spring from the present system of economy, and the utilisation of these ref-erences to contradictions merely in order to utter goodwishes? No, we do not find a single Narodnik who has examinedthis question of the difference between the modern theoryand romanticism. 
 The Narodniks likewise utilise theirreferences to contradictions merely in order to utter good wishes. 
 The next question is: has a single Narodnik ever asked wherein lies the difference between the sentimental criti-cism of capitalism and the scientific, dialectical criticismof it? Not one of them has raised this question of thesecond major difference between modern theory and romanticism. 
 Not one of them has considered it necessary to use the present development of social and economicrelations as the criterion of his theories (yet it is the application of this criterion that constitutes the chief distin-guishing feature of scientific criticism). 
 And the last question is: has a single Narodnik ever asked wherein lies the difference between the viewpoint ofromanticism, which idealises small production and bewailsthe “break-up” of its foundations by “capitalism,” and theviewpoint of the modern theory, which takes large-scalecapitalist machine production as its point of departure and proclaims this “break-up of foundations” to be progres-sive? (We employ this generally accepted Narodnik term. 
It vividly describes the process of change in socialrelations resulting from the influence of large-scale ma-chine industry which everywhere , and not only in Russia, has taken place with an abruptness and sharpness that have astonished public opinion. 
) Again no. 
 Not a single Narod-nik has asked himself this question, not one of them has at-tempted to apply to the Russian “break-up” those yardstickswhich made people acknowledge the West-European “break-up” as progressive. 
 They all weep about the foundations, ad-vise that this break-up be stopped, and assure us through their tears that this is the “modern theory. 
”... The comparison of Sismondi’s theory and their “theory,” which they have presented as a new and independent solutionof the problem of capitalism based on the last word of West-European science and life, clearly demonstrates to whata primitive stage of the development of capitalism and public thought the origin of that theory belongs. 
 But the point is not that this theory is old. 
 There are quite a few veryold European theories that would be very new for Russia. 
The point is that even when that theory appeared, it was a petty-bourgeois and reactionary theory . 
 VI CORN TARIFFS IN ENGLAND AS APPRAISED BY ROMANTICISM AND BY SCIENTIFIC THEORY We shall supplement our comparison between the theory of the romanticism on the main points of contemporary eco-nomics and the modern theory with a comparison betweentheir treatment of a certain practical problem. 
 Such a com-parison will be all the more interesting because, on the one hand, this practical problem is one of the biggest, most fun-damental problems of capitalism, and on the other hand, be-cause the two most outstanding exponents of these hostile theories have expressed their opinion on this subject. 
 We are referring to the Corn Laws in England and their repeal. 
85 In the second quarter of the present century this problem deeply interested not only English but also Conti-nental economists; they all realised that this was by no means a specific problem relating to tariff policy, but the general problem of Free Trade, of free competition, of the “destinyof capitalism. 
” It was a matter of crowning the edifice ofcapitalism by giving full effect to free competition; of clear-ing the road for the completion of that “break-up” whichlarge-scale machine industry began in England at the end of the last century; of removing the obstacles that were hin-dering this “break-up” in agriculture . 
 It was in this way that the two Continental economists of whom we intend to speakviewed the problem. 
 In the second edition of his Nouveaux Principes Sismon-di added a chapter specially devoted to “laws governing trade in grain” (l. 
 III, ch. 
 X). 
 First of all, he emphasises the urgency of the problem: “Half the English people today are demanding the re-peal of the Corn Laws, demanding it with extreme irrita-tion against those who support them; but the other halfare demanding that they be retained, and cry out indignant-ly against those who want them repealed” (I, 251). 
 In examining the problem, Sismondi points out that the interests of the English farmers demanded corn tariffs toensure them a remunerating price . 
 * The interests of the manu-facturers, however, demanded the repeal of the Corn Laws, because the manufactories could not exist without foreignmarkets, and the further development of English exports was being retarded by the laws, which restricted imports: “The manufactory owners added that the glut in the market was the result of these same Corn Laws; that wealthy people on the Continent could not buy their goods because theycould not find a market for their corn” (I, 254). 
 ** *These words are in English in the original. 
— Ed. 
 **One-sided as may be this explanation given by the English manufacturers, who ignore the deeper causes of crises and their inev-“The opening of the market to foreign corn will prob-ably ruin the English landowners and reduce all rents to an infinitely low price. 
 This, undoubtedly, is a great calamity, but it is not an injustice” (I, 254). 
 And Sismondiproceeds to argue in the naïvest manner that the revenuesof the landowners should be commensurate with the service(sic!!) they render “society” (capitalist?), and so forth “Thefarmers,” continues Sismondi, “will withdraw their capital, or part at least, from agriculture. 
” This argument of Sismondi’s (and he contents himself with this argument) reveals the main flaw in romanticism,which does not pay sufficient attention to the process ofeconomic development that is actually taking place. 
 Wehave seen that Sismondi himself points to the gradual devel-opment and growth of capitalist farming in England. 
 But he hastens to denounce this process instead of studying itscauses. 
 It is only this haste, the desire to thrust his innocentwishes upon history, that can explain the fact that Sismon-di overlooks the general trend of capitalist development inagriculture and the inevitable acceleration of this process with the repeal of the Corn Laws, i. 
e. 
, the capitalist prog-ress of agriculture instead of its decline, which Sismondiprophesies. 
 But Sismondi remains true to himself. 
 He had no sooner approached the contradiction inherent in this capitalistprocess than he immediately set about naïvely “refuting” it in his endeavour to prove at all costs that the path being followed by the “English fatherland” was a wrong one. 
 “What will the day labourer do?... Work will stop, the fields will be converted into pastures.... 
 What will become ofthe 540,000 families who will be denied work? * Even assum-itability when the expansion of the market is slight, it, neverthe-less, undoubtedly contains the absolutely correct idea that the real-isation of the product by its sale abroad demands, on the whole , corresponding imports from abroad. 
 We bring this explanation of the English manufacturers to the notice of those economists who brush aside the problem of the realisation of the product in capitalist society with the profoundremark: “They will sell abroad. 
” *To “prove” the unsoundness of capitalism, Sismondi forth-with makes an approximate calculation (such as our Russian roman-ticist, Mr. 
 V. 
 V. 
, for example, is so fond of doing). 
 Six hundred thou-ing that they will be fit for any kind of industrial work, is there, at the present time, an industry capable of absorbing them?... Can a government be found that will voluntarily subject half the nation it governs to such a crisis?... Willthose to whom the agriculturists are thus sacrificed benefitby it to any extent? After all, these agriculturists are thenearest and most reliable consumers of English manufactures. 
The cessation of their consumption would strike industry a blow more fatal than the closing of one of the biggest for-eign markets” (255-56). 
 The notorious “shrinking of the homemarket” appears upon the scene. 
 “How much will the manu-factories lose by the cessation of the consumption of thewhole class of English agriculturists, who constitute nearlyhalf the nation? How much will the manufactories lose by the cessation of the consumption of wealthy people, whose revenues from agriculture will be almost wiped out?”(267). 
 The romanticist moves heaven and earth to prove tothe manufacturers that the contradictions inherent in thedevelopment of their industry, and of their wealth, merelyexpress their error, their short-sightedness. 
 And to “con-vince” the manufacturers of the “danger” of capitalism, Sis-mondi dilates on the threatening competition of Polishand Russian grain (pp. 
 257-61). 
 He resorts to every pos-sible argument; he even wants to touch the pride of English-men. 
 “What will become of England’s honour if the Emperorof Russia is in a position, whenever be wishes, to obtain some concession or other from her, to starve her by closing the Baltic ports?” (268). 
 Let the reader recall how Sismonditried to prove that the “apologists of the money power” werewrong, by contending that it was quite easy to cheat whenselling.... 
 Sismondi wants to “refute” the theoretical interpret-ers of capitalist farming by arguing that the rich farmers cannot withstand the competition of the wretched peasants (quoted above), and in the end arrives at his favourite con-clusion, evidently convinced that he has proved that the sand families, he says, are engaged in agriculture. 
 When the fields are converted into pastures, no more than a tenth of this numberwill be “wanted. 
” ... The less the understanding of the process in allits complexity shown by this author, the more eagerly he resortsto childish “rule of thumb” calculations. 
 path being followed by the “English fatherland” is a “wrong one. 
” “The example of England shows us that this practice” (the development of money economy, to which Sismondi contrasts l’habitude de se fournir soi-même, “the habit of pro-viding for oneself”) “is not without its dangers” (263). 
 “Thevery system of economy” (namely, capitalist farming) “isbad, rests on a dangerous foundation, and this is what oneshould try to change” (266). 
 The concrete problem evoked by the conflict of definite interests in a definite system of economy is thus submergedin a flood of innocent wishes! But the interested parties them-selves raised the issue so sharply that to confine oneself tosuch a “solution” (as romanticism does on all other problems)became utterly impossible. 
 “But what is to be done?” Sismondi asks in despair. 
 “Open England’s ports, or close them? Doom the manufacturingor the rural workers of England to starvation and death?It is, indeed, a dreadful question; the position in which theEnglish Cabinet finds itself is one of the most delicatethat statesmen can possibly face” (260). 
 And Sismondi again and again reverts to the “general conclusion” that the sys-tem of capitalist farming is “dangerous,” that it is “dan-gerous to subordinate the whole of agriculture to a systemof speculation. 
” But “how it is possible, in England, to takemeasures, effective but at the same time gradual, such aswould raise the significance (remettraient en honneur) of the small farms, when one half of the nation, employed in the manufactories, is suffering hunger and the measures theydemand doom the other half of the nation, engaged in agri-culture, to starvation—I do not know. 
 I think the CornLaws should be considerably amended; but I advise thosewho are demanding their complete repeal to study the follow-ing problems carefully” (267)—then follow the old com-plaints and apprehensions about the decline of agriculture,the shrinking of the home market, and so forth. 
 Thus, at the very first impact with reality, romanticism suffered utter fiasco. 
 It was obliged to issue to itself a tes-timonium paupertatis and itself acknowledge receipt of it. 
 Recall how easily and simply romanticism “solved” all problems in “theory”! Protection is unwise, capitalism is afatal blunder, the road England has taken is wrong and dangerous, production must keep in step with consumption, while industry and commerce must keep in step with agri-culture, machines are advantageous only when they lead to a rise in wages or to a reduction of the working day, meansof production should not be alienated from the producer,exchange must not run ahead of production, must not leadto speculation, and so on, and so forth. 
 Romanticism coun-tered every contradiction with an appropriate sentimental phrase, answered every question with an appropriate in-nocent wish, and called the sticking of these labels uponall the facts of current life a “solution” to the problems. 
 Itis not surprising that these solutions were so charminglysimple and easy: they ignored only one little circumstance—the real interests, the conflict of which constituted the con-tradiction. 
 And when the development of this contradiction brought the romanticist face to face with one of these partic-ularly violent conflicts, such as was the struggle between theparties in England that preceded the repeal of the CornLaws, our romanticist lost his head altogether. 
 He felt per-fectly at ease in the haze of dreams and good wishes, he so skilfully composed maxims applicable to “society” in general (but inapplicable to any historically determinedsystem of society); but when he dropped from his world offantasy into t he maelstrom of real life and conflict ofinterests, he did not even have a criterion of how concreteproblems are to be solved. 
 The habit of advancing abstract propositions and of reaching abstract solutions reduced the problem to the bare formula: which partof the population should be ruined—the agricultural orthe manufacturing? And, of course, the romanticist couldnot but conclude that neither part should be ruined,that it was necessary to “turn from the path” ... but the real contradictions encompassed him so tightly that he was unable to ascend again into the haze of goodwishes, and the romanticist was obliged to give an answer . 
 Sismondi even gave two answers: first—“I do not know”; second—“on the one hand, it cannot butbe recognised; on the other hand, it must be admitted. 
” 86 On January 9, 1848, Karl Marx delivered a “speech on Free Trade” * at a public meeting in Brussels. 
 Unlike the romanticists, who declared that “political economy is nota science of calculation, but a science of morality,” he tookas the point of departure of his exposition precisely theplain and sober calculation of interests . 
 Instead of regarding the problem of the Corn Laws as one concerning a “system”chosen by a nation or as one of legislation (as Sismondilooked upon it), the speaker began by presenting it as a con-flict of interests between manufacturers and landowners,and showed how the English manufacturers tried to raisethe issue as the affair of the entire nation, tried to assurethe workers that they were acting in the interests of the na-tional welfare. 
 Unlike the romanticists, who had presentedthe problem in the shape of the considerations which a leg-islator must have in mind when carrying out the reform,the speaker reduced the problem to the conflict betweenthe real interests of the different classes of English society. 
He showed that the entire problem sprang from the necessi-ty of cheapening raw materials for the manufacturers. 
 Hedescribed the distrust of the English workers who regarded“these self-sacrificing gentlemen, Bowring, Bright and theircolleagues, as their worst enemies.... 
” “The manufacturers build great palaces at immense ex-pense, in which the Anti-Corn-Law League 88 takes up, in some respects, its official residence; they send an army ofmissionaries to all corners of England to preach the gospelof Free Trade; they have printed and distributed gratisthousands of pamphlets to enlighten the worker upon hisown interests, they spend enormous sums to make the pressfavourable to their cause; they organise a vast administra-tive system for the conduct of the Free Trade movement, andthey display all their wealth of eloquence at public meet-ings. 
 It was at one of these meetings that a worker criedout: ‘If the landlords were to sell our bones, you manufac-turers would be the first to buy them in order to put themthrough a steam-mill and make flour of them. 
’ The Englishworkers have very well understood the significance of thestruggle between the landlords and the industrial capital-*“Discours sur la libre-échange. 
”87 We are using the German translation: “Rede über die Frage des Freihandels. 
” ists. 
 They know very well that the price of bread was to be reduced in order to reduce wages, and that industrial profitwould rise by as much as rent fell. 
” Thus the very presentation of the problem is quite different from that of Sismondi. 
 The aims the speaker set himselfwere, firstly, to explain the attitude of the different classesof English society towards the problem from the angle oftheir interests; and secondly, to throw light on the significanceof the reform in the general evolution of the English socialeconomy. 
 The speaker’s views on this last point coincide with those of Sismondi in that he, too, does not see in this a particularproblem, but the general one of the development of capitalism in general, of “Free Trade” as a system. 
 “The repeal of the CornLaws in England is the greatest triumph of Free Trade in thenineteenth century. 
 ” 89 “... By the repeal of the Corn Laws, free competition, the present social economy is carried to itsextreme point. 
” * Hence, the issue presents itself to these authors as a question of whether the further development of capitalism is desirable or should be retarded, whether “dif-ferent paths” should be sought, and so forth. 
 And we knowthat their affirmative answer to this question was indeed thesolution of the general fundamental problem of the “destinyof capitalism” and not of the specific problem of the CornLaws in England, for the point of view established here wasalso applied much later in relation to other countries Theauthors held such views in the 1840s in relation to Germany,and in relation to America, ** and declared that free competi-*Die Lage der arbeitenden Klasse in England (1845). 
90 This work was written from exactly the same point of view before the repeal of the Corn Laws (1846), whereas the speech dealt with in the textwas delivered after they were repealed. 
 But the difference in time is of no importance to us: it is sufficient to compare the above-quotedarguments of Sismondi, advanced in 1827, with this speech of 1848,to see the complete identity of the elements of the problem in the case of both authors. 
 The idea of comparing Sismondi with a later Germaneconomist was borrowed by us from Handwörterbuch der Staatswissen-schaften , B. 
 V. 
, Art. 
 “Sismondi” von Lippert, Seite 679. 
 The parallel he drew was of such thrilling interest that Mr. 
 Lippert’s expositionat once lost all its woodenness ... that is to say, “objectivity,” andbecame interesting, vivacious, and even fervid. 
 **Cf. 
 Neue Zeit ,91 the recently discovered articles of Marx in Westphälisches Dampfboot . 
92 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR tion was progressive for that country; with respect to Ger-many one of them wrote, as late as the sixties, that she suffered not only from capitalism, but also from the insuf-ficient development of capitalism. 
 Let us return to the speech we have been dealing with. 
 We pointed to the fundamentally different point of view ofthe speaker, who reduced the problem to one of the interestsof the different classes in English society. 
 We see the same profound difference in his presentation of the purely theo-retical problem of the significance of the repeal of the CornLaws to the social economy. 
 For him it is not the abstractquestion of which system England should adopt, what path she should choose (as the question is put by Sismondi, whoforgets that England has a past and a present, which al-ready determine that path). 
 No, he forthwith presents the question on the basis of the present-day social and economic system ; he asks himself: what must be the next step in the development of this system following the repeal of the CornLaws? The difficultly involved in this question was that of deter-mining how the repeal of the Corn Laws would affect agricul-ture, for as regards industry its effect was clear to everybody. 
 To prove that this repeal would benefit agriculture as well, the Anti-Corn-Law League * offered a prize for the three best essays on the beneficial effect the repeal of theCorn Laws would have upon English agriculture. 
 The speaker briefly outlined the views of the three prize-winners, Hope, Morse, and Greg, and at once singled out the last-named,whose essay most scientifically and most strictly followedthe principles laid down by classical political economy. 
 Writing mainly for big farmers, Greg, himself a big manu-facturer, showed that the repeal of the Corn Laws would thrust the small farmers out of agriculture and they would turn to industry, but it would benefit the big farmerswho would be able to rent land on longer leases, invest morecapital in the land, employ more machines and get along withless labour, which was bound to become cheaper with thefall in the price of corn. 
 The landlords, however, would have to be content with a lower rent because land of poorer *These words are in English in the original. 
— Ed. 
 quality would drop out of cultivation, as it would be unable to withstand the competition of cheap imported grain. 
 The speaker proved to be quite right in regarding this forecast and this open defence of capitalism in agricultureas the most scientific. 
 History has confirmed his forecast. 
“The repeal of the Corn Laws gave a marvellous impulseto English agriculture.... 
 A positive decrease of the agricul-tural population went hand in hand with increase of the area under cultivation, with more intensive cultivation, un-heard-of accumulation of the capital incorporated with thesoil, and devoted to its working, an augmentation in theproducts of the soil without parallel in the history of Eng-lish agriculture, plethoric rent-rolls of landlords, and grow-ing wealth of the capitalist farmers.... 
 Greater outlay of capital per acre, and, as a consequence, more rapidconcentration of farms, were essential conditions of the newmethod. 
” * But the speaker, of course, did not confine himself to recognising Greg’s arguments as being the most correct. 
 Coming from the mouth of Greg, they were the reasoning of a Free Trader who was discussing English agriculture ingeneral, and was trying to prove that the repeal of theCorn Laws would benefit the nation as a whole. 
 After whatwe have said above it is evident that these were not theviews of the speaker. 
 *This was written in 1867. 
93 To explain the rise in rents, one must bear in mind the law established by the modern analysis ofdifferential rent, namely, that a rise in rent is possible simultaneously with a reduction in the price of corn . 
 “When the English corn duties were abolished in 1846 the English manufacturers believed thatthey had thereby turned the landowning aristocracy into paupers. 
Instead, they became richer than ever. 
 How did this occur? Verysimply. 
 In the first place, the farmers were now compelled by contractto invest £12 per acre annually instead of £8. 
 And, secondly, thelandlords, being strongly represented in the Lower House too, grantedthemselves a large government subsidy for drainage projects andother permanent improvements of their land. 
 Since no total displace-ment of the poorest soil took place, but rather, at worst, it be-came employed for other purposes—and mostly only temporarily—rents rose in proportion to the increased investment of capital, andthe landed aristocracy consequently was better off than ever before”(Das Kapital , III, 2, 259). 
 94 He explained that a reduction in the price of corn, so glorified by the Free Traders, meant an inevitable reduction in wages, the cheapening of the commodity “labour” (more exactly: labour-power); that the drop in the price of cornwould never be able to compensate the workers for the dropin wages, firstly, because with the drop in the price of cornit would be more difficult for the worker to save on the con-sumption of bread with a view to buying other articles; secondly, because the progress of industry cheapens articles of consumption, substituting spirits for beer, potatoes forbread, cotton for wool and linen, and, by all this, loweringthe worker’s standard of requirements and living. 
 Thus we see that apparently the speaker establishes the elements of the problem just as Sismondi does: he too ad-mits that the ruination of the small farmers and the impov-erishment of the workers in industry and agriculture willbe the inevitable consequences of Free Trade. 
 It is here thatour Narodniks, who are also distinguished for their inimi-table skill in “citing,” usually stop quoting “excerpts,” andwith complete satisfaction declare that they fully “agree. 
” But these methods merely show that they do not un-derstand, firstly, the tremendous difference in the presentationof the problem, which we indicated above; secondly, theyoverlooked the fact that it is only here that the radical difference between the new theory and romanticism begins : the romanticist turns from the concrete problems of actual development to dreams, whereas the realist takes the established facts as his criterion in definitely solving theconcrete problem. 
 Pointing to the forthcoming improvement in the condi-tions of the workers the speaker went on to say: “Thereupon the economists will tell you: “ ‘Well, we admit that competition among the workers, which will certainly not have diminished under Free Trade,will very soon bring wages into harmony with the lowprice of commodities. 
 But, on the other hand, the lowprice of commodities will increase consumption, the largerconsumption will require increased production, which will be followed by a larger demand for hands, and this larger demand for hands will be followed by a rise inwages. 
’ “The whole line of argument amounts to this: Free Trade increases productive forces . 
 If industry keeps growing, if wealth, if the productive power, if, in a word, productive capital increases the demand for labour, the price of labour,and consequently the rate of wages, rise also. 
 The most favourable condition for the worker is the growth of capital. 
This must be admitted . 
 * If capital remains stationary, in-dustry will not merely remain stationary but will decline and in this case the worker will be the first victim. 
 He goes to the wall before the capitalist. 
 And in the case where cap-ital keeps growing, in the circumstances which we havesaid are the best for the worker, what will be his lot? He will go to the wall just the same.... 
” And quoting data given byEnglish economists the speaker went on to explain in detail how the concentration of capital increases the division of labour, which cheapens labour-power by substitutingunskilled for skilled labour, how the machines oust theworkers, how big capital ruins the small industrialists andsmall rentiers and leads to the intensification of crises,which still further increase the number of unemployed. 
 The conclusion he drew from his analysis was that Free Trade signifies nothing but freedom for the development of cap-ital. 
 Thus, the speaker was able to find a criterion for the solution of the problem which at first sight seemed to leadto the hopeless dilemma that brought Sismondi to a halt: both Free Trade and its restraint equally lead to the ruin of the workers. 
 The criterion is the development of the pro-ductive forces . 
 It was immediately evident that the prob-lem was treated from the historical angle: instead ofcomparing capitalism with some abstract society as itshould be (i. 
e. 
, fundamentally with a utopia), the author compared it with the preceding stages of social economy, compared the different stages of capitalism as they succes-sively replaced one another, and established the fact that the productive forces of society develop thanks to the devel-opment of capitalism . 
 By applying scientific criticism to the arguments of the Free Traders he was able to avoid the *Our italics. 
 mistake usually made by the romanticists who, denying that the arguments have any importance, “throw out the baby with the bath water”; he was able to pick out their sound kernel, i. 
e. 
, the undoubted fact of enormous technical progress. 
 OurNarodniks, with their characteristic wit, would, of course,have concluded that this author, who had so openly taken the side of big capital against the small producer , was an “apolo-gist of money power,” the more so that he was addressing continental Europe and applying the conclusions he drew from English life to his own country, where at that time large-scale machine industry was only taking its first timid steps. 
And yet, precisely this example (like a host of similar exam-ples from West-European history) could help them studythe thing they are not at all able to understand (perhaps they do not wish to do so?), namely, that to admit that big capital is progressive as compared with small production,is very, very far from being “apologetics. 
” It is sufficient to recall the above-quoted chapter from Sismondi and this speech to be convinced that the latteris superior both from the standpoint of theory and of hos-tility towards every kind of “apologetics. 
” The speaker de-scribed the contradictions that accompany the developmentof big capital much more exactly, fully, straightforwardlyand frankly than the romanticists ever did. 
 But he neverdescended to uttering a single sentimental phrase bewailingthis development. 
 He never uttered a word anywhere about a possibility of “diversion from the path. 
 ” He under-stood that by means of such phrases people merely cover upthe fact that they themselves are “diverting” from theproblem reality confronts them with, i. 
e. 
, a certain economicreality, a certain economic development and certain intereststhat spring from this development. 
 The above-mentioned fully scientific criterion enabled him to solve this problem while remaining a consistentrealist. 
 “Do not imagine, gentlemen,” said the speaker, “that in criticising freedom of trade we have the least in-tention of defending the system of protection. 
” And he went on to point out that under the contemporary system of social economy both Free Trade and protection rested onthe same basis, briefly referred to the “breaking-up” process of the old economic life and of the old semi-patriarchal re-lationships in West-European countries carried through by capitalism in England and on the Continent, and indicated the social fact that under certain conditions Free Tradehastens this “break-up. 
” * And he concluded with the words: “It is in this sense alone, gentlemen, that I vote in favour ofFree Trade. 
” 96 *This progressive significance of the repeal of the Corn Laws was also clearly indicated by the author of “Die Lage” even before the repeal took place (loc. 
 cit. 
, p. 
 179)95 and he specially stressed the influence it would have upon the consciousness of the producers. 
 Published according to the 1899 editionWritten in exile in summer 1897 Appendix written in autumn 1897 Published in pamphlet form in Geneva in 1899THE NEW FACTORY LAW97 I WHY WAS THE NEW FACTORY LAW PASSED? On June 2, 1897, a new factory law was passed reducing working hours in mills and factories and establishing holi-days. 
 The workers of St. 
 Petersburg have long been waiting for this law, which the government promised in 1896, afterthe fright it received from the mass workers’ strike in thespring of that year. 
 This mass strike at the cotton-spinningand cotton-weaving mills was followed by others, and inall cases the workers demanded shorter working hours. 
 The government took savage reprisals against the strikers; it arrested masses of workers right and left and exiled themwithout trial. 
 It also tried, in its fright, to influence theworkers by silly talk about the employers’ Christian lovefor the workers (Minister Witte’s circular to the factory in-spectors issued in 1895-96). 
 But the workers only jeered at this talk, and no amount of persecution could check the movement, in which tens and hundreds of thousands ofworkers were involved. 
 It was then that the governmentrealised that it would have to yield and concede to at leastsome of the workers’ demands. 
 In addition to the lies and cantand savage persecution of strikers, the St. 
 Petersburg workers received in answer to their strikes the government’s promise of a law to reduce working hours. 
 This promise was an-nounced to the workers with unusual solemnity in special no-tices 98 from the Minister of Finance, which were posted up in the factories. 
 The workers waited impatiently for the fulfil-ment of the promise, they expected the law to be promulgat-ed by April 19, 1897, and were already prepared to be-lieve that this government promise, like numerous other gov-ernment statements, was a gross lie. 
 This time, however, the government kept its promise, a law was promulgated— but what kind of a law we shall see further on. 
 But first we must examine the circumstances which prompted the government to keep its promise. 
 Our government began to occupy itself with the problem of reducing working hours long before 1896. 
 The problemwas raised fifteen years ago: the St. 
 Petersburg employerspetitioned for a law of this kind as far back as 1883. 
 Simi-lar petitions were made on several other occasions by other employers, too (notably the Polish), but they were allpigeon-holed, as were a host of other projects for improvingthe workers’ conditions. 
 The Russian Government does nothurry to deal with such projects; they lie pigeon-holed fordecades. 
 Now when it comes to handing over several mil-lion rubles to loyal Russian landowners who “petition” for doles from the public funds, or to granting a subsidyor bonus to the “downtrodden” employers, then the RussianGovernment does hurry, and the wheels of the bureaucraticand ministerial machine begin to revolve at full speed, asthough “greased” with “palm-oil. 
” When matters concern the workers, however, not only are draft laws pigeon-holed for years and decades (for example, the Employers’ Liabil-ity Bill has been in the “drafting stage,” I think, for overten years), but even laws already passed are not enforced,for the officials of His Imperial Majesty’s Government areloath to incommode Messrs. 
 the Employers (for example, the law of 1886, which makes it incumbent upon employ-ers to provide hospitals for their workers, has in the vastmajority of cases not been enforced to this day). 
 The ques-tion is, what caused action on a long-standing issue to betaken so quickly on this occasion? Why was it settled atonce, given priority over other measures and pushed through the Ministry and the Council of State? Why did it at once assume the form of a bill and become law? Obviously, therewas some force that spurred on the officials, stirred theminto action, broke down their stubborn reluctance to “pes-ter” our native employers with new demands. 
 This forcewas the St. 
 Petersburg workers and the huge strikes they conducted in 1895-96, which, thanks to the assistance the workers received from the Social-Democrats (throughthe League of Struggle), were accompanied by the presenta-tion of definite demands to the government and by the dis-tribution of socialist proclamations and leaflets among the workers. 
 The government realised that no amount of police persecution would break the determination of theworking masses, once they had become conscious of theirinterests, had united for a struggle, and were led by theparty of Social-Democrats, the champions of the workers’cause. 
 The government was forced to make concessions. 
 The workers compelled the government to pass the new factory law, they won it from their bitterest enemy, just as they did in the case of the law of June 3, 1886, passed eleven yearsago, on factory rules, fines, wage rates, etc. 
 At that timethe workers’ struggle was waged most vigorously in Moscowand Vladimir gubernias. 
 It took the form of numerous strikes; then, too, the workers presented plain and precise demands to the government, and during the famous Morozovstrike, conditions drawn up by the workers themselves werehanded up to the inspector from the crowd. 
 These conditionsstated, for example, that the workers demanded a reduc-tion of fines. 
 The law of June 3, 1886, passed soon after, was a direct answer to the workers’ demands and contained regulations governing fines. 
 * And so it is today. 
 In 1896, the workers demanded a re-duction of working hours, and backed their demands byhuge strikes. 
 The government is now answering this demand by promulgating a law reducing working hours. 
 At that time, in 1886, the workers’ revolts compelled the government to yield, and it tried to reduce its concessions to a minimum,to leave loopholes for the employers, to delay the introductionof the new regulations, to do the workers out of as many oftheir demands as possible. 
 Today, in 1897, the governmentis in the same way yielding only to the workers’ revolts, and in the same way is trying by all the means in its power to reduce the concessions to the workers, to haggle , to do them out of an hour or two, even to lengthen working hoursas compared with those proposed by the employers; it istrying to give the employers the benefit of a few more holi-days by not making them compulsory; it is trying to delay *See pamphlet Explanation of the Law on Fines . 
 (In the present volume, p. 
 29. 
— Ed. 
) the introduction of the new system by postponing the op-eration of the principal regulations, pending future instruc-tions by the ministers. 
 Thus the laws of June 3, 1886, and of June 2, 1897—which are the principal factory actsin Russia—are both forced concessions, won by the Russianworkers from the police government. 
 Both show how the Russian Government treats the most legitimate demands ofthe workers. 
 II WHAT SHOULD BE CONSIDERED WORKING TIME? Let us examine in detail the law of June 2, 1897. 
 * A s we have said, the new law, firstly, limits the working day for all workers, and, secondly, establishes compulsory rest-days on Sundays and holidays. 
 Before laying down rulesabout the amount of working time the law must first de-fine what is meant by working time. 
 The new law lays downthe following rule: “Working time, or the number of work-ing hours per day, shall in the case of every worker be deemed to be the time during which, according to the labour contract, he is obliged to be on the premises of the estab-lishment and at the disposal of the manager for the per-formance of work. 
” Hence, all the time that the workerspends at the factory, either according to schedule or atthe manager’s demand, is to be considered as working time. 
 Whether the worker, during this time, is engaged at his actual or customary work, or whether the manager ordershim to do some other job, or even to just wait , makes no difference: all the time the worker spends at the factorymust be considered as working time. 
 For example, in somefactories, after the bell goes on Saturdays, the workers re-main to clean the machines. 
 According to the law, time spent on cleaning machines is also to be regarded as part of working time . 
 Consequently, if an employer does not pay the worker for cleaning machines, it means that he is mak-ing gratuitous use of the hired worker’s working time . 
 Hence, if an employer who has hired a worker at piece rates com-pels him to wait, or to do some other job without special *It comes into force in November 1898. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR pay (every worker knows that this often happens), it means that the employer is making gratuitous use of the hired work-er’s working time . 
 The workers should remember this defini-tion of working time as laid down in the new law and, on thestrength of it, resist every attempt on an employer’s partto make gratuitous use of labour-power. 
 Naturally, such adefinition of working time should follow logically from thelabour contract: some workers may think this so obvious that it is not worth talking about. 
 But the government, in its anxiety to serve the capitalists, deliberately obscures agreat deal of what is obvious to every worker. 
 So here too thegovernment has tried to leave a little loophole for thosegentlemen, the employers. 
 The law defines working time asthe time the worker is obliged under the labour contract t o be in the factory. 
 But what if the labour contract does not specify how many hours a day the worker is obliged to be inthe factory? It often happens at engineering plants, for ex-ample, that all the contract between the workers and theemployer says is that the workers undertake to make a cer-tain article (a machine part, a certain number of bolts or nuts, etc. 
) at a certain price; but nothing is said about how much time the worker has to spend on the job. 
 Is thenew law about the number of working hours per day ap-plicable in such cases? Common sense, of course, would sug-gest that it is; after all, the worker is employed in the facto-ry—how can this not be considered working time? But the “common sense” of the capitalists, and of the government that supports them, is of a special brand. 
 According to the let-ter of the clause we have quoted, the law on the reductionof working hours can easily be evaded in such cases. 
 Theemployer may argue that in the contract he did not oblige the worker to be in the factory—and there you are. 
 And since not every employer is so smart as to see this trick, the officials of the Ministry of Finance hastened to draw theattention of Russia’s merchants to this useful little loopholein the new law. 
 The Ministry of Finance has long beenissuing its own special sheet, Vestnik Finansov , Promy-shlennosti i Torgovli 99—one of those official periodicals which, besides publishing government decisions, do their best to magnify the achievements of the Russian capitalistsand to extol the government’s solicitude for the pockets of the bankers, factory owners, merchants and landowners, un-der the guise of solicitude for the people. 
 Shortly after the new law was passed this sheet published an article on it (Vestnik Finansov , No. 
 26, 1897) explaining its significance at length and arguing that it was precisely the government’sfunction to be concerned about the health of the workers. 
Well, it was in this article that the officials did their bestto show the employers how to get round the new law. 
 This article clearly explains that the new law cannot be applied in those cases where the labour contract says nothing aboutworking time, for when a worker contracts to do a definitejob “ he is not a hired worker , but a person who accepts an order . 
” Thus, it is not very hard for an employer to dispense with the inconvenient law: all he has to do is to call the work-er a “person who accepts an order” and not a worker! Instead of stating that working time is deemed to be the time a worker is in the factory at the disposal of the employer, the law is deliberately worded more vaguely and speaks of the time during which the worker is obliged under contract to be in the factory. 
 One would think that this amounts to the same thing, but actually, here again they have not scrupled to resort to deliberate vagueness to the workers’detriment! III TO WHAT EXTENT DOES THE NEW LAW REDUCE WORKING HOURS? The law of June 2, 1897, restricts working time on day-work to 11 2 hours. 
 On Saturdays, and on the eve of holidays, it restricts it to 10 hours. 
 Hence, the reduction ofworking hours under the new law is miserly. 
 There are quite a number of workers—and in St. 
 Petersburg they most likely form the majority—for whom this law will mean no reduction of working hours at all; rather the contrary, it threatens to lengthen them. 
 The ordinary working dayin St. 
 Petersburg factories is 10 to 10 2 hours. 
 The leg-islative enactment of such excessive working hours clearly shows that this law was an answer to the demands of workers at the St. 
 Petersburg cotton-spinning and cotton-weaving mills. 
For these workers, the new law does perhaps mean a reduc-tion of working hours, since most of them worked 12 to 14 hours a day. 
 (We shall explain later why we say “perhaps. 
”) The law lays down a ten-hour day for artisans, and also for factories under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of War. 
The government, however, decided that factory workersmight be made to work longer hours! Even the St. 
 Peters-burg employers petitioned the government for a reductionof the working day to 11 hours! The government decided to throw in an extra half-hour for the benefit of the Mos-cow employers, who compel their workers to keep going,in two shifts, right round the clock, and whom the workersapparently have not yet taught a proper lesson. 
 The Rus-sian Government, which boasts of its solicitude for theworkers’ welfare, has in fact proved to be as stingy as a petty huckster. 
 It has proved to be more stingy than the employers themselves, who squeeze extra thousands outof the workers as a result of every extra half-hour of work. 
The workers can clearly see from this example that the gov-ernment not only protects the interests of the employers,but protects the interests of the worst of them, and that it is a far worse enemy of the workers than the capitalist class. 
 The St. 
 Petersburg workers would have won shorter hours for themselves and for all Russian workers had not the gov-ernment interfered . 
 The united workers had forced the em-ployers to yield; the St. 
 Petersburg employers were preparedto concede the workers’ demands; but the government for-bade the employers to yield, so as not to create a precedent for the workers. 
 Then the majority of the St. 
 Petersburgemployers realised that they would have to make concessionsto the workers, and petitioned the government to reduce theworking day to 11 hours. 
 But the government protects theinterests of the employers of all Russia, and not only of St. 
 Petersburg, and since there are employers in Holy Russia who are far more stingy than those of St. 
 Petersburg, thegovernment, in its desire to be “fair,” could not allow theSt. 
 Petersburg employers to rob the workers too little . 
 The employers of St. 
 Petersburg must not run too far ahead ofthose in the rest of Russia; and so the government adds a half-hour to the working day requested by the capitalists. 
 Clearly, the workers must draw three lessons from thisconduct of the government: First lesson: Russia’s advanced workers must do their utmost to draw the more backward workers into the move-ment. 
 Unless the entire mass of Russian workers is en-listed in the struggle for the workers’ cause, the advancedworkers of the capital cannot hope to win much, even ifthey force their employers to yield; for the government is so exceedingly “fair” that it does not allow the better em-ployers to make substantial concessions to the workers. 
 Sec-ond lesson: the Russian Government is a far worse enemy of the Russian workers than the Russian employers are, forthe government not only protects the interests of the em-ployers, not only resorts, for this purpose, to brutal perse-cution of the workers, to arrests, deportations and the use oftroops against unarmed workers, but what is more, protects the interests of the most stingy employers and resists any tendency of the better employers to yield to the workers. 
Third lesson: in order to win themselves human working con-ditions and an eight-hour day, for which the workers are nowstriving all over the world, the Russian workers must relyon the strength of their own organisation alone and steadily win one concession after another from the government. 
 The government is, as it were, bargaining with the workers, try-ing to see whether it can impose an extra half-hour or so. 
But the workers will show that they know how to stand upfor their demands. 
 The government is, as it were, testingthe workers’ patience, to see whether it can get off with quite a cheap concession. 
 But the workers will show that they have patience enough for a most stubborn struggle,since to them it is a fight for their lives, a fight to preventthe working people from being utterly downtrodden andoppressed. 
 IV WHAT DOES THE LAW CONSIDER “NIGHT-TIME” FOR THE WORKERS? “Night-time shall mean the period between 9 p. 
m. 
 and 5 a. 
m. 
 when one shift operates, and between 10 p. 
m. 
 and 4 a. 
m. 
 when two or more shifts operate. 
” So runs the new law. 
 “Night” for the common people, who have to toil all theirlives for others, and “night” for the fine folk, who live on the labour of others, are, according to the “law,” two entirely different things. 
 During the greater part of the year both in St. 
 Petersburg and in Moscow it is still quite dark, still night at 4 a. 
m. 
 But the Russian law lays it down that the workermust adjust his whole life to the interests of capital; theworker must believe that day-time begins without fail af-ter four in the morning, even if it may still be several hoursbefore sunrise. 
 And if the worker does not live in the facto-ry grounds, he has to get up at three o’clock, and even earli-er, in order to be at the factory at four! For St. 
 Petersburgofficials the “day” begins at noon, or even at 1 p. 
m. 
; but then,officials are a special type of people.... 
 The workers’ “day”only ends at ten at night, and if the streets are quite darkwhen he leaves the factory, he should not be disconcerted by this: he should remember and believe that the “day” has only just ended—for so the law decrees. 
 Why not passa law that makes the worker’s “day” begin when the factorywhistle summons him to work, and end when that samewhistle summons a new shift? That would be franker andfairer. 
 In Switzerland they already have a law which de-fines what night-time is for the worker; but how can you expect the Swiss to be up to all the tricks devised by Rus-sian police officials? It appears that among these terribleSwiss a working man’s “night” is the same as that of otherpeople, namely, from 8 p. 
m. 
 to 5 (or 6) a. 
m, The only re-striction on “night-work” in the new law is that workers engaged even part of the night shall not work more than ten hours. 
 That is all. 
 The law does not prohibitnight-work. 
 In this respect, too, the law falls short ofthe petitions of the St. 
 Petersburg employers, who four-teen years ago (in 1883) appealed for the prohibition of night-work for adults. 
 Consequently, the St. 
 Petersburg workers would have won more from the employers in this respect too, had not the government interfered in order to protect the interests of the most retrograde employers in Russia. 
The government would not listen to the employers ofSt. 
 Petersburg, for it did not want to offend those in Moscow,most of whom compel their workers to work at night. 
 As usual, the government tried to mask its subservience to the interests of the worst employers by deceptive talk and assurances. 
 In an article explaining the new law, Vestnik Finansov , published by the Ministry of Finance, stated that in other countries (France, for instance) night-work is forbidden. 
 But, it declared, our law cannot do this. 
 “It is not always possible to forbid establishments to work afull twenty-four hours: a large number of industries, bytheir very nature, require continuous operation. 
” This is obviously quite a lame excuse. 
 We are not dis-cussing special industries which require continuous opera-tion, but industries in general. 
 Even under the present law continuous operation is impossible when work is done intwo shifts unless overtime is worked, since day-work hasbeen fixed at 11 2 hours and night-work at 10 hours, or 212 hours in all. 
 That is why the new law makes special provision for industries in which continuous operation is neces-sary (through special ministerial regulations, of which more anon). 
 Consequently, there was absolutely nothing to makethe prohibition of night-work “impossible. 
” We have alreadysaid that the government would have us believe that it isconcerned for the workers’ health. 
 Here is what the Ministryof Finance says about night-work: “Night-work is undoubt-edly more fatiguing and unhealthy and, in general, less nat-ural than work by daylight; and it is more detrimental thelonger and more systematic it is. 
 It might seem that in viewof the detrimental character of night-work, it would be bet-ter to prohibit it for adult male workers too (just as it isprohibited for women and for adolescents of both sexes in some industries, and in the case of children everywhere). 
 But there are no grounds for this even from the standpoint ofthe worker’s general welfare; moderate night-work is lessdetrimental to him than excessively long hours of day-workfor the same pay. 
” You see how skilful Russian Governmentofficials are in throwing dust into the eyes of the people! Even their protection of the interests of the worst employ-ers is presented as solicitude for the “worker’s welfare. 
”And how brazen is the justification invented by the Minis-try: “moderate night-work,” don’t you see, “is less detri-mental than excessively long hours of day-work for the samepay. 
” The Ministry wants to say that the worker is driven to work at night by low wages, so low that the worker cannot get along without working excessively long hours. 
 And so,the Ministry, confident that this will always be so, that the worker will never succeed in winning better wages, cyn-ically declares: since the worker has to toil monstrously long hours to feed his family, is it not all the same to him whether he works the extra hours in the day-time or atnight? Of course, if the majority of the Russian workersgo on earning the same miserable wages as at present, wantwill drive them to work extra hours. 
 But how insolent itis to justify the sanctioning of night-work on the plea of the worker’s downtrodden condition! “The pay for the work will be the same”—that is the main thing for the servitorsof capital—“and with the present level of wages, the workercannot get along without working extra hours. 
” And bureau-crats like these, who concoct kulak arguments in the inter-ests of the stingy employers, have the audacity to talk about the “standpoint of the worker’s general welfare. 
” But are they not too confident in hoping that the worker willalways be so downtrodden, that he will always agree tothis “same pay,” that is, to the same beggarly remunera-tion for his labour? Low wages and long hours always gohand in hand; the one is impossible without the other. 
 When pay is low, the worker is forced to work extra hours, and to work at night, in order to earn enough to live on. 
 Whenworking hours are excessively long, pay will always be low,because when working long hours the worker produces lessarticles per hour and of far worse quality than in a shortworking day, and because the worker, crushed as he is by excessive toil, will always remain downtrodden and powerless under the yoke of capital. 
 Consequently, when the Ministry,which serves the Russian factory owners, proposes to preservethe present preposterously low wages of the Russian workers,and at the same time talks about the “workers’ welfare,” itshows as clearly as clear can be that its phrases are sheer cant and lies. 
 V HOW DOES THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE TRY TO PROVE THAT TO RESTRICT OVERTIME WOULD BE “UNFAIR” TO THE WORKER? We have referred to the new law as a law to reduce the working day. 
 We have said that it restricts the workingday to 11 2 hours (10 hours in the case of night-work). 
 But actually this is not so, it is far worse. 
 All the restrictions provided for in the law relate only to ordinary, normal, regular work, but not to overtime . 
 Consequently, the employ-er’s “right” to compel the workers to work any number ofhours, even twenty-four at a stretch, is not restricted at all. 
 Here is what the law says about overtime: “Overtime shall mean work performed by the worker in an industrialestablishment during hours other than those in which he is obliged to work by factory rules. 
 Overtime shall be per-mitted only by special agreement between the manager ofthe industrial establishment and the worker. 
 The labourcontract may contain stipulations only as regards such over-time work as is necessitated by the technical conditions ofthe industry. 
” This is a highly important clause of the new law, and its edge is directed entirely against the workers, leaving the employer a free hand. 
 Hitherto overtime hasbeen regulated by custom; there has been no mention of itin any law. 
 Now the government has legalised overtime. 
 The stipulation in the law that such work shall require a“special agreement” between worker and employer is just an empty and utterly meaningless phrase. 
 All work is done “by agreement” between the workers and the employers. 
 Theworkers are not serfs (although many a Russian official wouldlike nothing better than to turn them into such); they workfor hire, that is, by agreement. 
 There was no point in stipu-lating that overtime shall be done by agreement. 
 The gov-ernment inserted that meaningless phrase into the law in order to create the impression that it wants to restrict over-time. 
 As a matter of fact the law does not restrict it at all. 
Formerly the master used to say to the worker: “If you wantto work overtime, all right; if not, here’s your discharge!”—and now he will say the same. 
 Only formerly it was done by custom; now it will be done with the sanction of the law. 
 Formerly, an employer who dismissed a worker for re-fusing to work overtime could not claim the support of thelaw; now the law directly suggests to him how he can oppressthe worker. 
 Instead of restricting overtime, this clause ofthe law may easily render it more prevalent. 
 The law even permits the employer to include the demand for overtime in the contract when “it is necessitated by the technicalconditions of the industry,” This reservation will cause no inconvenience to the employer at all. 
 How is one to decide which work is “necessitated by the technical conditions of the industry,” and which is not? Who will investigate it? If an employer states that the job he has given a worker todo out of hours is “necessitated by the technical conditionsof the industry,” how can he be refuted? Nobody will in-vestigate it, nobody will check the employer’s statement. 
The law has only strengthened the arbitrary powers of the employers by suggesting to them a particularly reliable way of oppressing the workers. 
 Now, all the employer has to do is to stipulate in the contract that the worker has no right to refuse to work over-time when “necessitated by the technical conditions of theindustry,” and the trick is done! Let the worker decline to work overtime—he will simply be discharged. 
 And where (thinks the employer) will you find a worker who will attemptto prove that the work was not “necessitated by the technicalconditions of the industry”! The very idea of a worker makingsuch a complaint is ridiculous. 
 Needless to say, there willnever be any such complaints, and they would be useless if they were made. 
 The government has therefore quite legally endowed the employers with arbitrary powers as regardsovertime. 
 How eager the Ministry of Finance is in its hasteto serve the employers and to teach them how to make thewidest use of overtime under the protection of the new legis-lation is very clearly shown by the following argument in Vestnik Finansov : “Overtime is also necessary in the case of rush orders, which the employers cannot possibly foresee * in industries operating for definite and brief seasons, if theowner of the establishment finds it impossible or difficult toincrease the number of workers. 
” You see how skilfully the law is “interpreted” by the zealous lackeys of the employers installed in the Ministry of Finance! The law only speaks of overtime necessitatedby technical conditions, but the Ministry of Finance hastensto consider as “necessitated” overtime due to “unforeseen” (?!) *The old song! Every year Russian factories—especially those in the central regions—receive rush orders for the Nizhni-NovgorodFair; and every year they solemnly assure all the simpletons whobelieve them, or who pretend to believe them, that they were unable to foresee this!... orders, and even when the employer finds it “difficult” to increase the number of workers! Why, that is simply mak-ing fools of the workers! Any astute employer can always say that he finds it “difficult. 
” Increasing the number ofworkers means hiring others, which means reducing the num-ber of unemployed hanging round the factory gate, meanslessening competition among workers, making them moreexacting in their demands and, perhaps, having to agree to pay higher wages. 
 It goes without saying that there is not an employer who would not consider this to be “difficult”for him. 
 With such arbitrary powers for the employersto demand overtime, the law on the reduction of the workingday is robbed of all value. 
 There will be no reduction at allfor vast numbers of workers, since they will continue to work 15 to 18 hours a day and more, remaining at the factory at night to do overtime. 
 The absurdity of a law to reduce theworking day which does not forbid (or at least restrict) over-time is so obvious that in all the preliminary drafts of the lawit was proposed to restrict overtime. 
 As far back as 1883,the St. 
 Petersburg employers (the employers themselves!) peti-tioned to have overtime restricted to one hour a day. 
 The government, scared by the St. 
 Petersburg strikes of 1895-96,immediately appointed a commission to draft a bill to reduceworking hours; this commission also recommended that over-time be restricted, namely, to 120 hours a year. 
 * By reject-ing every proposal to restrict overtime in any degree what-soever, the government definitely set out to protect the interests of the worst of the employers, openly legalisedthe complete subjection of the workers, and made it quiteclear that it intended to leave everything as it was beforeand to make shift with meaningless phrases. 
 In its anxietyto serve the interests of the employers, the Ministry of Finance went so far as to try to prove that any restriction of overtime would be “unfair to the worker himself. 
” Hereare its arguments, which should give every worker food forthought. 
 “To deprive the worker of the right to work at thefactory more than a fixed number of hours a day would be *Even the Ministry of Finance itself, in its interpretation of the new law, was obliged to admit that “the sanctioning of overtime seems to be inappropriate” ( Vestnik Finansov ). 
 difficult in practice” (Why? Because the factory inspectors are very remiss in the performance of their duties, fearing noth-ing so much as to offend the employers? Or because so long as the Russian worker has no rights and is inarticulate, itwill be difficult to carry out any reforms for his benefit? TheMinistry of Finance has unwittingly let the cat out of thebag: indeed, as long as the Russian workers, like the Russianpeople in general, stand disfranchised in face of a police government, as long as they have no political rights, no reforms can be effective) ... “and would be unfair to the work-ers: a man should not be punished for seeking the meansof subsistence, for occasionally exerting his strength evenabove the limit beyond which his work may prove detrimen-tal to his health. 
” See how humane and philanthropic the Russian Government is! Bow in gratitude, Russian workers! The government is so merciful, that it “does not rob” you ofthe “right” to work 18 hours a day, even 24 if you like. 
 Thegovernment is so fair that it does not want to punish youwhen the employer forces you to overstrain yourself at thejob! In all other countries, it is the employer, not the worker, who is punished if work is done at the factory over and above the regular hours. 
 Our officials have forgotten that. 
 Indeed,how could Russian officials take the risk of punishing the em-ployers! Perish the thought! We shall soon see that the em-ployers will not be punished even if they break every clause ofthis new law. 
 In all other countries, the workers, in their “search for the means of subsistence,” have the right to organise unions, mutual benefit societies, to openly resistthe employer, to present their demands to him, to conductstrikes. 
 In our country this is not allowed. 
 On the otherhand, however, our workers have been granted the “right”to work any number of “extra” hours a day. 
 Why did these humane officials forget to add that our fair government “does not rob” the Russian worker of the “right” to be sentto prison without trial, or to be beaten up by any policebashi-bazouk for every attempt to protect himself from theoppression of the capitalists? VI WHAT POWERS DOES THE NEW LAW GRANT THE MINISTERS? We have already shown that on the most essential points the new law has not laid down any obligatory, hard and fastrules. 
 The government has preferred to grant the fullest possible powers to the administration (namely, the ministers) to establish all sorts of rules and privileges in the interestsof employers, to hamper the application of the new law, etc. 
The powers granted to the ministers by the new law are ex-tremely broad and extensive. 
 The ministers (namely, theMinister of Finance or the Minister of Railways, etc. 
, in concurrence with the Minister of Internal Affairs) are “empow-ered” to issue detailed regulations governing the applicationof the new law. 
 A host of questions relating to all the clausesof the new law in all and sundry respects are left entirely to the discretion of the ministers. 
 The powers of the ministersare so vast that they are virtually the sole executors of the new law; if they want to, they can issue regulations which will really enforce it; or, if they want to, they can act sothat the law will be scarcely enforced at all. 
 And, indeed,see what regulations the ministers are empowered to issue“in pursuance of the present law” (that is the way the law putsit. 
 We have already seen how smart the Ministry of Finance can be when acting “in pursuance” of the law—it will act in such a way that the workers, in its opinion, will only have tobe thankful that the government does not punish them forworking too much and does not “deprive them of the right”to work even 24 hours a day). 
 We would enumerate all thevarious categories of these regulations if that were possible; but the fact is that, in addition to the questions enumerated in the law which are to be settled by the ministerial regu-lations, the law also empowers them to issue other regulations without any restriction. 
 The ministers may issue regulationsgoverning working hours. 
 That is to say, it is not enough tohave a law governing working hours; there are to be minis-terial regulations for the same thing. 
 The ministers may issue regulations concerning shifts; but, of course, they mayalso not, so as not to inconvenience the employers. 
 Theministers have been empowered to issue regulations govern-ing the number of shifts a day, meal times, etc. 
 That is what the law says: et cetera ( and so forth ); in other words, the ministers are empowered to issue any regulations they like. 
 If they don’t like, there will be no regulations on mealtimes at all, and the employers will go on oppressing theworkers as they do now, not allowing them to go home fordinner, and not allowing mothers to go home to feed theirchildren. 
 It is left to the ministers to issue regulations gov-erning overtime, namely, indicating when it shall be permitted, how frequently, and what record shall be kept. 
Consequently, here the ministers have a perfectly free hand. 
They may even alter the requirements of the law, that is, they may strengthen or mitigate them (the law deliberately stipulates the right of the ministers to mitigate the require-ments of the new law in respect of the employers) in three cases: firstly, “when same is deemed necessary owing to thecharacter of the industry (continuity and so forth). 
” This“and so forth” is also in the law, thus enabling the minis-ters to plead any “character of the industry” they like. 
Secondly, “owing to the nature of the work (tending of boilers or transmission belts, current and emergency repairs, and so forth). 
” Here we have “and so forth” again! Thirdly,“and in other important and exceptional cases. 
” Further,the ministers may determine which industries are particular-ly detrimental to the health of the workers (or they maynot: the law does not compel, but only authorises them to do so ... although they had that authority before, but never wanted to exercise it!) and to issue special regulations forthese industries. 
 The workers now see why we said thatit is impossible to enumerate the questions left to be set-tled by the ministers: the law is strewn with “et ceteras” and“and so forths. 
” Russian laws in general may be divided into two categories: those which grant some rights to the workers and the common people generally, and others which pro-hibit something, or allow officials to prohibit it. 
 In thelaws of the first category, even the most trivial rights of theworkers are enumerated with the utmost precision (even, for example, the worker’s right to absent himself from work with good cause) and not the least departure is permitted on pain of the severest penalties. 
 In these laws you will not finda single “et cetera” or “and so forth,” In the laws of the second category, only general prohibitions are invariably indicated, without any precise enumeration , so that the management may prohibit anything it likes ; in these laws you will always find small but very important additions: “et cetera,” “and soforth. 
” These little phrases are striking testimony of thealmighty power exercised by Russian officials over the peo-ple, and of the latter’s utter rightlessness in regard to them;of the senseless and savage character of the abominable bu-reaucracy and red tape in which every institution of the Imperial Russian Government is steeped through and through. 
Any law which may be of the slightest benefit is in-variably so wrapped up in red tape that its enforcement isendlessly delayed. 
 More, the enforcement of the law is leftto the complete discretion of the officials, who, as everybody knows, are ready heart and soul to “serve” any moneybag, and to play every possible dirty trick on the common people. 
The ministers, be it remembered, are only empowered toissue all these regulations “in pursuance of the present law”;that is, they may issue them or they may not. 
 The law doesnot bind them to anything. 
 The law does not fix any date: they may issue the regulations now, or they may do so in ten years’ time. 
 Naturally, the few rules enumerated in the law lose all meaning and importance: they are empty wordsthat merely conceal the government’s desire to frustrate thelaw in its practical application. 
 Vast powers are granted toour ministers by practically every law affecting the life of the workers. 
 And we understand perfectly why the govern-ment does so: it wants to be of the greatest possible serviceto the employers. 
 After all, it is much easier for an employerto influence the official responsible for enforcing the law,than to influence the passage of the law itself. 
 Everybodyknows how easily our capitalist magnates gain access to the drawing-rooms of Messrs. 
 the Ministers and there engage in pleasant conversations, how hospitably they entertain eachother at dinners, what gracious little presents to the tuneof tens and hundreds of thousands of rubles are made tothe corrupt officials of the Imperial Government (eitherdirectly, in the shape of bribes, or indirectly, in the shape of shares to company “founders,” or of honorary and lucra-tive posts in these companies). 
 Consequently, the broaderthe rights the new law confers on the officials in respect of its enforcement, the more advantageous it is both for the officials and for the factory owners : the advantage to the officials is that they can grab more, and to the factory owners that they can more easily secure privileges and exemp-tions. 
 In illustration, let us remind the workers of twocases which show what these ministerial regulations issued“in pursuance of the law” lead to in practice. 
 The law of June 3, 1883, laid it down that the fines money belongs to the workers and must be expended on their needs. 
 The min-ister “pursued” this law in such a way that in St. 
 Peters-burg, for instance, it was not enforced for ten years, andwhen at last it began to be enforced, the whole matter wasput into the hands of the employer, whom the worker has tobeg for his money as though it were a dole. 
 Second example: this same law (of June 3, 1886) lays it down that wages must be paid not less than twice a month; but the minister “pur-sued” the law in such a way as to give the employers theright to withhold the wages of a new worker for six weeks. 
Every worker now clearly understands why this time, too, theministers have been empowered to “pursue” the law. 
 The employers also understand this perfectly, and they have already set their machinery going. 
 We have seen that theministers are “empowered” to issue regulations on overtime. 
The employers have already begun to bring pressure to bearon the government to induce it not to restrict overtime. 
 Moskovskiye Vedomosti , a newspaper which always zealous-ly defends the interests of the worst employers, persis-tently eggs on the government to the most savage and bru-tal actions, and enjoys such immense influence “in highspheres” (that is, among the higher officials, ministers, etc. 
),has now launched a regular campaign against the imposi-tion of restrictions on overtime. 
 The employers have thou-sands of ways of exerting pressure on the government: they have their societies and associations; employers are membersof numerous government commissions and boards (forexample, the Factory Boards), they have personal access toministers; they may write as much as they like in the pressabout their wishes and demands, and the press has tremen-dous influence in our times. 
 As to the workers, they have no legal means of exerting pressure on the government. 
 There is only one thing the workers can do, and that is to /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR join forces, to spread the consciousness of their interests as members of one class among all the workers, and to put up united resistance to the government and the employers. 
 Every worker can now see that the enforcement of the newlaw will depend entirely on who exerts strongest pressureon the government, the employers or the workers. 
 It wasonly by struggle, by a conscious and staunch struggle, thatthe workers secured the passage of this law. 
 Only by struggle will they be able to secure the actual enforcement of the law, and its enforcement in the interests of the workers. 
 Withouta stubborn struggle, without the staunch resistance of theunited workers to every claim the employers make, the newlaw will remain a scrap of paper, one of those false and pre-tentious signboards with which our government tries to em-bellish the utterly rotten edifice of police tyranny and the rightless and oppressed state of the workers. 
 VII HOW OUR “CHRISTIAN” GOVERNMENT CURTAILS THE WORKERS’ HOLIDAYS Besides regulations on working hours, the new law also contains a regulation concerning compulsory rest-days forfactory workers on Sundays and holidays. 
 The grovellinghacks, of whom there are so many among our Russian news-papermen and journalists, have hastened to mark this reg-ulation by lauding our government and its humaneness tothe skies. 
 We shall presently see that actually this humanelaw tends to curtail holidays for the workers. 
 But first let us examine the general regulations concerning Sunday andholiday rest. 
 First of all, it should be noted that the St. 
 Petersburg employers petitioned for the establishment of legal rest-days on Sundays and holidays fourteen years ago(in 1883). 
 In other words, here too, the Russian Governmentonly delayed, postponed and resisted reform as long as it was possible. 
 According to the law, the list of holidays onwhich work is forbidden explicitly includes all Sundays and fourteen other holidays, of which we shall speak at greater length later. 
 The law does not absolutely forbidwork on holidays, but permits it on the following condi-tions: firstly, “mutual agreement” between the employer and the workers is required; secondly, work on a holiday is permitted, provided it is “compensated by a week-day”; thirdly, the agreement to replace the holiday by a week-daymust be immediately reported to the factory inspector. 
Hence, under the law, work on holidays must on no accountbe allowed to reduce the number of rest-days, for the employ-er is obliged to compensate the workers for working on a holiday by giving them a free week-day. 
 The workers must always bear this in mind, and also the fact that the lawdemands the mutual consent of the employer and the work-ers for such an arrangement. 
 In other words, the workersmay always quite legally refuse to agree to such an arrange-ment, and the employer has no right to compel them to do so. 
 In practice, of course, the employer will be able to extort the workers’ consent in the following way: he will ask theworkers one by one to agree, and each worker will be afraidto refuse, for fear of being discharged. 
 In doing this, theemployers will of course be acting illegally, for the lawdemands the consent of the workers , that is, of all the workers jointly. 
 But how can all the workers in one factory (and there are sometimes hundreds and even thousands of them,working in many different places) make their common con-sent known? The law does not say how, and here again ithas placed in the hands of the employers another means ofoppressing the workers. 
 The workers have only one way of preventing such oppression: in every such case they must demand the election of workers’ deputies to convey the gener-al decision of all the workers to the employer. 
 The workers can base this demand on the law, for the latter speaks ofthe consent of all the workers , and all the workers cannot speak to the employer at once. 
 This system of electing work-ers’ deputies will, in general, be very beneficial to the workers, and will be useful for all kinds of other negotiationswith the employers and the office, inasmuch as it is verydifficult, and often quite impossible, for the individualworker to present his demands, claims, etc. 
 Further, asregards workers of “non-Orthodox persuasion,” the law “per-mits” that days which are not celebrated by their Church may not be included in the list of holidays. 
 But then thereare other holidays which are celebrated by Catholics, and not by Orthodox people. 
 The law says nothing about this and, therefore, makes an attempt to discriminate somewhat against non-Orthodox workers. 
 Even more marked is the discrimination against non-Christian workers: for them thelaw “permits” other days in the week instead of Sunday tobe included in the list of holidays. 
 Only “permits”! OurChristian government so savagely persecutes persons whodo not profess the ruling religion that very likely this too is an attempt to oppress non-Christians by making the law vague. 
 The law is indeed very obscure on this point. 
 It shouldbe interpreted as meaning that one day in the week must bea compulsory rest-day, and that all that is permitted is thesubstitution of some other day for Sunday. 
 But the “ruling”religion only grants privileges to the “rulers”; as for the working man, it will never miss an opportunity to invent some sort of a trap for him. 
 Let us see which holidays the law says must be included in the list. 
 It is all very well talk-ing about establishing Sunday and holiday rest; but evenbefore this the workers did not as a rule, in the majorityof cases, work either on Sundays or on holidays. 
 The law, after all, may fix the rest-days in such a way that the total number of compulsory holidays may prove to be far fewer than the number of customary holidays. 
 This is exactly what our Christian government has done in the new law . 
 It has estab-lished 66 holidays in the year: 52 Sundays, 8 fixed holidays(January 1 and 6, March 25, August 6 and 15, September 8, and December 25 and 26) and 6 movable holidays (Friday and Saturday in Passion Week, Easter Monday and Tuesday,Ascension Day and Descent of the Holy Ghost). 
 But how manycustomary holidays a year have there been in our factories till now? We have precise information on this score for Moscowand Smolensk gubernias, and that only for a few factories. 
 But as the difference between the factories, and even be-tween the two gubernias, is very small, this information isquite sufficient to enable us to form an opinion about thereal value of the new law. 
 In Moscow Gubernia, figures werecollected for 47 large factories, employing a total of over20,000 workers. 
 It was found that in hand-operated factories, the number of holidays per year is 97, and in the machine-operated factories the number is 98. 
 The lowest number ofholidays per year is 78, These 78 holidays are celebrated at all the investigated factories without exception . 
 In Smolensk Gubernia, the information relates to 15 factories, employing a total of about 5,000 to 6,000 workers. 
 The average number of holidays per year is 86, or nearly as many as in MoscowGubernia. 
 The lowest number of holidays was found at oneof the factories, where it was 75. 
 Corresponding to this num-ber of holidays per year, which is customary for Russian factories, is the number of holidays established for factories under the jurisdiction of the War Ministry, where 88 an-nual holidays are the rule. 
 The laws of our country recognisepractically the same number of days for civil servants as non-working (87 a year). 
 Consequently, each year the workers hadthe same number of customary holidays as other citizens. 
 In its solicitude for the workers’ health, our “Christian gov-ernment” cut out a fourth of these customary holidays, 22 in all, leaving only 66 compulsory holidays. 
 Let us enu-merate the customary holidays cut out by the governmentin the new law. 
 Of the fixed holidays the following have beencut out: February 2—Candlemas; May 9—St Nicholas’ day;June 29—St Peter’s day; July 8—the Feast of Our Lady of Ka-zan; July 20—St Elijah’s day; August 29—St John the Bap-tist’s day; September 14—the Feast of the Holy Cross;October 1—the Feast of the Intercession (even this holidaythe government deemed superfluous and non-compulsory. 
We may be certain that not a single employer will befound who will dare compel his employees to work on that day. 
 Here again the government is protecting the interests and mean practices of the worst employers); November21—Presentation of the Blessed Virgin, and December 6—StNicholas’ day. 
 Thus, 10 fixed holidays have been cut out. 
 * Further, of the movable holidays, the following have beencut out: Shrove Saturday and Wednesday of the last week of Lent, i. 
e. 
, two holidays. 
 In all, therefore, 12 holidays have been cut out from the minimum hitherto allowed the workers as rest-days according to prevailing custom. 
 Ourgovernment is so fond of calling itself a “Christian” govern-*We have enumerated only the holidays that have been observed by all factories till now. 
 There are many other holidays that have been observed by the overwhelming majority of factories, for example, pre-Lent days, Shrove Friday; Thursday, Friday and Saturday ofEaster week, and many others. 
 ment; when addressing the workers, the ministers and other officials sweeten their speeches with phrases about the “Christian love” and “Christian sentiments” of the employers and of the government towards the workers, etc. 
 But assoon as action takes the place of phrases, all this hypocriticaland canting talk is sent to blazes, and the government be-comes a huckster trying to extort something from the workerswherever possible. 
 The employers themselves, that is, the best of them, long long ago petitioned for the establishment of legal rest-days on Sundays and holidays. 
 After fifteenyears of procrastination, the government has at last passeda law establishing compulsory rest on Sundays and holidays, but while making this concession to the workers it does notmiss the opportunity of injuring them by cutting out one-fourth of the customary holidays from the list of those that are compulsory. 
 Thus, the government is behaving like a realusurer: while making one concession, it does its best to makeup for it by some other extortion. 
 With such a law, it mayvery easily happen that at some of the factories the employerswill try to reduce the number of workers’ rest-days and com-pel the workers to work on holidays which have hitherto been kept but which the law has not included in the compul-sory list of holidays. 
 To prevent their conditions from beingworsened, the workers must, in this respect too, always beready to resist every attempt to reduce the number of hol-idays. 
 The law only specifies the compulsory holidays; but the workers have the right to demand others as well. 
 Only they must see to it that all the holidays are stipulatedin the rules of the factory and should place no trust inverbal promises. 
 The workers can be sure of not beingcompelled to work on a holiday only when that holidayhas been included in the factory rules. 
 Just as in the case of holidays, so in the case of half-holidays, the law attempts to leave matters where they were before, andeven in some respects to worsen them. 
 The law provides foronly one half-holiday—Christmas eve: on that day work mustcease not later than noon. 
 This has been the case until nowat the majority of factories, and if any factory did not release the workers at noon on Christmas eve, in most cases it allowed them a half-holiday on the eve of some other big holiday. 
Generally speaking, one half-holiday in the year has hitherto been the rule at the majority of the factories. 
 Further, the new law says that on Saturdays and the eve of holidays the working day is limited to ten hours, that is, 1 2 hours less than the ordinary working day. 
 Here, too, the law has not improvedthe workers’ conditions, and, if anything, has worsenedthem: hitherto, at nearly all the factories , work on Saturday ceased earlier than usual. 
 One investigator, who has col-lected a great deal of information on this subject and who is generally well acquainted with factory life, states that it may be safely concluded that, on the average, work on Sat-urdays ceases two hours before the usual time. 
 Consequently,here, too, the law did not miss the opportunity, while con-verting a customary rest period into a compulsory one, to extort from the workers at least one half-hour as compen-sation for this concession. 
 One half-hour a week amounts to 23 hours a year (counting 46 working weeks), that is, twodays extra work for the employer’s benefit.... 
 Not a bad pres-ent for our poor, indigent employers! We may be quite surethat these knights of the moneybag will not hesitate to ac-cept this present and will do their best to compensate them-selves in this way for the “sacrifices” demanded of them by the new law (as they are fond of putting it), and, therefore,in this respect too, the workers must rely only on them-selves, on the strength of their organisation. 
 Without a stub-born struggle, the working class, in this respect too, willfail to achieve any improvement in their condition, notwith-standing the new law. 
 VIII HOW IS THE OBSERVANCE OF THE NEW LAW GUARANTEED? How is the observance of laws guaranteed in general? Firstly, by supervision over the observance, and secondly,by punishment of infringements, of the law. 
 Let us seehow matters stand with regard to the new factorylaw. 
 Supervision over the observance of laws has been en-trusted to the factory inspectors. 
 Hitherto, the regulations governing factory supervision issued in 1886 have not beenextended to the whole of Russia by far, but only to a few gubernias, the most highly industrialised ones. 
 The exten-sion of the area of factory supervision has always followed the extension of the area of the working-class movement and of workers’ strikes. 
 On the very date that the law to reducethe working hours was promulgated (that is, June 2, 1897),another law was issued extending factory supervision tothe whole of Russia and to the entire Kingdom of Poland. 
This extension of the factory regulations to the whole of Russia and the institution of Factory Inspection is, of course, a step forward. 
 The workers will take advantage of thisto inform a larger number of their comrades about theirconditions, about the labour laws, about the attitude ofthe government and its officials towards the workers, etc. 
The application of the same rules that govern the advanced workers (of St. 
 Petersburg, Moscow, Vladimir and other gu-bernias) to all factory workers in Russia will, of course, alsohelp the working-class movement to spread more rapidlyto all Russian workers. 
 As to how far effectively the factory inspectors supervise the observance of the law, we shallnot go into this in detail. 
 A separate pamphlet should be written on this subject (it is so wide), and perhaps we shall find some other opportunity to discuss the question of Fac-tory Inspection with the workers. 
 Let us only briefly re-mark that so few factory inspectors are appointed in Russiathat they are very rarely to be seen at the factories. 
 Thefactory inspectors are completely under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Finance, which turns them into servitors of the employers, compels them to report strikes and unrestto the police, to prosecute workers for leaving the factoryeven when the employer himself does not prosecute them;in a word, it turns them, in a manner of speaking, into policeofficials, into factory police. 
 The employer has thousands of ways of exerting influence on the factory inspectors and of forcing them to do what he wants. 
 The workers, however,have no means of influencing the factory inspectors, andcannot have such means as long as the workers do not enjoythe right of free assembly, the right to form their unions,to discuss their affairs in the press, and to issue workers’ newspapers. 
 So long as these rights are withheld, no super-vision by officials over the employers can ever be seriousand effective. 
 But supervision alone is not enough to secure the observance of the law. 
 Strict penalties for non-observance of the law must also be imposed. 
 Otherwise, what is the good of a factory inspector telling the employer that he is acting wrongly? The employer will simply ignore him and go onacting as before. 
 That is why, when a new law is passed,the penalties imposed on those who infringe it are alwaysstipulated. 
 The new law of June 2, 1897 , reducing working hours and establishing rest-days , however , contains no penalties for its infringement . 
 The workers can see from this how different is the government’s attitude to the employ-ers and to the workers. 
 When a law is passed, say, forbid-ding the worker to leave the factory before his time is up, thepenalty in case he does leave is fixed at once, including evenso severe a penalty as arrest. 
 For going on strike, for example, the workers are liable, under the law, to arrest and even imprisonment, but the employer is only fined for the infringe-ment of the regulations which causes the strike. 
 So inthis case, too, the requirement of the law that the employersshall allow the workers to rest on Sundays and holidays andnot make them work more than 11 2 hours a day is not sup-ported by any penalties for its infringement. 
 What will be done to an employer who is guilty of infringing this law?At the most, he may be hauled before the magistrate, whocannot levy a fine exceeding 50 rubles, or the Factory Boardmay itself impose a penalty in the shape of a fine. 
 But willa fine of 50 rubles deter an employer? Why, he makes far much more than 50 rubles profit by compelling all his workers to work a night or on a holiday! It will actually benefit the factoryowner to break the law and pay a fine. 
 The failure of the lawto stipulate the penalty for its infringement by the employeris a crying injustice, which plainly shows that our govern-ment is anxious to delay the enforcement of the law as long as possible, that it does not intend to demand strict observ-ance of the law by the employers. 
 It happened in othercountries, too, in times long past, that a government wouldpass factory laws without stipulating any penalties fortheir infringement. 
 And, in fact, such laws were notobserved at all and remained mere scraps of paper. 
 That is why this ridiculous custom of passing laws without ensuring their enforcement has long been abandoned in other coun-tries. 
 Today the Russian Government is resorting to this same old trick in the hope that the workers will not notice it. 
 But this hope is unfounded. 
 As soon as the workers become acquainted with the new law, they themselves will see to it that it is observed; they will not allow the slightest de-parture from it and will refuse to work until its provisionsare complied with. 
 Such supervision by the workers them-selves will be far more effective than that of any factory po-lice. 
 Without such supervision the law will not be ob-served. 
 IX WILL THE NEW LAW IMPROVE THE WORKERS’ CONDITION? At first glance, it may even seem strange that we raise this question. 
 The law reduces working hours and estab-lishes compulsory rest-days on Sundays and holidays. 
 Surelythis is an improvement of the workers’ condition? But we have already shown in detail above how vague and indef-inite are the provisions of the new law, how often the law,while laying down rules to improve the workers’ condition,itself frustrates those rules by leaving the employer’s arbitrarypower untouched, or by limiting the compulsory holidays toa number far smaller than is customary. 
 Let us try and calculate whether working time will be reduced by the introduction of the new law if the numberof rest-days is no more than the number establishedby the law, that is, if the workers are given rest-days only on the compulsory holidays established bythe law, and the employers succeed in compelling them to work on the other, customary holidays. 
 Whether they suc-ceed or not is, of course, an open question. 
 That will dependon what resistance the workers put up. 
 But that the employerswill try to compensate themselves for the reduction in work-ing hours by reducing the number of holidays, is beyonddoubt. 
 That the law does its utmost to assist this noble en-deavour of the capitalists to oppress the workers, is also beyond doubt. 
 Well, let us see what the effect of this wouldbe. 
 To compare working time under the old system with that under the new (i. 
e. 
, under the law of June 2, 1897), we must take the number of working hours per year . 
 Only in this way can account be taken of all the holidays and shorter working days on the eve of holidays. 
 How many hours a year does theRussian factory worker usually work now, that is, beforethe operation of the law of June 2, 1897? It goes withoutsaying that exact information on this point is not available,for it is impossible to calculate the number of working hours of every worker. 
 We must avail ourselves of the information collected for a few factories, and assume that the number of hours at other factories is approximately the same as thatat the factories investigated. 
 Let us take the informationcollected for Moscow Gubernia. 
 The number of workingdays in the year was calculated exactly in the case of 45 big factories. 
 It was found that the total number of working days in the year at all these 45 factories together was 12,010,that is, an average of 267 working days per factory. 
 * The number of working hours per week (as shown by data forseveral hundred factories) averages 74, or 12 3 hours a day. 
 Hence, in the year there were 267 8123=3,293 working hours, or in round numbers 3,300. 
 In the city of Odessa, we reckoned up the figures for 54 large factories for which we haveinformation regarding the number of working days in theyear, and the number of hours. 
 We found that the averagenumber of working hours per year in all these factories is3,139, or considerably less than in Moscow Gubernia. 
 In Odessa the working day is shorter, in most cases 10 2 hours, the average for these 54 factories being 10. 
7 hours. 
 Hencethe number of working hours per year is lower, althoughthere are fewer holidays. 
 Let us see how many working hourswe get under the new law. 
 First of all, let us count up thenumber of working days in the year. 
 For this purpose, we must deduct from 365, firstly, 66 holidays; secondly, half a day on Christmas eve, and, thirdly, the free time the worker *If the number of working days in the year is 267, the number of non-working days, holidays, must be 98. 
 We said above that therewere 89 holidays, but we arrived at this figure by taking, firstly, only machine-operated factories, and secondly, not the average number of holidays for all factories, but the number of holidays most oftenmet with. 
 enjoys by ceasing work 1 2 hours earlier on the eve of hol-idays. 
 The number of holiday eves will be 60 (not 66, for about 6 holidays coincide with other rest-days). 
 Hence, the reduced hours on the eve of holidays amount to 60 812 = 90 working hours, or 8 working days. 
 Thus, in all, from the 365 days in the year, we have to deduct 74 2 holidays (66#2#8=742). 
 The result is 290 2 working days, or 29028112=3,340 working hours. 
 Thus we find that if the number of holidays is reduced to the compulsory number established by the law, the condition of the workers will be worsened rather than improved by the intro-duction of the new law . 
 On the whole, the number of working hours per year will remain what it was before, or will evenbe increased ! Of course, this calculation is only approximate; it cannot be made with complete accuracy. 
 But it is basedon quite reliable data and clearly shows what a smart de-vice the government has invented to oppress the workers by reducing the number of compulsory holidays as compared with the customary number. 
 This calculation clearlyshows that if the workers do not firmly stand up for one anoth-er and offer joint resistance to the employers, their condi-tion may be worsened by the introduction of the new law!And please note in addition, that in this calculation we have taken only day-work, that is, ordinary working hours. 
 But what about overtime? As we have seen, the law placed norestrictions on this, and we do not know whether the minis-ters will introduce any restrictions in the regulations whichthey have been “empowered” to issue. 
 It is this absence of anyrestrictions on overtime which chiefly leads us to doubt wheth-er the new law will improve the condition of the workers. 
 If, with the reduction of the normal (ordinary) working day,the wages of the majority of the Russian workers remain aspreposterously low as they are at present, the worker will be compelled by want to consent to work overtime, and hiscondition will not improve . 
 What the worker needs is to work no more than eight hours a day, and to have time for rest, for his development, and for the enjoyment of his rights asa human being, a family man, and a citizen. 
 What the work-er needs is to get not a beggarly wage, but enough to livea decent human life, himself to enjoy the advantage of theimprovements introduced in production, and not to surren-der all the profit to his exploiters. 
 If in order to earn the same pay the worker has to work the same number of hours as be-fore, is it not all the same to him whether his excessive toil is called ordinary time or overtime? The law to reduce theworking day will then remain a dead letter , a scrap of paper . 
 The new law will then not affect the employers in the slight-est, and will not compel them to concede anything to theworking people. 
 And the officials of the Ministry of Finance, in their servility to the capitalists, are evidently already hinting at this . 
 In the same Vestnik Finansov article they reassure the employers by saying: “The new law, while re-stricting freedom of contract in the hiring of workers for ordi-nary jobs, does not deprive the employer of the opportunityto operate his establishment at any time of the day or night and even, in case of need” (yes, yes! our poor downtrodden employers so often experience the “need” for the unpaid la-bour of the Russian workers) ... “on holidays by entering intospecial agreements” (to work overtime) “with the work-ers. 
” You see how these lackeys bow and scrape to the money-bags! Please don’t be much disturbed, Messrs. 
 the Employers, they as much as say: you may “operate your establishmentat any time of the day or night”; all you have to do is to callovertime what used to be considered ordinary time. 
 You merely have to change the name , that is all! The most amazing thing in this statement is the brazen-ness of the officials; they are convinced in advance that there will be no restriction whatever on overtime (if overtimeis restricted, the employers will not be able to operate atany time of the day or night!). 
 They are convinced in advancethat their frank and cynical advice to the employers notto stand on ceremony will not reach the ears of the workers! In this, even the officials of the Ministry of Finance, we think, have excelled themselves! It will be very instructivefor the workers to learn how officials talk to the employers and what advice they give them. 
 On learning this, the workers will realise that under cover of the new law theirold enemies are attacking them, in pursuit of their old striving to enslave the workers on the most “ legal grounds . 
” X WHAT IS THE SIGNIFICANCE OF THE NEW LAW? We have now acquainted ourselves with the new law in all its details. 
 All that remains is to discuss what significance this law has for the workers and the working-classmovement in Russia. 
 The significance of the new factory law lies, on the one hand, in its being a forced concession by the government, in its having been won from the police government by the united and class-conscious workers. 
 The promulgation ofthis law shows the success of the working-class movement in Russia; it shows what tremendous power lies in the class-conscious and staunch demand of the working masses. 
 No amount of persecution, no wholesale arrests and deporta-tions, no grandiose political trials, no hounding of the workershave been of any avail. 
 The government set all its forcesand resources into motion. 
 It hurled itself upon theSt. 
 Petersburg workers with all the weight of the tremendouspower it commands. 
 It hounded and persecuted the workers without trial and with unparalleled ferocity in the endeavour at all costs to knock the spirit of protest, of struggle, out of the workers, to crush the workers’ incipient socialist movement against the employers and the government. 
 It wasall to no avail, and the government was compelled to realisethat no amount of persecution of individual workers would eradicate the workers ’ movement and that it would have to make concessions. 
 This autocratic government, consideredto be all-powerful and independent of the people, had toyield to the demands of several tens of thousands ofSt. 
 Petersburg workers. 
 We have seen how insignificant andambiguous these concessions are. 
 But this is only the first step. 
 The working-class movement has long ago spread beyond St. 
 Petersburg; it is growing and expanding, embracingthe masses of industrial workers with growing thoroughnessall over the country . 
 And when all these masses, led by one party, the socialist party, present their joint demands, thegovernment will no longer be able to get away with such an insignificant concession! On the other hand, the significance of the new law lies in the fact that it necessarily and inevitably gives a fresh impetus to the Russian working-class movement. 
 We have seen how the law tries wherever possible to leave loopholes for the employers, to leave the most important points vague and indefinite. 
 Everywhere there is bound to be conflictbetween the employers and the workers over the applicationof this law; and this conflict will embrace a far larger area,for the law applies to the whole of Russia. 
 The workers willbe able to wage the struggle consciously and firmly, to in-sist on their demands, and to evade the snares which our anti-strike police laws have set for them. 
 The introductionof new factory regulations, the change in the ordinary, reg-ular working day in the vast majority of factories all overRussia will be of tremendous benefit: it will stir up the mostbackward sections of the workers; everywhere it will awaken a most lively interest in questions of factory life and factory regulations; it will provide a splendid, convenient andlawful opportunity for the workers to present their demands , to uphold their interpretation of the law , to uphold the old customs when they are more advantageous to the worker (as, for example, the customary holidays and the cessation of work on Saturdays not 1 2 but 2 and more hours earlier), to press for more favourable terms when concluding new agreements on overtime, and to press for higher pay , so that the reduction of the working day may really benefit theworkers and not be detrimental to them in any way. 
 APPENDIX I The pamphlet on the new factory law (the law of June 2, 1897) had already been written when, in the beginning of October, there were published regulations governing the application of this law, as endorsed by the Ministry of Finance in agree-ment with the Ministry of Internal Affairs on September20, 1897. 
 We have already spoken about the enormous im-portance these regulations must have for the law as a whole. 
This time the Ministry hastened to issue regulations before the new law came into force, because these regulations (as we shall see presently) indicate the cases in which departuresfrom the requirements of the new law are permitted, i. 
e. 
,when the employers are permitted “to operate” for longer hoursthan stipulated by law. 
 If the factory owners did not urgentlyneed these regulations, the workers, of course, would have had to wait long before they were issued. 
 The publication of the “regulations” was soon followed by the publication ofInstructions to Factory Inspectorate Officials concerning theapplication of the law of June 2, 1897, ostensibly for thepurpose merely of explaining to the factory inspectors how the law should be applied; these instructions legally give the offi-cials a perfectly free hand and are directed entirely against the workers , for they permit the employers to evade the law in every way. 
 The Imperial Government is very fond of draft-ing laws in magnificent terms and then of permitting theselaws to be evaded by substituting instructions for them. 
 A detailed examination of the regulations reveals to us that this is precisely the nature of the new instructions. 
 Let us also point out that these “instructions” are largely copied word for word from the article in Vestnik Finansov which we referred /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR to on many occasions in the pamphlet on the new law. 
 Thus, in the pamphlet we showed how Vestnik Finansov suggested a trick to the employers, namely: the newspaper explained that the new law did not apply in those cases whereno mention was made of the length of the working day inthe contract between the worker and the employer, since inthat case, it suggested, the worker was not “a hired worker,but a person who accepts an order. 
” This pettifogging ex-planation is repeated word for word in the “instructions. 
” The regulations consist of twenty-two clauses, many ofwhich, however, simply repeat in their entirety the clausesof the law of June 2, 1897. 
 Let us observe that these regu-lations apply only to employers “who come within the juris-diction of the Ministry of Finance”; they do not apply to mining and metallurgical plants, or to railway workshops, or to government factories. 
 A strict distinction must bedrawn between these regulations and the law itself: theregulations have been issued only in pursuance of the law, and the ministers who issued them may supplement andamend them, or issue new ones. 
 The regulations deal with the following five subjects: 1) meal times; 2) Sunday and holiday rest; 3) departures from the new law; 4) shifts and 5) over-time. 
 Let us examine the regulations on each subject indetail and show in each case how the Ministry of Finance,in its instructions, recommends that these regulations beapplied. 
 II Concerning meal times, the following regulations are laid down: first, that meal times do not count as part of working hours, that the worker is free during meal times; the meal times must be indicated in the factory rules; second, thatmeal times are obligatory only in those cases when theworking day exceeds ten hours, and the meal time mustnot be less than of one hour’s duration. 
 This regulationdoes not improve the workers’ condition in the least. 
 If anything, it does the opposite. 
 An hour’s break is very little: most factories allow an hour and a half for dinner, and insome cases also half an hour for lunch. 
 The ministers did their best to make the break as short as possible! Quite often the worker scarcely has time to go home to dinner in an hour. 
 It goes without saying that the workers will not permit such a short break to be established and will demand a longerone. 
 Another reservation concerning compulsory meal hoursalso threatens to encroach upon the workers’ rights: accord-ing to the ministers’ regulations, a break for meals isobligatory only when the working day exceeds ten hours! Hence, where the working day is ten hours, the employer is entitled not to give the workers a break for meals! Again,the workers themselves will have to see to it that the employ-ers will not be able and will not dare to take advantage ofthis right. 
 The workers can refuse to agree to such regu-lations (when they are included in the factory rules) and can demand more frequent breaks for meals. 
 The minis-ters were not satisfied even with these restrictions. 
 In a“note” to this regulation it is added that “in cases where con-siderable obstacles are encountered, departures from thisrequirement are permitted ,” i. 
e. 
, Messrs. 
 the Employers are permitted to give the workers no breaks for meals at all! The ministers permit this, but it is hardly likely that the workers will permit it . 
 Moreover, the ministers also per-mit departures when the demand for a break is recognised as burdensome for the workers. 
 Oh, these solicitous minis-ters! Our ministers thought about the “burden” which meal-time breaks would impose upon the workers, but Messrs. 
 the Ministers do not say a word about the “burden” imposed upon the workers by having to get their dinner within an hour, orabout the still greater “burden” of working ten hours with-out a break! A third regulation governing meal times re-quires that the worker be given the opportunity to take foodat intervals of no more than six hours. 
 But the regulations do not call for a break every six hours; what, then, is the sense of such a regulation? How can a worker take food with-out a break? Messrs. 
 the Ministers did not trouble aboutthat. 
 If there is no break (the regulations say), the worker“must be given an opportunity to take food during workingtime, and the factory rules must indicate the place for taking food. 
” The whole of this regulation is so absurd that one can only express astonishment! One of twothings: either this “place for taking food” will be indi-cated as one other than where the worker works ; in that case a break will be inevitable. 
 Or the place will be indicated as the one where the worker works ; in that case, what is the sense of indicating the place? If the worker has no right to inter-rupt his work—how can he eat without interrupting his work? Messrs. 
 the Ministers regard the workers as machines:a machine can be fed with oil while it is working, whythen (think our “solicitous” ministerial hangers-on of the capital) cannot the worker stuff himself with food while working? The only hope left to the workers is that such astupid regulation could only have been invented in Russianbureaucratic offices, and will not actually be put into force. 
The workers will demand that the indicated “place for taking food” will not be where they work : the workers will demand a break for meals every six hours. 
 This, then, is all the regu-lations say about meal times. 
 The ministers have pursuedthe law in such a way that it can only worsen the workers’condition, unless the workers themselves stand up, and standup together, for their rights and not for the ministerialregulations. 
 III Concerning Sundays and holidays, there is only one brief regulation, namely, that on Sundays and holidays the work-ers must be free from work for no less than twenty-four hours at a stretch. 
 This was the least that could be ordered “in pursuance” of the law governing Sundays and holidays. 
It could not be less. 
 It never occurred to the ministers togive the workers longer rest periods (for example, thirty-six hours, as is the case in some other countries). 
 As regardsnon-Christians, the regulations say nothing. 
 IV On the subject of departures from the law, there are many regulations, very many in fact, and drawn up in great detail. 
 Let us remind the workers that the law gave the ministers power to permit, in the regulations, departures from the law,by extending the requirements of the law (i. 
e. 
, demanding more for the workers from the employers) and reducing the re-quirements of the law (i. 
e. 
, demanding less for the workers from the employers). 
 Let us see what the ministers have done. 
 First regulation. 
 Departures from the law arepermitted in those cases where “the workers are engagedon continuous operations, i. 
e. 
, such operations as cannot arbitrarily be interrupted without damage to instruments,materials, or goods. 
” In such cases, Messrs. 
 the Employers may “operate” for periods longer than that provided for in the law. 
 All that the regulation demands in such a case is,firstly, that the working hours during the course of twoconsecutive days should not exceed twenty-four hours(and in the case of broken shifts—thirty hours). 
 Why it saystwenty-four hours in two days and not twelve hours in one day we shall see in the paragraph dealing with shifts. 
 Second-ly, the regulation demands that where operations are con-tinuous, the worker must be freed from work four days amonth, if his working day exceeds eight hours. 
 Thus, forworkers who are engaged on continuous operations, the num-ber of rest-days is greatly reduced : four a month, forty-eight a year, whereas even the law (with all its restricted holidays) allows sixty-six compulsory holidays a year. 
 What reason-able grounds did the ministers have for reducing this numberof holidays? None whatever; in any case, the continuity of operations is broken even with four holidays a month, i. 
e. 
, in any case the employers must hire other workers for the holidays (if the operation is indeed continuous, i. 
e. 
, if it cannot be interrupted ). 
 Thus, Messrs. 
 the Ministers cut the workers’ holidays still more only in order to “restrict” the employers as little as possible, to reduce the number ofcases when other workers must be hired! More than that. 
 The “instructions” go so far as to permit the factory inspectors to sanction factory rules which provide for even fewer rest-days for the workers ! The factory inspector must merely report such cases to the Department of Commerceand Industry. 
 This is a very striking example, whichshows why our government is fond of meaningless laws anddetailed regulations and instructions: to alter an inconven-ient regulation, it is sufficient to apply to the Department ... of Palm-Greasing!! Similarly, the factory inspector may(according to the instructions!) permit the term continuous to be applied to such operations as are not included in the list appended to the instructions: it is sufficient to report to the Department.... 
 A note to this regulation says that the continuous operations must be specially indicated in the factory rules. 
 “Departures from this law are only per-mitted insofar as they are really necessary” (this is whatthe ministers’ regulation says). 
 But who is to see wheth-er they are really necessary or not? Nobody but the workers: they must not permit reservations regarding continuous operations to be included in the factory rules unless theyare really necessary. 
 Second regulation. 
 Departures from the law are permitted in cases where the workers areengaged on auxiliary operations in various kinds of pro-duction (current repairs, tending of boilers, motors and trans-mission belts, heating, lighting, water supply, watch and fire service, and so forth). 
 These departures must also beespecially indicated in the factory rules. 
 As regards rest-days for these workers, the regulations do not say a word . 
 Again, the workers themselves must see to it that theyget rest-days, i. 
e. 
, must not agree to factory rules which do not provide rest-days for such workers. 
 Third regu-lation. 
 Departures from the regulations governing thelength of the working day and rest on Sundays and hol-idays and from the factory rules are permitted in twoother cases: first, in case of sudden damage to machines,tools, etc. 
, which causes a stoppage of work in the whole factory, or in one of its departments. 
 In such cases, the necessary repairs may be made regardless of the regulations. 
 Secondly, permission is given, regardless of the regulations,to perform “temporary work in any department of the estab-lishment, in those cases when, as a consequence of fire,break-down and similar unforeseen circumstances, the work in one or another department of the establishment is reduced or entirely stopped for a time, and when that is essen-tial for the full running of the other departments of the es-tablishment. 
” (In such cases, the employer must that veryday report the matter to the factory inspector, who sanc-tions such work. 
) This last regulation shows what tremen-dous “solicitude” our ministers display to ensure that the employers do not expend an extra ruble. 
 Suppose there wasa fire in one department of a factory. 
 Work is stopped. 
 After the repairs are made the employer wants to make up for lost time. 
 Therefore , the minister permits him to squeeze as much extra labour out of the workers as he likes by compelling them to work even as long as eighteen hours a day. 
 But whathave the workers got to do with it? When the employer makesmore profit, does he share it with the workers, does heshorten the working day? Why, then, should the working daybe lengthened for the workers when the employer suffers loss? Why, that means—I take the profit, but I make the workers bear the losses. 
 If it is necessary to make up forlost time, why not hire additional workers? The “solicitude”displayed by the Russian ministers for the pockets of theemployers is amazing! Fourth regulation. 
 Departures fromthe new law may also be made “in other especially important and exceptional cases. 
” (What are these cases? So many es-pecially important and exceptional cases have been enumer-ated that one might think no more would be left!) Suchdepartures are permitted in each separate case by the Min-ister of Finance and the Minister of Internal Affairs. 
 Thusthe employer will make a request, the ministers will grant permission, and all’s well. 
 The workers are not even asked: can the “gentry” be expected to ask the opinion of the commonpeople? The vulgar mob must work for the capitalists andnot argue about whether it is an “exceptional” case or justthe ordinary lust for gain that compels the employer to gobegging. 
 Such are the ministers’ regulations about depar-tures from the new law. 
 As we see, all these regulations in-dicate how and when the law may not be obeyed, how andwhen the law’s demands on the employers for the workers’benefit may be reduced. 
 The ministers say not a single word about increasing the legal demands upon the employers forthe workers’ benefit. 
 Let the workers recall what was said in the pamphlet on the new factory law about the purpose for which the law gives the ministers such great powers! V As regards shifts, there is only one short regulation which, in cases where 18 hours’ work is done in two shifts, permitsan increase in the number of hours to 12 a day with the proviso that the working time for two weeks shall not exceed 9 hours per day for each worker. 
 Thus, this regulation also permits lengthening of the working day. 
 How many regula-tions have there been to lengthen the working day, but not one to shorten it—and there will be none! According to thisregulation, the workers may be compelled to work 12 hoursa day for a whole week, and the “instructions” again add thatthe factory inspectors may permit other departures from the law, provided they report these to the Director.... 
 The ques-tion of shifts is also covered by the above-mentioned regulaion which fixes the working time on continuous operations at-24 hours in two days . 
 The instructions explain why it says 24 hours in two days and not 12 hours in one day. 
 This issaid in order to leave in force the scandalous system that prevails in some factories of working a continuous double shift with an interval of eight hours : under this system, a worker works 16 hours one day and 8 hours the next, withoutever having proper rest or proper sleep. 
 It is difficult toimagine anything more scandalous than such shifts; but farfrom doing anything to restrict this scandalous system, the ministers even had the insolence to say in the “instructions” that under many circumstances such shifts are more conven-ient for the workers!! How solicitous the ministers are forthe convenience of the workers ! VI As regards overtime, the regulations at first sight appear to give the most precise directions. 
 The limitation of over-time is the chief thing required not only in the ministerialregulations, but also in the new law as a whole. 
 We have already spoken above about the utter vagueness of the law itself on this point, about the original intention of the Min-istry of Finance not to issue any additional overtime reg-ulations. 
 It now turns out that the ministers have afterall limited overtime, have limited it in precisely the wayproposed by the commission which drafted the new law, i. 
e. 
, to 120 hours a year. 
 But, on the other hand, in his “instruc-tions,” the Minister of Finance reproduced from Vestnik Fi-nansov , for the edification of the factory inspectors, all the traps and tricks against the workers which we quoted in the pamphlet on the new law: the “instructions,” we repeat, are copied from Vestnik Finansov . 
 The first regulation concerns the point in the new law which permits the employer to include in the contract withthe worker the stipulation to work such overtime as is neces-sitated by the technical conditions of the industry. 
 We havealready mentioned the vagueness of this. 
 And yet, this clause of the law is of enormous importance: if the stipulation to work overtime is included in the factory rules, then overtimebecomes obligatory for the worker, and the entire law remains entirely unenforced in this respect . 
 The minis-terial regulations now interpret this term in the follow-ing way: only such work may be regarded as “necessitated by the technical conditions of the industry” as is called forth “exclusively by departures from its normal course whichare accidental and dependent upon the nature of the indus-try. 
” Thus, for example, departures called forth by an in-creased influx of orders are not affected (as they are notdependent upon the nature of the industry). 
 Departures called forth by a fire, break-down and so forth, are also not affected, because they, too, do not depend upon the natureof the industry itself. 
 Common sense would suggest that this is how the regulation should be interpreted. 
 But herethe “instructions” come to the employers’ aid. 
 The “instruc-tions” so brilliantly increase the number of cases when overtime may be made compulsory for the workers, includ-ing it in the terms of hire, i. 
e. 
, in the factory rules,that absolutely anything you like can be classed among these cases. 
 Indeed, let the workers recall how the lawwas pursued in the Vestnik Finansov article and compare the “instructions” with the latter. 
 First, the “instructions” speak of work “necessitated by the technical conditions of the industry”—and then, imperceptibly, it substitutesanother term: “work that is absolutely essential” (Is thatso? But who is to judge what is essential?)—and further onthe instructions give petty examples of what is “absolutelyessential”: it turns out that this includes those cases when the employer finds it “impossible, or difficult” (our old ac-quaintance!) “to increase the number of workers,” when thereis rush and urgent work (in seasonal work, for example); when a print-shop has to issue a newspaper daily; when the job could not be foreseen in advance, and so forth. 
 In short, if you want anything, ask for it. 
 The shameless hangers-on of the capitalists in the Ministry of Finance have pursued t he law in such a way that the employer has the right to include in his factory rules the demand for any amount of overtime. 
 And once such a demand is included in the factory rules , the whole new law goes to blazes and everything remains as before . 
 The workers must not permit these demands to be included in the factory rules, otherwise their condi-tions, far from being improved, will be worsened. 
 Thisexample shows the workers how the employers and govern-ment officials conspire to enslave the workers again on alegal basis. 
 The “instructions” clearly reveal this conspiracy, this subservience of the Ministry of Finance to the interests of the capitalists. 
 The second overtime regulation lays down that the overtime by each worker shall not exceed 120 hours peryear, but this figure does not include , firstly, the overtime stipulated in the contract as obligatory for the worker due to “the technical conditions of the industry,” and we have just seen that the ministers have permitted this term tobe applied to any number of cases which have nothing to do with the “technical conditions of the industry”; secondly,it does not include the overtime worked in case of fire, break-down, and so forth, or to make up for time lost in case of a stoppage in some department. 
 Taken together, all these overtime regulations remind us astonishingly of the fable about how the lion sharedthe prey “equally” among his fellow hunters; the first por-tion he took by right; the second portion he took for being theking of beasts; the third for being strongest of all; and as for the fourth—whoever dared as much as stretch his paw towards it would not get away alive. 
 100 This is exactly how our employers will now argue about overtime. 
 First, theywill squeeze overtime out of the workers “by right,” on theplea that it is “necessitated by the technical conditions ofthe industry,” i. 
e. 
, any amount of overtime, as long as it is provided for in the factory rules. 
 Second, they will squeeze overtime out of the workers in “special cases,”i. 
e. 
, when they want to throw the burden of their losses on the workers. 
 Third, they will squeeze another 120 hours per year out of them on the grounds that they are rich and the workers are poor. 
 Fourth, in “exceptional cases” they will receive special privileges from the ministers. 
 Andthen the workers may “freely” enjoy what remains out ofthe 24 hours of the day after all this—bearing well in mindthat the fair government does not by any means “deprivethem of their right” to work even 24 hours a day.... 
 To legalise this squeezing of overtime out of the workers it is ordered that the employers shall keep special registers of all these forms of overtime. 
 In one register they will record whatthey squeeze out of the workers “by right”; in another regis-ter, what they squeeze out in “special cases”; in a third, whatthey squeeze out by “special agreement” (not more than 120 hours per year); in a fourth, what they squeeze out of them in “exceptional cases. 
” Instead of an improvement in theworkers’ condition, we get nothing but red tape and bureau-cratic correspondence (as is always the case with all the re-forms introduced by the autocratic Russian Government). 
The factory policemen will visit the factories and “inspect” ... these registers (which the devil himself will not be able to make head or tail of), and during the time that they arefree from this useful occupation they will report to theDirector of the Department of Commerce and Manufacturesuggesting new sops for the employers, and to the Departmentof Police about workers’ strikes. 
 How shrewd are these people, these hucksters and bashi-bazouks who constitute our government! For a reasonable price they will now hirea foreign representative who will shout at all the crossroadsof “Europe” about the laws for the workers’ benefit that wehave in this country, VII In conclusion let us make a general survey of the ministe-rial regulations. 
 Let us recall what regulations the new lawprovides the ministers with. 
 Three categories of regulations: 1) regulations to interpret the law; 2) regulations to increase or reduce the demands made by the new law on employers;3) regulations concerning trades especially harmful to the workers’ health. 
 What use have the ministers made of the powers granted them by this law? As to the first category, they have confined themselves to the most essential, to the very minimum below which theycould not go. 
 They have permitted overtime on a very wideand elastic scale—120 hours per year and, moreover, bymeans of the instructions have introduced such a host ofexceptions that they rob the regulations of all meaning. 
 They have done their best to cut down the workers’ meal times, they have left the scandalous shift system as it was,if they have not actually made it worse. 
 As to the second category of regulations, the ministers have done all they could to reduce the demands of the new law on the employers, i. 
e. 
, they have done all they could for the employers and absolutely nothing for the workers : in no single case do the regulations increase the demands of thenew law upon the employers for the workers’ benefit. 
 As to the third category of regulations (i. 
e. 
, those for the benefit of the workers who are compelled to work at the mostharmful occupations), the ministers have done absolutely nothing, they have said not a single word about them. 
 All that the instructions say is that the factory inspectors mayreport to the Department about especially injurious trades!As far as “reporting” goes the factory inspectors could formerlyalso report anything they liked, only till now, for someinexplicable reason, these factory policemen “reported” about workers’ strikes and about methods of terrorising the workers, and not about protecting the workers in the especially in-jurious trades. 
 From this the workers can see for themselves what they may expect from the officials of the police government. 
 Tosecure an eight-hour day and the complete banning of over-time the Russian workers still have a long and stubborn struggle to wage. 
 ABOUT A CERTAIN NEWSPAPER ARTICLE Issue No. 
 239 of Russkiye Vedomosti101 (dated August 30) contains a short article by Mr. 
 N. 
 Levitsky entitled “Certain Problems Affecting the Life of the People. 
” “Living in the country and being in constant contact with the people” theauthor “long ago came up against” certain problems affectingthe life of the people, the solution of which by means ofappropriate “measures” is an “urgent necessity,” a “pressingneed. 
” The author expresses the conviction that his “brief remarks” on a subject of such importance “will meet with a response among those who are interested in the people’sneeds,” and he expresses the desire to provoke an exchange ofopinion on the problems he advances. 
 The “lofty style” in which Mr. 
 N. 
 Levitsky’s article is written and the high-sounding words in which it abounds lead one to expect that it deals with some really important, urgent, vital problems of modern life. 
 Actually, however,the author’s proposals merely provide one more example, andan exceedingly striking one at that, of the truly Manilov-ian 102 fantasy to which the Narodnik journalists have accus-tomed the Russian public. 
 That is why we thought it would be useful to voice our views on the problems that Mr. 
 N. 
 Le-vitsky raises. 
 Mr. 
 N. 
 Levitsky enumerates five “problems” (point by point) and he not only provides an “answer” for every “prob-lem,” but also indicates very definitely the appropriate“measure” to be taken. 
 The first problem is—“cheap and accessible” credit, the elimination of the tyranny of money-lenders, “kulaks, and all sorts of sharks and parasites. 
”The measure to be taken is—“to devise a simpler type of village peasants’ loan and saving bank,” and the author proposes that the branches of the State Bank should issue savings-bank books not to individuals, but to specially or-ganised associations, which will make deposits and receiveloans through a single treasurer. 
 And so the author’s long “contact with the people” enabled him to draw this conclusion on the hackneyed problem ofcredit—“devise” a new type of loan and savings bank! Evidently the author imagines that not enough paper and ink is being wasted in this country on drafting endless“types,” “models,” “rules,” “model rules,” “normal rules,”etc. 
, etc. 
 “Living in the country,” our practical man failedto see any of the more important problems raised by the desireto replace the “kulak” by “cheap and accessible credit. 
” We shall not, of course, discuss here the importance of credit: we take the author’s aim for granted ; we shall merely exam-ine from the purely practical aspect the remedies he pro-poses with such pomp. 
 Credit is an institution of developedcommodity circulation. 
 The question is—is it possible toestablish such an institution among our peasantry, whom the countless survivals of laws and prohibitions that spring from the division of society into social estates have placed inconditions that rule out regular, free, extensive and devel-oped commodity circulation? Is it not ridiculous, when speak-ing of the urgent and pressing needs of the people, to reducethe problem of credit to devising “rules” of a new type and to say nothing whatever about the need to abolish the entire mass of “rules” which hinder regular commodity circulationamong the peasantry, hinder the free purchase and sale ofproperty—real estate and personal property—hinder the peas-ants from moving freely from place to place and from one oc-cupation to another, and hinder individuals from other classes and social estates from joining the peasant communities? What can be more comical than fighting “kulaks, usurers,parasites and sharks” by perfecting the “rules” of credit banks?Usury in its worst forms is most tenacious in our rural dis-tricts, and is so precisely because of the exclusiveness ofthe estate system there, because of the thousand fetters which shackle the development of commodity circulation— and yet our practical-minded author says not a word aboutthese fetters, but declares that the drafting of new rules is the urgent problem of rural credit. 
 In all probability the developed capitalist countries, where the rural districts have long been placed in conditions that facilitate the circulation of commodities, and where credit has beenextensively developed, in all probability these countriesachieved this success thanks to the multitude of “rules”drafted by benevolent officials! The second problem is—“the helpless position of a peas-ant family when the head of the family dies,” and also “the urgent necessity” of “safeguarding and preserving the peas-ant working agricultural population by all possible meansand methods. 
” As you see, the further he goes the wider andmore majestic become Mr. 
 Levitsky’s “problems”! The firstproblem concerned a very ordinary bourgeois institution, the value of which we could only admit with very consider-able reservation; but here we have a problem of such gigan-tic importance that “in principle” we fully admit its urgencyand cannot suppress a warm feeling for the author for raising it. 
 But the Narodnik’s gigantic problem is matched by a“measure” of gigantic ... what is the mildest way we can put it? ... unwisdom. 
 Listen: “...there arises the urgent need to organise and introduce compulsory (sic!) mutual life insur-ance for the entire peasant population on a mass scale at thecheapest possible rates * (societies, associations, artels, etc. 
). 
 And it is necessary to ascertain the role and part to beplayed in this business by a) private insurance companies, b) the Zemstvos, and c) the state. 
” Our muzhiks are so dull-witted! They give no thought to the fact that if the head of the family dies the rest will haveto go begging; that if the crop fails they will starve, andthat even if they have a good crop sometimes, they will haveto go begging just the same on returning from abortive quests for “earnings. 
” These stupid muzhiks have no idea that there is such a thing as “life insurance,” to which many good gentle-men have long had recourse and out of which other goodgentlemen (shareholders in insurance companies) make mon-ey. 
 Starving “Sysoika” 103 has no idea that all he has to do is to join with “Mityai,” who is starving like himself, in organising a mutual life insurance company (with low, very *Author’s italics. 
 low contributions!), and their families will be provided for in the event of their death. 
 Luckily, the thinking for these dull-witted muzhiks is done by our enlightened Narodnik intelligentsia, one of whose representatives “living in thecountry and being in constant contact with the people,”“long ago came up against” this tremendous, this astoundingand stupendous “project”! Third problem. 
 “In connection with this problem it is necessary to raise and discuss the problem of establishing an imperial capital fund for insuring the lives of the peas-ant population * on the same lines as the existing imperial food and fire funds. 
” It goes without saying that to dealwith insurance, we must discuss the question of capital. 
 Butit seems to us that our highly esteemed author is guilty here of an important omission. 
 Is it not also “necessary to raise and discuss” the question as to which ministry and whichdepartment will be in charge of the proposed institution?Firstly, there can be no doubt that the Economic Departmentof the Ministry of Internal Affairs should be in charge of it. 
Secondly, the Zemstvo Department of the Ministry of Intern-al Affairs is also closely interested. 
 Thirdly, the Ministry of Finance should also be in charge of insurance affairs. 
 Inview of this, would it not be more advisable to propose theestablishment of a special Chief Administration of StateCompulsory Mutual Life Insurance for the Entire PeasantPopulation, on the lines, say, of the Chief State Horse-Breeding Administration ? Fourth problem. 
 “Further, in view of the tremendously widespread character of all sorts of artels throughout Rus-sia, and also in view of their undoubted usefulness and im-portance to the national economy, the urgent need has arisen4) of organising a separate, special Society for the Promo-tion of Agricultural and Other Artels . 
” That artels of all sorts are beneficial to the classes of the population who organisethem is undoubted. 
 It is also undoubted that to unite therepresentatives of the various classes will also be of greatbenefit to the entire national economy. 
 Only the authorwaxes far too enthusiastic when he talks about “the tremen-dously widespread character of all sorts of artels throughout *Author’s italics. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR Russia. 
” Everybody knows that, compared with any West-European country, the number of “all sorts of artels” is incredibly, phenomenally small in Russia.... 
 “Everybody knows this” ... except the dreamy Manilov. 
 The editors ofRusskiye Vedomosti , for example, know it since they published above Mr. 
 N. 
 Levitsky’s article a very interesting and highly informative item, entitled “Syndicates in France. 
”From this article Mr. 
 N. 
 Levitsky might have learned how immensely “ all sorts of artels ” are developed in capitalist France (compared with non-capitalist Russia). 
 I underline“all sorts,” for it can easily be seen from this article thatthere are four sorts of syndicates in France: 1) workers’syndicates (2,163 syndicates with 419,172 members); 2) em-ployers’ syndicates (1,622 with 130,752 members); 3) agri-cultural syndicates (1,188 with 398,048 members) and 4) mixed syndicates (173 with 31,126 members). 
 Add up all thesefigures, Mr. 
 Levitsky! You will get a total of nearly a millionpeople (979,000) organised in “all sorts of artels. 
” And nowtell us, with your hand on your heart, are you really notashamed of the phrase you let slip about the “tremendously widespread character of all sorts (sic!!!) of artels throughout Russia”? Do you really fail to see what a comical, sadlycomical impression your article creates by the side of thebare figures of the “syndicates in France”? These poor French-men, whom, evidently, the canker of capitalism has de-prived of the “tremendously widespread character of all sorts of artels,” would probably burst into Homeric laughter at the proposal to establish a “separate special society” ... forpromoting the establishment of all sorts of societies! Itgoes without saying, however, that this laughter wouldonly be a demonstration of the notorious frivolity of theFrench, who are incapable of understanding Russian thor-oughness. 
 These frivolous Frenchmen form “all sorts of artels,” not only without first setting up “societies for thepromotion of artels” but even—horribile dictu!—withoutfirst drawing up “model,” “normal” rules and “simplifiedtypes” of societies of various kinds! Fifth problem ... (the urgent need has arisen) “to publish, under the auspices of this society (or separately), a special organ ... devoted exclusively to the study of the co-operative movement in Russia and abroad . 
”... Yes, yes, Mr. 
 Levitsky! When a disordered stomach prevents a person from having a proper meal, he has no alternative but to read about how other people eat. 
 But in all probability, the doctors would not allow a person who is so sick to read about the dinnersother people eat, for such reading might stimulate an inor-dinate appetite not commensurate with the diet prescribed.... 
And the doctors would be quite consistent in doing so. 
 We have expounded Mr. 
 Levitsky’s short article in suf-ficient detail. 
 The reader will probably ask whether it wasworth dealing at such length with a casual newspaper arti-cle, whether it was worth devoting such a lengthy commentto it. 
 Indeed, what importance is there in the fact that some-body (who, generally speaking, is prompted by the bestintentions) happened to talk nonsense about some sort of compulsory mutual life insurance for the entire peasant population? We have heard very similar opinions expressedon analogous subjects. 
 These opinions are, to say the least,groundless. 
 Maybe it is an accident that our “progressive jour-nalists” every now and again positively vomit up such phe-nomenally wild “projects” on the lines of “feudal socialism” that one can only shrug one’s shoulders in amazement? Maybe it is an accident that organs like Russkoye Bogatstvo and Russkiye Vedomosti , which are by no means ultra-Narodnik, which always protest against the extremes of Narodism andagainst the conclusions drawn from Narodism à la Mr. 
 V. 
 V. 
,and which are even not averse to covering up the rags and tatters of their Narodism with the bright new label of some “ethico-sociological school,” that even such organs periodi-cally, with punctilious regularity, present the Russianpublic now with some “educational utopia” proposed byMr. 
 S. 
 Yuzhakov 104—a scheme for compulsory secondary education in agricultural gymnasia in which indigent peasants are to pay the tuition fees by work—and now with this project of Mr. 
 N. 
 Levitsky’s for compulsory mutuallife insurance for the entire peasant population? * It would be too naïve to put this down to accident. 
 There is a Manilov in every Narodnik. 
 Disdain for conditions asthey really are and for economic evolution as it really is, *Comparing these two fantasy-weavers of Narodnik journalism one cannot help giving preference to Mr. 
 N. 
 Levitsky, whose project is a trifle cleverer than that of Mr. 
 S. 
 Yuzhakov. 
 unwillingness to analyse the real interests of the different classes of Russian society in their inter-relationships, the habit of laying down the law from above about the “needs” and “destiny” of the fatherland, of boasting about the miserablesurvivals of medieval associations that exist in the Russianvillage communities and artels, together with a disdainfulattitude towards the incomparably more highly developedassociations characteristic of more highly developed capi-talism—all these features are to be found in a greater or lesser degree in every Narodnik. 
 That is why it is so edifying to watch some not over-clever, but very naïve, writer, witha fearlessness worthy of a better cause, carrying these fea-tures to their full logical development and embodying themin the dazzling picture of some “project. 
” These projects al-ways turn out to be dazzling, so dazzling that merely to show them to the reader is to prove how harmful contempo-rary petty-bourgeois Narodism is to our social thought andsocial development. 
 Such projects always contain much thatis comical; in most cases a superficial reading of them createsno other impression than a desire to laugh. 
 But try to get at their real meaning and you will say: “It would all be funny were it not so sad!” 105 Written in exile in September 1897 Published in the magazine Published according Novoye Slovo , No. 
 1, 1897 to the text in Signed: K. 
 T—n Novoye Slovo Written in exile at the end of 1897 First published in pamphlet form in Geneva, 1898Published according to the text of the 1902 edition checked with copy of the manuscript, the 1898 and 1905 editions, and the text in the miscellany Twelve Years by Vl. 
 Ilyin, 1907THE TASKS OF THE RUSSIAN SOCIAL-DEMOCRATS106 The second half of the nineties witnessed a remarkable increase in the work being done on the presentation and solution of the problems of the Russian revolution. 
 Theappearance of a new revolutionary party, NarodnoyePravo, 107 the growing influence and successes of the Social-Democrats, the evolution within Narodnaya Volya108—all this has evoked a lively discussion on questions of programme both in study circles of socialist intellectuals and work-ers and in illegal literature. 
 Regarding the latter sphere,reference should be made to “An Urgent Question” andthe “Manifesto” (1894) of the Narodnoye Pravo Party,to the Leaflet of the Narodnaya Volya Group , to Rabotnik published abroad by the League of Russian Social-Demo-crats, 109 to the increasing output of revolutionary pam-phlets in Russia, mainly for workers, and the agitationconducted by the Social-Democratic League of Struggle forthe Emancipation of the Working Class in St. 
 Petersburgaround the important strikes there in 1896, etc. 
 At the present time (the end of 1897), the most urgent question, in our opinion, is that of the practical activities of the Social-Democrats. 
 We emphasise the practical side of Social-Democracy, because on the theoretical side the mostcritical period—the period of stubborn refusal by its oppo-nents to understand it, of strenuous efforts to suppress the newtrend the moment it arose, on the one hand, and of stalwart defence of the fundamentals of Social-Democracy, on the other—is now apparently behind us. 
 Now the main and basic features of the theoretical views of the Social-Demo-crats have been sufficiently clarified. 
 The same cannot be said about the practical side of Social-Democracy, about its political programme , its methods, its tactics. 
 It is in this sphere, we think, that misapprehension and mutualmisunderstanding mostly prevail, preventing a complete rap-prochement between Social-Democracy and those revolution-aries who in theory have completely renounced the prin-ciples of the Narodnaya Volya and in practice are either led by the very force of circumstances to carry on propaganda and agitation among the workers—nay, more: to conducttheir activities among the workers on the basis of the class struggle —or else strive to base their whole programme and revolutionary activities on democratic tasks. 
 If we are not mistaken, the latter description fits the two revolutionary groups which are operating in Russia at the present time, parallel to the Social-Democrats, namely, the NarodnayaVolya and Narodnoye Pravo. 
 We, therefore, think it particularly opportune to try to explain the practical tasks of the Social-Democrats and to state the grounds on which we consider their programme to be the most rational of the three now existing and the argu-ments advanced against it to be based very largely on mis-understanding. 
 The object of the practical activities of the Social-Demo-crats is, as is well known, to lead the class struggle of theproletariat and to organise that struggle in both its mani-festations: socialist (the fight against the capitalist class aimed at destroying the class system and organising socialistsociety), and democratic (the fight against absolutism aimedat winning political liberty in Russia and democratisingthe political and social system of Russia). 
 We said as is well known . 
 And indeed, from the very moment they ap-peared as a separate social-revolutionary trend, the Russian Social-Democrats have always quite definitely indicatedthis object of their activities, have always emphasised thedual manifestation and content of the class struggle of theproletariat and have always insisted on the inseparableconnection between their socialist and democratic tasks—a connection clearly expressed in the name they have adopt-ed. 
 Nevertheless, to this day you often meet socialists whohave the most distorted notions about the Social-Democrats and accuse them of ignoring the political struggle, etc. 
 Let us, therefore, dwell a little on a description of both aspects of the practical activities of Russian Social-Democracy. 
 Let us begin with socialist activity. 
 One would have thought that the character of Social-Democratic activity inthis respect had become quite clear since the Social-Demo-cratic League of Struggle for the Emancipation of the Work-ing Class in St. 
 Petersburg began its activities among the St. 
 Petersburg workers. 
 The socialist activities of Russian Social-Democrats consist in spreading by propaganda the teachings of scientific socialism, in spreading among theworkers a proper understanding of the present social andeconomic system, its basis and its development, an under-standing of the various classes in Russian society, of their interrelations, of the struggle between these classes, of the role of the working class in this struggle, of its attitude to-wards the declining and the developing classes, towards thepast and the future of capitalism, an understanding of thehistorical task of international Social-Democracy and ofthe Russian working class. 
 Inseparably connected with prop-aganda is agitation among the workers, which naturally comes to the forefront in the present political conditions ofRussia and at the present level of development of the massesof workers. 
 Agitation among the workers means that theSocial-Democrats take part in all the spontaneous manifes-tations of the working-class struggle, in all the conflicts between the workers and the capitalists over the working day, wages, working conditions, etc. 
, etc. 
 Our task is tomerge our activities with the practical, everyday questionsof working-class life, to help the workers understand thesequestions, to draw the workers’ attention to the most im-portant abuses, to help them formulate their demands to the employers more precisely and practically, to develop among the workers consciousness of their solidarity, con-sciousness of the common interests and common cause of allthe Russian workers as a united working class that is partof the international army of the proletariat. 
 To organisestudy circles among workers, to establish proper and secret connections between them and the central group of Social-Democrats, to publish and distribute working-class liter-ature, to organise the receipt of correspondence from all centres of the working-class movement, to publish agita-tional leaflets and manifestos and to distribute them, and to train a body of experienced agitators—such, in broad outline, are the manifestations of the socialist activitiesof Russian Social-Democracy. 
 Our work is primarily and mainly directed to the factory, urban workers. 
 Russian Social-Democracy must not dissi-pate its forces; it must concentrate its activities on the in-dustrial proletariat, who are most susceptible to Social-Democratic ideas, most developed intellectually and polit-ically, and most important by virtue of their numbersand concentration in the country’s large political centres. 
The creation of a durable revolutionary organisation amongthe factory, urban workers is therefore the first and most urgent task confronting Social-Democracy, one from which it would be highly unwise to let ourselves be diverted at thepresent time. 
 But, while recognising the necessity of con-centrating our forces on the factory workers and opposing thedissipation of our forces, we do not in the least wish to sug-gest that the Russian Social-Democrats should ignore other strata of the Russian proletariat and working class. 
 Nothing of the kind. 
 The very conditions of life of the Russian factoryworkers very often compel them to enter into the closestrelations with the handicraftsmen, the industrial proletar-iat scattered outside the factory in towns and villages, andwhose conditions are infinitely worse. 
 The Russian factory worker also comes into direct contact with the rural population (very often the factory worker’s family live in the country)and, consequently, he cannot but come into close contactwith the rural proletariat, with the many millions of regu-lar farm workers and day labourers, and also with those ruinedpeasants who, while clinging to their miserable plots of land, have to work off their debts and take on all sorts of “casual jobs,” i. 
e. 
, are also wage-labourers. 
 The RussianSocial-Democrats think it inopportune to send their forces among the handicraftsmen and rural labourers, but they donot in the least intend to ignore them; they will try to en-lighten the advanced workers also on questions affecting the lives of the handicraftsmen and rural labourers, so that when these workers come into contact with the more backwardstrata of the proletariat, they will imbue them with the /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR ideas of the class struggle, socialism and the political tasks of Russian democracy in general and of the Russian prole-tariat in particular. 
 It is impractical to send agitators among the handicraftsmen and rural labourers when there is stillso much work to be done among the factory, urban workers,but in numerous cases the socialist worker comes willy-nilly into contact with these people and must be able to takeadvantage of these opportunities and understand the general tasks of Social-Democracy in Russia. 
 Hence, those who ac-cuse the Russian Social-Democrats of being narrow-minded,of trying to ignore the mass of the labouring population forthe sake of the factory workers, are profoundly mistaken. 
On the contrary, agitation among the advanced sections ofthe proletariat is the surest and the only way to rouse (as the movement expands) the entire Russian proletariat. 
 The dissemination of socialism and of the idea of the class strug-gle among the urban workers will inevitably cause these ideasto flow in the smaller and more scattered channels. 
 Thisrequires that these ideas take deeper root among the betterprepared elements and spread throughout the vanguard of the Russian working-class movement and of the Russian revolution. 
 While concentrating all its forces on activityamong the factory workers, Russian Social-Democracy isready to support those Russian revolutionaries who, in prac-tice, come to base their socialist activities on the class strug-gle of the proletariat; but it does not in the least conceal the point that no practical alliances with other groups of revolutionaries can, or should, lead to compromises or con-cessions on matters of theory, programme or banner. 
 Con-vinced that the doctrine of scientific socialism and the classstruggle is the only revolutionary theory that can todayserve as the banner of the revolutionary movement, the Russian Social-Democrats will exert every effort to spread this doctrine, to guard it against false interpretationand to combat every attempt to impose vaguer doctrineson the still young working-class movement in Russia. 
Theoretical reasoning proves and the practical activitiesof the Social-Democrats show that all socialists in Russia should become Social-Democrats . 
 Let us now deal with the democratic tasks and with the democratic work of the Social-Democrats. 
 Let us repeat, once again, that this work is inseparably connected with socialist activity. 
 In conducting propaganda among the workers, the Social-Democrats cannot avoid political prob-lems, and they would regard any attempt to avoid them, oreven to push them aside, as a profound mistake and a depar-ture from the basic principles of international Social-De-mocracy. 
 Simultaneously with the dissemination of scien-tific socialism, Russian Social-Democrats set themselves the task of propagating democratic ideas among the working-class masses; they strive to spread an understanding of ab-solutism in all its manifestations, of its class content, ofthe necessity to overthrow it, of the impossibility ofwaging a successful struggle for the workers’ cause withoutachieving political liberty and the democratisation of Rus-sia’s political and social system. 
 In conducting agitation among the workers on their immediate economic de-mands, the Social-Democrats inseparably link this withagitation on the immediate political needs, the distressand the demands of the working class, agitation againstpolice tyranny, manifested in every strike, in every conflict between workers and capitalists, agitation against the restric-tion of the rights of the workers as Russian citizens in gen-eral and as the class suffering the worst oppression andhaving the least rights in particular, agitation againstevery prominent representative and flunkey of absolutismwho comes into direct contact with the workers and who clearly reveals to the working class its condition of political slavery. 
 Just as there is no issue affecting the life of theworkers in the economic field that must be left unused forthe purpose of economic agitation, so there is no issue in thepolitical field that does not serve as a subject for politicalagitation. 
 These two kinds of agitation are inseparably con-nected in the activities of the Social-Democrats as the two sides of the same medal. 
 Both economic and political agita-tion are equally necessary to develop the class-consciousnessof the proletariat; both economic and political agitation areequally necessary for guiding the class struggle of the Rus-sian workers, because every class struggle is a political strug-gle. 
 By arousing the class-consciousness of the workers, by organising, disciplining and training them for united actionand for the fight for the ideals of Social-Democracy, both kinds of agitation will enable the workers to test their strength on immediate issues and immediate needs, to wring partial concessions from their enemy and thus improve their economic conditions, compel the capitalists to reckonwith the strength of the organised workers, compel the gov-ernment to extend the workers’ rights, to pay heed totheir demands and keep the government in constant fear ofthe hostility of the masses of workers led by a strong Social-Democratic organisation. 
 We have pointed to the inseparably close connection between socialist and democratic propaganda and agitation, to the complete parallelism of revolutionary activity inboth spheres. 
 Nevertheless, there is a big difference betweenthese two types of activity and struggle. 
 The difference is that in the economic struggle the proletariat stands abso-lutely alone against both the landed nobility and the bour-geoisie, except, perhaps, for the help it receives (and byno means always) from those elements of the petty bour-geoisie which gravitate towards the proletariat. 
 In thedemocratic, political struggle, however, the Russian working class does not stand alone; at its side are all the political opposition elements, strata and classes, since they are hos-tile to absolutism and are fighting it in one form or another. 
Here side by side with the proletariat stand the opposition elements of the bourgeoisie, or of the educated classes, orof the petty bourgeoisie, or of the nationalities, religions and sects, etc. 
, etc. 
, persecuted by the autocratic government. 
 The question naturally arises of what the attitude of theworking class towards these elements should be. 
 Further,should it not combine with them in the common struggleagainst the autocracy? After all, all Social-Democrats admitthat the political revolution in Russia must precede the socialist revolution; should they not, therefore, combine with all the elements in the political opposition to fightthe autocracy, setting socialism aside for the time being? Isnot this essential in order to strengthen the fight againstthe autocracy? Let us examine these two questions. 
 The attitude of the working class, as a fighter against the autocracy, towards all the other social classes and groupsin the political opposition is very precisely determined by the basic principles of Social-Democracy expounded in the famous Communist Manifesto . 
 The Social-Democrats sup-port the progressive social classes against the reactionary classes, the bourgeoisie against the representatives of priv-ileged landowning estate and the bureaucracy, the bigbourgeoisie against the reactionary strivings of the pettybourgeoisie. 
 This support does not presuppose, nor does itcall for, any compromise with non-Social-Democratic pro-grammes and principles—it is support given to an ally against a particular enemy. 
 Moreover, the Social-Democrats render this support in order to expedite the fall of the commonenemy, but expect nothing for themselves from these tem-porary allies, and concede nothing to them. 
 The Social-Democrats support every revolutionary movement against the present social system, they support all oppressed nation-alities, persecuted religions, downtrodden social estates,etc. 
, in their fight for equal rights. 
 Support for all elements of the political opposition will be expressed in the propaganda of the Social-Democratsby the fact that, in showing that the autocracy is hostile to the workers’ cause, they will also point to its hostili-ty towards various other social groups; they will point tothe solidarity of the working class with these groups on a particular issue , in a particular task , etc. 
 In agitation, this support will be expressed by the Social-Democrats’ takingadvantage of every manifestation of the police tyranny of the autocracy to point out to the workers how this tyranny affects all Russian citizens in general , and the representatives of the exceptionally oppressed social estates, nationalities, re-ligions, sects, etc. 
, in particular; and how that tyranny affectsthe working class especially. 
 Finally, in practice, this sup-port is expressed in the readiness of the Russian Social-Democrats to enter into alliances with revolutionaries of other trends for the purpose of achieving certain particularaims, and this readiness has been shown in practice on morethan one occasion. 
 This brings us to the second question. 
 While pointing to the solidarity of one or other of the various opposition groups with the workers, the Social-Democrats will always single out the workers from the rest, they will always point outthat this solidarity is temporary and conditional, they will always emphasise the independent class identity of the pro-letariat, who tomorrow may find themselves in opposition to their allies of today. 
 We shall be told that “such action will weaken all the fighters for political liberty at the present time. 
” We shall reply that such action will strengthen all the fighters for political liberty. 
 Only those fighters are strongwho rely on the consciously recognised real interests of certain classes , and any attempt to obscure these class interests, which already play a predominant role in contemporary society, will only weaken the fighters. 
 That is the first point. 
The second point is that, in the fight against the autocracy,the working class must single itself out, for it is the only thoroughly consistent and unreserved enemy of the autoc-racy, only between the working class and the autocracy is no compromise possible, only in the working class can de-mocracy find a champion who makes no reservations, isnot irresolute and does not look back. 
 The hostility of allother classes, groups and strata of the population towardsthe autocracy is not unqualified ; their democracy always looks back. 
 The bourgeoisie cannot but realise that indus-trial and social development is being retarded by the autoc-racy, but it fears the complete democratisation of the po-litical and social system and can at any moment enter intoalliance with the autocracy against the proletariat. 
 Thepetty bourgeoisie is two-faced by its very nature, and whileit gravitates, on the one hand, towards the proletariat and democracy, on the other, it gravitates towards the reaction-ary classes, tries to hold up the march of history, is aptto be seduced by the experiments and blandishments ofthe autocracy (for example, the “people’s policy” 110 o f Alexander III), is capable of concluding an alliance withthe ruling classes against the proletariat for the sake of strengthening its own small-proprietor position. 
 Educated people, and the “intelligentsia” generally, cannot but revoltagainst the savage police tyranny of the autocracy, whichhunts down thought and knowledge; but the material inter-ests of this intelligentsia bind it to the autocracy and tothe bourgeoisie, compel it to be inconsistent, to compromise, to sell its oppositional and revolutionary ardour for an offi-cial salary, or a share of profits or dividends. 
 As for the dem-ocratic elements among the oppressed nationalities and the persecuted religions, everybody knows and sees that the class antagonisms within these categories of the population are much deeper-going and stronger than the solidarity binding all classes within any one category against theautocracy and in favour of democratic institutions. 
 Theproletariat alone can be—and because of its class positionmust be—a consistently democratic, determined enemyof absolutism, incapable of making any concessions or compromises. 
 The proletariat alone can be the vanguard fighter for political liberty and for democratic institutions. 
 Firstly, this is because political tyranny bears mostheavily upon the proletariat whose position gives it noopportunity to secure a modification of that tyranny—ithas no access to the higher authorities, not even to the offi-cials, and it has no influence on public opinion. 
 Secondly, the proletariat alone is capable of bringing about the com-plete democratisation of the political and social system, since this would place the system in the hands of the workers. 
That is why the merging of the democratic activities of the working class with the democratic aspirations of other classes and groups would weaken the democratic movement, would weaken the political struggle, would make it less determined, less consistent, more likely to compromise. 
On the other hand, if the working class stands out a s the vanguard fighter for democratic institutions, this willstrengthen the democratic movement, will strengthen the struggle for political liberty, because the working class will spur on all the other democratic and political opposition elements, will push the liberals towards the political radi-cals, will push the radicals towards an irrevocable rupturewith the whole of the political and social structure of presentsociety. 
 We said above that all socialists in Russia should become Social-Democrats . 
 We now add: all true and consistent democrats in Russia should become Social-Democrats . 
 We will illustrate what we mean by quoting the following example. 
 Take the civil service, the bureaucracy, as repre-senting a special category of persons who specialise in thework of administration and occupy a privileged position as compared with the people. 
 We see this institution ev-erywhere, from autocratic and semi-Asiatic Russia to cul-tured, free and civilised England, as an essential organ of bourgeois society. 
 The complete lack of rights of the people in relation to government officials and the complete absence of control over the privileged bureaucracy correspond to the backwardness of Russia and to its absolutismIn England powerful popular control is exercised over theadministration, but even there that control is far from being complete , even there the bureaucracy retains not a few of its privileges, and not infrequently is the master and not the servant of the people. 
 Even in England we see that pow-erful social groups support the privileged position of thebureaucracy and hinder the complete democratisation ofthat institution. 
 Why? Because it is in the interests of theproletariat alone to democratise it completely ; the most progressive strata of the bourgeoisie defend certain preroga-tives of the bureaucracy and are opposed to the election of all officials, opposed to the complete abolition of electoralqualifications, opposed to making officials directly re-sponsible to the people, etc. 
, because these strata realisethat the proletariat will take advantage of such completedemocratisation in order to use it against the bourgeoisie. 
 This is the case in Russia, too. 
 Many and most diverse strata of the Russian people are opposed to the omnipotent, irre-sponsible, corrupt, savage, ignorant and parasitic Russianbureaucracy. 
 But except for the proletariat, not one of these strata would agree to the complete democratisation of thebureaucracy, because all these strata (bourgeoisie, petty bourgeoisie, the “intelligentsia” in general) have some ties with the bureaucracy, because all these strata are kith and kin of the Russian bureaucracy. 
 Who does not know how easy it is in Holy Russia for a radical intellectual, or social-ist intellectual, to turn into an official of the ImperialGovernment, an official who takes comfort from the thought that he does “good” within the limits of office routine, an official who pleads this “good” in justification of his politicalindifference, his servility towards the government of theknout and the whip? The proletariat alone is unreservedly hostile to the autocracy and the Russian bureaucracy, socialists proletariat alone has no ties with these organs of aristocratic-bourgeois society and the proletariat alone is capable of irre-concilable hostility towards them and of waging a determinedstruggle against them. 
 When we show that the proletariat, led in its class struggle by Social-Democracy, is the vanguard fighter of Russian democracy, we encounter the very widespread and very strange opinion that Russian Social-Democracy relegatespolitical tasks and political struggle to the background. 
 Aswe see, this opinion is the very opposite of the truth. 
 Howare we to explain this astonishing failure to understand theprinciples of Social-Democracy that have often been ex-pounded and were expounded in the very first Russian So-cial-Democratic publications, in the pamphlets and bookspublished abroad by the Emancipation of Labour group? 111 In our view, the explanation of this amazing fact lies in thefollowing three circumstances. 
 First, it lies in the general failure of the representatives of old revolutionary theories to understand the principles of Social-Democracy, accustomed as they are to base theirprogrammes and plans of activity on abstract ideas and noton an exact appraisal of the actual classes operating in thecountry, classes that have been placed in certain relationshipsby history. 
 This lack of realistic discussion of the interests which support Russian democracy can only give rise to the opinion that Russian Social-Democracy leaves the dem-ocratic tasks of Russian revolutionaries in the background. 
 Second, it lies in the failure to understand that when eco-nomic and political issues, and socialist and democraticactivities, are united into one whole, into the single class struggle of the proletariat , this does not weaken but strength-ens the democratic movement and the political struggle,by bringing it closer to the real interests of the mass of thepeople, dragging political issues out of the “stuffy studiesof the intelligentsia” into the street, into the midst of theworkers and labouring classes, and replacing abstract ideas by real manifestations of political oppression from which the greatest sufferers are the proletariat, and onthe basis of which the Social-Democrats conduct their agi-tation. 
 It often seems to the Russian radical that insteadof frankly and directly calling upon the advanced workersto join the political struggle, the Social-Democrat points to the task of developing the working-class movement, of organising the class struggle of the proletariat, and therebyretreats from his democracy, relegates the political struggle to the background. 
 But if this is retreat , it is the kind of retreat that is meant in the French proverb: “Il faut reculer pour mieux sauter!” (Step back in order to leap farther for-ward. 
) Third, the misunderstanding arises from the fact that the very term “political struggle” means something differentto the Narodovoltsi and Narodopravtsi, on the onehand, and to the Social-Democrats, on the other. 
 The Social-Democrats understand the political struggle differently, they understand it much more broadly than do the representatives of the old revolutionary theo-ries. 
 A clear illustration of this seeming paradox is providedby the Leaflet of the Narodnaya Volya Group , No. 
 4, Decem-ber 9, 1895. 
 While heartily welcoming this publication, which testifies to the profound and fruitful thinking that is going on among the present-day Narodovoltsi, we cannotrefrain from mentioning P. 
 L. 
 Lavrov’s article, “Pro-gramme questions” (pp. 
 19-22), which vividly revealsthe different conception of the political struggle en-tertained by the old-style Narodovoltsi. 
 * “... Here,” writes P. 
 L. 
 Lavrov, speaking of the relation of the Narod-naya Volya programme to the Social-Democratic pro-gramme, “one thing and one thing alone is material, viz. 
,is it possible to organise a strong workers’ party underthe autocracy and to do so apart from the organisa-tion of a revolutionary party directed against the au-tocracy?” (p. 
 21, col. 
 2); also a little before that (in col. 
 1): “... to organise a Russian workers’ party while autocracyreigns without at the same time organising a revolutionaryparty against this autocracy. 
” We cannot at all understandthese distinctions which seem to be of such cardinal impor-tance to P. 
 L. 
 Lavrov. 
 What is the meaning of “a workers’ party apart from a revolutionary party against the autoc-*P. 
 L. 
 Lavrov’s article in No. 
 4 is, in fact, only an “excerpt” from a long letter written by him for Material . 
112 We have heard that the full text of this letter and a reply by Plekhanov were also published abroad this summer (1897) but we have seen neither the one nor the other. 
 Nor do we know whether Leaflet of the Narodnaya Volya Group , No. 
 5, in which the editors promised to publish an editorial article on P. 
 L. 
 Lavrov’s letter, has appeared yet. 
 See No. 
 4, p. 
 22, col. 
 1, footnote. 
 racy”?? Is not a workers’ party itself a revolutionary party? Is it not directed against the autocracy? This queer idea is explained in the following passage in P. 
 L. 
 Lavrov’s arti-cle: “A Russian workers’ party will have to be organisedunder the rule of the autocracy with all its charms. 
 If theSocial-Democrats succeeded in doing this without at thesame time organising a political conspiracy * against the autocracy, with all that goes with such a conspiracy ,* then, of course, their political programme would be a fit and proper programme for Russian socialists, since the emancipationof the workers by the efforts of the workers themselveswould be accomplished. 
 But this is very doubtful, if notimpossible” (p. 
 21, col. 
 1). 
 So that’s the point! To theNarodovoltsi, the term political struggle is synonymous with the term political conspiracy ! It must be confessed that in these words P. 
 L. 
 Lavrov has managed to bring outin bold relief the fundamental difference between thetactics in the political struggle adopted by the Narodo-voltsi and by the Social-Democrats. 
 Blanquist, 113 conspir-atorial traditions are fearfully strong among the for-mer, so much so that they cannot conceive of political struggle except in the form of political conspiracy. 
The Social-Democrats, however, are not guilty of sucha narrow outlook; they do not believe in conspiracies; theythink that the period of conspiracies has long passed away,that to reduce political struggle to conspiracy means, on the one hand, immensely restricting its scope, and, on the other hand, choosing the most unsuitable methods of strug-gle. 
 Everyone will understand that P. 
 L. 
 Lavrov’s remarkthat “the Russian Social-Democrats take the activities of theWest as an unfailing model” (p. 
 21, col. 
 1) is nothing morethan a polemical manoeuvre, and that actually the Russian Social-Democrats have never forgotten the political condi-tions here, they have never dreamed of being able to forma workers’ party in Russia legally, they have never sepa-rated the task of fighting for socialism from that of fightingfor political liberty. 
 But they have always thought, andcontinue to think, that this fight must be waged not by con-spirators, but by a revolutionary party based on the working-*Our italics. 
 class movement. 
 They think that the fight against the au-tocracy must consist not in organising conspiracies, but in educating, disciplining and organising the proletariat, in political agitation among the workers which denouncesevery manifestation of absolutism, which pillories all theknights of the police government and compels this govern-ment to make concessions. 
 Is this not precisely the kindof activity being conducted by the St. 
 Petersburg League of Struggle for the Emancipation of the Working Class? Does not this organisation represent the embryo of a revo-lutionary party based on the working-class movement,which leads the class struggle of the proletariat againstcapital and against the autocratic government withouthatching any conspiracies, while deriving its strength from the combination of socialist and democratic struggle into the single, indivisible class struggle of the St. 
 Petersburgproletariat? Brief as they may have been, have not theactivities of the League already shown that the proletariat,led by Social-Democracy, is a big political force with whichthe government is already compelled to reckon, and to which it hastens to make concessions? Both the haste with which the law of June 2, 1897, was passed, and the contentof that law clearly reveal its significance as a concessionwrung by the proletariat, as a position won from the enemyof the Russian people. 
 This concession is a very tiny one,the position won is very small, but the working-class organ-isation that has succeeded in forcing this concession is also not distinguished for breadth, stability, long standingor wealth of experience or resources. 
 As is well known, theLeague of Struggle was formed only in 1895-96, and itsappeals to the workers have been confined to hectographedor lithographed leaflets. 
 Can it he denied that an organisa-tion like this, if it united, at least, the biggest centres of the working-class movement in Russia (the St. 
 Petersburg,Moscow-Vladimir, and the southern areas, and also themost important towns like Odessa, Kiev, Saratov, etc. 
),if it had a revolutionary organ at its disposal and enjoyedas much prestige among the Russian workers generally as the League of Struggle does among the St. 
 Petersburg work-ers—can it be denied that such an organisation would bea tremendous political factor in contemporary Russia, a factor that the government would have to reckon with in its entire home and foreign policy. 
 By leading the class struggle of the proletariat, developing organisation and discipline among the workers, helping them to fight fortheir immediate economic needs and to win position afterposition from capital, by politically educating the workersand systematically and unswervingly attacking the autoc-racy and making life a torment for every tsarist bashi-bazouk who makes the proletariat feel the heavy paw of the police government—such an organisation would at oneand the same time be a workers’ party organisation adaptedto our conditions, and a powerful revolutionary party di-rected against the autocracy. 
 To discuss in advance whatmethods this organisation will resort to in order to deliver a smashing blow at the autocracy, whether, for example, it will prefer insurrection, a mass political strike, or some oth-er form of attack, to discuss these things in advance and todecide this question now would be empty doctrinairism. 
 Itwould be akin to generals calling a council of war beforethey had mustered their troops, mobilised them, and under-taken a campaign against the enemy. 
 When the army of the proletariat fights unswervingly and under the leader-ship of a strong Social-Democratic organisation for its eco-nomic and political emancipation, that army will itselfindicate the methods and means of action to the generals. 
Then, and then only, will it be possible to decide the question of striking the final blow at the autocracy; for the solution of the problem depends on the state of the working-classmovement, on its breadth, on the methods of struggle devel-oped by the movement, on the qualities of the revolutionaryorganisation leading the movement, on the attitude of othersocial elements to the proletariat and to the autocracy, on the conditions governing home and foreign politics—in a word, it depends on a thousand and one things which cannotbe guessed, and which it would be useless to try to guess inadvance. 
 That is why the following argument of P. 
 L. 
 Lavrov’s is also extremely unfair: “If, however, they” (the Social-Democrats) “have, in one way or another, not only to group the workers’ forcesfor the struggle against capital, but also to rally revolu-tionary individuals and groups for the struggle against the autocracy, the Russian Social-Democrats will actually be adopting the programme of their opponents, the Na-rodnaya Volya, no matter what they may call themselves. 
Differences of opinion concerning the village commu-nity, the destiny of capitalism in Russia and economicmaterialism are points of detail of very little importanceto the real cause, either facilitating or hindering the so-lution of particular problems, particular methods of pre-paring the main points, but nothing more” (p. 
 21, col. 
 1). 
 It is strange to have to challenge this last proposition— that differences of opinion on the fundamental questionsof Russian life and of the development of Russian society, onthe fundamental problems of the conception of history, concern only “points of detail”! It was said long ago that without a revolutionary theory there can be no revolutionarymovement, and it is hardly necessary to advance proof ofthis truth at the present time . 
 The theory of the class struggle, the materialist conception of Russian history and the ma-terialist appraisal of the present economic and political situation in Russia, recognition of the need to relate the revolutionary struggle strictly to the definite interestsof a definite class and to analyse its relation to other classes—to call these great revolutionary questions “pointsof detail” is so colossally wrong and unexpected, comingfrom a veteran of revolutionary theory , that we are almost prepared to regard this passage as a lapsus. 
 As for the first part of the tirade quoted, its unfairness is still more as-tonishing. 
 To state in print that the Russian Social-Demo-crats only group the workers’ forces for the struggle againstcapital (i. 
e. 
, only for the economic struggle!) and do notrally revolutionary individuals and groups for the struggle against the autocracy, means that the author either does not know or does not want to know generally known facts concern-ing the activities of the Russian Social-Democrats. 
 Or, per-haps, P. 
 L. 
 Lavrov does not regard the Social-Democrats whoare engaged in practical work in Russia as “revolutionaryindividuals” and “revolutionary groups”?! Or (and this, perhaps, is more likely) by “struggle” against the autocracy he means only conspiracies against it? (Cf. 
 p. 
 21, col. 
 2:“... it is a matter of ... organising a revolutionary conspiracy ”; /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR our italics. 
) Perhaps, in P. 
 L. 
 Lavrov’s opinion, those who do not organise political conspiracies are not engaged in political struggle? We repeat once again: opinions like these fully correspond to the old-time traditions of theold-time Narodnaya Volya, but do not correspond at alleither to contemporary conceptions of the political struggleor to contemporary conditions. 
 We have still to say a few words about the Naro-dopravtsi. 
 P. 
 L. 
 Lavrov is quite right, in our opinion, when he says that the Social-Democrats “recommend theNarodopravtsi as being more frank, and are ready tosupport them, without, however, merging with them” (p. 
 19,col. 
 2); he should only have added: as more frank demo-crats , and to the degree that the Narodopravtsi act as consistent democrats. 
 Unfortunately, this condition is more a matter of the desired future than of the actualpresent. 
 The Narodopravtsi expressed a desire to freethe democratic tasks from Narodism and from the ob-solete forms of “Russian socialism” generally; but theythemselves were still far from being freed from old prejudices, and were far from consistent when they described their party, exclusively a party for political re-forms, as a “social (??!)-revolutionary” party (see their “Man-ifesto” dated February 19, 1894), and declared in their “Man-ifesto” that “the term people’s rights includes the organisa-tion of people’s industry” (we are obliged to quote from memo-ry) and thus introduced Narodnik prejudices sub rosa. 
 Hence, P. 
 L. 
 Lavrov was, perhaps, not altogether wrong when hedescribed them as “masquerade politicians” (p. 
 20, col. 
 2). 
But perhaps it would be fairer to regard the doctrine ofNarodnoye Pravo as transitional, to the credit of which itmust be said that it was ashamed of the original character of the Narodnik doctrines and openly gave battle to those most abominable Narodnik reactionaries who, despite theexistence of absolute rule by the police and the upper class,have the audacity to speak of the desirability of economicand not political reforms (see “An Urgent Question,” pub-lished by the Narodnoye Pravo Party). 
 If the Narodnoye Pravo Party does not really contain anybody but ex-socialists who conceal their socialist banner for tactical considerations,and who merely don the mask of non-socialist politicians (as P. 
 L. 
 Lavrov assumes, p. 
 20, col. 
 2), then, of course, that party has no future whatever. 
 If, however, the party also contains not masquerade, but real non-socialist politi-cians, non-socialist democrats, then this party can do nolittle good by striving to draw closer to the political opposi-tion among our bourgeoisie, by striving to arouse the polit-ical consciousness of our petty bourgeoisie, small shop-keepers, small artisans, etc. 
—the class which, everywhere in Western Europe, played a part in the democratic move-ment and, in Russia, has made exceptionally rapid progressin cultural and other respects in the post-Reform period,and which cannot avoid feeling the oppression of the policegovernment that gives its cynical support to the big factoryowners, the magnates of finance and industrial monopoly. 
 All that is needed for this is that the Narodopravtsi should make it their task to draw closer to various strataof the population and should not confine themselves to thevery same “intelligentsia” whose impotence, owing to theirisolation from the real interests of the masses, is admittedeven in “An Urgent Question. 
” What is needed is that the Narodopravtsi abandon all idea of merging different so-cial elements and of pushing socialism aside in favour ofpolitical tasks, that they abandon the false shamewhich prevents them from drawing closer to the bour-geois strata of the population, i. 
e. 
, that they notonly talk about a programme for non-socialist politi-cians, but act according to this programme, rousing and developing the class-consciousness of those social groupsand classes for whom socialism is quite unnecessary, butwho, as time goes on, increasingly feel the oppression ofthe autocracy and the need for political liberty. 
 Russian Social-Democracy is still very young. 
 It is only just emerging from its embryonic state in which theoreticalquestions predominated. 
 It is only just beginning to developits practical activity. 
 In place of criticism of Social-Demo-cratic theories and programmes, revolutionaries of other parties have of necessity moved on to criticism of thepractical activity of the Russian Social-Democrats. 
 And it must be admitted that this latter criticism differs most sharply from the criticism of theory, differs so much, in fact, that it was possible to float the comical rumour that the St. 
 Petersburg League of Struggle is not a Social-Demo-cratic organisation. 
 The very fact that such a rumour ap-peared shows how unfounded is the accusation now currentthat the Social-Democrats ignore the political struggle. 
The very fact that such a rumour appeared shows that many revolutionaries whom the Social-Democrats’ theory could not convince are beginning to be convinced by theirpractice . 
 Russian Social-Democracy is still faced with an enor-mous, almost untouched field of work. 
 The awakening ofthe Russian working class, its spontaneous striving for knowledge, organisation, socialism, for the struggle against its exploiters and oppressors becomes more widespread,more strikingly apparent every day. 
 The enormous progressmade by Russian capitalism in recent times is a guaranteethat the working-class movement will grow uninterruptedlyin breadth and depth. 
 We are apparently now passing through the period in the capitalist cycle when industry is “prospering,” when business is brisk, when the factoriesare working at full capacity and when countless new facto-ries, new enterprises, joint-stock companies, railway enter-prises, etc. 
, etc. 
, are springing up like mushrooms. 
 Oneneed not be a prophet to foretell the inevitable and fairly sharp crash that is bound to succeed this period of industrial “prosperity. 
” This crash will ruin masses of small owners,will throw masses of workers into the ranks of the unem-ployed, and will thus confront all the workers in an acute formwith the problems of socialism and democracy which havelong faced every class-conscious, every thinking worker. 
 Russian Social-Democrats must see to it that when this crash comes the Russian proletariat is more class-conscious,more united, able to understand the tasks of the Russianworking class, capable of putting up resistance to the capi-talist class—which is now reaping huge profits and alwaysstrives to burden the workers with the losses—and capable of leading Russian democracy in a decisive struggle against the police autocracy, which binds and fetters the Russianworkers and the whole of the Russian people. 
 And so, to work, comrades! Let us not lose precious time! Russian Social-Democrats have much to do to meet the requirements of the awakening proletariat, to organise the working-class movement, to strengthen the revolutionarygroups and their mutual ties, to supply the workers withpropaganda and agitational literature, and to unite theworkers’ circles and Social-Democratic groups scatteredall over Russia into a single Social-Democratic Labour Party ! TO THE WORKERS AND SOCIALISTS OF ST. 
 PETERSBURG THE LEAGUE OF STRUGGLE The St. 
 Petersburg revolutionaries are experiencing hard times. 
 It seems that the government has concentrated all its forces for the purpose of crushing the recently born work-ing-class movement which has given such a display ofstrength. 
 Arrests are being made on an unprecedented scaleand the prisons are overcrowded. 
 Intellectuals, men andwomen, and masses of workers are being dragged off andexiled. 
 Almost every day brings news of ever new victims of the police government, which has flung itself in fury upon its enemies. 
 The government has set itself theaim of preventing the new trend in the Russian revolu-tionary movement from gaining strength and gettingon its feet. 
 The public prosecutors and gendarmes arealready boasting that they have smashed the League of Struggle. 
 This boast is a lie. 
 The League of Struggle is intact, despite all the persecution. 
 With deep satisfaction we declare thatthe wholesale arrests are doing their job—they are a power-ful weapon of agitation among the workers and socialistintellectuals, that the places of the fallen revolutionaries are being taken by new people who are ready, with fresh energy, to join the ranks of the champions of the Russian pro-letariat and of the entire people of Russia. 
 There can beno struggle without sacrifice, and to the brutal persecution ofthe tsarist bashi-bazouks we calmly reply: Revolutionarieshave perished—long live the revolution! So far, increased persecution has only been able to cause a temporary weakening of certain functions of the League of Struggle, a temporary shortage of agents and agitators. 
 This is the shortage that we now feel and that impels us tocall upon all class-conscious workers and all intellectualsdesirous of devoting their energies to the revolutionary cause. 
The League of Struggle needs agents. 
 Let all study circlesand all individuals desirous of working in any sphere of revolutionary activity, even the most restricted, inform those in touch with the League of Struggle. 
 (Should anygroup be unable to contact such individuals—this is veryunlikely—they can do so through the League of RussianSocial-Democrats Abroad. 
) People are needed for all kindsof work, and the more strictly revolutionaries specialise in the various aspects of revolutionary activity, the more strictly they give thought to their methods of undergroundwork and ways of screening it, the more selflessly theyconcentrate on the minor, unseen, particular jobs, the saferwill the whole thing be and the more difficult will it be forthe gendarmes and spies to discover the revolutionaries. 
 In advance the government has enmeshed not only the existing centres of anti-government elements, but alsopossible and probable ones, in a network of agents. 
 Thegovernment is steadily developing the size and range ofthe activities of those of its lackeys who are hounding revo-lutionaries, is devising new methods, introducing more provo-cateurs, trying to exert pressure on the arrested by means of intimidation, confrontation with false testimony, forged sig-natures, planting faked letters, etc. 
, etc. 
 Without a strengthen-ing and development of revolutionary discipline, organisationand underground activity, struggle against the governmentis impossible. 
 And underground activity demands above all that groups and individuals specialise in different aspects of work and that the job of co-ordination be assigned tothe central group of the League of Struggle, with as fewmembers as possible. 
 The aspects of revolutionary workare extremely varied. 
 Legal agitators are needed who cantalk to the workers in a way that does not render them liable to prosecution, and can say just a, leaving it to others to say b and c. 
 Literature and leaflet distributors are needed. 
 Organisers of workers’ study circles and groups are needed. 
 Correspondents are needed who can give a complete picture of events in all factories. 
 People are needed who will keep an eye on spies and provocateurs. 
 People are needed who will arrange underground meeting places. 
People are needed to deliver literature, transmit instruc-tions, and to arrange all kinds of contacts. 
 Fund collec-tors are needed. 
 Agents are needed to work among the intel-ligentsia and government officials, people in contact with the workers and factory life, with the administration (with the police, factory inspectors, etc. 
). 
 People are needed forcontact with the different towns of Russia and other coun-tries. 
 People are needed to arrange various ways of runningoff all sorts of literature. 
 People are needed to look afterliterature and other things, etc. 
, etc. 
 The smaller and more specific the job undertaken by the individual person or individual group, the greater will be the chance that theywill think things out, do the job properly and guarantee itbest against failure, that they will consider all the detailsof underground work and use all possible means of hood-winking and misleading the gendarmes, the more will suc-cess be assured, the harder will it be for the police and gen-darmes to keep track of the revolutionaries and their linkswith their organisations, and the easier for the revolutionaryparty to replace, without prejudice to the cause as a whole,agents and members who have fallen. 
 We know that speciali-sation of this kind is a very difficult matter, difficult because it demands from the individual the greatest endurance and selflessness, demands the giving of all one’s strength to workthat is inconspicuous, monotonous, that deprives one of con-tact with comrades and subordinates the revolutionary’sentire life to a grim and rigid routine. 
 But it was only in con-ditions such as these that the greatest men of revolutionary practice in Russia succeeded in carrying out the boldest undertakings, spending years on all-round preparation, andwe are profoundly convinced that the Social-Democratswill prove no less self-sacrificing than the revolutionaries ofprevious generations. 
 We are also aware that the prelimi-nary period envisaged by our system during which the League of Struggle will collect the necessary information about individuals or groups offering their services and givethem something to do by way of trial will be a very difficult one for many people eager to devote their energies to revolutionary work. 
 But without this preliminary testing, revolutionary activity in present-day Russia is impossible. 
 In suggesting this system of work to our new com-rades we are expressing a view arrived at after long experi-ence, being deeply convinced that it best of all guaran-tees successful revolutionary work. 
 Published according to the text in Economic Studies and Es-says checked with the text in the miscellany The Agrarian Question by Vl. 
 Ilyin, 1908Written in exile 1897 First published in 1898 in the miscellany Economic Studies and Essays by Vladimir IlyinTHE HANDICRAFT CENSUS OF 1894-95 IN PERM GUBERNIA AND GENERAL PROBLEMS OF “HANDICRAFT” INDUSTRY114 Written in exile 1897 First published in 1898 in the miscellany Economic Studies and Essays by Vladimir IlyinPublished according to the text in Economic Studies and Es-says checked with the text in the miscellany The Agrarian Question by Vl. 
 Ilyin, 1908THE HANDICRAFT CENSUS OF 1894-95 IN PERM GUBERNIA AND GENERAL PROBLEMS OF “HANDICRAFT” INDUSTRY114 ARTICLE ONE (I. 
 General Data. 
—II. 
 The “Handicraftsman” and Wage-Labour. 
— III. 
 ”Communal-Labour Continuity”) Perm scientific societies, assisted by the Zemstvo, have undertaken the preparation of an extensive handbook forthe 1896 Exhibition in Nizhni-Novgorod under the generaltitle: A Survey of Perm Territory . 
 Enough material has been collected to fill well over three thousand pages, andthe whole edition is to consist of eight volumes. 
 As was to be expected, the work was not completed in time for the exhibition, and so far only the first volume, a sketch ofthe handicraft industries of the gubernia, * has been pub-lished. 
 For the novelty, wealth and fulness of the materialon which it is based, the Sketch is a work of outstanding interest. 
 The material was obtained through a special handicraft census financed by the Zemstvo and taken in 1894-95. 
 This was a house-to-house census, each householderbeing questioned individually. 
 The information was collect-ed by the Zemsky Nachalniks. 
 115 The programme of this house-to-house investigation was very broad, embracing themembers of the families of master handicraftsmen, the wage-labour employed by them, agriculture, information on the purchase of raw materials, the technique of production,distribution of work according to the months of the year,sale of products, dates on which the establishments werefounded, and the indebtedness of handicraftsmen. 
 Asfar as we are aware, this is perhaps the first time such abun-*A Survey of Perm Territory. 
 A Sketch of the State of Handicraft Industry in Perm Gubernia . 
 Published out of funds provided by the Perm Gubernia Zemstvo. 
 Perm, 1896, pp. 
 II #365#232 pp. 
 of tables, 16 diagrams and a map of Perm Gubernia. 
 Price: 1 ruble50 kopeks. 
 dant information has been published in our literature. 
 But to whom much is given, much is required. 
 The very wealth of the material entitles us to demand its thorough analysis by the investigators, but the Sketch is a long way from meeting this demand. 
 Both in the tabulated data and inthe method of grouping and analysing them there are manygaps, which the present author has had in part to fill byselecting material from various parts of the book and com-puting the appropriate data. 
 Our purpose is to acquaint the reader with the material of the census, the methods by which it has been analysed,and the conclusions to be drawn from the data relative tothe economic realities of our “handicraft industries. 
” We underscore the words “economic realities,” because we only deal with what exists in reality, and why that reality is what it is, and not something else. 
 As to extending the con-clusions drawn from the data on Perm Gubernia to “ourhandicraft industries” in general, the reader will see fromwhat follows that such an extention is quite legitimate,for the forms of “handicraft industry” in Perm Gubernia are exceedingly varied and embrace every possible form ever mentioned in the literature on the subject. 
 But there is one request we must earnestly make, namely, that the reader draw the strictest possible distinction be-tween two aspects of the following commentary: the studyand analysis of the actual facts, on the one hand, and the discussion of the Narodnik views held by the authors of the Sketch , on the other. 
 I GENERAL DATA The handicraft census of 1894-95 embraced 8,991 families (excluding the families of wage-workers) in all uyezds ofthe gubernia, or, in the opinion of the investigators, about72 per cent of the total number of Perm handicraftsmen; otherdata point to the existence of 3,484 families more. 
 The basic division according to type adopted in the Sketch i s as follows: two groups of handicraftsmen are distinguished (indicated in the tables by the Roman numerals I and II): those who have a farm (I) and those who have not (II); then three sub-groups of each group (Arabic numerals 1, 2 and 3): 1) those who produce for the market; 2) those who work to order for private customers, and 3) those whowork to order for buyers-up. 
 In the last two sub-groups theraw material is usually supplied by the customer or thebuyer-up. 
 Let us take a look at this method of classifying. 
The division of handicraftsmen into those who farm land and those who do not is, of course, a sound and necessary method. 
 The large number of landless handicraftsmen inPerm Gubernia, frequently concentrated in industrialsettlements, has led the authors to stick to this classifi-cation and to use it in the tables. 
 We learn, for example,that 6,638 persons, or one-third of the total number of handicraftsmen (19,970 working members of families and wage-workers in 8,991 establishments) do not farm land. 
 * This fact alone shows the fallacy of the common assumptionsand assertions that the connection between handicraftindustry and agriculture is universal; this connection issometimes stressed as a specifically Russian feature. 
 If we exclude the rural (and urban) artisans who have been wrongly classed as “handicraftsmen,” we find that 2,268 of the remain-ing 5,566 families, or over two-fifths of the total numberof industrialists working for the market, are landless. 
Unfortunately, even this basic classification is not adheredto consistently in the Sketch . 
 Firstly, it is applied only to master craftsmen, no similar data being given for wage-workers. 
 This omission is due to the fact that, in general,the census registered only the establishments, the owners,and ignored the wage-workers and their families. 
 In placeof these terms, the Sketch employs the very inaccurate expres-sion “families engaged in handicraft industries. 
” This is inac-curate because families whose members are employed by handicraftsmen as wage-workers are no less “engaged in hand-icraft industries” than the families which hire them. 
 Theabsence of house-to-house information on the families of wage-workers (who constitute one-fourth of the total number ofworkers) is a grave omission in the census. 
 This omission is *Actually, more than one-third are landless, for the census covered only one town. 
 But of that more anon. 
 highly characteristic of the Narodniks, who at once adopt the viewpoint of the small producer and leave wage-labour in the shade. 
 Below we shall find frequent gaps of this kind in the information on wage-workers, but for the moment letus confine ourselves to the remark that although the absenceof information on wage-workers’ families is a commonfeature of the literature on handicrafts, there are exceptions. 
In the Moscow Zemstvo statistics one occasionally comes across systematic information on wage-workers’ families, and even more so in the well-known inquiry of Messrs. 
Kharizomenov and Prugavin, Industries of Vladimir Gubernia , which contains house-to-house censuses that regis-ter wage-workers’ families on a par with those of masters. 
Secondly, by including the mass of landless industrialists under the heading of handicraftsmen, the investigators naturally removed the grounds for the common, althoughabsolutely incorrect, method of excluding the urban indus-trialists from this category. 
 And, indeed, we find that the1894-95 census includes one town—Kungur (p. 
 33 of thetables)—but only one . 
 No explanation is given in the Sketch , and it remains a mystery why the census was taken for one town only, and why this particular town was cho-sen—whether by chance or for some sound reason. 
 This causesno little confusion, and seriously detracts from the valueof the general data. 
 On the whole, therefore, the handicraftcensus repeats the usual Narodnik mistake of separating the country (“handicraftsmen”) from the town, although often enough an industrial district embraces a town andthe surrounding villages. 
 It is high time to abandon thisdistinction, which is due to prejudice and an exaggerationof outdated divisions into social estates. 
 We have already referred on several occasions to rural and urban artisans, sometimes excluding them from the number of handicraftsmen, and sometimes not. 
 The factis that these fluctuations are characteristic of all literature on“handicraft” industries, and demonstrate the unsuitabilityof a term like “handicraftsman” for the purposes of scientificinvestigation. 
 The generally accepted opinion is that only those who work for the market, the commodity producers, should be regarded as handicraftsmen; but in practice itwould be hard to find all investigation of the handicraft industries in which artisans, that is, producers who work for private customers (2nd sub-group in the Sketch ) are not counted as handicraftsmen. 
 Both in the Transactions of the Commission of Inquiry into the Handicraft Industryand the Industries of Moscow Gubernia you will find arti-sans classed as “handicraftsmen. 
” We consider it useless toargue about the meaning of the word “handicraft,” for, aswe shall see later, there is no form of industry (except perhaps machine industry) which has not been included un-der this traditional term, a term that is absolutely uselessfor scientific investigation. 
 It is certain that a strict dis-tinction must be made between commodity producers whowork for the market (1st sub-group) and artisans who fulfilthe orders of private customers (2nd sub-group), because of the complete difference in the social and economic signif-icance of these forms of industry. 
 The attempts made in the Sketch to obliterate this distinction (cf. 
 pp. 
 13 and 177) are very unsuccessful; far more correct is the remark madein another Zemstvo statistical publication on the Perm han-dicraftsmen to the effect that “the artisans have very few points of contact with the sphere of handicraft industry— fewer than the latter has with factory industry. 
” * Both factory industry and the 1st sub-group of “handicraftsmen”relate to commodity production , which is non-existent in the 2nd sub-group. 
 A no less strict distinction must bemade in the case of the 3rd sub-group, the handicraftsmen who work for buyers-up (and manufacturers) and who differ essentially from those of the first two sub-groups. 
 It would be desirable for all investigators of so-called “handicraft”industry to adhere strictly to this division and use precisepolitical-economic terminology, instead of assigning anarbitrary meaning to colloquial terms. 
 The following table shows the division of the “handi-craftsmen” into groups and sub-groups: Before proceeding to draw conclusions from these figures, *The Handicraft Industries of Perm Gubernia at the Siberian-Urals Science and Industry Exhibition in Ekaterinburg , 1887, by Y. 
 Krasnoperov, in three parts, Perm, 1888-89, Part I, p. 
 8. 
We shall quote from this valuable publication, briefly referring toit as Handicraft Industries and indicating the part and the page. 
 Group I Group II Sub-group Sub-group Grand totalTotal Total 123 12 3 Number of 2,285 2,821 1,013 6,119 935 604 1,333 2,872 8,991 establish-37. 
3 46. 
1 16. 
6 100 32. 
6 21. 
0 46. 
4 100 — ments Number of: Family workers 4,201 4,146 1,957 10,304 1,648 881 2,233 4,762 15,066 Wage-workers 1,753 681 594 3,028 750 282 844 1,876 4,904 Total 5,954 4,827 2,551 13,332 2,398 1,163 3,077 6,638 19,970 Number of es-tablishments employing wage-worker 700 490 251 1,441 353 148 482 983 2,424 let us recall that the town of Kungur was included in Group II, which thus consists of a mixture of urban andrural industrialists. 
 We see from the table that althoughthere is a preponderance of agriculturists (Group I) amongthe rural industrialists and artisans, they are more back-ward in the development of forms of industry than those who do not cultivate the land (Group II). 
 Among the formerprimitive artisanship is far more prevalent than productionfor the market. 
 The greater development of capitalism amongthe non-agriculturists is shown by the larger proportionof establishments employing wage-workers, of the wage-work-ers themselves, and of handicraftsmen who work for buyers-up. 
 It may therefore be concluded that the tie with agri-culture tends to preserve the more backward forms of indus-try, and vice versa, that the development of capitalism inindustry leads to a break with agriculture. 
 Unfortunately,exact information on this subject is not available, and we have perforce to content ourselves with indirect indications. 
 For example, the Sketch tells us nothing about the division of the rural population of Perm Gubernia into agricultur-ists and landless people, and so we cannot determine inwhich of these categories the industries are most developed. 
There is a similar neglect of the highly interesting ques-tion of the territorial distribution of industry (the investi-gators were in possession of the most exact information onthis point, for each village separately), of the concentra-{ tion of industrialists in the non-agricultural, factory, or trade and industrial settlements generally, of the centres of each branch of industry, and of the spread of the indus-tries from these centres to the surrounding villages. 
 If we add to this that the household statistics showing when the establishments were founded (see § III below) providedan opportunity to determine how the industries developed, that is, whether they spread from the centres to the sur-rounding villages or vice versa, whether they spread mostlyamong agriculturists or non-agriculturists, etc. 
, then one cannot help regretting the inadequate analysis of the data. 
 The only information we are able to obtain concerns the dis-tribution of industries by uyezds. 
 To acquaint the reader with these figures we shall group the uyezds as suggested in the Sketch (p. 
 31): 1) the five “uyezds where the proportion of handicraftsmen working for the market is largest and where, simultaneously, the development of handicraft industry is relatively high”; 2) the five “uyezds where the development of the handicraft industry is relatively weak,and where the handicraftsmen working for the market pre-dominate”; 3) the two “uyezds where it is also at a low level,but where the majority often consists of handicraftsmen whofulfil orders for private customers. 
” Summarising the prin-cipal data for these groups of uyezds we get the following table (see p. 
 364). 
 This table enables us to draw the following interesting conclusions. 
 The more highly rural industry is developed ina group of uyezds, 1) the smaller the proportion of ruralartisans, i. 
e. 
, artisan production is to a greater extent replaced by commodity production; 2) the larger the pro-portion of handicraftsmen who belong to the non-agricul-tural population, and 3) the more marked the development ofcapitalist relations and the larger the proportion of depen-dent handicraftsmen. 
 In the third group of uyezds the ruralartisans predominate (77. 
7% of all the handicraftsmen); in this case agriculturists predominate (only 5. 
7% are non-agriculturists) and capitalism is poorly developed: only7. 
2% are wage-workers and only 2. 
7% of the handicrafts-men’s families work for buyers-up, i. 
e. 
, a total ofonly 9. 
9% are dependent handicraftsmen. 
 In the secondgroup of uyezds, on, the contrary, commodity production Number of craftsmenPercent-ages of Number of per-Producing for handi-sons, both sexes Producing for Producing forprivate In all crafts-in families the market buyers-upcustomers men Groups ofuyezds 1) Five uyezdsin whichhandicraftindustry ismost highly 4,160 1,7025,862 3,930 1,397 5,327 2,501 623 3,124 10,591 3,722 14,313 78. 
2 53. 
4 21,320 15,483 36,803 developed — — —27. 
4 — — — — 21. 
8 — 26. 
0 100 — — 57. 
9 42. 
1 100 ) Five uyezdsin whichhandicraftindustry isless highly1,436 904 2,340 259 158 417 1,077 252 1,329 2,772 1,314 4,086 67. 
5 38. 
4 7,335 3,740 11,075 developed — — — 6. 
3 — ) Two uyezdsin whichartisan pro-duction pre-340 59 399 56 — 56 1,499 88 1,587 1895 147 2,042 22. 
3 9. 
95,998 364 6,362 dominates — — — 2. 
7 — —77. 
7 — 7. 
2 100 — — 94. 
3 5. 
7 100 5,9362,665 8,601 4,245 1,555 5,800 5,077 963 6,040 15,258 5,183 20,441 70. 
5 46. 
1 34,653 19,587 54,240 In all— — — 20. 
8 — — — — 29. 
5 — 25. 
3 100 — — 63. 
9 6. 
1 00 1) The first group consists of Shadrinsk, Kungur, Krasnoufimsk, Ekaterinburg and Osa uyezds; the second of Verkhotu-rye, Perm, Irbit, Okhansk and Cherdyn uyezds, and third, Solikamsk and Kamyshlov uyezds. 
 2) By “dependent” handicraftsmen we mean: a) wage-workers and b) members of the handicraftsman’s family who producefor buyers-up. 
 3) The number of handicraftsmen in the table differs from that given above since the figures for the uyezds given in theSketch (pp. 
 30-31) differ from the totals in the appended table. 
 Members of families Wage-work-ers Total Members of families Wage-work-ers Total Members of families Wage-work-ers Total Members of families Wage-work-ers Total Producing for the market Dependent (see footnote) With own farm Farming no land Total predominates and is already eliminating handicraft: only 32. 
5% are artisans. 
 The percentage of handicraftsmen engaged in agriculture drops from 94. 
3% to 66. 
2%, the propor-tion of wage-workers increases more than fourfold—from7. 
2% to 32. 
1%; there is an increase, although not so large,in the proportion of family workers who work for buyers-up,so that the aggregate proportion of dependent handicrafts-men is 38. 
4%, or nearly two-fifths of the total. 
 Lastly, in the first group of uyezds, natural artisan production is still further eliminated by commodity production and employs on-ly one-fifth of the total number of “handicraftsmen” (21. 
8%),and at the same time the number of non-agricultural indus-trialists increases to 42. 
1%; the proportion of wage-workersdrops somewhat (from 32. 
1% to 26%), but on the other hand there is an enormous increase in the proportion of family workers dependent on buyers-up, namely, from6. 
3% to 27. 
4%, so that the aggregate number of dependenthandicraftsmen is more than half the total—53. 
4%. 
 Thedistrict with the largest (absolute and relative) number of“handicraftsmen” is the one where capitalism is most devel-oped: the growth of commodity production forces artisan production into the background, leads to the devel-opment of capitalism and to the transfer of industries to non-agriculturists, in other words, to the separation of industryfrom agriculture (or, perhaps, to the concentration of indus-tries among the non-agricultural population). 
 The reader may doubt whether it is right to regard capitalism as being more developed in the first group of uyezds, where thereare fewer wage-workers than in the second, but where morehandicraftsmen work for buyers-up. 
 Domestic industry, itmay be objected, is a lower form of capitalism. 
 But weshall see below that many of these buyers-up are manufac-turers who own large capitalist establishments. 
 Here domestic industry is an adjunct of the factory , and signifies a higher degree of concentration of production and capital(some of the buyers-up have 200, 500, even 1,000 personsand more, working for them), a higher degree of division oflabour, and, consequently, a more highly developed form of capitalism. 
 This form is to the small workshop of the owner who employs wage-workers as capitalist manufacture isto capitalist simple co-operation. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR The figures quoted are sufficient to refute the attempt of the compilers of the Sketch to draw a fundamental con-trast between “the handicraft form of production” and “capitalist production”—an assertion which repeats thetraditional prejudice of all the Russian Narodniks, headedby Messrs. 
 V. 
 V. 
 and N. 
 —on. 
 The Perm Narodniks as-sume that the “basic difference” between these two formsis that under handicraft production “labour owns both the instruments and materials of production and all the fruits of labour in the shape of the produce of production” (p. 
 3). 
We are now in a position to declare quite emphatically thatthis is false. 
 Even if we include artisans among the handi-craftsmen the majority of them do not fit this definition : this applies, firstly, to the wage-workers, and they represent 25. 
3%; secondly, to family workers who work for buyers-up, for they own neither the materials of production northe fruits of their labour, but are merely paid wages—andthey constitute 20. 
8%; and, thirdly, to the family workersof the first and second sub-groups who employ wage-workers,for they own the “fruits” of other labour in addition to their own. 
 They probably constitute about 10% (1,691 of the 6,645 establishments in the first and second sub-groups,or 25. 
4%, employ wage-workers; in the 1,691 establishmentsthere are probably not less than 2,000 family workers). 
And so we already have 25. 
3% #20. 
8% #10% =56. 
1% of the “handicraftsmen,” or more than half, who do not fit this definition. 
 In other words, even in a remote and econom-ically backward gubernia like Perm, the “handicraftsmen”who either hire themselves out or hire others, who exploitor are exploited, are already preponderant today . 
 But it would be far more correct for such a computation to excludeartisan production and to take commodity production alone. 
 Artisan production is such an archaic form of industry that even among our native Narodniks, who have repeatedlyproclaimed that backwardness is Russia’s good fortune(à la Messrs. 
 V. 
 V. 
, Yuzhakov and Co. 
), there has not beena single one who has frankly and openly risked defending itand proclaiming it a “pledge” of his ideals. 
 Artisan production in Perm Gubernia is still very widespread as compared with Central Russia: we need only mention thedyeing industry, for instance. 
 This is a purely artisan indus-try for the dyeing of peasant homespuns, which in less out-of-the-way parts of Russia have long been superseded by factory-made prints. 
 But even in Perm Gubernia artisan production has been pushed far into the background: evenin rural industry, only 29. 
5%, or less than one-third, of theproducers are artisans. 
 If we exclude the artisans, then, weget 14,401 persons who work for the market; of these, 29. 
3%are wage-workers and 29. 
5% family workers who work for buyers-up, in other words, 58. 
8% are dependent “handi-craftsmen,” while another 7% or 8% are small mastersemploying wage-workers. 
 Thus, about 66%, or nearly two-thirds , of the “handicraftsmen” have two fundamental points of similarity , and not of difference, with capitalism: firstly, they are all commodity producers, and capitalism is nothing but commodity production developed to the full; secondly, the specifically capitalist relations of the purchaseand sale of labour-power apply to a large number of them. 
 The compilers of the Sketch try hard to assure the reader that for “weighty” reasons, wage-labour in “handicraft”production has a significance all of its own. 
 We shall exam-ine these assurances and the examples they quote in their proper place (§ VII). 
 Here it will be enough to mention thatwherever commodity production prevails and wage-labouris not casually but systematically employed, we have allthe features of capitalism. 
 One may say that it is undevel-oped, embryonic, that it possesses specific forms, but it is a distortion of the truth to assume a “basic difference” when in reality there is a basic similarity . 
 Let us, incidentally, mention one other distortion. 
 On p. 
 5 of the Sketch it is said that “the products of the handi-craftsman ... are made from materials that are chieflyprocured locally. 
” But the Sketch itself provides us with the data to check this point, it shows how the distribution of handicraftsmen engaged in processing livestock producecompares with the distribution of livestock and agriculturalproduce in the uyezds of the gubernia, how the dis-tribution of those who process plant products compareswith the distribution of forests; and how the distribu-tion of those engaged in metal-working compares with the distribution of the pig-iron and malleable iron produced inthe gubernia. 
 This comparison shows that 68. 
9% of the handicraftsmen engaged in processing livestock products are concentrated in three uyezds, which account for only 25. 
1% of the livestock population, and only 29. 
5% of the cultivated area. 
 In other words, we find that the very con-trary of the above assertion is true, and the Sketch itself at this point declares that “the high degree of development ofthe industries engaged in processing livestock produce ischiefly dependent on raw materials brought from outside— for instance, in the Kungur and Ekaterinburg uyezds on the raw hides dressed by the local leather factories and handi-craft tanneries, from which the material for the boot indus-try, the principal handicraft in these uyezds, is obtained”(24-25). 
 Hence, handicraft industry in these parts is basednot only on the large turnover of the local capitalist leather merchants, but also on semi-manufactures obtained from factory owners, i. 
e. 
, handicraft industry is a sequelor adjunct to developed commodity circulation and tocapitalist leather establishments. 
 “In Shadrinsk Uyezd,the raw material brought from outside is wool, which fur-nishes the material for the chief industry of the uyezd—the making of felt boots. 
” Further, 61. 
3% of the handicraftsmen engaged in processing plant produce are concentrated infour uyezds. 
 Yet these four uyezds contain only 20. 
7% ofthe total forest area of the gubernia. 
 On the other hand, inthe two uyezds where 51. 
7% of the forest area is concentrat-ed, there are only 2. 
6% of the handicraftsmen engaged in processing plant produce (p. 
 25). 
 In other words, here too we find the contrary to be the case, and here too the Sketch states that the raw material is brought from outside (p. 
 26). 
 * Hence, we observe the very interesting fact that a deep-rooted commodity circulation precedes the develop-ment of the handicraft industries (and is a condition for their development). 
 This fact is very important, for it shows, firstly, that commodity economy is long established, hand-icraft industry being only one of its elements; it showsalso how absurd it is to depict our handicraft industry asa sort of tabula rasa still “able” to take a different path. 
 Theinvestigators report, for example, that “handicraft industry” *These two types of handicraftsmen—those processing livestock and plant produce—make up 33% #28%=61% of the total num-ber. 
 Metal-working engages 25% of the handicraftsmen (p. 
 20). 
 in Perm Gubernia “continues to reflect the influence of those means of communication which determined the commercial and industrial physiognomy of the area not only in the pre-railway days, but even in pre-Reform days” (p. 
 39). 
 Actually,the town of Kungur was the road junction in the Cis-Uralsarea: through it passes the Siberian highway which connectsKungur with Ekaterinburg, with branches to Shadrinsk;another commercial highway from Kungur, that of Blago-datnaya Gora, connects the town with Osa. 
 Lastly, the Birsk highway connects Kungur with Krasnoufimsk. 
 “Wethus find that the handicraft industry of the gubernia becameconcentrated in districts around the highway junctions: inthe Cis-Urals area—in the uyezds of Kungur, Krasnoufimskand Osa and in the Trans-Urals area—in the uyezds of Ekaterinburg and Shadrinsk” (p. 
 39). 
 Let us remind the reader that it is these five uyezds that constitute the groupthat is first in its development of handicraft industry, andthat 70% of the total number of handicraftsmen are concen-trated in them. 
 Secondly, this fact shows us that the “organ-isation of exchange” in handicraft industry, about which the handicraft friends of the muzhik chatter so frivolously, has already been created and by none other than the Russian merchant class itself. 
 Later on we shall find much to confirmthis. 
 Only in the third category of handicraftsmen (thosewho process metal) do we find that the distribution of rawmaterial production and its processing by handicraftsmen correspond: 70% of this category of handicraftsmen are concentrated in the four uyezds producing 70. 
6% of thetotal pig-iron and malleable iron. 
 But here the raw mate-rial is itself a product of the large-scale metallurgical in-dustry, which, as we shall see, has its “own views” onthe “handicraftsman. 
” II THE “HANDICRAFTSMAN” AND WAGE-LABOUR Let us now summarise the data on wage-labour in the handicraft industries of Perm Gubernia. 
 Without re-peating the absolute figures already cited, let us confineourselves to indicating the most interesting percentages; Group I Group II Sub-group Sub-group T otal In all In all 12 3 12 3 Employing wage-work-ers 30. 
6 17. 
4 24. 
1 23. 
6 37. 
8 24. 
4 36. 
1 34. 
2 26. 
9 Percent-Employing age of es-only wage-tablish-workers 1. 
3 1. 
2 0. 
7 1. 
1 1. 
6 1. 
4 0. 
3 1. 
0 1. 
1 ments Employing six or more wage-work-ers 2. 
0 0. 
1 1. 
4 1. 
1 1. 
3 0. 
8 0. 
4 0. 
8 0. 
9 Wage-workers 29. 
4 14. 
1 23. 
2 22. 
7 31. 
2 29. 
3 27. 
4 28. 
3 24. 
5 Average number Family 1. 
8 1. 
5 1. 
9 1. 
6 1. 
7 1. 
4 1. 
6 1. 
6 1. 
6 of workers Wage 0. 
75 0. 
23 0. 
57 0. 
48 0. 
78 0. 
43 0. 
63 0. 
63 0. 
52 per estab-Total 2. 
6 1. 
7 2. 
5 2. 
1 2. 
5 1. 
8 2. 
2 2. 
2 2. 
1 lishment Percentage of estab-lishments with three or more family work-ers 20. 
3 7. 
8 20. 
9 15. 
1 18. 
5 8. 
6 14. 
3 14. 
6 14. 
9 We thus see that the percentage of wage-workers is higher among the non-agriculturists than among the agriculturists,and that the difference is chiefly accounted for by the second sub-group: among the farming artisans the proportion of wage-workers is 14. 
1%, and among the non-agriculturists it is 29. 
3%, or over twice as high. 
 In the other two sub-groups, the proportion of wage-workers in Group II is slightlyhigher than in Group I. 
 It has already been said that thisresults from capitalism being less developed among theagricultural population. 
 Of course, the Perm Narodniks, like all other Narodniks, declare this to be of advantage to the agriculturists. 
 We shall not, at this point, enter into acontroversy on the general subject of whether the under-de-velopment and backwardness of the given social and econom-ic relations may be regarded as an advantage; we shallmerely say that the figures we quote below will show that this is an advantage that gives the agriculturists low earn-ings. 
 It is interesting to note that insofar as the employment of wage-labour is concerned the difference between the« ’ ‘’ » « ‘ » groups is less than the difference between the sub-groups of the same group . 
 In other words, the economic structure of the industry (artisans—commodity producers—workers for buyers-up) has a greater influence on the extent to whichwage-labour is employed than the existence or absence ofties with agriculture. 
 For example, the small agricul-turist commodity producer is more akin to the small non-agri-culturist commodity producer than to the agriculturist artisan. 
 The proportion of wage-workers in the first sub-group is 29. 
4% in Group I and 31. 
2% in Group II, whereasin the second sub-group of Group I it is only 14. 
1%. 
 Simi-larly, the agriculturist who works for a buyer-up is moreakin to the non-agriculturist who does the same (23. 
2%and 27. 
4% wage-workers respectively) than to the agricul-turist artisan. 
 This shows us that the general prevalence of capitalist commodity relations in the country tends to re-duce to one level the agriculturist and the non-agriculturistengaged in industry. 
 This levelling process is brought outeven more saliently by the data on the incomes of handi-craftsmen. 
 The second sub-group, as we have said, is an exception; but if, instead of the figures showing the percent-age of wage-workers, we take the average number of wage-workers per establishment, we shall find that the agricultur-ist artisans are more akin to the non-agriculturist artisans(0. 
23 and 0. 
43 wage-workers per establishment respectively)than to the agriculturists in the other sub-groups. 
 The average number of workers per establishment among the artisans of both groups is almost the same (1. 
7 and 1. 
8),whereas in the sub-groups of each group this average differsvery considerably (Group I—2. 
6 and 1. 
7; Group II—2. 
5and 1. 
8). 
 The average figures per establishment in each sub-group also reveal the interesting fact that the number is lowest among the artisans of both groups: 1. 
7 and 1. 
8 workers per workshoprespectively. 
 This means that production is most scatteredamong artisans, the individual producers are most isolated,and co-operation in production least practised. 
 First placein this respect is held by the first sub-group of each group, that is, by the small masters who produce for the market. 
 The number of people engaged in the workshops in thesesub-groups is the largest (2. 
6 and 2,5 persons); here handi-craftsmen with big families are the most numerous (20. 
3% and 18. 
5% have 3 or more workers in the family; the third sub-group of Group I—20. 
9%—is something of an exception); at the same time the employment of wage-labour is the largest(0. 
75 and 0. 
78 wage-workers per workshop); and there isalso the largest proportion of big establishments (2. 
0% and1. 
3% of establishments employ six or more wage-workers). 
Consequently, co-operation in production is here most wide-spread, because of the most extensive employment of wage-labour, and of members of the family (1. 
8 and 1. 
7 fam-ily workers per establishment; the third sub-group ofGroup I, with 1. 
9 persons, is something of an exception). 
 This latter circumstance brings us to the highly impor-tant question of the relation between family labour and wage-labour employed by “handicraftsmen,” a relation which prompts us to doubt the correctness of the prevailingNarodnik doctrine that wage-labour in handicraft produc-tion merely “supplements” family labour. 
 The Perm Na-rodniks support this view when they argue on p. 
 55 that“the identification of the interests of the handicraftsmen with those of the kulaks” is refuted by the fact that the most prosperous handicraftsmen (Group I) have the largest num-ber of family workers, whereas “if the handicraftsman wereprompted solely by the profit motive, the sole incentive ofthe kulak, and not by the desire to consolidate and develophis establishment with the aid of all the members of his family, we should expect the proportion of members of the family who devoted their labours to production to be smallestin this sub-group of establishments” (?!). 
 A strange conclu-sion! How can any conclusion regarding the role of “personalparticipation in work” (p. 
 55) be drawn if nothing is saidabout wage-labour? If the prosperity of handicraftsmen with large families did not indicate kulak tendencies, we should find among them the lowest proportion of wage-work-ers, the lowest proportion of establishments employing them, the lowest proportion of establishments with a large number of workers (more than five), and the smallest aver-age number of workers per establishment. 
 Actually, how-ever, the most prosperous handicraftsmen (first sub-group) hold first, and not last place in all these respects , and this despite the fact that they have the largest families and the largest number of family workers, and constitute the larg-est proportion of handicraftsmen with three or more family workers! Clearly, the facts point to the very opposite of what the Narodniks would have them mean: the handi-craftsman does, in fact, strive for profit, and by kulak meth-ods; he takes advantage of his greater prosperity (one of theconditions for which is the possession of a large family)to employ wage-labour on a larger scale. 
 Having a larger number of family workers than the other handicraftsmen he uses this to oust the others by hiring the largest number of workers. 
 “Family co-operation, “about which Mr. 
 V. 
 V. 
 and theother Narodniks speak so unctuously (cf. 
 Handicraft Indus-tries , I, p. 
 14), is a guarantee of the development of capitalist co-operation. 
 This, of course, will seem a paradox to the reader who is used to Narodnik prejudices; but it is a fact. 
 To obtain precise data on this subject, one should know notonly the distribution of the establishments according tothe number of family and of wage-workers (which is given inthe Sketch ), but also according to the combination of family and wage-labour. 
 The house-to-house returns furnished every opportunity of making such a combination, of calculating the number of establishments in each category employing one,two, etc. 
, wage-workers and classifying them according tothe number of family workers. 
 Unfortunately, this was notdone. 
 In order to make up for this omission, if only par-tially, let us turn to the work already mentioned, Handi-craft Industries , where we do find combined tables of estab-lishments classified according to the number of family andwage-workers. 
 The tables are given for five industries,embracing a total of 749 establishments with 1,945 workers(op. 
 cit. 
, 1, pp. 
 59, 78 and 160; III, pp. 
 87 and 109). 
 In orderto analyse these data with reference to the problem we are now considering, namely, the relation between family la-bour and wage-labour, we must divide all the establishmentsinto groups according to the total number of workers (forit is the total number of workers which shows the size of theworkshop and the degree of co-operation in production), anddetermine the role of family labour and wage-labour in each group. 
 Let us take four groups: 1) establishments with one worker; 2) establishments with two to four workers;3) establishments with five to nine workers, and 4) establish-ments with ten or more workers. 
 This division according to the total number of workers is all the more necessary, as the establishments with one worker and those with ten, for example, obviously represent entirely different economictypes; to combine them and strike “averages” would be ut-terly absurd as we shall see later in the case of the figuresgiven in the Sketch . 
 Grouping the data as indicated, we get the following table: Number ofNumber per es-tablishment of Establishments grouped according to total number of workers Establishments with 1 worker 345 343 2 345 2 0. 
5 0. 
995 0. 
005 1. 
00 ” 2 to 4 workers 319 559 251 810 143 44. 
8 1. 
76 0. 
78 2. 
54 ” 5 to 9 workers 59 111 249 360 53 89. 
8 1. 
88 4. 
22 6. 
10 ”10 or more workers 26 56 374 430 26 100 2. 
15 14. 
38 16. 
53 Total 749 1,069 876 1,945 224 29. 
9 1. 
43 1. 
16 2. 
59 These detailed figures fully confirm the proposition ad-vanced above, which seemed so paradoxical at first glance, i. 
e. 
,the larger the total number of workers in an establishment, the larger the number of family workers employed in it, and the more extensive, consequently, the “family co-opera-tion”; but, at the same time, capitalist co-operation alsoincreases, and does so far more rapidly. 
 Despite the fact that they have a large number of family workers, the more prosperous handicraftsmen employ many additional wage-workers. 
 “Family co-operation” is thus the pledge and foun-dation of capitalist co-operation . 
 Let us examine the data of the 1894-95 census relat-ing to family and wage-labour. 
 The establishments aredivided according to the number of family workers asfollows:Number of estab-lishments Family work-ersWage-work-ers Total Number of establish-ment employingwage-workers Per cent Family work-ers Wage-work-ers Total % Establishments with 0 family workers 97 1. 
1 ” ” 1 ” ” 4,787 53. 
2” ” 2 ” ” 2,770 30. 
8 ” ” 3 ” ” 898 10. 
0 ” ” 4 ” ” 279 3. 
1” ” 5 or more ” 160 1. 
8 Total 8,991 100. 
0 The preponderance of one-man establishments should be noted: they constitute more than half the total. 
 Even ifwe were to assume that all the establishments that combine family labour with wage-labour have no more than one family worker each, we would still find that 2,500 of themwould be run by one man. 
 These are the representatives ofthe most scattered producers, representatives of the mostdisunited small workshops—a disunity that is generallycharacteristic of the much-vaunted “people’s production. 
” Let us take a glance at the opposite pole, the largest work-shops: Wage-workers Number of per estab-% wage-workers * lishment Establishments with 0 wage-workers 6,567 73. 
1 — — 1 ” ” 1,537 17. 
2 1,537 1 2 ” ” 457 5. 
1 914 23 ” ” 213 2. 
3 639 3 4 ” ” 88 0. 
9 352 4 5 ” ” 44 0. 
5 220 5 6-9 ” ” 41 0. 
4 290 7. 
1 10 or more ” 44 0. 
5 952 21. 
7 Total 8,991 100 4,904 0. 
5 Thus we see that the “small” establishments of the handi-craftsmen sometimes attain imposing dimensions: nearly one-fourth of the total number of wage-workers is concentrated in the 85 largest establishments; on an average, each such estab-lishment employs 14. 
6 wage-workers. 
 These handicraftsmen *Computed from the data in the Sketch (p. 
 54 and total number of wage-workers). 
85 0. 
9 1,242 14. 
6{ { { { are already employers, owners of capitalist establishments. 
 * Co-operation on capitalist lines is widely employed in them: with 15 workers per establishment, division of labour is pos-sible on a fairly extensive scale, there is a big saving on pre-mises and tools, of which a larger quantity and greater varietycan be used. 
 Their purchase of raw material and the sale of theproduct are necessarily conducted on a large scale; this consid-erably reduces the cost of raw material and its delivery, fa-cilitattes sales, and makes proper commercial relations pos-sible. 
 When we come to consider the data on incomes weshall find confirmation of this in the 1894-95 census. 
 Atthe moment it will be sufficient to mention these gen-erally-known theoretical propositions. 
 It should, there-fore, be clear that the technical and economic features of these establishments also differ radically from those of the one-man workshops, and it is really astonish-ing that the Perm statisticians should nevertheless havedecided to combine them and compute general “aver-ages” from them. 
 It may be said a priori that suchaverages will be absolutely fictitious, and that the anal-ysis of the household statistics, in addition to dividing the handicraftsmen into groups and sub-groups, should also havedivided them into categories based upon the number of work-ers per establishment (both family and wage-workers). 
Unless such a division is made, there can be no question ofobtaining accurate data on incomes, or on the conditions of purchase of raw material and sale of products, or on the technique of production, or on the relative status of thewage-worker and the owner of the one-man establishment,or on the relation between the big and small workshops—allof which are items of the highest importance for a study ofthe economics of “handicraft industry. 
” The Perm investi-gators endeavour, of course, to underrate the importance of the capitalist workshops. 
 If there are establishments withfive or more family workers, they argue, that means thatcompetition between the “capitalist” and the “handicraft *The overwhelming majority of our “factories” (so called in the official statistics), actually 15,000 out of 21,000, employ less than 16 workers. 
 See Directory of Factories for 1890 . 
 form of production” (sic!) can only have significance when the number of wage-workers exceeds five per establishment, and such establishments constitute only 1% of the total. 
 The argument is purely artificial: in the first place, estab-lishments with five family workers and five wage-workersare a pure abstraction, resulting from an inadequateanalysis of the facts, for wage-labour is combined withfamily labour. 
 An establishment with three family workers will, by hiring another three workers, have more than five workers and, compared with the one-man establishments,will occupy an exceptional competitive position. 
 Secondly,if the statisticians really wanted to investigate the questionof “competition” between the various establishments, di-viding them according to the number of wage-workers they employ, why did they not make use of the data of the house-to-house census? Why did they not group the establish-ments according to the number of workers and show thesize of their incomes? Would it not have been more appro-priate for statisticians who had such rich material at theirdisposal to make a real study of the facts, instead of treat-ing the reader to all sorts of stuff of their own invention and hastily abandoning facts in order to “do battle” withthe adversaries of Narodism? “... From the standpoint of the supporters of capitalism, this percentage may, perhaps, be considered sufficientground for the prediction that the handicraft form must inevitably degenerate into the capitalist form; but in this respect it does not actually represent an alarming symptom atall, especially in view of the following circumstances...”(p. 
 56). 
 Charming, is it not? Instead of taking the trouble to sift the available material for precise data on the capitalist establishments, the authors combined them with the one-man establishments and then began to controvert imaginary“predictors”!—We do not know what these “supporters ofcapitalism” who are so repugnant to the Perm statisticiansare likely “to predict,” but for our part we can only say thatall these phrases merely cover an attempt to evade the facts. 
 And the facts show that there is no special “handicraft form of production” (that is an invention of “handicraft” econo-mists), that the small commodity producers give rise to large capitalist establishments (in the tables we found a handicraftsman employing 65 wage-workers!—p. 
 169), and that it was the investigators’ duty to group the data in such a way that we could examine this process and comparethe various establishments insofar as they approximate capitalist enterprises . 
 The Perm statisticians not only failed to do this themselves, but even deprived us of the oppor-tunity of doing so, for in the tables all the establishments in a given sub-group are lumped together so that it is impossible to separate the factory owner from the one-manproducer. 
 The compilers cover up the omission with meaning-less aphorisms. 
 The large establishments, you see, consti-tute only 1% of the total, so that if they are excluded, theconclusions based on the remaining 99% will not be affected (p. 
 56). 
 But this one per cent, this one-hundredth part, is not commensurate with the others! One large establishmentis equal to more than 15 establishments of the one-man pro-ducers who account for over 30 “hundredths” (of the totalnumber of establishments)! This calculation relates to thenumber of workers. 
 And if we take the gross output, or net income, we shall find that one large establishment is not equal to 15, but perhaps to 30 other establishments. 
 * One-fourth of all the wage-workers is concentrated in this “one-hundredth” of the establishments, an average of 14. 
6workers per establishment. 
 To give the reader some idea ofthe significance of this latter figure, let us take the figures given for Perm Gubernia in the Collection of Data on Factory Industry in Russia (published by the Depart-ment of Commerce and Manufactures). 
 As the figures varyconsiderably from year to year, we shall take the averagefor seven years (1885-91). 
 The result for Perm Guberniais 885 “factories and works” (as understood by the official statistics), with an aggregate output of 22,645,000 rubles and a total of 13,006 wage-workers, which gives us an “aver-age” of 14. 
6 workers per factory. 
 *We shall presently give data showing the distribution of es-tablishments according to net income. 
 We learn that the aggregatenet income of 2,376 establishments with the lowest income (up to50 rubles) =77,900 rubles, while that of 80 establishments with the highest income =83,150 rubles. 
 The average per “establishment,” therefore, is 32 rubles and 1,039 rubles respectively. 
 In confirmation of their opinion that the large estab-lishments are of no great significance, the compilers of the Sketch refer to the fact that very few (8%) of the number of wage-workers employed by the handicraftsmen are em-ployed by the year, the majority being piece-workers (37%),seasonal workers (30%) and day labourers (25%, p. 
 51). 
The piece-workers “usually work in their own homes withtheir own implements and maintain themselves,” while the day labourers are engaged “temporarily,” like agricultural labourers. 
 That being the case, “we cannot regard the rela-tively large number of wage-workers as unquestionable proofthat these establishments are of the capitalist type” (56).... 
“It is our conviction that neither the piece-workers, northe day labourers in general constitute the cadres of a work-ing class similar to the West-European proletariat; only those who work regularly throughout the year can formthese cadres. 
” All praises to the Perm Narodniks for their interest in the relation between the Russian wage-workers and the“West-European proletariat. 
” The question is an interest-ing one, there’s no gainsaying that! Nevertheless, from sta-tisticians we would have preferred to hear statements basedon fact, and not on “conviction. 
” For, after all, the mereutterance of one’s “conviction” will not always convinceothers.... 
 Would it not have been better to give more facts,instead of telling the reader about the “convictions” of Mr. 
 X or Mr. 
 Y? How incredibly few facts on the position of the wage-workers, working conditions, working hours in the establish-ments of various size, the families of the wage-workers,etc. 
, are given in the Sketch . 
 If the only purpose of the argu-ment on the difference between the Russian workers andthe West-European proletariat was to hide this omission, we should have to retract our praise.... 
 All we learn about wage-workers from the Sketch is their division into four categories: annual, seasonal, piece andday workers. 
 To get some idea of these categories, we haveto turn to the data scattered throughout the book. 
 Thenumber of workers in each category and their earnings are given for 29 industries (out of 43). 
 In these 29 industries there are 4,795 wage-workers, earning a total of 233,784 ru-bles. 
 In all the 43 industries, there are 4,904 wage-workers with aggregate earnings amounting to 238,992 rubles. 
 Thus, our summary embraces 98% of the wage-workers and their earnings. 
 Here, en regard, * are the figures of the Sketch ** and of our summary: Figures of our summary Number of Their earnings wage-work -Number of Per ers accord-% wage-% Total worker % *** ing to workers (rubles) (rubles) Sketch Annual 379 8 351 7. 
4 26,978 76. 
8 100 Seasonal 1,496 30 1,432 29. 
8 40,958 28. 
6 37 Piece 1,812 37 1,577 32. 
9 92,357 58. 
5 76. 
1 Day 1,217 25 1,435 29. 
9 73,491 51. 
2 66. 
7 Total 4,904 100 4,795 100 233,784 48. 
7 In the Sketch summary there are either mistakes or mis-prints. 
 But that is by the way. 
 The point of chief interestis the data on earnings. 
 The earnings of the piece-workers,of whom the Sketch says that “essentially, piece-work is the nearest stage on the road to economic independence”(p. 
 51—also, no doubt, “according to our conviction”?),are considerably lower than those of the worker employed by the year. 
 If the statement of the statisticians that themaster usually finds board for the annual worker, whereasthe piece-worker has to find his own, is based on fact andnot merely on “conviction,” the difference will be even great-er. 
 The Perm master handicraftsmen have chosen a queerway to place their workers on the “road to independence”!It consists in lowering wages .... 
 The fluctuations in the work-ing season, as we shall see, are not big enough to explainthis difference. 
 Further, it is very interesting to note thata day labourer’s earnings equal 66. 
7% of an annual work-er’s. 
 Hence, each day labourer is occupied on an averagefor about eight months in the year. 
 Obviously, it wouldbe far more correct to refer to this as a “temporary” diver-sion from industry (if the day labourers are really diverted *For purposes of comparison. 
— Ed. 
 **P. 
 50. 
 The Sketch does not summarise the figures for earnings. 
 *** The earnings of an annual worker are taken as 100. 
 from industry of their own accord, and not because the mas-ter does not furnish them with work), than as the “predom-inance of the seasonal element in wage-labour” (p 52). 
 III “COMMUNAL-LABOUR CONTINUITY” The data collected by the handicraft census which in-dicate the foundation dates of practically all the establish-ments investigated are of great interest. 
 Here are thegeneral data on the subject: Number of establish-ments founded before 1845 . 
 ....... 
. 
 6 4 0 in 1845-55 . 
 ....... 
. 
 2 5 1 ” 1855-65 . 
 ....... 
. 
 5 3 3 ” 1865-75 . 
 ....... 
. 
 1,339 ” 1875-85 . 
 ....... 
. 
 2,652 ” 1885-95 . 
 ....... 
. 
 3,469 Total ......... 8,840 Thus, we see that the post-Reform period has stimulated a big development in handicraft industry. 
 It seems theconditions favouring this development have been and areoperating with ever-growing force as time goes on, sinceeach succeeding decade has witnessed the opening of moreand more establishments. 
 This fact is clear evidence of theintensity with which the development of commodity pro-duction, the separation of agriculture from industry, andthe growth of commerce and industry in general are proceed-ing among the peasantry. 
 We say “separation of agriculturefrom industry,” for this separation begins earlier thanthe separation of the agriculturists from the industrialists:every enterprise which produces for the market gives rise toexchange between agriculturists and industrialists. 
 Hence,the appearance of such an enterprise implies that the agri-culturists cease to produce articles in their homes and pur-chase them in the market, and to make such purchases thepeasant has to sell agricultural produce. 
 The growing num-ber of commercial and industrial establishments thus implies a growing social division of labour, the general basis of commodity economy and of capitalism. 
 * The opinion has been expressed in Narodnik literature that the rapid development of small production in industry since the Reform is not a phenomenon of a capitalist nature. 
The argument is that the growth of small production provesits strength and vitality, as compared with large-scaleproduction (Mr. 
 V. 
 V. 
). 
 This argument is absolutely false. 
 The growth of small production among the peasantry signi-fies the appearance of new industries, the conversion ofnew branches of raw material processing into independentspheres of industry, progress in the social division of labour,the initial process of capitalist development, while theswallowing-up of small by large establishments implies a further step forward by capitalism, leading to the triumph of its higher forms. 
 The spread of small establishmentsamong the peasantry extends commodity economy and pre-pares the ground for capitalism (by creating petty mastersand wage-labourers), while the swallowing-up of smallestablishments by manufactories and factories implies that big capitalism is utilising ground that has been prepared. 
 The simultaneous existence of these two, seemingly contra-dictory, processes in one country actually has nothingcontradictory in it: it is quite natural that in a more devel-oped part of the country, or in a more developed sphere ofindustry, capitalism should progress by drawing small handicraftsmen into the mechanised factory, while in more remote regions, or in backward branches of industry, theprocess of capitalist development is only in its initial stageand manifests itself in the appearance of new branches andnew industries. 
 Capitalist manufacture “conquers but par-tially the domain of national production, and always rests on the handicrafts of the town and the domestic industry of the rural districts as its ultimate basis (Hintergrund). 
If it destroys these in one form, in particular branches, atcertain points, it calls them up again elsewhere...” ( Das Kapital , I 2, S. 
 779). 
116 *Consequently, if Mr. 
 N. 
 —on’s attacks on the “separation of industry from agriculture” were not the platonic lamentations ofa romanticist, he should also bewail the appearance of every handi-craft establishment. 
 The figures showing the dates the establishments were founded are also inadequately treated in the Sketch : all the information given is for uyezds, and not for groups or sub-groups; nor is there any other grouping (according tosize of establishment, whether located in the centre of theindustry or in the surrounding villages, etc. 
). 
 Althoughthey did not analyse the census data in accordance withtheir own system of groups and sub-groups, the Perm Narodniks here too found it necessary to treat the reader to sermons that are amazing for their ultra-Narodnikunctuousness and ... absurdity. 
 The Perm statisticianshave made the discovery that in the “handicraft form ofproduction” there prevails a specific “form of continuity”of establishments, namely, “communal-labour continuity,” whereas the system that prevails in capitalist industry is “property-inheritance continuity,” and that “communal-la-bour continuity organically converts the wage-worker intoan independent master” (sic!), which finds expression in thefact that when the owner of an establishment dies andthere are no family workers among the heirs, the industry passes to another family, “perhaps to that of a wage-worker employed in the very same establishment,” and also inthe fact that “community land tenure guarantees thelabour industrial independence of both the owner of a handi-craft industrial establishment and his wage-worker” (pp. 
 7,68, et al. 
). 
 We have no doubt that this “communal-labour principle of continuity in the handicraft industries,” as invented bythe Perm Narodniks, will occupy a fitting place in thehistory of literature, alongside the sentimental theory of“people’s production” propounded by Messrs. 
 V. 
 V. 
, N. 
 —on, and others. 
 Both theories are of the same mould, both embel-lish and distort the truth with the help of Manilovian phrases. 
 Everybody knows that the establishments, materials,tools, etc. 
, of the handicraftsmen are private property which is transmitted by inheritance , and not by some sort of communal law; that the village community in no wayguarantees independence even in agriculture, let alone industry, and that the same economic struggle and exploi-tation goes on within the community as outside it. 
 Whathas been turned into the special theory of the “communal-labour principle” is the simple fact that the small master, owning very little capital, has to work himself, and that the wage-worker may become a master (if he is thrifty and abstemious, of course); examples of this are cited in the Sketch on p. 
 69.... 
 All the theoreticians of the petty bour-geoisie have always consoled themselves with the fact thatin small production a worker may become a master, and none of their ideals have ever gone beyond the conversion of the workers into small masters. 
 The Sketch even makes an attempt to cite “statistical data confirming the principleof communal-labour continuity” (45). 
 These data relate tothe tanning industry. 
 Out of 129 establishments, 90 (i. 
e. 
,70%) have been founded since 1870; yet in 1869 there were161 handicraft tanneries (according to the “list of inhabited places”), while in 1895 there were 153. 
 That is to say, tanneries have been transferred from some families to oth-ers—and this is regarded as the “principle of communal-labour continuity. 
” It would be absurd, of course, to argueagainst this anxiety to detect some special “principle” inthe fact that small establishments are easily opened and just as easily shut down, freely pass from one hand to anoth-er, and so on. 
 Let us only add, with regard to the tanningindustry in particular, that, firstly, the dates of origin ofthe establishments indicate that this industry developedfar more slowly than the other industries, and that, secondly, it is absolutely useless to compare 1869 with 1895, for the term “handicraft tannery” is constantly confused with the term “leather factory. 
” In the 1860s the overwhelmingmajority of the “leather factories” in Perm Gubernia (accord-ing to the factory statistics) had an output valued at lessthan 1,000 rubles (see the Ministry of Finance Yearbook , Part I, St. 
 Petersburg, 1869. 
 Tables and notes); in the 1890s establishments with an output of less than 1,000 rubles were, on the one hand, excluded from the list of factories,and the list of “handicraft tanneries,” on the other,happened to include many establishments with anoutput of over 1,000 rubles, some even with an out-put of 5,000 rubles, 10,000 rubles and more ( Sketch , p. 
 70, and pp. 
 149 and 150 of the tables). 
 What is the use of com-paring data for 1869 and 1895 when no definite distinctionis made between handicraft and factory-type tanneries? /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR Thirdly, even if it were true that the number of tanneries has decreased, might this not mean that many small establish-ments have been closed down and that larger establish-ments have been gradually opened in their place? Are weto believe that such a “change” also confirms the “principleof communal-labour continuity”? And the crowning incongruity is that all this sugary talk about the “communal-labour principle,” the “guarantee of communal-labour independence,” and the like, refers to the tanning industry, where the agriculturist handicrafts-men represent the purest type of petty bourgeois (see be-low), an industry which is highly concentrated in three large establishments (factories) that have been included inthe list side, by side with the one-man handicraft and arti-san establishments. 
 Here are the figures showing this concen-tration: In all, there are 148 establishments in this industry. 
 Workers: 267 family #172 wage-workers =439; aggregate output =151,022 rubles; net income =26,207 rubles. 
 Among these establishments there are 3 with 0 family workers # 65 wage-workers =65. 
 Value of output =44,275 rubles; net income =3,391 rubles (p. 
 70 of the text, and pp. 
 149 and 150 of the tables). 
 In other words, in three establishments out of 148 (“only 2. 
1%,” as the Sketch reassuringly puts it—p. 
 76) there is a concentration of nearly one-third of the total output of the “handicraft tanning industry,” yielding their owners thousands of rubles of income without their taking any partin production. 
 We shall encounter many similar incongrui-ties in relation to other industries, too. 
 But in describingthis industry, the authors of the Sketch paused, by way of exception, to discuss the three establishments mentioned. 
 With regard to one of them we are told that the owner (an agriculturist!) “is apparently occupied exclusively in com-merce, having his leather shops in the village of Beloyarskoyeand the city of Ekaterinburg” (pp. 
 76-77). 
 This is a speci-men of how capital invested in production combines withcapital invested in commerce—a fact that should be noted by the authors of the Sketch , who depict “kulakdom” and commercial operations as something adventitious, divorcedfrom production! In another establishment, the family consists of five males, not one of whom works at the trade “the father is engaged in commercial operations connected with his industry, and the sons (varying in age from 18 to 53), all of them educated, have apparently taken to otherand more congenial pursuits than transferring hides fromone vat to another and washing them” (p. 
 77). 
 The authorsmagnanimously concede that these establishments are“capitalist in character”—“but how far the future of these enterprises is ensured on the principle of transmission as inherited property is a question to which only the futurecan give its decisive answer” (76). 
 How profound! “Thefuture is a question to which only the future can give ananswer. 
” The sacred truth! But does it warrant a distortionof the present? ARTICLE TWO (IV. 
 The Agriculture of “Handicraftsmen. 
” — V. 
 Large and Small Establishments. 
—The Incomes of the Handicraftsmen) IV THE AGRICULTURE OF “HANDICRAFTSMEN” The house-to-house census of master handicraftsmen, big and small, provide very interesting data on the agriculture they engage in. 
 Here are the figures, divided according tothe sub-groups, as given in the Sketch : Per household Percentage of households Area culti-Sub-groups vated (des-Horses * Cows* Owning no Owning siatines) horses no cows 1. 
 Commodity pro-ducers 7. 
1 2. 
1 2. 
2 7. 
4 5 2. 
 Artisans 6. 
2 1. 
9 2. 
1 9. 
0 6 3. 
 Working for a buyer-up 4. 
5 1. 
4 1. 
3 16. 
0 13 In all 6. 
3 1. 
8 2. 
0 9. 
5 6 We thus see that the more prosperous the handicrafts-men are as industrialists, the more prosperous they are asagriculturists. 
 The lower they rank in production, the lower they rank in agriculture. 
 The handicraft census data, therefore, fully confirm the opinion already expressed inliterature, namely, that the differentiation of the handi-craftsmen in industry goes hand in hand with their differ-entiation as peasants in agriculture (A. 
 Volgin, The Sub-stantiation of Narodism , etc. 
, pp. 
 211, et. 
 seq. 
). 
 As the wage-workers employed by the handicraftsmen are on an even lower (or not higher) level than the handicraftsmen whowork for buyers-up, we are entitled to conclude that the *In the Sketch there is an obvious misprint in this column (see p. 
 58), which we have corrected. 
 proportion of impoverished agriculturists among them is even higher. 
 The house-to-house census, as we have already said, did not cover the wage-workers. 
 At any rate, even the figures cited clearly show how ludicrous is the assertion inthe Sketch that “community land tenure guarantees the la-bour industrial independence of both the owner of a handi-craft industrial establishment and his wage-worker. 
” The absence of detailed information on the agricultural activity of the one-man producers and small and large mas-ters is very acutely felt in the data now under examination. 
To fill the gap, if only partially, we must turn to the datafor the separate industries; sometimes in the Sketch we come across information on the number of agricultural labourersemployed by masters, * but no general summary is given. 
 Take the tanner agriculturists—131 households. 
 They employ 124 agricultural labourers, they cultivate 16. 
9dessiatines and possess 4. 
6 horses per household; they have4. 
1 cows each (p. 
 71). 
 The wage-workers (73 annual and51 seasonal) receive 2,492 rubles in wages, or 20. 
1 rubleseach, whereas the average wage of a worker in the tanning industry is 52 rubles. 
 Here too, therefore, we observe the phenomenon common to all capitalist countries—thestatus of the agricultural labourer is lower than that of theindustrial labourer. 
 The “handicraft” tanners obviouslyrepresent the purest type of peasant bourgeoisie, and thecelebrated “combination of industry with agriculture” so highly praised by the Narodniks is nothing more than the prosperous owners of commercial and industrial establish-ments transferring capital from commerce and industry to agriculture, and paying their farm labourers incrediblylow wages. 
 ** *It is well known that among the peasants even industrial workers are often compelled to perform agricultural work. 
 Cf. 
 Handicraft Industries , etc. 
, III, p. 
 7. 
 **The seasonal labourer in agriculture always receives more than half the yearly wage. 
 But let us assume that in this case theseasonal labourers receive only half the wage of the annual worker. 
 The wage of an annual worker will then be (2,492 : (73 # /FL0041))=25. 
5 rubles. 
 According to the Department of Agriculture, the average wages over a period of 10 years (1881-91) for a farm labourer employedby the year in Perm Gubernia was 50 rubles with board. 
 Take the handicraft oil-millers. 
 The agriculturists among them number 173. 
 A household, on the average, cultivates 10. 
1 dessiatines and possesses 3. 
5 horses and 3. 
3 cows. 
 There is no household without at least one horse and a cow. 
Together, they employ 98 labourers (annual and seasonal)who receive in wages a total of 3,438 rubles, or an averageof 35. 
1 rubles each. 
 “The refuse, or oil-cake that remainsafter the milling process, serves as excellent cattle feed, thanks to which it is possible to manure the fields on a larger scale. 
 Thus the household derives a triple advantagefrom the industry: the income from the industry itself,the income from livestock, and a higher yield from thefields” (164). 
 “Agriculture is carried on by them” (the oil-mill-ers) “on a wide scale, and many of them, not contenting themselves with the community allotments they get, also rent land from the poor households” (168). 
 The data showingthe distribution of flax and hemp growing by uyezds reveal“a certain connection between the area under flax and hempand the distribution of the oil-milling industry amongthe uyezds of the gubernia” (170). 
 Hence, the commercial and industrial enterprises in this case are those known as technical agricultural industries,the development of which is always characteristic of theprogress of commercial and capitalist agriculture. 
 Take the flour-millers. 
 Most of them engage in agri-culture—385 out of 421. 
 A household, on the average, cultivates 11. 
0 dessiatines and possesses 3. 
0 horses and 3. 
5 cows. 
 They employ 307 workers who are also agricul-turists and who receive wages totalling 6,211 rubles. 
 Likethe oil-milling industry, “flour-milling serves the millersas a means of marketing the produce of their own farmsin the most profitable form” (178). 
 These examples, we think, should be quite sufficient to show how absurd it is to regard the term “handicraftsmanagriculturist” as signifying something homogeneous and uni-form. 
 All the agriculturists we have cited are representativesof the agricultural petty bourgeoisie, and to combine thesetypes with the rest of the peasantry, including even the ruined households, is to obscure the most characteristic features of reality. 
 In the concluding part of their description of the oil-milling industry, the compilers try to argue against the “capitalist doctrine” that the stratification of the peasants is capitalist evolution. 
 This proposition, they claim, is based on the “absolutely arbitrary assertion that this strat-ification is a factor of most recent times and is an obvioussymptom of the rapid de facto spread of the capitalist re-gime among the peasantry despite the existence of de jurecommunity land tenure” (176). 
 The compilers argue that the village community has never precluded property stratifica-tions, but it “does not perpetuate them, does not give rise toclasses”; “these transitory stratifications have not become moremarked with the lapse of time, but, on the contrary, havebeen gradually obliterated” (177). 
 Naturally, such an asser-tion, in substantiation of which the artels (of which more anon, §VII), family divisions (sic!) and land redivisions (!) are cited, can only evoke a smile. 
 To say that the claim thatdifferentiation of the peasantry is growing and spreading isan “arbitrary” one, means to ignore well-known facts: peas-ants lose their horses and abandon the land on a mass scaleand this is coupled with “technical progress in peasant farm-ing” (cf. 
 Progressive Trends in Peasant Farming b y Mr. 
 V. 
 V. 
); the increase in the letting and mortgaging ofallotments is coupled with increased land renting; theincrease in the number of commercial and industrialestablishments is coupled with an increase in the numberof migratory industrialists, i. 
e. 
, vagrant wage-workers; etc. 
, etc. 
 The house-to-house census should have provided a wealth of material on the highly interesting question of how theincomes and earnings of the agriculturist handicraftsmencompare with the incomes of the non-agriculturists. 
 Allthe data on this subject are to be found in the tables, but the Sketch gives no summary, and we have had to compile one from the material contained in the book. 
 This summarywas based, firstly, on those given in the Sketch for the indi-vidual industries. 
 All we had to do in this case was to addtogether the data for the various industries. 
 But such summa-ries are not given in tabular form for all industries. 
 In some cases it was clear that mistakes or misprints had crept in—which is only natural in the absence of checktotals. 
 Secondly, the summary was based on a selection of figures contained in the descriptions of certain industries. 
 Thirdly, where neither of these sources was available, we had to turn directly to the tables (for example, in the case of the last industry: “mining”). 
 It goes without saying thatowing to this diversity in the character of the material con-tained in our summary, mistakes and inaccuracies werebound to have crept in. 
 Nevertheless, we believe that althoughthe grand totals of our summary do not coincide with the totals of the table, the deductions drawn from it may fully serve their purpose, for whatever corrections might be in-troduced, the average magnitudes and proportions (and itis these alone that we use for our deductions) would be butslightly changed. 
 For example, according to the totals ofthe tables in the Sketch , the gross income per worker is 134. 
8 rubles, and according to our summary it is 133. 
3 ru-bles; the net income per family worker is 69. 
0 rubles and68. 
0 rubles respectively; the earnings per wage-worker are48. 
7 rubles and 48. 
6 rubles respectively. 
 Here are the results of our summary showing gross income, net income, and the earnings of wage-workers in each group and sub-group (see table on page 392). 
 The chief results of this tabulation are as follows:1) The non-agricultural industrial population takes an incomparably bigger part in industry (relative to theirnumbers) than the agricultural population. 
 The number ofnon-agriculturist workers is less than half the number of agriculturist workers. 
 But they account for nearly half the gross output: 1,276,772 rubles out of a totalof 2,655,007 rubles, or 48. 
1%. 
 As regards income fromproduction, that is, the net income of the masters plusthe workers’ wages, the non-agriculturists even surpass theagriculturists, accounting for 647,666 rubles out of a total of 1,260,335 rubles, or 51. 
4%. 
 Consequently, we find that, while they are a minority in numbers, the non-agriculturalindustrialists do not lag behind the agriculturists in volumeof output. 
 This fact is of great importance when we cometo judge the traditional Narodnik theory that agricultureis the “main foundation” of so-called handicraft industry. 
 From this, other conclusions follow naturally: 2) The gross output per non-agriculturist worker (gross income) is considerably higher than that of the agricultur-Number ofGross income Net income Wages(rubles) (rubles) (rubles) Total Total Total Total I 1 . 
 . 
 . 
 2,239 4,122 1,726 5,848 758,493 129. 
7 204,004 49. 
5 74,558 43. 
2 278,563 225 I 2 . 
 . 
 . 
 2,841 4,249 712 4,961 383,441 77. 
3 186,719 43. 
9 34,937 49. 
0 221,656 93I 3 . 
 . 
 . 
 1,016 1,878 586 2,464 236,361 95. 
9 91,916 48. 
9 20,535 35. 
0 112,451 304Total forGroup I6,096 10,249 3,024 13,273 1,378,235 103. 
8 482,639 47. 
1 130,030 43. 
0 612,669 622 II 1 . 
 . 
 . 
 59 ,672 38 ,410 05,509 251. 
2 220,713 132. 
0 45,949 62. 
2 266,662 176 II 2 . 
 . 
 . 
 595 6 16 55. 
8 0,203 102. 
9 18,404 67. 
6 108,607 51II 3 . 
 . 
 . 
 1,320 2,231 852 3,083 492,347 159. 
7 229,108 102. 
7 43,289 50. 
8 272,397 262Total forGroup II2,874 4,779 1,862 6,641 1,276,772 192. 
2 540,024 113. 
0 107,642 57. 
8 647,666 489 Grand Total8,970 15,028 4,886 19,914 2,655,007 133. 
3 1,022. 
663 68. 
0 237. 
672 48. 
6 1. 
260. 
3351. 
111Group Sub-group Number of estab-lishments Family work-ers Wage work-ers Per worker Per family worker Per wage-worker Net income and wages combined Number of house-holds in debt ist: 192. 
2 rubles as against 103. 
8 rubles, or nearly twice as much. 
 As we shall see later, the working season of the non-agriculturists is longer than that of the agriculturists, but the difference is by no means so very great, so that thehigher labour productivity of the non-agriculturists is beyondall doubt. 
 This difference is smallest in the third sub-group—the handicraftsmen who work for buyers-up—which isquite natural. 
 3) The net income of the non-agriculturist masters, big and small, is more than double that of the agriculturists: 113. 
0 rubles, as against 47. 
1 rubles (nearly two-and-a-half timesas much). 
 This difference is to be observed in all the sub-groups, but it is the biggest in the first, among the handi-craftsmen who produce for the market. 
 It goes without saying that this difference is least of all to be explained by the difference in the length of working periods. 
 There can be nodoubt that it is due to the fact that the tie with the land lowers the incomes of the industrialists ; the market discounts the incomes derived by the handicraftsmen from agriculture,and the agriculturists have to content themselves with lower earnings. 
 This is probably aggravated by the fact that the agriculturists suffer bigger losses on sales, spendmore for materials and are more dependent on the merchants. 
In any case, it is a fact that the handicraftsman ’s tie with the land reduces his earnings . 
 There is no need to say more about the enormous significance of this fact which throws a true light on the meaning of the “power of the soil” in modern society. 
 We need only recall what a tremendousfactor low earnings are in preserving methods of productionthat are primitive and entail bondage, in retarding the useof machinery, and in lowering the workers’ standard ofliving. 
 * *On this last point (which is the first in importance) we would say that it is unfortunate that the Sketch furnishes no data on the standard of living of the agriculturists and non-agriculturists. 
 Butother investigators have noted that it is a common phenomenon for the living standard of the non-agriculturist industrialists to be incomparably higher than that of the “raw” agriculturists, and thisis equally true of Perm Gubernia. 
 Cf. 
 Reports and Investigations of Handicraft Industry in Russia published by the Ministry of Agriculture and State Property, Vol. 
 III, Yegunov’s article. 
 Theauthor points to the completely “urban” standard of living in some 4) The wages of non-agriculturist wage-workers are also everywhere higher than those of agriculturists, but the difference is by no means as great as in the case of the in-comes of the masters. 
 Generally, in all three sub-groups, thewage-worker employed by the agriculturist handicraftsmanearns an average of 43. 
0 rubles, while the wage-worker em-ployed by the non-agriculturist earns 57. 
8 rubles, or one-third more. 
 This difference may to a large extent ( but not entirely ) be due to the difference in the length of the work-ing season. 
 As to the relation between this difference andthe tie with the land, we cannot form a judgement, for wehave no data on agriculturist and non-agriculturist wage-workers. 
 Apart from the length of the working season,the difference in the level of requirements, of course, also plays its part. 
 5) The difference between the size of the masters’ incomes and workers’ wages is incomparably larger in the case ofthe non-agriculturists than in that of the agriculturists:taking all three sub-groups, the income of a non-agricultur-ist master is almost double a worker’s wages (113 rubles and 57. 
8 rubles respectively), whereas among the agricul-turists the income of the master is only slightly higher—4. 
1 rubles more (47. 
1 and 43. 
0)! If these figures are aston-ishing, even more so are those relating to the agriculturistartisans (I, 2), where the income of the master is less than a worker’s wages! But the reason for this will become quite clear later, when we cite data showing the tremendous difference between the size of incomes in large and smallestablishments. 
 By increasing productivity of labour, thelarge establishments make it possible to pay wages exceedingthe income of the poor, individual handicraftsmen workingalone, whose “independence,” in view of their subjection to the market, is quite fictitious. 
 This vast difference between the incomes of the large and the small establishments is tobe observed in both groups, but much more so in the caseof the agriculturists (due to the more depressed state of of the landless villages, to the endeavour of the non-agriculturist handicraftsman to dress and live “as decent people do” (European clothes, even to the starched shirt-samovar, larger consumption of tea, sugar, white bread, beef, etc. 
). 
 The author draws on the fam-ily budgets contained in Zemstvo statistical publications. 
 the small handicraftsmen). 
 The negligible difference be-tween the income of the small master and the wages of the worker clearly shows that the income of the small agricul-turist handicraftsman who employs no wage-workers isnot higher , and often even lower than the wages of a hired worker. 
 As a matter of fact, the net income of the master(47. 
1 rubles per family worker) is the average for all estab-lishments, large and small, for both the owners of factories and of one-man workshops. 
 Naturally, in the case of the big masters, the difference between their net income and thewages of their workers is not 4 rubles, but anything fromten to one hundred times as much, which means that theincome of the small one-man workshop is considerably be-low 47 rubles; in other words, this income is not higher , but often even lower than the wages of a worker. 
 Handicraft census data on the division of establishments according to netincome (see below, § V) fully bear out this seemingly paradox-ical conclusion. 
 But these data relate to all the establish-ments in general, to agriculturists and non-agriculturistsalike, and that is why this deduction from the above table is so important: we have learnt that it is the agriculturists whose earnings are lowest, in other words, that “the tiewith the land” greatly reduces earnings. 
 We have already said, when discussing the difference between the incomes of the agriculturists and the non-agri-culturists, that this difference cannot be explained by the difference in the length of the working periods. 
 Let us now examine the census data on this subject. 
 One of the itemsin the census programme, as we learn from the “introduction,”was the investigation of the “intensity of production through-out the year, on the basis of the number of family membersand wage-workers engaged in production each month” (p. 
 14). 
 Since this was a house-to-house census, in other words, since each establishment was investigated separately (unfortunate-ly, a specimen of the house-to-house census forms is not ap-pended to the Sketch ), it must be assumed that information regarding the number of workers engaged each month, orthe number of working months in the year, was gathered in the case of each establishment. 
 In the Sketch these data are gathered in one table (pp. 
 57 and 58), in which the num-ber of workers (family and wage-workers together) engaged in each month of the year is given for each of the sub-groups of both groups. 
 The attempt of the 1894-95 handicraft census to determine with such precision how many months in the year the handi-craftsmen work is highly instructive and interesting. 
 Indeed,without such information the data on incomes and earningswould be incomplete, and the statistical calculations wouldbe only approximate. 
 But, unfortunately, the data on working periods have been very scantily analysed: apart from this general table, all we are given is informationon the number of workers engaged each month inonly a few industries, sometimes divided according togroups, sometimes not; division according to sub-groupshas not been made for any industry. 
 The separation of the large establishments from the small would have been partic-ularly valuable in this instance, for we have every reasonto expect—both a priori and on the basis of data providedby other investigators of handicraft industry—that theworking periods of the big and the small handicraftsmen arenot the same. 
 Furthermore, the table itself on page 57 is apparently not free from mistakes or misprints (for example, in the months February, August and November; columns2 and 3 of Group II have evidently been mixed up, for thenumber of workers in the third sub-group is larger than inthe second). 
 Even when these inaccuracies are corrected(and the corrections are sometimes only approximate), the table gives rise to no little misgiving, which renders the use of it risky. 
 For instance, when we examine the data in thetable by sub-groups, we find that in the third sub-group(Group I) the maximum number of workers, 2,911, are en-gaged in December. 
 Yet, according to the Sketch , the total number of workers in the third sub-group is 2,551. 
 Similarly, in the third sub-group of Group II: maximum number of workers 3,221, actual number 3,077. 
 On the other hand,in the sub-groups the maxima engaged in one of the months are less than the actual number of workers. 
 How is this to be ex-plained? Is it because information on this subject was notgathered for all the establishments? That is very likely, although there is no hint of it in the Sketch . 
 In the case of the second sub-group of Group II, not only is the maximumnumber of workers (February) larger than the actual number (1,882 and 1,163 respectively), but even the average number of workers engaged in one month (i. 
e. 
, the quotient obtained by dividing the total number of workers engaged in the twelve months by 12) is higher than the actual number of work-ers (1,265 and 1,163 respectively)!! Which figure, oneasks, did the registrars regard as actual: the average numberof workers for the year, the average for some period (win-ter, say), or the number actually employed in some partic-ular month? An investigation of the monthly number of workers engaged in the separate industries does not helpto clear up the puzzle. 
 In the majority of the twenty-threeindustries for which this information is furnished, the max-imum number of workers engaged in any one month of theyear is less than the actual number of workers. 
 In the case of two industries, the maximum is higher than the actual number of workers: in the copper-working industry (239and 233 respectively) and in the forges (Group II—1,811 and1,269 respectively). 
 The maximum is equal to the actualnumber of workers in the case of two industries (rope-makingand oil-milling, Group II). 
 This being the case, we cannot use the data showing the number of workers engaged month by month for a compar-ison with their earnings, with the actual number of workersemployed, etc. 
 All that remains is to treat these data regard-less of others, and to compare the maximum and the mini-mum numbers of workers engaged in each month. 
 This is what is done in the Sketch , but the separate months are com-pared. 
 We consider it more correct to compare winter andsummer; for that will enable us to determine how far agri-culture diverts workers from industry. 
 We took the averagenumber of workers engaged in winter (October to March)as the standard, and, applying this standard to the number of workers engaged in summer, we arrived at the number of summer working months. 
 By adding up the number of win-ter and summer months we got the number of working monthsin the year. 
 Let us illustrate this by an example. 
 In the firstsub-group of Group I there were 18,060 workers engaged inthe six winter months, which gives us an average of (18,060: 6 =) 3,010 workers in one month. 
 In the summer, 12,345 workers were employed; in other words, the summer work-ing season is equal to (12,345:3,010) 4. 
1 months. 
 Hence, the working period in the first sub-group of Group I amounts to 10. 
1 months in the year. 
 This method of analysing the data seemed to us both the most correct and the most convenient. 
 It is the most correct,because it is based on a comparison of winter and summermonths, and hence, on an exact determination of the extentto which agriculture diverts workers from industry. 
 Thatthe winter months have been correctly taken is confirmed by the fact that in the October-March period the number of workers in both groups is higher than the average for theyear. 
 There is the greatest increase in the number of workersfrom September to October, and the greatest decrease fromMarch to April. 
 Incidentally, the choice of other monthswould have had little effect on the conclusions. 
 We consider the method chosen to be the most suitable because it gives an exact figure for the working period which allows us tocompare the groups and sub-groups in this respect. 
 Here are the data obtained by this method: Group I Group II Sub-groups Sub-groups 123 123 Working period (months) 10. 
1 9. 
6 10. 
5 10. 
0 10. 
0 10. 
4 10. 
9 10. 
5 10. 
2 These figures lead us to conclude that the difference between the working periods for agriculturists and non-agriculturistsis very small : that of the non-agriculturists is only 5% long-er. 
 The smallness of this difference gives rise to doubt as to the correctness of the figures. 
 In order to verify them, we have made some calculations and summaries of materialscattered throughout the book and have arrived at the fol-lowing results: The Sketch furnishes data on the monthly employment of workers in 23 of the 43 industries, the data are given accord-ing to groups in the case of 12 (13) * of them but not in the case of the remaining 10 groups. 
 We find that in threeof the industries (pitch and tar, dyeing and brick-making)the number of workers is higher in summer than in winter: *There is only one group in the horn industry—Group I. 
For the two groupsAver-Aver-age age in the six winter months only 1,953 workers are engaged in all three industries as against 4,918 in the six summer months. 
 In these industries there is a great preponderance of agricul-turists over non-agriculturists, the former constituting85. 
9% of the total number of workers. 
 It was obviouslyquite wrong to combine these, so to speak, summer industrieswith the others in the grand totals for groups, as that meantcombining unlike things and artificially raising the number of summer workers in all industries. 
 There are two ways of correcting the error which results from this. 
 The first isto deduct the figures for these three industries from the to-tals given in the Sketch for Groups I and II. 
 * The result is a working period of 9. 
6 months for Group I, and of 10. 
4months for Group II. 
 Here the difference between the two groups is bigger, but still very small—8. 
3%. 
 The second method of correcting the error is to combine the figures forthe twelve industries for which the Sketch gives information on the monthly employment of workers in Groups I andII separately. 
 This will embrace 70% of the total numberof handicraftsmen, and, what is more, the comparison between Groups I and II will be more correct. 
 We find that in the case of these twelve industries the working period in Group Iis only 8. 
9 months, and in Group II, 10. 
7 months, whilefor the two groups together it is 9. 
7 months. 
 The workingperiod of the non-agriculturists is now 20. 
2% longer thanthat of the agriculturists. 
 The agriculturists do not work for 3. 
1 months in summer, the non-agriculturists for only 1. 
3 months. 
 Even if we take the maximum difference in theworking periods in Groups II and I as the standard, weshall find that not only the differences in the gross outputof the workers of Groups I and II, or in the net incomesof their establishments, but even the differences in the wages of agriculturist and non-agriculturist wage-workers cannot be explained by the difference in the length of theworking periods . 
 Consequently, the conclusion drawn above, namely, that the tie with the land reduces the handicrafts-men’s earnings, remains fully valid. 
 *The distribution of the workers in these three industries be-tween Group I and Group II is done approximately, 85. 
9% being taken as the standard for Group I. 
 We must therefore conclude that the compilers of the Sketch are mistaken in their desire to explain the difference between the earnings of the agriculturists and non-agricul-turists by the difference in the length of the working periods. 
Their mistake was due to their not attempting to expressthe differences in the working periods by exact figures, andthis led them astray. 
 For example, on page 106 of the Sketch it is stated that the difference between the earnings of the agriculturist and the non-agriculturist furriers “is chiefly determined by the number of working days devoted to indus-try. 
” Yet the earnings of the non-agriculturists in thisindustry are from two to four times greater than those ofthe agriculturists (65 and 280 rubles respectively per familyworker in the first sub-group, and 27 and 62 rubles in the second sub-group), whereas the working period of the non-agriculturists is longer by only 28. 
7% (8. 
5 months as com-pared with 6. 
6). 
 The fact that the tie with the land lowers earnings could not escape the attention even of the compilers of the Sketch ; but they expressed it in the usual Narodnik formula on the “superiority” of the handicraft to the capitalist form: “by combining agriculture with industry, the handi-craftsman ... is able to sell his wares cheaper than those ofthe factory” (p. 
 4); in other words, he can manage on smallerearnings. 
 But where is the “superiority” of the tie with theland, if the market already so dominates the whole of the country’s industrial life that it discounts this tie by lower-ing the earnings of the agriculturist handicraftsman;if capital can take advantage of this “tie” to exert greaterpressure on the agriculturist handicraftsman, who is lessable to defend his interests, to choose a different master, adifferent customer, or a different occupation? The lowering of wages (and of industrial earnings in general) when the worker (or the small industrialist) has a plot of land is some-thing common to all capitalist countries, and is per-fectly well known to all employers who have long ago ap-preciated the vast “superiority” of workers tied to the land. 
Only in the decadent West do they bluntly call a spade a spade, but in our country the lowering of wages, the lowering of the living standard of the working population,the delay in introducing machinery, and the perpetuation of all sorts of bondage is referred to as the “superiority” of “people’s production,” which “combines agriculture with industry. 
 ”... In concluding our review of the 1894-95 census data on the working period, we cannot refrain from once againexpressing our regret that the data obtained have been soincompletely analysed, nor from voicing the hope that thisdefect will not deter other investigators of this inter-esting problem. 
 One cannot but admit that the method of investigation—determination of the number of workersemployed each month—was very well chosen. 
 Above wehave given data for the working period by groups and sub-groups. 
 There was some possibility of verifying the datafor the groups. 
 But it is utterly impossible to verify the data for the sub-groups, since the book furnishes absolutely no information on the differences in the length of the workingperiod in the various sub-groups. 
 Therefore, in citing thesedata, we make the reservation that we cannot guaranteetheir absolute reliability; and if we draw further conclusions,it is only for the purpose of raising this question and draw-ing the investigators’ attention to it. 
 The most important conclusion is that the smallest difference in the working pe-riods in Groups I and II is in the first sub-group (only 1% inall: 10. 
1 months and 10. 
0 months); in other words, It is themost prosperous handicraftsmen and the biggest and wealthi-est agriculturists who are least diverted from agriculture . 
 The difference is largest in the case of the artisans (second sub-group: 9. 
5 months and 10. 
4 months), that is, the indus-trialists and middle agriculturists least affected by commod-ity production. 
 It would appear that the prosperous agri-culturists are diverted so little from agriculture either be-cause of their larger families or their greater exploitation of wage-labour in industry or their hiring of agricultural la-bourers, and that the artisans are most diverted from agri-culture because they have been less differentiated as agri-culturists, have retained patriarchal relations to a greatextent, and work directly for agricultural customers whoreduce their orders in the summer. 
 * *There is an exception: the dyeing industry is run entirely by artisans, and summer work is greater than winter work. 
 The “tie with agriculture,” the census reveals, has a very marked influence on the literacy of the handicraftsmen;— literacy among wage-labourers has unfortunately not been investigated. 
 It appears that the non-agricultural popula-tion * is far more literate than the agricultural, and this feature is to be observed for both men and women in allsub-groups without exception, Here are the census figures(in percentages) on this subject in extenso (n. 
 62): Group I Group II (agriculturalist) (non-agriculturalist) Sub-groups Sub-groups 123 1 23 Males 32 33 20 31 41 45 33 39 33 Females 9 6 4 7 17 22 14 17 9 Males 39 37 26 36 44 57 51 49 40 Females 13 17 4 10 53 21 23 30 19 49 43 34 44 55 63 50 55 47 It is interesting to note that in the case of the non-agri-cultural population literacy is spreading far more rapidlyamong the women than among the men. 
 The proportionof literate males in Group II is 1 2 to 2 times as great as in Group I, while the proportion of literate females is 2 2 t o 5w times as great. 
 Summarising the conclusions drawn from the 1894-95 cen-sus on the subject of “agriculture connected with industry,”we may take it as demonstrated that the tie with agriculture: 1) preserves the most backward forms of industry and retards economic development; 2) reduces the handicraftsmen’s earnings and income, so that the most prosperous sub-groups of agriculturist mas-ters earn, in general and on the average, less than the least *We would remind the reader that only one town (and that an uyezd centre) was here included by way of exception: only 1,412,or 29. 
6 per cent, of the 4,762 family workers in Group II are towndwellers. 
“Percentage of literate persons to total” “Percentage of lit-erate persons among those di-rectly engaged in production” Percentage of fam-ilies with lit-erate membersAver-age Aver-age Both groups {{ prosperous non-agriculturist sub-groups of wage-workers , to say nothing of the non-agriculturist masters. 
 The masters of Group I have very low incomes even when compared with the wage-workers of that group—sometimes they are slightlyhigher and sometimes even lower than the workers’ wages; 3) retards the cultural development of the population whose consumption level is lower than that of the non-ag-riculturists and whose standard of literacy is far behind that of the latter. 
 These conclusions will be useful later for our assessment of the Narodnik programme of industrial policy. 
 4) Differentiation among the agriculturist handicrafts-men is seen to run parallel to that of the industrialists. 
The higher (more prosperous) categories of agriculturists constitute a pure type of peasant bourgeoisie who employ regular and day labourers to run their farms. 
 5) The working period of the agriculturists is shorter than that of the non-agriculturists, but the difference is verysmall (5% to 20%). 
 V LARGE AND SMALL ESTABLISHMENTS. 
—THE INCOMES OF THE HANDICRAFTSMEN We must dwell in greater detail on the data of the 1894-95 census on incomes from handicrafts. 
 The attempt to collect household data on incomes is very instructive, and it would be quite wrong to confine ourselves to general “averages”for the sub-groups (given above). 
 We have already, on morethan one occasion, referred to the fictitious nature of “aver-ages” derived by adding together individual handicraftsmenand owners of big establishments and then dividing the to-tal obtained by the number of the components. 
 Let us en-deavour to assemble the data contained in the Sketch on this subject in order to illustrate this method clearly and proveits fictitious nature and to demonstrate that in scientific in-vestigations and in analysing house-to-house census datahandicraftsmen must be grouped in categories according to number of workers (family and wage-workers) employed in the workshop, and all the census data arranged inaccordance with these categories. 
 The compilers of the Sketch must have noted the all too obvious fact of higher incomes in the big establishments, and tried to minimise its significance. 
 Instead of giving precise census data on the large establishments (which theycould have selected with no difficulty), they again con-fined themselves to general discussions, arguments and in-ventions against conclusions which the Narodniks find un-pleasant. 
 Let us examine these arguments. 
 “If in such” (big) “establishments we meet with a family income disproportionately larger than that of the smallestablishments, we must not lose sight of the fact that aconsiderable part of this income is mainly the reproductionof the value, firstly, of a certain portion of the fixed capitaltransmitted to the product, secondly, of the labour and expenses connected with commerce and transport which play no part in production, and, thirdly, of the value offood supplied to wage-workers who receive their board fromthe masters. 
 These facts” (facts, indeed!) “limit the possibil-ity of certain illusions arising which give an exaggeratednotion of the advantages of wage-labour in handicraft in-dustry or, what amounts to the same thing, of the capitalist element” (p. 
 15). 
 That it is highly desirable in all investi-gations “to limit” the possibility of illusions is somethingwhich nobody, of course, doubts, but for this it is necessaryto combat “illusions” by means of facts , facts taken from the household census, and not by citing one’s own opinions, which are themselves sometimes mere “illusions. 
” Is not, indeed, the authors’ argument about commercial and trans-port expenses an illusion? Who does not know that theseexpenses per unit of product are far smaller for the big pro-ducer than the small producer, * that the former buys his material cheaper and sells his product dearer, knowing how (and being in a position) to choose time and place? The handi-craft census, too, mentions these generally known facts—cf. 
 pp. 
 204 and 263, for example—and one cannot but regretthat the Sketch contains no facts about expenses on the purchase of raw materials and the sale of the product by *It goes without saying that only handicraftsmen in the same sub-group can be compared, and that a commodity producer cannot be compared with an artisan or a handicraftsman who works fora buyer-up. 
 big and small industrialists, by handicraftsmen and buyers-up. 
 Further, as regards the wear and tear of fixed capital, here again the authors, while combating illusions, are them-selves the victims of an illusion. 
 Theory tells us that largeexpenditures on fixed capital diminish the part of the valueper unit of product that represents wear and tear and istransmitted to the product. 
 “An analysis and comparisonof the prices of commodities produced by handicrafts or manufactures, and of the prices of the same commodities produced by machinery, shows generally that, in the prod-uct of machinery, the value due to the instruments of la-bour increases relatively, but decreases absolutely. 
 Inother words, its absolute amount decreases, but its amount,relatively to the total value of the product, of a pound of yarn, for instance, increases” ( Das Kapital , I 2, S. 
 406). 
117 The census also reckoned the costs of production, which include (p. 
 14, point 7) “repair of tools and fixtures. 
” Whatreason is there to believe that omissions in the registrationof this point are to be met with more frequently among thebig than among the small masters? Would not rather the contrary be the case? As to board provided for wage-workers, there are no facts on this point in the Sketch at all: we do not know exactly how many workers board with their mas-ters, how frequent are the omissions in the census on thispoint, how often agriculturist masters feed their wage-workers with produce from their farms, and how often the masters entered the workers’ board under expenditure on pro-duction. 
 Similarly, no facts on the inequality in the length of the working period in the big and the small establishments aregiven. 
 We do not deny that the working period in the bigestablishments is very likely longer than in the smallones, but, firstly, the differences in income are out of all proportion to the differences in the length of the working period; and, secondly, it remains to be stated that the Permstatisticians have been unable to offer a single weighty ar-gument, based on precise data, against the precise facts o f the house-to-house census (given below), and in support of theNarodnik “illusions. 
” We have obtained the data for the large and small establishments in the following way: we examined thetables appended to the Sketch , noted the large establish-ments (wherever they could be picked out, that is, wherever they were not lumped together with the mass of establish-ments in a general total), and compared them with the gen-eral totals given in the Sketch for all the establishments of the same group and sub-group. 
 This question is so im-portant that we hope the reader will not reproach us forthe numerous tables we give below: in tables the factsstand out more saliently and compactly. 
 Felt-boot industry: Number GrossWages ofNet of incomewage-incomeworkers Group I Sub-group I Per Total work-er Rubles Total 58 99 95 194 22,769 117. 
3 4,338 45. 
6 7,410 75. 
0 P. 
112 of text Large estab-10 14 65 79 13,291 168. 
0 3,481 53. 
5 3,107 222. 
0 Pp. 
 214, lishments 215 and 154 oftables Other estab-lishments not including the large 48 85 30 115 9,478 82. 
4 857 28. 
5 4,303 41. 
2 Thus, the “average” income per family worker, 75 ru-bles, was obtained by adding together incomes of 222 rublesand 41 rubles. 
 It appears that, after deducting the ten largeestablishments * with 14 family workers, the remaining establishments show a net income that is below the wages of a wage-worker (41. 
2 against 45. 
6 rubles), while in the large establishments wages are still higher. 
 The productivity of labour in the large establishments is more than double *But these are by no means the largest establishments. 
 From the division of establishments according to number of wage-workers (p. 
 113) it may be calculated that in three establishments there are 163 wage-workers, or an average of 54 per establishment. 
 Yet theseare also regarded as “handicraft establishments” and are added to-gether with the one-man workshops (of which there are no less than460 in the industry) to obtain general “average”!Number of estab-lishmentsFamilyworkersWage-workers Total Total Per work-er Total Per fam-ily work-er Reference topage of Sketch (168. 
0 and 82. 
4 rubles), the earnings of a wage-worker near-ly double (53 rubles and 28 rubles), while the net income is five times higher (222 and 41 rubles). 
 Obviously, no talk about differences in the working period or any other argu-ment can eliminate the fact that the big establishments havethe highest labour productivity * and the highest income, while the small handicraftsmen, for all their “independence” (firstsub-group: those who work independently for the market) and their tie with the land (Group I), earn less than wage-workers. 
 In the carpentry trade the “net income” of the first sub-group of Group I “averages” 37. 
4 rubles per family worker,whereas the average earnings of a wage-worker in the samesub-group are 56. 
9 rubles (p. 
 131). 
 It is impossible to pick outthe big establishments from the tables, but it can scarcely be doubted that this “average” income per family worker was obtained by combining the highly profitable establishmentsemploying wage-workers (who, after all, are not paid 56 rublesfor nothing) with the dwarf workshops of the small “independ-ent” handicraftsmen, who get much less than a wage-worker. 
 Next comes the bast-matting industry: Number of Gross income Wages Net income Group I Sub-group I Total 99 206 252 458 38,681 84. 
4 6,664 26. 
4 10. 
244 49. 
7 P. 
 151 of text Large estab-11 11 95 106 18,170 171. 
4 2,520 26. 
5 3,597 327. 
0 Pp. 
 95, lishments 97 and 136 of tables Others 88 195 157 352 20,511 58. 
2 4,144 26. 
4 6,647 34. 
0 Thus, almost half the total output is concentrated in eleven of the ninety-nine establishments. 
 In them, productivity oflabour is more than double; the wages of the workers are also higher; and net income is more than six times the “average” *“In one of the establishments” the introduction of a wool-carding machine was mentioned (p. 
 119). 
Number ofestablishmentsFamilyworkersWage-workersTotal Total Per work-er Total Per work-er Total Per fam-ily work-erReference topage ofSketch /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR and nearly ten times as high as that of the others, i. 
e. 
, the smaller establishments. 
 The latter have incomes but slightly higher than a worker’s wages (34 and 26 rubles respectively). 
 Rope and string industry *: Number of Gross Wages Net income income Group I Sub-group I Total 58 179 106 285 81,672 286 4,338 65. 
6 16,127 90. 
1 P. 
 158 of text* Large estab-4 5 56 61 48,912 800 4,695 83. 
8 5,599 1, 119. 
0 Pp. 
 40, lishments and 188 oftables Other 48 85 30 115 9,478 146 857 45. 
0 10,528 60. 
5 Thus, here too the general “averages” show a higher in-come for the family workers than for the wage-workers (90 against 65. 
6 rubles). 
 But 4 of the 58 establishments ac-count for over half the total output. 
 In these establishments (capitalist manufactories of the pure type) ** productivity of labour is almost three times the average (800 and 286 ru-bles) and over five times that of the remaining, i. 
e. 
, smaller,establishments (800 and 146 rubles). 
 Workers’ wages are much higher in the factories than in the small masters’ workshops (84 and 45 rubles). 
 The net income of the manu-facturers is over 1,000 rubles per family as compared withthe “average” of 90 rubles and with the 60. 
5 rubles of the *There is apparently a misprint or error in the table on p. 
 158: in Irbit Uyezd the net income is more than the 9,827 rubles shownin the total. 
 We had to change this table according to the data in the tables appended to the Sketch . 
 **Cf. 
 Handicraft Industries , pp. 
 46-47, as well as the descrip-tion of the industry given in the Sketch , p. 
 162, et. 
 seq. 
 It is most typical that “these employers were once real handicraftsmen andthat is why they have always been fond ... of giving themselves thatname. 
”Number ofestablishmentsFamilyworkersWage-workersTotal Total Per work-er Total Per work-er Total Per fam-ily work-er Reference topage of Sketch small handicraftsmen. 
 The income of the small handicrafts-man is, therefore, lower than a worker’s wages (60. 
5 and 65. 
6 rubles). 
 The pitch and tar industry: Number of Gross Wages Net income income Group I Sub-group I Total 167 319 980 399 22,076 55. 
3 2,150 26. 
8 10,979 34. 
4 Pp. 
 189 of text Large estab-999 910 16 26 4,440 170. 
7 654 40. 
8 2,697 269. 
7 Pp. 
 lishments 100, 101, 137, 160, 161,and 220 of tables Others 158 309 64 373 17,636 47. 
3 1,496 23. 
2 8,282 36. 
8 Although this industry is, in general, a small one that employs very few wage-workers (20%) we again find thesame purely capitalist phenomenon of the superiority of thelarge (relatively large) establishments of the independenthandicraftsmen in the agricultural group. 
 And yet pitch andtar production is a purely peasant, “people’s” industry! In the large establishments labour productivity is over three times, workers’ wages about one-and-a-half times and net incomeabout eight times the “average”; their net income, moreover,is ten times as high as that of other handicraft families whoearn no more than the average wage-worker, and less than a wage-worker in the larger establishments . 
 Let us note that pitch and tar production is chiefly a summer occupation, sothat differences in the working period cannot be very great. 
 * *It may be seen from the Sketch that in the pitch and tar in-dustry both the primitive method of distilling pitch in pits and the more perfected cauldron , and even cylindrical boiler , methods are employed (p. 
 195). 
 The household census furnished material showing the distribution of these different methods, but it was not utilised,the large establishments not being treated separately. 
Number ofestablishmentsFamilyworkersWage-workersTotal TotalPer work-er Total Per work-er Total Per fam-ily work-erReference topage ofSketch The baking industry: Number of Gross Wages Net income income Group I Sub-group I Total 27 63 55 188 44,619 378. 
1 2,497 45. 
4 7,484 118. 
8 P. 
 215 of text Large estab-4 7 42 26 25,740 525 2,050 48. 
8 4,859 694 Pp. 
 68 lishments and 229 of Others 23 56 13 373 18,879 273 447 34. 
4 2,625 46. 
8 tables Thus, here again, the averages for the entire sub-group are absolutely fictitious. 
 The large establishments (of small capitalists) account for over half the total output, yield a net income six times the average and 14 times that of thesmall masters, and pay their workers wages exceeding the incomes of the small handicraftsmen . 
 We do not mention pro-ductivity of labour; three or four of the large establishmentsproduce a more valuable product—treacle. 
 The pottery industry. 
 Here again we have a typical small peasant industry with an insignificant number of wage-workers (13%), very small establishments (less than twoworkers per establishment) and a predominance of agricul-turists. 
 And here too we get the same picture: Number of Gross Wages Net income income Group I Sub-group I Total 97 163 31 194 12,414 63. 
9 1,830 59 6,657 41 P. 
 291 of text Large estab-7 9 17 26 4,187 161. 
0 1,400 80. 
2 1,372 152 Pp. 
 168 lishments and 206 of Others 90 154 14 168 8,227 48. 
9 430 30. 
0 5,285 34. 
3 tablesNumber ofestablishmentsFamilyworkersWage-workersTotal Total Per work-er Total Per work-er Total Per fam-ily work-er Reference topage of Sketch Number ofestablishmentsFamilyworkersWage-workers Total Total Per work-er Total Per work-er Total Per fam-ily work-er Reference topage of Sketch Here, consequently, it is at once apparent from the “average” figures that the wage-worker’s earnings are high-er than the family worker’s income. 
 By treating the large establishments separately, we get the explanation of thiscontradiction, which we have already recorded in numerousinstances. 
 In the large establishments labour productivity,wages and masters’ incomes are all incomparably higher,while the small handicraftsmen get less than the wage-workers and less than half the earnings of the wage-workers in the best-organised shops . 
 The brick industry: Number of Gross Wages Net income income Group I Sub-group I Total 229 558 218 766 17,606 22. 
6 4,560 20. 
9 10,126 18. 
1 P. 
 299 of text Large estab-8 9 45 54 3,130 57. 
9 1,415 31. 
4 1,298 144 Pp. 
 46 lishments 120, 169 and 183 of tables Others 221 549 173 722 14,476 20. 
0 3,145 18. 
2 8,282 16. 
0 Thus, here too, the “average” income of a family worker is lower than the earnings of a wage-worker. 
 Here againit is to be explained by combining the big establish-ments—which are distinguished by a considerably higher labour productivity, higher payment of wage-workers, anda very high (comparatively) income—and the smallestablishments, the income of whose owners is about halfthe earnings of the wage-workers in the big establish-ments. 
 We might go on citing figures for other industries too, * but we think that those given are more than enough. 
 *Cf. 
 vehicle building, p. 
 308 of the text and pp. 
 11 and 12 of the tables; chest making, p. 
 335; tailoring, p. 
 344, etc. 
Number ofestablishmentsFamilyworkersWage-workersTotal Total Per work-er Total Per work-er Total Per fam-ily work-er Reference topage of Sketch Let us now summarise the conclusions that follow from the facts examined: 1) The combining of large and small establishments re-sults in absolutely fictitious “average” figures, which giveno conception of the real state of affairs, obscure cardinaldifferences, and present as homogeneous something thatis heterogeneous, of mixed composition. 
 2) The data for a number of industries show that the large establishments (where a large number of workers are en-gaged) are distinguished from the average and small estab-lishments: a) by an incomparably higher productivity of labour; b) by better payment of wage-workers, and c) by a far higher net income. 
 3) All the large establishments we have selected, without exception, employ wage-labour on an incomparably largerscale (than the average-sized establishments in the givenindustry), the proportion of wage-labour being substantiallygreater than that of family labour. 
 The value of their out-put is as much as 10,000 rubles, while the number of wage-workers employed is ten and more per establishment. 
 These large establishments, therefore, represent capitalist work-shops. 
 The census data consequently reveal the prevalence of purely capitalist laws and relations in the celebrated “handicraft” industry; they reveal the absolute superior-ity of the capitalist workshops, based on the co-operation of wage-workers, over the one-man workshops and small workshops in general—a superiority both in productivityof labour and in remuneration for labour, even of wage-workers. 
 4) In the case of a number of the industries the earnings of the small independent handicraftsmen prove to be no higher, and often even lower, than the earnings of wage-workers in the same industry. 
 This differencewould be even greater if to the wage-workers’ earningswere added the value of the board received by some ofthem. 
 We have dealt with this last conclusion separately be-cause the first three concern phenomena that are universal and inevitable under the laws of commodity production,whereas the last does not contain phenomena that are every-where inevitable. 
 We accordingly formulate this concept as follows: because of lower labour productivity in small establishments and the defenceless position of their owners in the market (especially in the case of agricul-turists), it is possible that the earnings of an independenthandicraftsman may be lower than those of a wage-worker—and the facts show that this very often is thecase. 
 The validity of our calculations is beyond question, for we have taken a number of industries, not choosing themat random, but taking all those where the tables allowedus to deal with the large establishments separately; we havenot taken individual establishments, but all those of thesame kind, and in every case compared with them several large establishments in different uyezds. 
 But it would be desirable to express the phenomena described in a more gen-eral and more precise form. 
 Fortunately, the Sketch con-tains material that enables us to satisfy this desire in part . 
 This is the material on the division of establishments accord-ing to net income . 
 In the case of certain industries, the Sketch indicates how many establishments have a net in-come of up to 50, 100, 200 rubles, etc. 
 It is these data thatwe have combined. 
 We find that there are data availablefor 28 industries, * embracing 8,364 establishments, or 93. 
2% of the total number (8,991). 
 In all, in these 28 indus-tries there are 8,377 establishments (income figures are not given for 13 establishments), with 14,135 family and 4,625 wage-workers, or 18,760 in all, which constitutes 93. 
9%of the total number of workers. 
 Naturally, from these datacovering 93% of the handicraftsmen we are fully entitledto draw conclusions regarding all of them, for there are nogrounds for assuming that the remaining 7% differ from these 93%. 
 Before presenting our summary, it is necessary to make the following remarks: 1) In thus classifying the material, the compilers of the Sketch have not always strictly adhered to uniform and iden-tical headings for the groups. 
 For example, they have “up *These data are also available for the lace-, lock-and accordion-making industries, but we omit them, as they do not record estab-lishments according to the number of family workers. 
 to 100 rubles,” “less than 100 rubles,” and sometimes even “100 rubles each. 
” The top and bottom limits of the category are not always indicated, that is, sometimes the classifica-tion begins with the category “up to 100 rubles,” sometimeswith that of “up to 50 rubles,” “up to 10 rubles,” and so on;sometimes the classification ends with the category “1,000rubles and over,” sometimes the categories “2,000 to 3,000rubles” and others are introduced. 
 None of these inaccu-racies is of any serious importance. 
 We have unified all the categories contained in the Sketch (there are fifteen of them: up to 10, up to 20, up to 50, up to 100, up to 200, up to 300,up to 400, up to 500, up to 600, up to 700, up to 800, up to900, up to 1,000, 1,000 and over, and 2,000 to 3,000 rubles),and we have eliminated all minor inaccuracies and misun-derstandings by assigning them to one or another of these categories. 
 2) The Sketch only indicates the number of establish-ments in certain income categories, but does not indicate the income of all the establishments in each category. 
 Yet it is these latter figures that we need most. 
 We have therefore assumed that the aggregate income of the establish-ments in any category is determined with sufficient accuracyby multiplying the number of establishments by the av-erage income, that is, by the arithmetical mean of the maxi-mum and minimum of the given category (for example,150 rubles in the case of the 100 to 200 ruble category, etc. 
). 
 Only in the case of the lowest two categories (up to 10 ru-bles and up to 20 rubles) have the maximum incomes (10 ru-bles and 20 rubles respectively) been taken instead of the av-erages. 
 Verification has shown that this method (one gen-erally permissible in statistical calculations) yieldsresults that approximate very closely to reality. 
 For in-stance, the aggregate net income of the handicraft families in these 28 industries, according to the Sketch , amounts to 951,653 rubles, while according to our approximatefigures, based on the income categories, it amounts to955,150 rubles, an excess of 3,497 rubles =0. 
36%. 
 Con-sequently, the difference or error is less than 4 kopeks in 10 rubles. 
 From our summary we learn the average income per family (in each category), but not per family worker. 
 To determine the latter, another approximate calculation had to be made. 
 Knowing the division of families according to the number of family workers (and separately—according to the number of wage-workers employed), we assumed that thelower the income of a family, the smaller its size (i. 
e. 
,the smaller the number of family workers per establish-ment) and the fewer the establishments employing wage-workers. 
 On the contrary, the higher the income per family, the larger the number of establishments employing wage-workers and the larger the family, that is, the number offamily workers per establishment is larger. 
 Obviously, thisassumption is the most favourable for anyone who mightwant to contest our conclusions. 
 In other words, whatever other assumption was made, it would only help to rein-force our conclusions. 
 We now give a summary showing the division of the hand-icraftsmen according to the income of their establish-ments. 
 Category Category (rubles) (rubles) (Approxi-(Approxi-mately) mately) Up to 10 127 10 1,270 Up to 600 40 550 22,000 ”” 20 139 20 2,780 ”” 700 38 650 24,700 ”” 50 2,110 35 78,850 ”” 800 22 750 16,500 ”” 100 3,494 75 262,050 ”” 900 20 850 17,000 ”” 200 1,414 150 212,100 ”” 1,000 17 950 16,150 ”” 300 602 250 150,050 1,000 and over 19 1,500 28,500 ”” 400 208 350 72,800 2,000-3,000 2 2,500 5,000 ”” 500 112 450 50,400 All establishments .... 
 8,364 — 955,150Number ofestablishmentsAverageincome perestablishment Income ofall establish-ments Number ofestablishmentsAverageincome perestablishment Income ofall establish-ments These data are too detailed and have therefore to be com-bined under simpler and clearer headings. 
 Let us take five income categories of handicraftsmen: a) poor, with incomes of up to 50 rubles per family; b) in straitened circumstances,with incomes of 50 to 100 rubles per family; c) medium,with incomes of 100 to 300 rubles per family; d) well-to-do,with incomes of 300 to 500 rubles per family, and e) affluent,with incomes of over 500 rubles per family. 
 According to the data showing the incomes of establish-ments we shall add to these categories a rough division ofestablishments according to the number of family and wage-workers they employ. 
 * We get the following table (see p. 
 417). 
 These data lead to very interesting conclusions, which we shall now enumerate, taking the handicraftsmen cate-gory by category: a) Over one-fourth of the families (28. 
4%) come under the category of poor , with an average income of about 33 rubles per family. 
 Let us assume that this is the income ofonly one family worker, that all in this category are one-man producers. 
 In any case the earnings of these handicrafts-men are considerably lower than the average earnings of wage-workers employed by handicraftsmen (45. 
85 rubles). 
If the majority of these one-man producers belong to thelower (3rd) sub-group, that is, work for buyers-up, thismeans that the “masters” pay those who work at home lessthan wage-workers employed in the workshop. 
 Even if we assume that the working period of this category is the shortest, their earnings are nevertheless at the poverty level. 
 b) Over two-fifths of the total number of handicrafts-men (41. 
8%) belong to the group of families in straitenedcircumstances, who have an average income of 75 rublesper family. 
 Not all of these are one-man establishments (the previous category was assumed to consist solely of *The 8,377 establishments in the 28 industries are divided accord-ing to the number of family and wage-workers as follows: no familyworkers—95 establishments; 1 worker—4,362; 2 workers—2,632; 3 workers—870; 4 workers—275; 5 workers and over—143. 
 The establishments employing wage-workers number 2,228, and aredivided as follows: 1 wage-worker—1,359; 2 workers—447; 3 work-ers—201; 4 workers—96; 5 workers and more—125. 
 The wage-workers total 4,625, and their aggregate wages total 212,096 rubles(45. 
85 rubles per worker). 
 Number Net incomeAverage Rough division of familiesincome Categories of handicrafts-According to number menPerfamily workers of wage-workers accordingfamily to size ofworker income(ap-prox. 
) 1 2 3 4 0 1 2 3 4 a) Poor2,376 28. 
4 77,900 8. 
2 32. 
7 32. 
72,376 — — — — — — — — — — b) In strait-ened cir-cumstances 3,494 41. 
8 262,050 27. 
4 75. 
0 50 1,986 1,598 — — — — — — — — — c) Medium 2,016 24. 
1 362,150 37. 
9 179. 
6 72. 
0 — 1,124 870 22 — — 1,359 392 — — — d) Well-to-do 320 3. 
8 123,200 12. 
9 385. 
0100. 
0 — — — 253 67 — — 55 201 64 — d) Affluent 158 1. 
9 129,850 13. 
6 821. 
8 348 — — — — 76 82 — — — 32 125 e)Total8,364 100 955,150 100 114. 
267. 
54,3622,632 870 275 143 82 1,359 447 201 96 125Families % Rubles % 5 or more 5 or more one-man producers): about half the families have two fami-ly workers each, and hence the average earnings per fam-ily worker are only about 50 rubles, i. 
e. 
, not more, or even less , than the earnings of a wage-worker employed by a handicraftsman (apart from wages, amounting to 45. 
85 rubles, part of the wage-workers also receive their board). 
Thus , judged by their earnings , seven-tenths of the total num-ber of handicraftsmen are on a par with , and some even at a lower level than , the wage-workers employed by handi-craftsmen . 
 Astonishing as this conclusion is, it fully con-forms to the facts quoted above on the superiority of largeestablishments over small. 
 The low income level of thesehandicraftsmen can be judged by the fact that the aver-age wage of an agricultural labourer employed by the year in Perm Gubernia is 50 rubles, in addition to board. 
 * Conse-quently, the standard of living of seven-tenths of the “inde-pendent” handicraftsmen is no higher than that of agricul-tural labourers! The Narodniks, of course, will say that these earnings are only supplementary to agriculture. 
 But in the first place, has it not been established long ago that only a minority of the peasants are able to derive enough from agricultureto maintain their families, after land redemption payments,rent and farm expenses are deducted? And please note thatwe are comparing the handicraftsman’s earnings with thewages of a farm labourer who receives his board from his master. 
 Secondly, seven-tenths of the total number of handi-craftsmen must also include non-agriculturists. 
 Thirdly,even if it turns out that agriculture covers the maintenanceof the agriculturist handicraftsmen of these categories,the drastic effect of the tie with the land in reducing earn-ings still remains beyond all doubt. 
 Another comparison: in Krasnoufimsk Uyezd, the aver-age earnings of a wage-worker employed by a handicrafts-man are 33. 
2 rubles (p. 
 149 of the tables), while the averageearnings of a person employed at “his own” works, thatis, of an ironworker from among the former possessional 118 peasants, are estimated by the Zemstvo statisticians at *The cost of board is 45 rubles per annum, according to the figures—average for 10 years (188l-91)—of the Department ofAgriculture. 
 (See S. 
 A. 
 Korolenko, Hired Labour , etc. 
) 78. 
7 rubles ( Material for a Statistical Survey of Perm Gubernia. 
 Krasnoufimsk Uyezd. 
 Zavodsk District , Kazan, 1894), or over twice as much. 
 And it is a generally known fact that the wages of ironworkers from among the formerpossessional peasants are always lower than wages of “free”workers in the factories. 
 One can, therefore, see thatreduced consumption, a miserable standard of living, is theprice paid for the celebrated “independence” of the Russian handicraftsman “based on an organic tie between industry and agriculture”! c) In the category of “medium” handicraftsmen we have included families with incomes of 100 to 300 rubles, or anaverage of about 180 rubles per family. 
 They constitute al-most one-fourth of the total number (24. 
1%). 
 Absolutely, their income is very, very low: counting two-and-a-half family workers per establishment, it amounts to about 72rubles per family worker—a very inadequate sum, and onewhich no factory worker would envy. 
 Compared, however,with the incomes of the mass of handicraftsmen this sum isfairly high! It appears that even this meagre “sufficiency” is only secured at the expense of others: the majority of the handicraftsmen in this category employ wage-workers(roughly about 85% of the masters employ wage-labourers,and the average for the 2,016 establishments is over onewage-worker per establishment). 
 Hence, in order to fighttheir way out of the mass of poverty-stricken handicrafts-men, this category, under the existing commodity-capitalist relations, have to win a “sufficiency” for themselves fromothers, have to engage in economic struggle, to squeezeout the mass of the small producers still further and becomepetty bourgeois. 
 Either poverty and the lowering of theirstandard of living to the nec plus ultra, or ( for a minority ) the building-up of their (absolutely very meagre) welfare at the expense of others—such is the dilemma with whichcommodity production confronts the small producer. 
Such is the language of facts. 
 d) The category of well-to-do handicraftsmen embraces only 3. 
8% of the families, those with an average income of about 385 rubles, or about 100 rubles per family worker (assuming that under this heading come masters with 4 or5 family workers per establishment). 
 Such an income, about double the earnings of a wage-worker, is already based on a considerable employment of wage-labour: all the establishments in this category employ an average of about 3 wage-workers per establishment. 
 e) The affluent handicraftsmen, those with an average income of 820 rubles per family, constitute only 1. 
9% ofthe total. 
 This category partly includes establishments with5 family workers, and partly establishments with no family workers at all, that is, those based exclusively on wage-la-bour. 
 On an average, this amounts to about 350 rubles ofincome per family worker. 
 The high incomes of these “hand-icraftsmen” accrue from the large number of wage-workers employed, averaging about 10 persons per establishment. 
 * These are already small manufacturers, owners of capitalistworkshops, and to include them among the “handicrafts-men,” together with the one-man establishments, rural arti-sans and even domestic producers who work for manufac-turers (and sometimes, as we shall see below, for these sameaffluent handicraftsmen!) only testifies, as we have already remarked, to the utter vagueness and haziness of the term “handicraft. 
” In concluding our examination of the census data on hand-icraftsmen’s incomes we must make the following remark. 
 It might be said that the concentration of incomes in thehandicraft industries is not very high: 5. 
7% of the estab-lishments account for 26. 
5% of the total income, and 29. 
8% for 64. 
4%. 
 Our reply to this is that, firstly, even this degreeof concentration shows how totally unsuitable and unscien-tific are sweeping arguments about “handicraftsmen,” and “average” figures relating to them. 
 Secondly, we shouldnot lose sight of the fact that these data do not include buy-ers-up , with the result that the income division is highly inaccurate. 
 We have seen that 2,346 families and 5,628workers work for buyers-up (third sub-group); consequent-ly, here it is the buyers-up who get the principal income. 
 Their separation from the mass of the producers is abso-lutely artificial and entirely unwarranted. 
 Just as it would *Of the 2,228 establishments employing wage-workers in these 28 industries, 46 employ 10 wage-workers or more—a total of 887,or an average of 19. 
2 wage-workers per establishment. 
 be wrong to describe the economic relations in large-scale factory industry without mentioning the size of the manu-facturers’ incomes, so is it wrong to describe the economics of “handicraft” industry without mentioning the incomesof the buyers-up—incomes obtained from the same industryin which handicraftsmen are also engaged, and constitutingpart of the value of goods produced by handicraftsmen. 
 Weare therefore entitled, in fact we are obliged, to conclude that the actual distribution of incomes in handicraft indus-try is far more uneven than was shown above, for the cate-gories which include the largest industrialists of all havebeen omitted. 
 ARTICLE THREE (VI. 
 What Is a Buyer-Up?—VII. 
 “Gratifying Features” of Handicraft Industry. 
—VIII. 
 The Narodnik Programme of Industrial Policy) VI WHAT IS A BUYER-UP? Above we called the buyers-up the biggest of the indus-trialists. 
 From the ordinary Narodnik viewpoint, this isheresy. 
 It is customary to depict our buyers-up as individ-uals who take no part in production, who are extraneous and alien to industry itself, and depend “solely” on ex-change. 
 This is not the place to dwell in detail on the theoretical fallacies contained in this view, which is based on a failureto understand the general and principal groundwork, found-ation, or background of present-day industry (handicraft industry included)—namely, commodity economy , of which merchant capital is an essential component, and not a cas-ual and incidental adjunct. 
 Here we must stick to the factsand figures of the handicraft census, and our task will nowbe to examine and analyse the data on buyers-up. 
 A circum-stance favouring this examination is the fact that handicrafts-men who work for buyers-up have been put into a separate sub-group (the third). 
 But this advantage is outweighed bythe great number of omissions and uninvestigated factors,which rather seriously complicates our inquiry. 
 No data areavailable on the number of buyers-up, on large buyers-upand small, on their ties with the well-to-do handicraftsmen (ties of origin, ties between the commercial operations of the buyer-up and production in his workshop, etc. 
), on thebusiness of the buyer-up. 
 The Narodnik prejudice of treat-ing the buyer-up as extraneous prevented most investi-gators of handicraft industry from examining business doneby buyers-up, although this is obviously a prime and prin- /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR cipal question for the economist. 
 A careful and detailed study should be made of the business methods of the buyer-up, how his capital is built up, how this capital operates in the purchase of raw material and the sale of the product,what are the conditions (social and economic) in which cap-ital operates in these spheres, what expenses he incurs inorganising purchases and sales, how these expenses varyaccording to the amount of merchant capital and the vol-ume of purchases and sales, and what conditions sometimes induce the buyer-up to process the raw material partly inhis own workshops and then to give out the semi-finishedproduct to domestic workers for further processing (thefinal finishing process sometimes being done by the buyer-up himself), and sometimes to sell the raw material to small industrialists, in order, later, to buy their wares in the mar-ket. 
 A comparison should be made between the cost of pro-duction of an article turned out by a small handicraftsman,by a large producer in a workshop where several wage-work-ers are employed, and by a buyer-up who gives out mate-rial to be worked up by domestic workers. 
 The unit of in-vestigation should be each enterprise , that is, each separate buyer-up, and it is necessary to determine the amount of histurnover, the number of persons working for him in his work-shop or workshops, or in their own homes, the number ofworkers he employs to acquire raw materials, to store themand the finished product, and to sell the latter. 
 A comparison should be made between the technique of production (number and quality of implements and fixtures, division of labour , etc. 
) used by the small master, the workshop owner who em-ploys wage-workers, and by the buyer-up. 
 Only such aneconomic investigation can give an exact scientific answer to the questions: what is a buyer-up, what is his significance in the economic process and in the historical development of the forms of industry under commodity production. 
 Theabsence of such information in the conclusions of the house-to-house census, which made a detailed study of all these ques-tions for each handicraftsman, cannot but be regarded as aserious omission. 
 Even if it was impossible (for some reason or another) to register and investigate the business of each buyer-up, much of this information could have beendrawn from the household data on handicraftsmen who work for buyers-up. 
 Instead, we find nothing in the Sketch but hackeyed Narodnik phrases, such as: the “kulak” is “essentially alien to production itself” (p. 
 7)—the kulak category being extended to include both buyers-up and ownersof assembly workshops, on the one hand, and usurers, on theother; “wage-labour is governed not by its technical concen-tration, as in the case of the factory (?), but by the mone-tary dependence of the handicraftsmen ... one of the forms of kulakism” (309-10); “the source of the exploitation of labour ... lies in the function of exchange, and not in thefunction of production” (101); or what we often meetwith in the handicraft industries is not the “capitalisationof production,” but the “capitalisation of the process ofexchange” (265). 
 Of course, we have no intention of accusing the Sketch investigators of originality: they simply bor-rowed wholesale the maxims scattered so profusely in theworks of, say, “our well-known” Mr. 
 V. 
 V. 
 In order to judge the true value of such phrases, we have only to remember, for example, that in one of our principalindustries, textiles, the “buyer-up” was the immediate fore-runner, the father, of the big manufacturer engaged in large-scale machine production. 
 All our textile industriesbegan with supplying yarn to be worked up by handicrafts-men at home; this, in other words, was work for the “buyer-up,” for the “kulak,” who, while possessing no workshop ofhis own (“was alien to production”), “merely” supplied the yarn, and took the finished goods. 
 Our good Narodniks did not even attempt to investigate the origin of these buyers-up, their genealogical connections with the owners of smallworkshops, their role as organisers of the buying of raw ma-terials and the selling of products, the role of their capitalin concentrating means of production, in gathering together masses of scattered small handicraftsmen, in introducing division of labour, and in creating the elements of what isnot only large-scale production but which is also becomingmachine production. 
 Our good Narodniks confined themselvesto whining and complaining about this “deplorable,” “artifi-cial,” etc. 
, etc. 
, phenomenon; they consoled themselves with the belief that this was not the “capitalisation” of production, but “merely” of the process of exchange, and talked sentimen-tally about “different paths for the fatherland. 
” Meanwhile these “artificial” and “unsubstantial” “kulaks” kept on follow-ing their old path, continued to concentrate capital, to “gath-er together” means of production and producers, to extend their purchases of raw materials, to further the division of pro-duction into separate operations (warping, weaving, dyeing,finishing, etc. 
) and to transform scattered, technically back-ward capitalist manufacture , based on hand labour and ser-vitude, into capitalist machine industry . 
 An exactly similar process is now taking place in the bulk of our so-called “handicraft” industries; and the Narodniksin just the same way shun an investigation of realities asthey develop, in just the same way replace a discussion ofthe origin of existing relations and their evolution by a dis-cussion of what might be ( if what is were not), in just the same way-console themselves with the thought that so far these are “merely” buyers-up, and in just the same way ideal-ise and paint in rosy colours the worst forms of capitalism—worst in technical backwardness, economic imperfection,and the social and cultural conditions of the working masses. 
 Let us turn to the data of the Perm handicraft census. 
 Wherever necessary, we shall endeavour to make good the above-mentioned omissions by drawing upon Handicraft Industries of Perm Gubernia , etc. 
, a book to which we have already referred. 
 Let us first of all pick out the industrieswhich account for the bulk of the handicraftsmen employedby buyers-up (third sub-group). 
 For this purpose we shall have to turn to our own summary, which (as already men-tioned) does not coincide with the Sketch figures. 
 Numbers of families working for buyers-upIndustry Group I Group II Total Bootmaking . 
 . 
 ...... 3 1 6 0 5 6 3 6 Felt-boot . 
 . 
 . 
 ...... 6 0 7 1 2 6 1 9 Ironworking . 
 . 
 ...... 7 0 4 1 2 4 8 2 Bast-matting . 
 . 
 ...... 1 3 2 1 0 1 4 2 Carpentry and joinery. 
 . 
 . 
 . 
 . 
 38 49 87 Vehicle building . 
 ...... 3 2 2 8 6 0 T a i l o r i n g ......... 4 4 2 4 6 Total for 7 industries . 
 . 
 . 
 914 1,158 2,072 Total number of handicrafts-men in third sub-group . 
 . 
 . 
 1,016 1,320 2,336 Thus, about nine-tenths of the handicraftsmen working for buyers-up are concentrated in these seven industries. 
 It is to these industries that we shall turn first. 
 Let us begin with the bootmaking industry. 
 The over-whelming majority of the bootmakers who work for buyers-up are in Kungur Uyezd, the centre of the leather industryin Perm Gubernia. 
 A large number of handicraftsmen workfor leather manufacturers: on p. 
 87 of the Sketch mention is made of 8 buyers-up, who have 445 establishments working for them. 
 * All these buyers-up have been leather goods manufacturers “for ages,” and their names may be found inthe Directory of Factories for 1890 and 1879, and in the notes to the Ministry of Finance Yearbook , Issue I for 1869. 
 119 The leather goods manufacturers cut out the leather and in this form distribute it to the “handicraftsmen” to be sewn. 
 The lasting is done separately, by several fami-lies, who work to the order of the manufacturers. 
 Generallyspeaking, a whole number of “handicraft” industries areconnected with the leather goods factories, that is, a whole se-ries of operations are done in the home. 
 These include 1) dress-ing of hides and skins; 2) sewing of uppers; 3) gluing of leather clippings into boards for stiffeners; 4) making ofscrews for boots; 5) making of brads for boots; 6) last making;7) preparation of ash for the tanneries; 8) making of “tan”(from willow bark). 
 The scrap and waste of the leatherindustry are used by the felt and glue-making indus-tries ( Handicraft Industries , III, pp. 
 3-4, et al. 
). 
 In addi-tion to detailed division of labour (i. 
e. 
, division of theproduction of an article into several operations performedby different persons), a commodity division of labour hasarisen in this industry: each family (sometimes even eachstreet in a handicraft village) produces one kind of foot-wear. 
 There is an amusing point we must mention—in Handi-craft Industries , etc. 
 , the “Kungur leather industry” is de-clared to be a “typical expression of the idea of the organicconnection between factory and handicraft industry to theirmutual advantage” (sic!) ... the factory entering into a *These include two buyers-up (Ponomaryov and Fominsky) who have 217 establishments working for them. 
 Altogether, thereare 470 bootmaking establishments working for buyers-up in KungurUyezd. 
 correct (sic!) association with handicraft industry, with the object, in its own interests (exactly!), of developing and not reducing ... its capacity (III, p. 
 3). 
 For example, Fominsky, the manufacturer, was awarded a gold medal at the 1887Ekaterinburg Exhibition not only for the excellent qualityof his leather, but also for his “extensive operations, which furnish work for the surrounding population ” (ibid. 
, p. 
 4, author’s italics). 
 Indeed, of the 1,450 persons he employed, 1,300 were domestic workers. 
 Of the 120 persons employed by Sartakov, another manufacturer, 100 were domestic work-ers, etc. 
 Hence the Perm manufacturers vie very success-fully with the Narodnik intellectuals in implanting and de-veloping handicraft industries.... 
 The organisation of the bootmaking industry in Krasno-ufimsk Uyezd ( Handicraft Industries , I, pp. 
 148-49) is in every way analogous; the leather goods manufacturers alsostitch leather boots, partly in their workshops, partlyby giving the work out to domestic workers. 
 One of thebiggest of the owners of a leather and boot establishmentemploys about 200 regular workers. 
 We are now in a position to form a fairly clear idea of the economic organisation of the bootmaking and of many otherallied “handicraft” industries. 
 They are nothing but branches of large capitalist workshops (“factories,” according tothe terminology used in our official statistics), performingnothing but detailed operations in the large-scale capitalist manufacture of leather goods. 
 The entrepreneurs have organ-ised the buying of materials on a broad scale, have set upfactories for tanning the hides, and have established a wholeorganisation for the further processing of the leather based onthe division of labour (as the technical condition) and wage-la-bour (as the economic condition): some of the operations (such as cutting out leather for boots) are performed in their workshops, others are performed by “handicraftsmen” whowork for them in their homes, the employers determiningthe amount of output, the rates of payment, the kind of goodsto be made, and the quantity of each kind. 
 They have also organised the wholesale marketing of the product. 
 Obvious-ly, in scientific terminology this is nothing but capitalist manufacture , in part already passing into the higher form of factory industry (inasmuch as machines and machinery are used in production: the big leather factories have steam engines). 
 To single out parts of this system of manufacture as a separate “handicraft” form of production is a patent ab-surdity, which only obscures the basic fact that wage-labourprevails in the leather goods production and bootmaking andthat the entire trade is under the sway of big capital. 
 In-stead of comical arguments on the desirability of a “co-op-erative organisation of exchange” in this industry ( Sketch , p 93), it would not be amiss to make a detailed study of its actual organisation, a study of the conditions which makeit preferable for the manufacturers to give out work to bedone in the home. 
 The manufacturers undoubtedly find itmore profitable, and we shall understand why if we bear inmind the low earnings of the handicraftsmen in general, and in particular of the handicraft agriculturists and those of the third sub-group. 
 By giving out material to be workedup at home, the employers lower wages, economise on prem-ises, partly on implements, and on supervision, evade thenot always welcome demands made on manufacturers (theyare not manufacturers but merchants!), get workers who are more scattered, disunited, and less capable of self-defence, and also unpaid taskmasters for these workers—“middle-men,” “subcontractors” (as they are called in our textile indus-try under the system of giving out yarn to be used in thehome)—in the shape of those handicraftsmen they employand who, in their turn , employ wage-workers (it was found that the 636 families who make boots for buyers-up employ 278 wage-workers). 
 We have already seen from the general tablethat these wage-workers (in the third sub-group) receive thelowest wages of all. 
 And this is not surprising, for they aresubjected to double exploitation: exploitation by their ownemployer who squeezes his “own little profit” out of the workers, and exploitation by the leather goods manufactur-er who gives out material to the small masters. 
 We knowthat these small middlemen, who are well familiar with localconditions and with the personal characteristics of the work-ers, are particularly prolific in inventing different forms ofextortion, in practising bondage hiring, the truck system , *120 etc. 
 The excessive working hours in these workshops and *These words are in English in the original. 
— Ed. 
 “handicraftsmen’s huts” are common knowledge, and one cannot help regretting that the 1894-95 handicraft census has furnished practically no information on subjects so important for the study of our native sweating system ,* with its host of middlemen who intensify the pressure on the workersand its utterly shameless and unrestricted exploitation. 
 On the organisation of the felt-boot industry (the second largest as regards the absolute number of families working for buyers-up) the Sketch , unfortunately, gives practically no information whatever. 
 We have seen that in this industrythere are handicraftsmen who employ dozens of wage-work-ers, but whether they give out work to be done at home, getpart of the operations done outside their workshops, ** was not made clear. 
 Let us only note a fact mentioned by the investigators, that the sanitary conditions in the felt-boot- industry are extremely unsatisfactory ( Sketch , p. 
 119; Hand-icraft Industries , III, 16)—intolerable heat, excessive dust, stifling atmosphere. 
 And this in the cottages the handi-craftsmen live in! The natural result is that they are unableto stand more than fifteen years of this work and end as consumptives. 
 I. 
 I. 
 Molleson, an investigator of workshop sanitary conditions, says: “The chief contingent of felt-bootmakers consists of workers between the ages of 13 and 30. 
They are nearly all easily recognisable by their pallor, dullcomplexion, and their languid and sickly appearance ” (III,- p. 
 145, author’s italics). 
 The practical conclusion drawn by this investigator is: “It should be made incumbent on the employers to build workshops (felt-boot) of much largersize, so as to provide a specified constant volume of air perworker”; the “workshops should be designed exclusively forwork, and it should be strictly forbidden to allow workers tosleep in them at night” (ibid. 
). 
 In other words, the sanitary inspectors demand the building of factories for these handi-craftsmen and the prohibition of work in the home. 
 Onecannot help hoping that this recommendation will be acted *These words are in English in the original. 
— Ed. 
 **The felt industry in the Arzamas and Semyonov uyezds of Nizhni-Novgorod Gubernia is organised on those lines. 
 See Tran-sactions of the Commission of Inquiry into Handicraft Industryand the Material of the Nizhni-Novgorod Zemstvo Statistical De-partment. 
 upon, for it would promote technical progress by eliminat-ing a host of middlemen and would pave the way for the regulation of working hours and working conditions; in a word, it would eliminate the most crying abuses in our“people’s” industry. 
 Among the buyers-up in the bast-matting industry is a merchant named Butakov, who, we learn from informationfor 1879, had a bast-matting factory in the town of Osa, which employed 180 workers. 
 * Has this manufacturer to be regarded as “alien to production itself,” just because hehas found it more profitable to give out the work to be doneat home? It would also be interesting to know in what waythe buyers-up who have been thrown out of the list of handi-craftsmen differ from those “handicraftsmen” who, having no family workers, “purchase bast and give it out to craftsmen to make into matting and sacks on their own looms” ( Sketch , 152)—a striking illustration of the confusion into which theinvestigators have been led by Narodnik prejudices. 
 The sani-tary conditions in this industry will also not bear criticism—overcrowding, filth, dust, damp, foul smells and long work-ing hours (12 to 15 a day), all of which turns the centres of the industry into veritable “hotbeds of famine typhus,” ** of which, in fact, there have been frequent outbreaks. 
 On the organisation of work for buyers-up in the ironwork-ing industry, we again learn nothing from the Sketch and are again obliged to turn to Handicraft Industries, etc. 
 , which contains a very interesting description of this indus-try in Nizhni-Tagil. 
 The manufacture of trays and otherarticles is divided among several establishments: forging , tinning , and decorating . 
 Some of the handicraft masters have establishments of all these kinds, and are consequentlymanufacturers of the pure type. 
 Others perform one of the operations in their own workshops and then give out the articles to handicraftsmen for tinning and decorating intheir homes. 
 Here, consequently, the uniformity of the eco-nomic organisation of the industry—both when the workis given out to be done in the home and when several detail *Directory of Factories for 1879 . 
 The matting makers working for buyers-up are mostly concentrated in Osa Uyezd. 
 **Sketch , p. 
 157. 
 workshops belong to one master—stands out very clearly. 
 The handicraftsmen who act as buyers-up, giving out work to be done at home, are among the biggest masters (of whom there are 25) who have organised the most profitable pur-chase of raw material and the marketing of the product ona large scale; these twenty-five handicraftsmen (and theyalone) take their goods to the fair or have their own shops. 
In addition to them, the big “manufacturer traders” are also buyers-up; they exhibited their wares at the Factory De-partment of the Ekaterinburg Exhibition. 
 The author ofthe book classes them under “factory-handicraft (sic!)industry” ( Handicraft Industries , I, pp. 
 98-99). 
 Thus, on the whole, we get a very typical picture of capitalist manu-facture, interwoven in the most diverse and fantastic ways with small establishments. 
 In order to demonstrate clearly how little the division of industrialists into “handicrafts-men” and “manufacturers,” into producers and “buyers-up,”helps us to understand these complex relations, let us takethe figures given in this book and show the economic rela-tions in the industry in a table: Independent production forProduction for buyers-upthe market Total Estab-output Estab-lish-Total (t hou-lish-Total ments sand m ents rubles) A. 
 “F a c t o r y -h a n d i c r a f t i n d u s t r y” ?? ? ? 6 0 #7 (“manufacturer traders”) a) 29 51 39 90 b) 39 53 79 132 B. 
 “H a n d i c r a f t i n d u s t r y” 68 104 118 222 25 (handicraftsman buyers-up) 95 # 30 16 88 161 249 8 163 # 37 200,000 rubles = total output of the entire Nizhni-Tagil industry a) Handicraftsmen dependent on others for marketing. 
 b) Handicraftsmen dependent on others for both marketing and production. 
Family Wage-Family Wage-workers workers workers workers « ’ ’ ‘’ »{ { { And now we shall be told that the buyers-up, like the usurers, are “alien to production itself,” that their domi-nation merely implies the “capitalisation of the process of exchange,” and not the “capitalisation of production”! Another highly typical instance of capitalist manufacture is the chest-making industry ( Sketch , pp. 
 334-39; Handi-craft Industries , I, pp. 
 31-40). 
 It is organised as follows: a few big proprietors who own workshops employing wage-workers purchase the materials, partly manufacture the goods in their own workshops, but mainly give out materialto small detailed workshops, subsequently assembling thevarious parts of the chest in their own workshops and send-ing the finished article to market. 
 Division of labour—thetypical condition and technical basis of manufacture—is widely employed in production: the making of a complete chest is divided into ten or twelve detailed operationseach performed by different handicraftsmen. 
 Thus, theorganisation of the industry consists in combining detailworkers (Theilarbeiter, as they are called in Das Kapital ) under the command of capital . 
 Why capital prefers to give out work to be done at home rather than employ wage-workers in a workshop is made quite clear by thedata provided in the 1894-95 handicraft census on the estab-lishments of the Nevyansk Factory, Ekaterinburg Uyezd(one of the centres of the industry), where, side by side with assembly workshops, we also meet with detail handicrafts-men. 
 Hence a comparison between the two is quite possi-ble. 
 Here are comparative figures given in a table (on p. 
 173of the tables): Number of Gross Wages Net income Chest-income makers of Nevyansk Factory “Buyers II 1 2 1 13 14 5,850 418 1,300 100 1,617 808. 
5* -up” “Handi-II 3 8 11 8 19 1,315 70. 
3 351 44 984 89. 
4 craftsmen” *Per establishment. 
Group Sub-group Number ofestablishmentsFamilyworkersWage-work-ers Total Total Perworker Total Per wage-worker Total Per familyworker Before examining this table, we must say that if we had taken the data for the entire first and third sub-groups( Sketch , p. 
 335) and not for the Nevyansk Factory alone, the conclusions would have been the same. 
 The gross income in the two sub-groups obviously cannot be compared, for the same material passes through the hands of variousdetail workers and through the assembly workshops. 
 Butthe data for incomes and wages are characteristic. 
 We findthat the wages of hired workers in the assembly workshopsare higher than the incomes of the dependent handicrafts-men (100 rubles and 89 rubles respectively), notwithstand-ing the fact that the latter exploit wage-workers in theirturn. 
 But the wages of these latter are less than half those of the workers in the assembly workshops. 
 Why, then, shouldour employers not prefer “handicraft” industry to factoryindustry, when the former yields them such substantial “advantages”! We find a fully analogous organisation of production for the buyers-up in the vehicle-building industry( Sketch , p. 
 308, et. 
 seq. 
; Handicraft Industries , I, p. 
 42, et. 
 seq. 
)—the same assembly workshops, whose owners are“buyers-up” (and work-distributors, work-givers) in relationto the handicraftsmen who make the parts, and the earnings of the wage-worker in the workshop are again higher than the income of the dependent handicraftsman (not to mentionhis wage-worker). 
 These higher wages are recorded for bothagriculturists (Group I) and non-agriculturists (Group II). 
In the cabinet-making industry, the buyers-up are the fur-niture shops in the city of Perm ( Sketch , 133; Handicraft Industries , II, 11) that supply the handicraftsmen with models when placing orders, and in this way, inci-dentally, have “gradually improved the technique of pro-duction. 
” In the tailoring trade, the ready-made clothing shops in Perm and Ekaterinburg give out material to be made up by handicraftsmen. 
 As we know, an exactly similar organisa-tion of the tailoring and dressmaking industry also existsin other capitalist countries, in Western Europe and Amer-ica. 
 The difference between the “capitalist” West and Rus-sia, with her “people’s industry,” is that this state of affairs /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR is called the Schwitz-system * in the West and means are sought to combat this worst of all systems of exploitation; the German tailors, for example, demand that the mastersshould build factories (that is, are “artificially implanting capitalism,” as the Russian Narodnik would put it)—whereas in our country this “sweating system” is benignly called“handicraft industry” and its superiority to capitalism is argued and discussed. 
 We have now examined all the industries in which the vast majority of handicraftsmen employed by buyers-up are engaged. 
 What are the results of our review. 
 We have be-come convinced of the absolute unsoundness of the Narodnikcontention that the buyers-up, and even the assembly work-shop masters, are mere usurers, elements alien to produc-tion, and so on. 
 Despite the above-mentioned inadequacyof the Sketch data, despite the absence in the census pro-gramme of questions about the business conducted by the buyers-up, we have succeeded in establishing, for most ofthe industries, intimate ties between the buyers-up and pro-duction—even their direct participation in production, “participation” as owners of shops which employ wage-work-ers. 
 Nothing could be more absurd than the opinion that working for buyers-up is merely the result of some abuse, of some accident, of some “capitalisation of the process of ex-change” and not of production. 
 The contrary is true: working for a buyer-up is a special form of production , a special organ-isation of economic relations in production—an organi-sation which has directly sprung from small commodity production (“petty people’s production,” as it is customary to call it in our lofty literature), and which to this day isconnected with it by a thousand threads; for it is the most prosperous petty masters, the most go-ahead “handicraftsmen,” who lay the basis for this system by extending their opera-tions through supplying work to domestic workers. 
 Work for buyers-up is directly associated with the capitalist work-*Sweating system. 
— Ed. 
 shop employing wage-workers, and often just constitutes an extension of it or one of its departments; it is sim-ply an adjunct of the factory , understanding this latter ex-pression in the generally accepted and not the scientific sense. 
 In the scientific classification of forms of industry in their successive development, work for buyers-up belongs toa considerable extent to capitalist manufacture , since 1) it is based on hand production and on the existence of many small establishments; 2) it introduces division of labour be-tween these establishments and develops it also within the workshop; 3) it places the merchant at the head of produc-tion, as is always the case in manufacture, which presup-poses production on an extensive scale, and the wholesale purchase of raw material and marketing of the product; 4) it reduces those who work to the status of wage-workers en-gaged either in a master’s workshop or in their own homes. 
 These features, as we know, are typical of the scientific con-ception of manufacture as a special stage in the develop-ment of capitalism in industry (see Das Kapital , I, Kapital XII). 
 121 This form of industry, then, already implies the deep-going rule of capitalism, being the direct predecessorof its last and highest form—large-scale machine industry. 
 Work for the buyer-up is consequently a backward form of capitalism, and in contemporary society this backwardnesshas the effect of seriously worsening the conditions of the working people, who are exploited by a host of middlemen (the sweating system *, are disunited, are compelled to content themselves with the lowest wages and to work under the most insanitary conditions and for extremely long hours, and—what is most important—under condi-tions which render public control of production extremely difficult. 
 We have now concluded our review of the 1894-95 handi-craft census data. 
 This review has fully confirmed the state-ment made above regarding the utter meaninglessness of the term “handicraft industry,” We have seen that this *These words are in English in the original. 
— Ed. 
 term has been used to cover the most diverse forms of industry, we might even say: practically every form of in-dustry known to science . 
 And, indeed, the term has been made to include patriarchal artisans who work for private cus-tomers using the customers’ own materials and receivingremuneration sometimes in kind, sometimes in cash. 
 Further,it has been made to include representatives of an entirelydifferent form of industry—the small commodity producers who work together in families. 
 It has been made to include owners of capitalist workshops who employ wage-workers,and also these wage-workers themselves, who sometimesnumber several dozen to an establishment. 
 It has been madeto include manufactory owners who possess capital in consid-erable quantity and command a whole system of detail workshops. 
 It has likewise been made to include workers em-ployed at home for capitalists. 
 In all these subdivisions,both agriculturists and non-agriculturists, peasants and towndwellers have equally been regarded as “handicraftsmen. 
”The confusion is by no means peculiar to this particularinvestigation of the Perm handicrafts. 
 Not at all. 
 It is to be met with whenever and wherever anything is said or written about “handicraft” industry. 
 Anybody who is familiar, forexample, with the Transactions of the Commission of In-quiry into Handicraft Industry knows that it, too, classes all these categories as handicraftsmen. 
 And it is a fa-vourite method of our Narodnik economists to lump to-gether this endless variety of forms of industry, to call this jumble “handicraft,” “people’s” industry, and—risumteneatis, amici! *—to contrast this meaningless hodge-podge with “capitalism,” with “factory industry. 
” This ad-mirable method, which testifies to the remarkable profun-dity and erudition of its initiator, was, if we are not mistaken, “theoretically justified” by Mr. 
 V. 
 V. 
, who on the very first pages of his Essays on Handicraft Industry takes the official figures for the number of “factory” workers in Moscow,Vladimir and other gubernias, compares them with thenumber of “handicraftsmen,” and finds, of course, that “peo-ple’s industry” in Holy Russia is developed to a far greater extent than “capitalism. 
” But our “authoritative” economist *Restrain your laughter, friends!— Ed. 
 very wisely remains silent on the fact, established time and again by investigators, * that the overwhelming majority of these “handicraftsmen” also work for manufacturers . 
 The compilers of the Sketch , faithful to Narodnik prejudices, have used the same method. 
 Although the total annualoutput of “handicraft” industry in Perm Gubernia amountsto only 5 million rubles, ** and that of “factory” industry to 30 million rubles, “the number of persons employed in factory industry amounts to 19,000 and in handicraft indus-try, to 26,000” (p. 
 364). 
 The classification, you see, isalmost touching in its simplicity: a) Factory workers ...... 19,000 b) Handicraftsmen ...... 26,000 Total . 
 . 
 . 
 . 
 45,000 Naturally, such a classification offers endless scope for reflections on the “possibility of a different path for the fa-therland”! But it is not for nothing that we have before us the data of the handicraft household census which investigated theforms of industry. 
 We shall attempt to give a classificationthat corresponds to the census data (of which the Narodnik classification is a sheer mockery) and to the various forms of industry. 
 We shall apply the percentages revealed by the census for 20,000 workers, to the higher figure of 26,000 de-rived by the authors from other sources. 
 *If nothing more, see Mr. 
 Kharizomenov’s article, “The Im-portance of Handicraft Industry,” in Yuridichesky Vestnik ,122 1883, Nos. 
 11 and 12, which contains a summary of the statistical ma-terial then available. 
 **Not to mention the curious way in which this figure was arrived at. 
 For instance, the largest component is the flour-milling industry (1,200,000 rubles), arrived at by including the total valueof the grain ground by the millers! In the tables and in the descrip-tion given in the Sketch , only the gross income of 143,000 rubles was taken (see p. 
 358 and note). 
 The bootmaking industry accounts for430,000 rubles, a substantial part of which consists of the turnover of the Kungur factory owners ; and so on, and so forth. 
 Number of workers Total 45,000 100% We are fully aware that there are errors even in this clas-sification: it does not include factory owners, but does in-clude handicraftsmen who employ dozens of wage-workers; some manufactory owners have been included acciden-tally, but not specified, while others have not been includedA. 
 Commodity Production I. 
 Workers capitalistically employed. 
 (1) “Factory” workers (average, ac-cording to statistics for the seven years,1885-91, 14. 
6 workers per establishment) (2) Wage-workers employed by “handi-craftsmen” (25% of total). 
 (One-fourth of these are employed in establishments averaging 14. 
6 workers per establishment) . 
 . 
 . 
 .......... 
 (3) Workers engaged at home in the employ of buyers-up, i. 
e. 
, working membersof handicraftsmen’s families in the thirdsub-group—20%. 
 (Many of these work for the same em-ployers as the workers under items 1 and 2) II. 
 Small commodity producers, i. 
 e. 
, handicraftsmen’s families in the first sub-group—30%. 
 (About one-third of these employ wage-workers) . 
 ............. 
. 
 B. 
 Artisan Production Rural (and partly urban) artisans, i. 
 e. 
, handicraftsmen’s families in the second sub-group—25%. 
 (A small proportion of these also em-ploy wage-workers) . 
 .......... 
19,000 42. 
2% 6,500 14. 
4% 30,700 68. 
2% 5,200 11. 
6% 7,800 17. 
4% 6,500 14. 
4%« ’ ’ ’’‘’’ ’ ’» having been discarded as “buyers-up”; it includes urban artisans of one town, but not of eleven other towns, and so on. 
 At any rate, this classification is based on the census data on forms of industry , and the errors mentioned are errors in these data, and not errors of classification. 
 * In any case, this classification gives an accurate ideaof the real state of affairs, it explains the real social andeconomic relations of the various participants in industry, and, consequently, their status and their interests—and such an explanation is the supreme task of any scientificeconomic investigation. 
 VII “GRATIFYING FEATURES” OF HANDICRAFT INDUSTRY We might be accused of one-sidedness, of accentuating only the dark sides of handicraft industry, were we to passover in silence the facts mentioned in the Sketch which are intended to stress its “bright side” and “gratifying features. 
” We are told, for example, that wage-labour in handi-craft industry has a character of its own, for here the wage-worker lives in “close contact” with the master, and“may” himself become a master. 
 The “gratifying feature”here, then, is the benign wish to turn all workers into small masters! ** Incidentally, not all—only some, for “the tendency to exploit the labour of others is undoubt-edly characteristic of all men in general, including thehandicraftsman” ( Sketch , p. 
 6). 
 This sentence is sim-ply inimitable for the naïveté with which “all men” arewithout further ado identified with the petty bourgeois! It is not surprising that those who look at the world through petty-bourgeois spectacles should discover suchremarkable truths. 
 On p. 
 268, a small factory employing *The objection may be raised that the wage-workers employed by artisan handicraftsmen (20% of the wage-workers employed byhandicraftsmen) should be classed under artisan and not com-modity production. 
 But here labour-power is itself a commodity, and its purchase and sale is an essential feature of capitalism. 
 **Not a word is said as to how this “close contact” reacts on the system and correctness of payment, the methods of hire, theenslavement of the worker, the truck system [these words are in English in the original. 
— Ed. 
], and so on. 
 eight wage-workers and with an output of 10,000 rubles is proclaimed to be “by its labour situation (sic!) a handi-craft enterprise in the strict sense of the term. 
” On pp. 
 272-74, we are told how another small manufacturer(employing seven wage-workers and five apprentices, andwith an output of 7,000 rubles) erected a blast furnace ona site rented from a village community and applied to theHandicraft Bank for a loan of 5,000 rubles with which to erect a furnace, explaining that his “whole enterprise is of purely local interest, inasmuch as the ore will be minedon community allotments by the local peasants them-selves. 
” The bank refused the loan for purely formal reasons. 
And the Sketch uses this as a peg on which to hang an attractive picture of the conversion of this enterprise into a co-operative: “this will undoubtedly please the employer, as one who has at heart the interests of the fellow com-munity members around him and not only those of theindustry. 
” The enterprise “embraces numerous labour inter-ests of the fellow community members, who will be miningore and felling timber and carrying them to the factory. 
” “Householders will deliver ore, charcoal, etc. 
, to the factory, just as the womenfolk deliver milk to the public cheesefactory. 
 Of course, this presupposes a more complex organi-sation than that of a public cheese factory, especially if thelocal skilled and unskilled labourers are employed in run-ning the business itself, that is, smelting iron from ore. 
” How idyllic! Manual labourers (“fellow community mem-bers”) will “deliver” ore, fuel and the rest “to the factory,”just as peasant women deliver milk to the cheese factory!We will not deny that the Handicraft Bank can (if its bureau-cratic organisation does not prevent it) perform the samesort of service as other banks in developing commodity production and capitalism, but it would be very sad indeed if it were at the same time to develop the pharisaism andManilov chit-chat of loan-seeking employers. 
 So far we have seen how enterprises employing large num-bers of wage-workers have been proclaimed “handicraft” onthe ground that their owners work themselves. 
 But for petty-bourgeois people this condition would be rather restrictive, and so the Sketch endeavours to expand it: it appears that an enterprise which “is conducted solely with the help of wage-labour” may also be a handicraft enterprise, provided that its “success” depends upon the owner’s “personal parti-cipation” (p. 
 295), or even if the owners “are obliged to con-fine their participation to the various worries involved inrunning the industry” (p. 
 301). 
 Our Perm Narodniks are mak-ing splendid “progress,” are they not? “Personal labour”—”personal participation”—”various worries. 
” Mein Liebchen,was willst du noch mehr? *123 Wage-labour in the brick industry, it appears, yields “special advantages” (302) to the wage-labourers, whom the brick kilns provide with “sup-plementary earnings”; yet the owners of these kilns often ex-perience “a shortage of money for the hire of workers. 
” The Sketch concludes that such owners should be granted credit facilities by the Handicraft Bank, “assigning such enter-prises, according to a note to Article 7, point 3 of the Handi-craft Bank Statutes, to specially deserving cases” (p. 
 302). 
Not very well put, but very impressive and portentous!“In conclusion,” we read at the end of the description of thebrick industry, “we find sufficient grounds for declaring thatamong the peasants in the brick industry the interests of masters and wage-workers have so much in common that although no artels have been formally registered in this in-dustry, actually there is a strong tie of companionship betweenthe masters and their wage-workers” (305). 
 We would referthe reader to the statistical picture of these “ties of companion-ship” given above. 
 It is also a curious fact—as a specimen of the confusion existing in Narodnik economic concepts— that the Sketch defends wage-labour and paints it in rosy colours by asserting that the kulak is not a master employ-ing wage-workers, but an owner of money capital who “ex-ploits labour in the person of the master handicraftsman andhis wage-workers” (!), and at the same time launches into the most irrational and immoderate defence of the kulaks: “kulakism, in whatever gloomy colours it may be painted,is so far a necessary wheel in the exchange mechanism of hand-icraft production.... 
 Kulakism should undoubtedly be regard-ed as a blessing insofar as the successes of the handicraftindustry are concerned, when compared with a situation under which the handicraftsman would be without work were *What more would you have, my dear?— Ed. 
 there no kulak or no finances available” (p. 
 8). 
 * How long will this “insofar” last? If it were said that merchant and usurycapital is a necessary factor in the development of capital-ism, a necessary wheel in the mechanism of a poorly devel-oped capitalist society (such as ours), that would be true. 
 Thus interpreted, the word “insofar” would mean: insofar as the innumerable restrictions on freedom of industry and freedom of competition (especially among the peasantry) continue topreserve the most backward and most pernicious forms of cap-italism in our country. 
 Only we fear that this interpretationwill not be to the liking of-the Perm or any other Narodniks! Let us now go over to the artels, those most direct and most important expressions of the alleged community principles which the Narodniks insist on finding in the handicraft indus-tries. 
 It will be interesting to examine the handicraft house-hold census data for the entire gubernia, a census whose programme specifically included the registration and studyof artels (p. 
 14, point 2). 
 We are accordingly in a position not only to acquaint ourselves with the various types of artels, but also to learn how widespread they are. 
 Take the oil-milling industry. 
 “Domestic artels in the strict sense of the term”: in the villages of Pokrovskoyeand Gavryata, two oil-mills are owned by five brothers, who have separated to form individual households, but who use the mills in turn. 
 These facts are of “profound interest,”for “they throw light on the contract conditions of communal-labour continuity in the handicraft industries. 
” Obviously,such domestic “artels are an important precedent to the spread-ing of factory-type industries among the handicraftsmen on co-operative lines” (pp. 
 175-76). 
 So then, the artel, in the strict sense of the term, as a precedent to co-operation and, as an *We find the same idea expressed in Handicraft Industries , I, p. 
 39, et. 
 seq. 
, in a controversy with the newspaper Dyelovoi Korres-pondent ,124 which said that the kulaks (masters of assembly work-shops in the chest-making industry) should not be included in the Handicraft Section. 
 “Our entire handicraft industry,” we read inreply, “is in bondage to private capital, so that if only those handi-craftsmen who trade in their own goods were included in the Handi-craft Section it would be as empty as an eggshell. 
” A highly signif-icant admission, is it not? Using the data of the census, we have shown above the meaning of this “bondage to private capital” which holds the handicraft industries in its grip. 
 expression of the communal principle, consists in property held in common by unseparated heirs !! If that is so, then obvi-ously the true palladium of the “communal principle” and “co-operation” is Roman civil law and Volume X of our code,125 with its institutions of the condominium, i. 
e. 
, propertyheld in common by heirs and non-heirs! “In the flour-milling industry ... the peasants’ artel spirit of enterprise found most vivid expression in peculiar do-mestic forms. 
” Many of the mills are jointly used by asso-ciations or even by whole villages. 
 Use of the mills: the mostwidespread method is by rotation; then comes division of thenet proceeds into shares proportionate to the expenses in-curred by each partner; in “such cases the associated ownersvery rarely take part themselves in production which is usually done by wage-labour” (p. 
 181; the same is true of the pitch-boiling artels—p. 
 197). 
 Truly an amazing pecu-liarity, and an amazing display of the artel principle—thecommon property of petty owners who jointly hire workers!On the contrary, the fact that the handicraftsmen use themills, pitch-boiling plants and smithies in rotation testifies to the astonishing disunity of the producers, whom even common property cannot induce to work co-operatively. 
 “One of the forms of artel organisation” is the “artel smithies” (239). 
 With the object of economising fuel, the mastersmiths jointly operate one smithy, hiring one labourer towork the bellows (economy in workers!) and renting both the premises and the hammer from the smithy owner in return for a special payment. 
 And so, the hiring out of articlesthat are the private property of one person to others for mon-ey is “artel organisation”! Verily, Roman law fully de-serves to be called the code of “artel organisation”! ... “In theartel organisation ... we find fresh evidence of the absence of class crystallisation in production among the handicrafts-men—evidence of the same merging of different strata of agriculturists and handicraftsmen that we observed in the case of the artel flour mills” (239). 
 And after this, there aremalicious persons who still dare to speak of the differentia-tion of the peasantry! Hitherto, therefore, we have not had a single instance of handicraftsmen combining to buy raw materials or to mar-ket the product, not to mention combination in production itself! Nevertheless, such combinations exist. 
 The Perm Gubernia handicraft household census registers as many as four of them . 
 They were all formed with the help of the Handicraft Bank—three in the vehicle-building trade, andone in the production of agricultural machines. 
 One of theartels employs wage-labour (two apprentices and two hired“auxiliary” workers). 
 In another, two partners use a smithyand a workshop belonging to a third partner, for which he receives special payment. 
 They buy raw material and market the product in common, but they work in separate workshops(except in the case of the smithy and workshop rented forcash). 
 Together, these four artels embrace 21 family work-ers. 
 The Perm Handicraft Bank has functioned for severalyears. 
 Let us assume that it will now “unite” (for the renting of a neighbour’s smithy) not 20, but 50 family workers a year . 
 All the 15,000 handicraft family workers will then be “united” in “artel organisations” in exactly 300 years. 
 Andwhen that job is done, they will begin “to unite” the handi-craftsmen’s wage-workers.... 
 And the Perm Narodniks exult:“These cardinal economic conceptions, evolved by the inde-pendent workings of the handicraftsmen’s minds, serve as a firm pledge of the economic progress of industry amongthem, based on labour’s independence of capital, for thesefacts speak not only of an elemental, but of a fully consciousaspiration of the handicraftsmen for labour independence”(p. 
 333). 
 Have mercy, gentlemen! It is impossible, of course, to picture Narodism without Manilovian phrase-mongering, but, after all, there’s a limit to everything! Not one of the ar-tels, as we have seen, expresses the “principle of labour’sindependence of capital”: they are all artels of masters andsmall masters, many of them employing wage-workers. 
 Thereis no co-operation in these artels; even the joint purchase of raw materials and sale of the product is ridiculously rare and embraces a surprisingly insignificant number of masters. 
 Itmay be safely said that there is no capitalist country in theworld where a register of nearly 9,000 small establishments,with 20,000 workers, would reveal such astonishing dispersion and backwardness of the producers; where among the latter one would find only a score or so cases of property owned in common , and less than a dozen cases of three to five owners uniting to buy raw materials and sell the product! Such dispersion would be the surest indication of unrelieved economic and cul-tural stagnation , if we did not, fortunately, see that capital-ism is day by day uprooting patriarchal handicraft, with the parochialism of its small self-sufficing proprietors, andbreaking down the small local markets (on which small pro-duction depends), replacing them by the national and theworld market, compelling the producers, not only of a village like Gavryata, but of a whole country, and even of several countries, to enter into association with each other, form-ing associations that are no longer merely of masters, bigand small, and confronting them with far wider problemsthan that of buying timber or iron more cheaply, or sellingnails or carts more profitably. 
 VIII THE NARODNIK PROGRAMME OF INDUSTRIAL POLICY Since practical recommendations and measures are always connected with what is considered to be “gratifying” andpromising in reality, one knows a priori what wishes for the handicraft industry would be expressed in the Sketch since it has reduced all “gratifying features” to drawing arose-coloured picture of wage-labour in petty economy and anexalted notion of the extremely scanty and one-sided associa-tions of small proprietors. 
 These wishes, a rehash of the usualNarodnik recipes, amaze one by their contradictory charac-ter, on the one hand, and by their inordinate exaggeration of commonplace “measures,” converted by phrase-mongeringinto solutions of great problems, on the other. 
 At the verybeginning of the Sketch , in the introduction, before the cen-sus data are even dealt with, we meet with verbose state-ments about the “task of handicraft credit” being “to over-come (sic!) the money shortage,” about the “co-operative organisation of exchange between production and consump-tion” (p. 
 8), about “spreading artel organisations,” establish-ing handicraft warehouses, technical advice bureaus, tech-nical schools, and the like (p. 
 9). 
 These statements recur inthe book over and over again. 
 “The economics of the industry must be so reorganised as to place the handicraftsmen in pos-session of money; or, to put it more plainly, to emancipatethe handicraftsman from the kulak” (119) “The task of our time” is to effect “the emancipation of the handicraftsman by means of credit,” etc. 
 (267). 
 “Exchange processes must be rationalised,” measures must be adopted “to implant rational principles of credit, exchange and production in peasantfarming” (362); what is needed is the “economic organisa-tion of labour” (sic!!—p. 
 363), “the rational arrangement ofthe economics of the national economy,” and so on, and soforth. 
 All this, as we see, is the familiar Narodnik panacea, tacked on to the census data. 
 And, as though in final confir-mation of their Narodnik orthodoxy, the compilers did notfail to condemn money economy in general, and for the read-er’s edification inform him that artisan production “per-forms a valuable service to the national economy, by afford-ing it the opportunity to avoid the conversion of natural economy into money economy. 
” “The national economy is vitally interested in demanding that the raw materials it pro-duces be worked up on the spot, as far as possible withoutthe intervention of money in the exchange processes” (p. 
 360). 
 Here we have the Narodnik programme expounded with a fullness and frankness that leave nothing to be desired! We say the “Narodnik programme,” for we are interested, not in what distinguishes the compilers of the Sketch from other Narodniks, but, on the contrary, in what they have in com-mon. 
 What interests us is the practical Narodnik programmefor the handicraft industries in general. 
 It is easy to see thatthe main features of this programme are saliently stressed in the Sketch : 1) condemnation of money economy and sym-pathy for natural economy and primitive artisan production;2) various measures for the encouragement of small peasantproduction, such as credits, technical developments, etc. 
;3) the spreading of associations and societies of all kindsamong the masters, big and small—raw material, warehous-ing, loan-and-savings, credit, consumers’ and producers’ societies; 4) “organisation of labour”—a current phrase inall and sundry Narodnik good intentions. 
 Let us examinethis programme. 
 To take first the condemnation of money economy: as far as industry is concerned, it is already of a purely Platon-ic character. 
 Even in Perm Gubernia, artisan production has already been forced far into the background by commodi-ty production, and is in such a pitiful state that we find the Sketch itself talking about the desirability of “emancipating the handicraftsman from dependence,” in other words, of abolishing the artisan’s dependence on the private custom-er “by seeking means of extending the marketing areabeyond the local consumption demand” (p. 
 33). 
 In otherwords, condemnation of money economy in theory and a de-sire to convert artisan production into commodity productionin practice! And this contradiction is by no means peculiar to the Sketch , it is characteristic of all Narodnik projects: however much they may kick against commodity (money)economy, realities driven out of the door fly in at the window,and the measures they advocate only serve to develop com-modity production. 
 Credit is an illustration of this. 
 In theirplans and proposals the Narodniks cannot dispense with com-modity economy. 
 The Sketch , for example, does not even hint that the proposed reforms should not be based on commodityeconomy. 
 On the contrary, all it wants is rational principlesof exchange , the co-operative organisation of exchange . 
 Com-modity economy remains, and is only to be reformed on ra-tional lines. 
 There is nothing new in this utopia; it had many an eminent exponent in the old economic literature. 
 Its theoretical unsoundness was disclosed long ago, so thatthere is no need to dwell on the subject here. 
 Instead of ut-tering absurd phrases about the necessity of “rationalising”economy, would they not do better first “to rationalise” theirnotions of the existing economy, of the socio-economic rela-tions existing among that extremely variegated and dissim-ilar mass of “handicraftsmen” whose destinies our Narod-niks wish to decide so bureaucratically and frivolously fromabove? Has not actual life shown us time and againthat Narodnik practical measures, concocted in accordancewith supposedly “pure” ideas on “organisation of labour,” etc. 
, lead in practice to nothing but encouragement and support for the “enterprising muzhik,” the small manufactur-er or the buyer-up and all the representatives of the pettybourgeoisie in general? This is not fortuitous, it is not becauseindividual measures are imperfect or unsuitable. 
 On thecontrary, given the general basis of commodity economy, it is the petty bourgeois above all and before all who inevitably and necessarily make use of credits, warehouses, banks,technical advice and the like. 
 But, it may be objected, if that is so, if the Narodniks in the practical measures they suggest, unconsciously and invol-untarily serve to develop the petty bourgeoisie, and, hence, capitalism in general, why should their programme be attackedby people who on principle regard the development of capital-ism as a progressive process? Is it reasonable to attack prac-tical and useful programmes because their ideological integ-ument is wrong, or, to put it mildly, debatable, for surely nobody will deny the “usefulness” of technical education, credits and of producers’ societies and associations? These are not imaginary objections. 
 In one form or another, in one connection or another, they are constantly to be heardin the replies to the arguments levelled against the Narod-niks. 
 We shall not dwell here on the point that even if such objections were justified, they do not in the least refute the fact that the dressing-up of petty-bourgeois projects asthe most exalted social panaceas is in itself a cause of gravesocial harm. 
 We intend to put the question on the practicalfooting of the vital and immediate needs of the times, andto judge the Narodnik programme from this deliberately narrowed viewpoint. 
 Although many of the Narodnik measures are of practical value in serving to develop capitalism, nevertheless, takenas a whole, they are 1) supremely inconsistent, 2) lifelesslydoctrinaire, and 3) paltry compared with the actual prob-lems with which developing capitalism confronts our indus-try. 
 Let us explain. 
 We have shown, firstly, how inconsist-ent the Narodniks are as practical men. 
 Side by side with the measures indicated above, which are usually describedas a liberal economic policy, and which have always beeninscribed on the banners of bourgeois leaders in the West, theNarodniks contrive to cling to their intention of retarding contemporary economic development, of preventing the progress of capitalism, and of supporting small production, which is being bled white in the struggle against large-scaleproduction. 
 They advocate laws and institutions whichrestrict the freedom of the mobilisation of land and freedom ofmovement, and which retain the peasantry as a closed social estate, etc. 
 Are there, we ask, any reasonable grounds for retarding the development of capitalism and big industry? We have seen from the census data that the notorious “inde-pendence” of the handicraftsmen is no guarantee that they will not be subordinated to merchant capital, to exploitation in its worst form; that actually the condition of the vast bulk of these “independent” handicraftsmen is often more wretched than that of the handicraftsmen’s wage-workers, and that their earnings are astonishingly low, their workingconditions (from the standpoint of sanitation and hours)highly unsatisfactory, and production scattered, technically primitive and undeveloped. 
 Are there, we ask, any reasona-ble grounds for perpetuating the police laws which reinforcethe “tie with the land,” and forbid the breaking of a tie that appeals so strongly to the Narodniks? * The data of the 1894-95 “handicraft census” in Perm Gubernia are clear proofof the utter absurdity of artificial measures to tie the peasants to the land. 
 All these measures do is reduce their earnings, which, wherever the “tie with the land” exists, are less thanhalf those of the non-agriculturists; they lower the standardof living, increase the isolation and disunity of producersscattered throughout the villages and render them more de-fenceless than ever against the buyer-up and subcontractor. 
 At the same time, the fact that the peasants are tied to the land hinders the development of agriculture, without, however,being able to prevent the rise of a rural petty-bourgeoisclass. 
 The Narodniks avoid raising the question: should thedevelopment of capitalism be retarded or not? They prefer todiscuss “the possibility of different paths for the fatherland. 
” But anybody who begins to talk about immediate practical measures thereby adopts the existing path . 
 ** Do whatever you like “to drag” the fatherland on to a different path!Such efforts will arouse no criticism (except the criticism *The Sketch , too, speaks very enthusiastically of the advantages of the village community and of the harm of the “freedom tomobilise” landed property, which, it claims, would result in theemergence of a “proletariat” (p. 
 6). 
 This contrasting of the commun-ity with freedom to dispose of land is an excellent illustration ofthe most reactionary and noxious feature of the “community. 
” Itwould be interesting to know whether there is a single capitalistcountry in which a “proletarian” earning from 33 to 50 rubles a yearwould not be classed as a pauper ? **And that this existing path is the development of capitalism has not, as far as we know, been denied by the Narodniks themselves,either by Mr. 
 N. 
 —on, or by Mr. 
 V. 
 V. 
, or by Mr. 
 Yuzhakov, etc. 
, etc. 
 of laughter). 
 But do not defend that which artificially retards present-day development, do not drown the problem of re-moving the obstacles from the existing path in talk about a “different path. 
” Here is another thing that should be borne in mind-when judging the Narodniks’ practical programme. 
 We have al-ready seen that the Narodniks try to formulate their ideas asabstractly as possible, to present them as the abstract demands of “pure” science or “pure” justice, and not as the real needs of real classes having definite interests. 
 Credit—that vitalneed of every master, big and small, in capitalist society—is presented by the Narodnik as a sort of element in the sys-tem of the organisation of labour; masters’ associations andsocieties are depicted as the embryonic expression of the idea of co-operation in general, of the idea of “handicraft emancipa-tion,” etc. 
, whereas everybody knows that all such associa-tions actually pursue aims which have nothing in commonwith such lofty matters, but are simply connected with thesize of these masters’ incomes, with the growing strengthof their position and with their increasing profits. 
 To thus convert commonplace bourgeois and petty-bourgeois wishes into a sort of social panacea only emasculates them, robs them of their vitality, of the guarantee of their urgency and prac-ticability. 
 The Narodnik endeavours to present the urgentneeds of each proprietor, buyer-up, or merchant (credits, asso-ciations, technical assistance) as general questions towering above individual interests. 
 The Narodnik imagines that he is thereby enhancing their significance, exalting them, whereasactually he is only converting a vital matter that interests certain specific groups of the population into a philistinewish, into armchair speculation, bureaucratic “reflections onthe benefits” of things. 
 Directly connected with this is a third circumstance. 
 Not realising that such practical meas-ures as credits and artels, technical assistance, etc. 
, reflectthe needs of developing capitalism, the Narodnik is unable tovoice the general and fundamental needs of this develop-ment, and instead proposes paltry, casually selected, half-measures which in themselves are incapable of exerting any serious influence and are inevitably doomed to failure. 
 Had the Narodnik openly and consistently adopted the stand-point of an exponent of the needs of social development along /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR capitalist lines, he would have been able to note the general conditions , the general demands of this development, and he would have seen that, given these general conditions (the chief of them, in the present case, being freedom of industry),all his petty projects and measures would be achieved auto-matically, that is, by the activities of the interested partiesthemselves, whereas, by ignoring these general conditionsand proposing nothing but practical measures of an utterly incidental character, he is only beating about the bush. 
 Let us, by way of illustration, take the question of the freedomof industry. 
 On the one hand, it is so much the general andfundamental question of questions concerning industrialpolicy, that an examination of it is particularly appropriate. 
On the other hand, the specific conditions of the Perm area furnish interesting corroboration of the cardinal importance of this question. 
 The metallurgical industry, as we know, is the major feature of the economic life of the area and has laid a veryspecific impress on it. 
 Both the history of the area’s colo-nisation and its present condition are closely connected with the needs of the Urals iron industry. 
 “Generally speak-ing, the peasants were settled in the Urals in order to fur-nish hands for the ironmasters,” we read in the letter of Ba-bushkin, a resident of Nizhniye Sergi, quoted in the Trans-actions of the Commission of Inquiry into HandicraftIndustry . 
 * And these artless words very faithfully depict the tremendous part played by the ironmasters in the life of the area, their significance as landlords and factory owners com-bined, accustomed to undivided and unrestricted rule, asmonopolists who base their industry on possessional rightsand not on capital and competition. 
 The monopoly basis ofthe Urals metallurgical industry has been reflected in law, in the well-known Article 394 of Volume VII of the Code of Laws (Mining Statute), an article about which so much hasbeen and is still being written in literature on the Urals. 
This law, promulgated in 1806, provides, firstly, that thesanction of the mining authority shall be required for miningtowns to open any factory and, secondly, forbids the opening in the ironworks area of “any manufactory or *Part XVI, pp. 
 594-95. 
 Cited in Handicraft Industries , I, p. 
 140. 
 factory whose operation chiefly depends on the action of fire, necessitating the use of coal or wood. 
” In 1861 the Urals ironmasters particularly insisted on the inclusion of this law in the terms governing the emancipation of the peas-ants, and Article 11 of the regulations for ironworkers reit-erates the same prohibition. 
 * The report of the Board of the Handicraft Industrial Bank for 1895 states, amongother things, that “most numerous of all, however, are com-plaints against the ban imposed by officials of the Department of Mines and the possessional works owners on the opening of fire-using establishments within the areas under their juris-diction, and against all sorts of restrictions on the operationsof the metal trades” ( Sketch , p. 
 223). 
 Thus, the traditions of the “good old days” have been preserved intact in the Urals to this day, and the attitude towards small peasant industry in this region fully harmonises with the “organisation oflabour” which ensured the ironmasters a supply of factoryworkers tied to their locality. 
 These traditions are verystrikingly illustrated in the following report in Permskiye Gubernskiye Vedomosti , 126 No. 
 183, 1896, quoted in the Sketch and rightly referred to there as being “highly eloquent. 
” Here it is: “The Ministry of Agriculture andState Property requested the Urals ironmasters to discussthe possibility of the ironworks taking measures to encouragethe development of handicraft production in the Urals. 
The ironmasters informed the Ministry that the development of handicraft industry in the Urals would be detrimental to big industry, for even today, when handicrafts are poorlydeveloped in the Urals, the population are unable to furnish *See Handicraft Industries , I pp. 
 18-19. 
— Sketch , pp. 
 222, 223, and 244. 
—Yegunov’s article in Volume III of Reports and Investigations of Handicraft Industry in Russia published by the Min-istry of State Property and Agriculture. 
 In publishing Yegunov’s arti-cle, the Ministry, in a comment, makes the reservation that the author’s views “substantially differ from the opinion and information of the Department of Mines. 
” In Krasnoufimsk Uyezd, for example, asmany as 400 smithies were closed down under these laws. 
 Cf. 
 Trans-actions of the Commission of Inquiry into Handicraft Industry , Part XVI, article by V. 
 D. 
 Belov, “Handicraft Industry in the Urals andIts Connection with Metallurgy. 
” The author relates that the handicraftsmen, fearing to incur the severity of the law, hide their machines. 
 One handicraftsman built a furnace on wheels to cast iron-ware, so as to make it easier to hide (op. 
 cit. 
, p. 
 18)! the works with the required number of hands *; if the popula-tion were to find jobs that could be done at home, the iron-works would risk being brought to a complete standstill” (Sketch , p. 
 244). 
 This report evoked the following exclamation from the compilers of the Sketch : “Of course, freedom of indus-try is a prime and essential condition of all industry, whetherlarge , medium or small .... 
 In the name of freedom of industry, all its branches should be legally equal.... 
 The metal-working handicraft industries of the Urals should be freed from all exceptional fetters imposed by the ironmasters to restrict their natural development” (ibid. 
 Our italics). 
 Reading this heartfelt and perfectly just defence of “freedom of industry,”we were reminded of the story about the metaphysicalphilosopher who delayed climbing out of a pit while he pon-dered over the nature of the rope that had been thrown him. 
 At last he decided: “It is nothing but a rope” 127 I n the same way, the Perm Narodniks ask disdainfully aboutfreedom of industry, freedom of capitalist development, free-dom of competition: What is freedom of industry?—Simplya bourgeois demand! Their aspirations soar much higher; it is not freedom of competition they want (what a low, narrow, bourgeois aspiration!), but “organisation of labour. 
”... Butthese Manilovian dreams have only to come “face to face”with prosaic and unadorned reality, and that reality imme-diately smells of such an “ organisation of labour ” that the Narodnik forgets all about the “harmfulness” and “danger” of capitalism, about the “possibility of different paths for the fatherland,” and calls for “ freedom of industry . 
” We repeat, we regard this desire as fully justified and con-sider that this view (shared not only by the Sketch , but by practically every author who has written on this subject)does credit to the Narodniks. 
 But ... what is one to do? It is impossible to say a word in praise of the Narodniks without immediately following it up with a big “but”—but we havetwo important remarks to make in this connection. 
 *Let us explain for the benefit of the reader that our iron industry statistics have repeatedly shown that the number of workers employed in proportion to output is considerably higher in the Urals than in the Southern or Polish iron districts. 
 Low wages—the re-sult of the workers being tied to the land—keeps the Urals at amuch lower technical level than the South or Poland. 
 First. 
 We can be sure that the overwhelming majority of the Narodniks will indignantly deny the correctness of our identify-ing “freedom of industry” with “freedom of capitalism. 
” They will say that the abolition of monopolies and of the survivalsof serfdom is “simply” a demand for equality, that it is in theinterest of the “entire” national economy in general and ofpeasant economy in particular, and not of capitalism at all. 
We know that the Narodniks will say this. 
 But it will be untrue. 
 Over a hundred years have elapsed since the days when “freedom of industry” was regarded in this idealisticabstract way, as a fundamental and natural (cf. 
 the worditalicised in the Sketch ) “right of man. 
” Since then the demand for “freedom of industry” has been advanced and achievedin a number of countries, and everywhere this demand has ex-pressed the discrepancy between growing capitalism and the survivals of monopoly and regulation, everywhere it has servedas the watchword of the advanced bourgeoisie, and every-where it has resulted in the complete triumph of capitalism,and nothing else. 
 Theory has since fully explained the absolutenaïveté of the illusion that “freedom of industry” is a demand of “pure reason,” of abstract “equality,” and has shown that freedom of industry is a capitalist issue. 
 The achievement of“freedom of industry” is by no means a “legal” reform only;it is a profound economic reform. 
 The demand for “freedom ofindustry” is always indicative of a discrepancy between thelegal institutions (which reflect production relations that have already outlived their day) and the new production relations , which have developed in spite of the old insti-tutions, have outgrown them and demand their abolition. 
If the order of things in the Urals is now evoking a generalcry for “freedom of industry,” it means that the traditionalregulations, monopolies and privileges that benefit the land-lord ironmasters are restricting e xisting economic relations , existing economic forces. 
 What are these relations and forces? These relations are the relations of commodity econo-my. 
 These forces are the forces of capital , which guides com-modity economy. 
 We have only to remember the “confes-sion” of the Perm Narodnik quoted above: “Our entire handi-craft industry is in bondage to private capital. 
” And, even without this confession, the handicraft census data speakquite eloquently for themselves. 
 Second remark. 
 We welcome the defence of freedom of industry by the Narodniks. 
 But we make this welcome con-tingent on its being conducted consistently . 
 Does “freedom of industry” merely consist in abolishing the ban on the openingof fire-using establishments in the Urals? Does not the factthat the peasant has no right to leave his village community,or to engage in any industry or pursuit he likes, constitutea far more serious restriction on “freedom of industry”? Does not the absence of freedom of movement, the fact that the law does not recognise the right of every citizen to chooseany town or village community in the country as his placeof domicile, constitute a restriction on freedom of industry?Does not the peasant community, with its social-estate ex-clusiveness—the fact that members of the trading and in-dustrial class cannot enter it—constitute a restriction on freedom of industry? And so on, and so forth. 
 We have enu-merated far more serious, more general and widespread restric-tions on freedom of industry, restrictions that affect allRussia, and the entire mass of the peasantry most of all. 
If “large, medium and small” industries are to have equal rights, should not the small industries be granted the same right to alienate land as is enjoyed by the large industries?If the Urals mining laws are “exceptional fetters, restrictingnatural development,” do not collective responsibility, theinalienability of allotments and the special social-estatelaws and regulations governing trades and occupations, mi-gration and transfer from one social estate to another, consti-tute “exceptional fetters”? Do they not “restrict naturaldevelopment”? The truth is that on this question, too, the Narodniks have betrayed the half-heartedness and two-facedness that arecharacteristic of every Kleinbürger ideology. 
 On the one hand, the Narodniks do not deny that in our society there are a host of survivals of the “organisation of labour” whoseorigin dates back to the days of apanage rights, and whichare in crying contradiction to the modern economic system andto the country’s entire economic and cultural development. 
On the other hand, they cannot help seeing that this eco-nomic system and development threaten to ruin the small pro-ducer, and, fearful for the fate of this palladium of their“ideals,” the Narodniks try to drag history back, to halt development, beg and plead that it be “forbidden,” “not al-lowed,” and cover up this pitiful reactionary prattle with talk about “organisation of labour,” talk that can only sound as a bitter mockery. 
 The chief and fundamental objection we have to make to the practical Narodnik programme for modern industry should now, of course, be clear to the reader. 
 Insofar as theNarodnik measures are part of, or coincide with, the reform which, since the days of Adam Smith, has been known as freedom of industry (in the broad sense of the term), they are progressive. 
 But, firstly, in that case, they contain nothingspecifically “Narodnik,” nothing that gives special supportto small production and “special paths” for the fatherland. 
Secondly, this favourable side of the Narodnik programme is weakened and distorted by the substitution of partial and mi-nor projects and measures for a general and fundamental so-lution of the problem—freedom of industry. 
 Insofar, however,as Narodnik aspirations run counter to freedom of industryand endeavour to retard modern development, they are reac-tionary and meaningless, and their achievement can bring nothing but harm. 
 Let us illustrate this by examples. 
 Take credit. 
 Credit is an institution of most developed commoditycirculation, of the most developed, nation-wide turnover ofcommodities. 
 Wherever achieved, “freedom of industry” in-evitably leads to the formation of credit institutions as com-mercial enterprises, to the breaking-down of the peasants’ soci-al-estate exclusiveness, to their mingling with the classes which make most frequent resort to credit, to the independentformation of credit societies by interested persons, and so on. 
On the other hand, what value can there be in credit meas-ures conferred on the “muzhiks” by Zemstvo officials and other“intellectuals” if the laws and institutions keep the peasant ry in a condition which precludes the possibility of a proper, developed commodity circulation, in a condition in whichlabour service is far easier, far more practicable, attainable and workable than property responsibility (the foundationof credit)? Under these conditions, credit measures will al-ways be something adventitious, an alien growth planted in absolutely uncongenial soil; they will be still-born, some-thing only dreamy intellectual Manilovs and well-meaningofficials could give birth to, and which the real traders in money capital will always jeer at. 
 So as to make no unfounded assertion, let us quote the opinion of Yegunov (in the article mentioned above) whom nobody can suspect of—”material-ism. 
” Speaking in reference to handicraft warehouses, hesays: “Even under the most favourable local conditions, astationary warehouse, and the only one in the whole uyezdat that, never can and never will replace a perpetually mobileand personally interested trader. 
” In reference to the Perm Handicraft Bank, we are told that in order to obtain a loan the handicraftsman must hand in an application to the bankor its agent and name his guarantors. 
 The agent comes, veri-fies his statement, gathers detailed information about hisbusiness, etc. 
, “and this whole pile of documents is sent, at thehandicraftsman’s expense, to the head office of the bank. 
” If it decides to grant the loan, the bank sends (through the agent, or through the volost administration) a bond for signa-ture, and only when the borrower has signed it (his signaturebeing certified by the volost authorities) and sent it back to thebank, does he receive his money. 
 If an artel applies for a loan,a copy of the articles of association is required. 
 It is the func-tion of the agents to see that loans are expended for the spe-cific purposes for which they have been granted, that thebusiness of clients is run on sound lines, etc. 
 “Obviously, inno way can it be said that handicraftsmen can easily obtain bank loans; it may be safely said that the handicraftsmanwill far more readily turn to the local moneyed man for a loan than submit to all the trying formalities we have described, pay postage, notary’s and local government fees, patientlywait all the months that elapse between the moment the needfor the loan arises and the day it is granted, and put up withsupervision for the whole period of the loan” (op. 
 cit. 
, p. 
 170). 
The Narodnik view on some sort of anti-capitalist credit is just as absurd as the incongruous, clumsy and useless at-tempts (using wrong methods) to get done by “intellectuals”and officials things that have everywhere and alwaysbeen the business of traders. 
 Technical education. 
 There is hardly need, we think, to dwell on this subject ... except to remind the reader of the project, worthy of “eternal memory,” of our well-known progressive writer, Mr. 
 Yuzhakov, to implant agriculturalgymnasia in Russia, at which poor peasant men and women would work off the cost of their education by serving, for example, as cooks or laundresses. 
 * ... Artels: but who does not know that the chief obstacle to their spreading is the tradi-tions of the very same “organisation of labour” which hasfound expression in the Urals mining laws? Who does not knowthat wherever freedom of industry has been introduced infull it has always led to an unparalleled blossoming and devel-opment of all sorts of societies and associations? It is very comical at times to see our Narodniks trying to represent their opponents as enemies of artels, associations, etc. 
, in gener-al. 
 The boot, of course, is on the other foot! The fact is thatif you want to look for the idea of association and for themeans of implementing it, you must not look back, to the past,to patriarchal artisan and small production, which are the cause of the extreme isolation, disunity and backwardness of the producers, but forward, to the future, towards the devel-opment of large-scale industrial capitalism. 
 We are perfectly aware of the haughty contempt with which the Narodnik will regard this programme of industrialpolicy that is being opposed to his own. 
 “Freedom of indus-try”! What an old-fashioned, narrow, Manchester School ** bourgeois aspiration! The Narodnik is convinced that for him this is an überwundener Standpunkt, *** that he has succeeded in rising above the transient and one-sided interestson which this aspiration is based, that he has risen to a pro-founder and purer idea of “organisation of labour. 
” ... Actual-ly, however, he has only sunk from progressive bourgeois ideology to reactionary petty-bourgeois ideology, which help-lessly vacillates between the desire to accelerate moderneconomic development and the desire to retard it, betweenthe interests of small masters and the interests of labour. 
On this question, the latter coincide with the interests of big industrial capital. 
 *See next article. 
 **There will be some, no doubt, who think that “freedom of in-dustry” precludes such measures as factory legislation, etc. 
 By “free-dom of industry” is meant the abolition of all survivals of the past that hinder the development of capitalism. 
 But factory legislation, like the other measures of modern so-called Socialpolitik, presup-poses an advanced development of capitalism and, in its turn, furthers that development. 
 *** Discarded viewpoint. 
— Ed. 
 Written in exile at the end of 1897 First published in 1898 in the miscellany Economic Studies and Essays by Vladimir IlyinPublished according to the text in Economic Studies and EssaysGEMS OF NARODNIK PROJECT-MONGERING (S. 
 N. 
 YUZHAKOV, EDUCATIONAL PROBLEMS. 
 JOURNALISTIC ESSAYS. 
—SECONDARY-SCHOOL REFORM. 
—SYSTEMS AND AIMS OF HIGHER EDUCATION. 
—GYMNASIUM TEXT-BOOKS. 
—THE PROBLEM OF UNIVERSAL EDU-CATION. 
—WOMEN AND EDUCATION. 
 ST. 
 PE-TERSBURG, 1897, PP. 
 VIII # 283. 
 PRICE 1 RUBLE 50 KOPEKS. 
)128 I Under the above title Mr. 
 Yuzhakov has published a col-lection of his articles that appeared in Russkoye Bogatstvo in the years 1895-97. 
 The author believes that his articles “embrace the most important of these problems,” i. 
e. 
,“educational problems,” and, “taken together, constitute asort of review of the most timely and urgent, but still inade-quately satisfied needs of our intellectual culture. 
” (Preface,p. 
 V. 
) On page 5, it is once more stressed that the author in-tends to dwell “chiefly on problems of principle. 
” But all these phrases merely show Mr. 
 Yuzhakov’s predilection for abroad sweep of thought, or rather, not so much of thought asof the pen. 
 Even the title of the book is too broad. 
 As a mat-ter of fact—as can be seen from the list of articles in the sub-title to the book—the author does not deal with “education-al problems” at all, but solely with the problem of the schools, and only of the secondary and higher schools at that. 
Of all the articles in the book, the most practical one is thaton the textbooks used in our gymnasia. 
 The author goes intoa detailed examination of the current textbooks of the Rus-sian language, geography and history, and demonstrates their utter worthlessness. 
 This article would make the more inter-esting reading if it, too, were not made irksome by the au-thor’s usual verbosity. 
 We intend to draw the reader’s atten-tion to only two of the articles in the book, one on the reformin secondary education, and the other on universal education,for these articles really do touch upon problems of principle and are very typical for an explanation of the favourite ideas of Russkoye Bogatstvo . 
 The Grineviches and Mikhai-lovskies are reduced to digging in the muck-heap of Russian doggerel for examples of preposterously stupid conclusions drawn from a hostile doctrine. 
 We, however, do not need to engage in such dreary excavations for the same purpose: we have only to turn to the magazine Russkoye Bogatstvo — and to only one of its undoubted “pillars” at that. 
 II Section II of the article “Principles of Reform in Secondary Education” has been entitled by Mr. 
 Yuzhakov “Aims ofSecondary Education. 
 Class Interests and Class Schools”(see Contents). 
 The theme, as you see, is of absorbing inter-est, promising as it does to explain one of the cardinal prob-lems, not only of education, but of social life in general, a problem, moreover, that is the source of one of the major disagreements between the Narodniks and the “disciples. 
” 129 Let us then see what conception this contributor to Rus-skoye Bogatstvo has of “class interests and class schools. 
” The author quite rightly says that the formula, “the school should prepare a man for life,” is quite meaningless, and that the question is what is needed for life, and “who needs it” (6). 
 “Who needs secondary education?—means: in whose in-terests, for whose benefit and advantage is education givento secondary-school pupils?” (7). 
 A splendid formulation ofthe question, and we would give our heartfelt praise to theauthor if ... if all these preludes did not later prove to be just empty talk: “It may be to the benefit and advantage of the state, the nation, of some particular social class,or of the individual who is being educated. 
” Here themuddle begins: we have to conclude that a class-dividedsociety is compatible with a non-class state, with a non-class nation, with individuals standing outside of classes! We shall soon see that this is by no means a slip of Mr. 
 Yuzhakov’s pen, that he actually does hold this absurdopinion. 
 “If class interests are kept in mind when draw-ing up the school curriculum, there can of course be noquestion of one general type of state secondary school. 
 Inthat case the educational establishments are necessarily of the social-estate type, providing not only instruction, but also education in the wider sense, for they not only have toimpart an education adapted to the special interests and aims of the estate, but also social-estate habits and a so-cial-estate esprit de corps” (7). 
 The first conclusion to be drawn from this harangue is that Mr. 
 Yuzhakov does not understand the difference between estates and classes, andtherefore hopelessly muddles these quite different concepts. 
The same misunderstanding is revealed in other parts of thearticle (see p. 
 8, for example), and this is all the more surpris-ing as Mr. 
 Yuzhakov in this same article comes very close to the essential distinction between these concepts. 
 “It should be borne in mind,” Mr. 
 Yuzhakov informs us on page11, “that often (although not necessarily) political, economicand religious organisations sometimes constitute legal privi-leges, sometimes the actual prerogatives of special groupsof the population. 
 In the first instance we have estates, in the second classes. 
” Here one of the differences between class and social estate has been correctly noted, namely,that what distinguishes classes from one another is not legalprivileges, but actual conditions, and that, consequently,classes in modern society presume legal equality . 
 And there is another difference between social estates and classes which Mr. 
 Yuzhakov apparently does not ignore: “... And at that time” (i. 
e. 
, after the abolition of serfdom) “... we re-nounced the feudal and social-estate structure of nationallife, and with it the system of exclusive social-estate schools. 
Today, the introduction of the capitalist process is dividingthe Russian nation, not so much into estates, as into eco-nomic classes...” (8). 
 Here another distinction between estates and classes in European and Russian history is correctly in-dicated, namely, that the social estates are a feature of feudal,and classes of capitalist society. 
 * If Mr. 
 Yuzhakov had given even a little thought to these distinctions, and had not surren-dered himself so easily to the sway of his agile pen and his Kleinbürger ** heart, he would have written neither the above-quoted tirade, nor the rest of the twaddle, such as thatclass curricula in schools are bound to mean one curriculumfor the rich and another for the poor, that in Western Europe *Social estates presuppose the division of society into classes, being themselves one of the forms of class distinction. 
 When we speak simply of classes, we always presume the non-estate classes of capi-talist society. 
 **Petty bourgeois. 
— Ed. 
 class curricula are a failure, that class schools presume class exclusiveness, and so on and so forth. 
 All this shows as clearly as can be that despite the promising title, despite his high-flown phrases, Mr. 
 Yuzhakov has no conception of thenature of class schools. 
 It is, most worthy Mr. 
 Narodnik,that education is organised in one and the same way, and isequally accessible to all the wealthy . 
 It is this last word alone that explains the nature of class schools, as distinct from social-estate schools. 
 It is therefore the purest non-sense on Mr. 
 Yuzhakov’s part to say, as he did in theabove-mentioned tirade, that where the schools follow classinterests “there can be no question of one general type ofstate secondary school. 
” Just the opposite: class schools—if adhered to consistently, that is, if they are freed of every survival of the social-estate system—necessarily presume one general type of school. 
 Full legal equality , full equality of rights for all citizens, with education fully equal andaccessible to all the wealthy—these constitute the essence ofclass society (and, consequently, of class education). 
 Estateschools demand that the pupils shall belong to a given social estate. 
 The class school knows no estates, it only knows citizens. 
 Of all pupils it demands one thing only , namely, that they should pay for their education. 
 A difference incurricula for rich and poor is by no means essential for classschools, since those who have not the wherewithal to pay fortuition, for textbooks and for the pupil’s maintenance during the whole tuition period are simply barred by the class school from secondary education. 
 The class school by no meanspresumes class exclusiveness: on the contrary, unlike socialestates, classes always leave the road quite free for the trans-fer of individuals from one class to another. 
 The class schoolsdo not close their doors to anybody who has the means to pay for tuition. 
 To say that in Western Europe “no success attends these dangerous programmes of semi-education andof the class moral and intellectual segregation of the varioussections of the people” (9) is an utter perversion of the truth;for everybody knows that, both in the West and in Russia,the secondary schools are essentially class schools and serve the interests of only a very small part of the population. 
 In view of the incredible confusion of ideas betrayed by Mr. 
Yuzhakov, we even think it worth while to give the follow-* ing supplementary explanation for his benefit: in modern society, even the secondary schools which charge no tuition fees are nonetheless class schools, for the cost of maintain-ing the pupil for seven or eight years is immeasurably great-er than the tuition fee, and is only within the reach of a verysmall minority. 
 If Mr. 
 Yuzhakov is anxious to be a practicaladviser to contemporary reformers of the secondary schools,if he wants to treat the problem from the angle of present-day realities (as he does), he should only speak of the substitution of class schools for estate schools— only of that, or else remain entirely silent on this ticklish question of “class inter-ests and class schools. 
” And even so, these problems of prin-ciple have very little in common with the substitution of mod-ern languages, for the classical languages, which Mr. 
 Yuzhakov recommends in this article. 
 Had he confined himself to this recommendation, we would have had no objection, and wouldhave even been ready to forgive him his unrestrained rheto-ric. 
 But since he has himself raised the question of “class interests and class schools,” let him bear the responsibilityfor all his absurd utterances. 
 Mr. 
 Yuzhakov’s utterances on this theme are by no means confined to what has already been said. 
 Faithful to the fun-damental ideas of the “subjective method in sociology,” Mr. 
Yuzhakov, having touched on the subject of classes, rises toa “broad point of view” (12, p. 
 15), so broad, that he cansuperbly ignore class differences; so broad that it enables him to speak, not of individual classes (fie, how narrow!), but of the nation in general. 
 This magnificent “broadness” of viewis attained by the hackneyed method of all moralists, bigand small, and by the Kleinbürger moralists in particular. 
Mr. 
 Yuzhakov sternly condemns this division of societyinto classes (and its reflection in education), holding forth with supreme grandiloquence and incomparable fervour on the “danger” (9) of this thing; on the point that “the classsystem of education in all its shapes and forms is fundamen-tally hostile to the interests of the state, the nation and theindividuals to be educated” * (8); on the “inexpediency and *One or the other, most worthy Mr. 
 Kleinbürger: either you are talking about a society that is divided into classes, or aboutone that is not. 
 In the first case, there can be no such thing as non-danger from both the state and the national standpoint” (9) of class curricula in schools; on the point that historical examples illustrate only “that exceptionally anti-national development of the class system and class interests of whichwe have spoken, and which has already been admitted asdangerous to the national welfare and to the state itself”(11); on the point that “the class system of administrationhas been abolished in one form or another everywhere” (11); on the point that this “dangerous” division into classes arouses “antagonism between the various groups of the popula-tion” and gradually obliterates “the sense of national solidar-ity and national patriotism” (12); on the point that “broadly,correctly and far-sightedly understood, the interests of thenation as a whole, of the state, and of individual citizens in general should not be mutually contradictory (at least in the modern state)” (15), and so on and so forth. 
 This is allsheer cant, empty phrase-mongering, which obscures the veryessence of contemporary reality with the senseless “aspira-tions” of the Kleinbürger, aspirations that imperceptibly findtheir way into the description of things as they are. 
 To find an analogy for the sort of outlook which gives rise to such phrase-mongering we have to turn to the exponents of that “ethical”school 130 in the West which was the natural and inevitable expression of the theoretical cowardice and politicalperplexity of the bourgeoisie there. 
 We, however, shall confine ourselves to comparing the following little fact with this magnificent eloquence and lofty-mindedness, this remarkable perspicacity and far-sightedness. 
 Mr. 
 Yuzhakov touched on the subject of social-estate and class schools. 
 As regards the first, precise statis-tics are available—at least as far as male gymnasia, progym-nasia and modern schools are concerned. 
 Here are the figures, which we have borrowed from a publication of the Ministry of Finance: Productive Forces of Russia (St. 
 Petersburg, 1896, Part XIX, Public Education, p. 
 31): class education. 
 In the second case, there can be neither a class state, nor a class nation, nor individuals who do not belong to one of the classes. 
 And in both cases the phrase is meaningless and only ex-presses the innocent wish of a Kleinbürger who timidly closes hiseyes to the most prominent features of contemporary reality. 
 “The division of students according to social estate (as percentages of the total number) may be seen from the fol-lowing table: In the male gymnasia and Children ofprogymnasia of In modern of the Ministry Public schools Education 1880 1884 1892 1880 1884 1892 Hereditary and life nobles and offi-cials ...... 47. 
6 49. 
2 56. 
2 44. 
0 40. 
7 38. 
0 Clergy ...... 5 . 
 1 5 . 
 0 3 . 
 9 2 . 
 6 1 . 
 8 0 . 
 9 Urban estates . 
 . 
 33. 
3 35. 
9 31. 
3 37. 
0 41. 
8 43. 
0 Rural estates (in-cluding non-Rus-sian and minorofficials) .... 
 8 . 
 0 7 . 
 9 5 . 
 9 10. 
4 10. 
9 12. 
7 Foreigners .... 
 2 . 
 0 2 . 
 0 1 . 
 9 3 . 
 0 4 . 
 8 5 . 
 4 Other estates . 
 . 
 . 
 2. 
0 Included in 3. 
0 Included in previous previous 100. 
0 100. 
0 100. 
0 100. 
0 100. 
0 100. 
0” This table shows clearly how incautious Mr. 
 Yuzhakov was when he said that we had immediately and resolutely(??) “renounced social-estate schools. 
” On the contrary, thesocial-estate system prevails in our secondary schools to this day, even if 56 per cent of the students in the gymnasia (not to mention the privileged educational establishmentsfor the nobility, etc. 
) are sons of nobles and officials. 
 Theironly serious rival is the urban estates, who now predominatein the modern schools. 
 The proportion of the rural estates—especially if we bear in mind their vast numerical superiority over the other estates—is altogether insignificant. 
 This table, therefore, clearly shows that anybody who sets out todiscuss the character of our contemporary secondary schoolsshould be perfectly clear in his own mind that it is only estateand class schools that are in question, and that insofar as“we” actually do renounce estate schools, it is exclusively in the interests of class schools. 
 It goes without saying that we do not by any means intend to claim that the question of super-seding the estate schools by class schools, and of improvingthe latter, is of no importance or concern to those classes that do not and cannot enjoy the advantages of secondary education: on the contrary, it is not a matter of unconcern to them either, for the estate system lays a particularly heavy burden on them both in life and in school, and thesuperseding of estate schools by class schools is only one ofthe links in the general and all-round Europeanisation ofRussia. 
 All we want is to show how Mr. 
 Yuzhakov distortedthe facts, and that actually his supposedly “broad” point of view is immeasurably inferior even to the bourgeois view on the question. 
 Incidentally, on the subject of the bourgeoisviews. 
 Mr. 
 A. 
 Manuilov simply cannot understand whyP. 
 B. 
 Struve, who so explicitly revealed the one-sidedness ofSchulze-Gävernitz, nevertheless “propagates his bourgeoisideas” ( Russkoye Bogatstvo , No. 
 11, p. 
 93). 
 Mr. 
 A. 
 Manuilov’s failure to understand this is solely and exclusively due to his failure to understand the fundamental views not only of theRussian, but of all the West-European “disciples,” and notonly of the disciples, but of the teacher as well. 
 Or perhaps Mr. 
Manuilov will deny that one of the fundamental views of the“teacher”—views that run like a scarlet thread through all his theoretical, literary and practical activities—is an ineradicable hatred of those lovers of “broad points of view”who with the help of sugary phrases obscure the classdivision of modern society? Or that another of his fundamen-tal views is a firm recognition of the progressiveness andpreferability of frank and consistent “bourgeois ideas” as compared with the ideas of those Kleinbürger who are so anx-ious to retard and halt capitalism? If this is not clear to Mr. 
Manuilov, let him ponder, say, over the writings of his fel-low magazine contributor, Mr. 
 Yuzhakov. 
 Let him imaginethat, on the subject now of interest to us, we see alongsideMr. 
 Yuzhakov a frank and consistent exponent of “bourgeois ideas,” who upholds the class character of the contemporary school, seeking to prove that nothing better could be imag-ined, and striving to eliminate the estate schools completelyand to make the class schools more widely accessible (in thesense referred to above). 
 Really, such ideas would be far supe-rior to those of Mr. 
 Yuzhakov’s: attention would be drawn to the contemporary school’s real needs, namely, to the abolition of its social-estate exclusiveness, and not to the vague“broad point of view” of the Kleinbürger. 
 A frank elucida-tion and defence of the one-sided character of the contempora-ry school would present a proper picture of reality, and by its very one-sidedness would help to enlighten the minds of the other side. 
 * Mr. 
 Yuzhakov’s “broad” effusions, on the contrary, only help to pervert social consciousness. 
Lastly, as to the practical side of the matter ... but Mr. 
 Yuzha-kov does not go one jot beyond the limits of the class school,not only in this article, but also in his “utopia,” which we shall now proceed to consider. 
 III Mr. 
 Yuzhakov’s article dealing with “the problem of uni-versal education” (see the title of the book) is called: “An Educational Utopia. 
 A Plan for Universal Compulsory Second-ary Education. 
” The very heading shows that this highlyedifying article of Mr. 
 Yuzhakov’s promises a lot. 
 But, actu-ally, Mr. 
 Yuzhakov’s “utopia” promises even far more. 
 “Noth-ing less, dear readers, without concession or compromise...”—is the way the author begins his article. 
—“A complete gymnasium education for the entire population of both sexes, compulsory for all, and involving no expenditure by the state,Zemstvo or people—such is my grand educational utopia”(201)! The worthy Mr. 
 Yuzhakov evidently thinks that thecrux of the matter is that of “expenditure”; on this same pagehe repeats that universal elementary education entails expen-diture, but that universal secondary education, according to his “plan,” entails no expenditure at all. 
 But not only does *We are fully aware that it is very, very hard for Russkoye Bo-gatstvo contributors to understand an argument of this character. 
 That again is due to their failure to understand not only the “dis-ciples,” but also the “teacher. 
” Here, for example, is how one of the “teachers” sought, as far hack as 1845, to prove that the English workers gained from therepeal of the Corn Laws. 
 This repeal, he wrote, involves the farmers’transformation into “Liberals, i. 
e. 
, conscious bourgeois,” and thisgrowth of class-consciousness on the one side necessarily involves asimilar growth of class-consciousness on the other (F. 
 Engels, The Condition of the Working Class in England in 1844 . 
 New York, 1887, p. 
 179). 
 131 How is it that you, gentlemen contributors to Russkoye Bogatstvo , just bow and scrape before the “teachers,” but do not expose them for “propagating bourgeois ideas”? Mr. 
 Yuzhakov’s plan entail no expenditure: it promises some-thing far more than secondary education for the entire people. 
 In order to give an idea of the full scope of what the Russkoye Bogatstvo contributor promises, we must anticipate and quote the author’s own triumphant exclamations after he has set forth his plan in full and stands back to admire it. 
 Mr. 
 Yu-zhakov’s plan is to combine gymnasium education with the productive labour of the “gymnasium students,” who are to maintain themselves: “... The cultivation of the school land ...will ensure abundant, palatable and wholesome food for the entire younger generation from birth to graduation from the gymnasium and also for the young people working off thecost of their education” (about this institution of the Yuzha-kov Zukunftsstaat, * more anon) “and for the whole staff of administrators, teachers and managers. 
 Furthermore, theywill all be supplied with footwear, and clothes will be made for them. 
 In addition, the school land will yield about 20,000 rubles, to wit, 15,000 rubles from surplus milk and springwheat ... and about 5,000 rubles from the sale of skins, bris-tle, feathers, and other by-products” (216). 
 Just think, reader, the entire younger generation to be maintained until gradua-tion from the gymnasium, that is, until the ages of 21-25 (p. 
 203)! Why, that means maintaining half the country’s total population. 
 ** The maintenance and education of scores of millions—that is real “organisation of labour” for you! Mr. 
 Yuzhakov, evidently, was seriously annoyed with the wicked people who asserted that the Narodnik projects for the“organisation of labour” are nothing but the empty twaddle of empty windbags, and so he decided to annihilate these wick-ed people completely by publishing a full “plan” for this“organisation of labour”—to be achieved “without any expen-diture. 
” ... But even that is not all: “... In the process, we en-larged the task; we had this same organisation assume the costof maintaining the entire child population; we took care to ensure dowries for young people about to be married—one that is quite good for the countryside; we found it *State of the future. 
— Ed. 
 **According to Bunyakovsky, for every thousand inhabitants in Russia there are 485 between the ages of 0 and 20 years, and 576between the ages of 0 and 25 years. 
 possible out of the same funds to appoint in every gymnasium, that is, in every rural area, a doctor, a veterinary surgeon, a trained agronomist, a trained gardener, a technologist and sixartisans, no less (who will raise the level of culture and satis-fy the corresponding requirements of the whole locality).... 
 And the financial and economic problems involved in real-ising these aims will all be solved by the adoption of our plan.... 
” * How disgraced those evil tongues will now be that insinuated that the celebrated Narodnik “we” was a“mysterious stranger,” a Jew with two skull-caps, and the like! What unseemly slander! Henceforth a mere reference to Mr. 
 Yuzhakov’s “plan” will be enough to prove the almightypower of this “we” and the feasibility of “our” projects. 
 Maybe the reader will have his doubts about this word: feasibility? Maybe the reader will say that by calling hiscreation a utopia, Mr. 
 Yuzhakov eliminated the question of feasibility?—That would be so if Mr. 
 Yuzhakov himself had not made highly substantial reservations about the word“utopia,” and if he had not repeatedly stressed the feasibility of his plan throughout his essay. 
 “I make bold to think,” he says at the very beginning of his article, “that this plan foruniversal secondary education will seem a utopia only at first glance” (201).... 
 What more do you want?... “I make even bolder to assert that education on these lines for the en-tire population is far more feasible than universal elementary education, which has nevertheless already been realised in Germany, France, England and the United States, and isvery near to being realised in several of the gubernias of Rus-sia” (201). 
 Mr. 
 Yuzhakov is so convinced of the feasibility of his plan (apparently, after having said that “plan” is a moreappropriate word than utopia is), that he does not neglect even the most minor “practical conveniences” in the elabora-tion of that plan, deliberately preserving, for example, the sys-tem of two gymnasia, for boys and girls, in deference to the “prejudice prevailing on the European continent against co-education,” and insistently stresses that his plan would “make it possible to leave the established curricula of themale and female gymnasia undisturbed, and would provide *P. 
 237. 
 Both eloquent lines of dots in this effusion belong to Mr. 
 Yuzhakov. 
 We would not have dared to omit a single letter. 
 more lessons, and, therefore, higher remuneration, for the teaching staffs. 
”... “All this is of no mean importance, given the desire not to confine it to a mere experiment, but to achieve really universal education” (205-06). 
 There have beenmany utopians in the world who vied in the attractivenessand elegance of their utopias, but hardly one of them willbe found to have betrayed so much solicitude for the “estab-lished curricula” and the remuneration of teaching staffs. 
 We are convinced that future generations will long continue to point to Mr. 
 Yuzhakov as a truly practical and truly busi-ness-like “utopian. 
” Obviously, in view of these promises of the author, his plan for universal education deserves the most careful exami-nation. 
 IV The principle from which Mr. 
 Yuzhakov proceeds is that the gymnasium should at the same time be an agriculturalestablishment and ensure its own maintenance by the summerlabour of its pupils. 
 That is the fundamental idea of the plan. 
 “That this idea is a correct one, can scarcely be doubt-ed” (237), Mr. 
 Yuzhakov opines. 
 And we agree with himthat this is indeed a correct idea; only, it should not neces-sarily be tacked on to the “gymnasia,” or to the possibilityof making them “pay” by their pupils’ labour. 
 The correctidea is that an ideal future society cannot be conceived without the combination of education with the productive labour of the younger generation: neither training and educa-tion without productive labour, nor productive labourwithout parallel training and education could be raisedto the degree required by the present level of technolo-gy and the state of scientific knowledge. 
 This thought was already expressed by the great utopians of the past; and it is fully shared by the “disciples,” who for this reason, incidental-ly, do not object in principle to female and juvenile labour inindustry, regard attempts to completely forbid such labouras reactionary, and only insist on the proper hygienic condi-tions being created for it. 
 Mr. 
 Yuzhakov is therefore wrong when he says: “I only wanted to suggest the idea” (237).... 
 The idea was suggested long ago, and we hesitate to believe(until the contrary is demonstrated) that Mr. 
 Yuzhakov could have been unfamiliar with it. 
 What this Russkoye Bogatstvo contributor wanted to suggest, and did suggest, was an ab-solutely independent plan for implementing this idea. 
 Only in this sense is it to be regarded as original, but here itsoriginality goes as far ... as the Pillars of Hercules. 
 If universal productive labour is to be combined with universal education, then obviously the duty of sharing inproductive labour should be laid upon all. 
 That, one would think, is self-evident. 
 But no, it appears not. 
 Our “Narod-nik’s” solution of the matter is that the duty of physicallabour should indeed be established as a general principle;but not for all , only for people without means . 
 The reader may think we are joking? Not a bit of it!“The purely urban gymnasia for people of means who are prepared to pay the full cost of education in money, might be preserved in their present form” (229). 
 On page 231 “peopleof means” are classed without more ado as “categories ofthe population” not liable to compulsory education in the“agricultural gymnasia. 
” Thus, in our Narodnik’s opinion,compulsory productive labour is not a condition for general and all-round human development, but simply a means of paying the cost of gymnasium education. 
 That is how he putsit. 
 At the very beginning of his article, Mr. 
 Yuzhakovdiscusses the problem of the winter workers needed bythe agricultural gymnasia. 
 The most “logical” of all, in hisopinion, is the following method of ensuring winter workers for the gymnasia. 
 The pupils of the junior classes do not work, and consequently receive their maintenance and tuition free,paying nothing towards the expenditures incurred by theschool. 
 “That being so, is it not his direct duty to work offthese expenditures at the end of the course? This duty, carefullythought out and firmly established for everybody who is unable to pay the cost of tuition , will assure the gymnasium farm the necessary contingent of winter workers and an additionalcontingent of summer workers.... 
 Regarded theoretically,this is very simple, comprehensible and quite incontrovert-ible” (205, our italics). 
 Mercy on us, what could be “simpler”?Pay if you have the money, work if you have not!—every shopkeeper will agree that nothing could be more “compre-hensible. 
” And how wonderfully practical it all is! Only—where does the “utopia” come in? And why does Mr. 
, Yuzha- /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR kov, by such plans, besmirch the grand fundamental idea which he intended to make the basis of his utopia? Labour service performed by students without means is the basis of Mr. 
 Yuzhakov’s whole plan. 
 True, he admits another method of acquiring winter workers—by hire, * but gives it a secondary place. 
 Labour service, however—for three years (and if necessary even for four)—is to be com-pulsory for all who are not called up for military service, in other words, for two-thirds of the male students and for all the girls. 
 “This system alone,” Mr. 
 Yuzhakov bluntly de-clares, “furnishes the key to the problem of universal educa-tion—and secondary, not just elementary, education at that” (207-08). 
 “A small contingent of regular workers, who have remained on at the gymnasium altogether, and have identi-fied their lives with it (!?), will supplement these labour forces of the gymnasium farm. 
 Such are the potential, and by no means utopian, labour resources of our agricultural gymnasi-um” (208). 
 And, it goes without saying, that with no shortage of things to be done, they will also do other jobs: “Auxiliary personnel for kitchen and laundry, as well as postmen, may easily be selected from among the three-year workers whohave been graduated from the gymnasium” (209). 
 The gymna-sia will need tradesmen: tailors, bootmakers, carpenters, etc. 
 Of course, “assistants may be supplied them from among those performing their three years’ labour service” (210). 
 What will these farm-hands (or agricultural gymnasium students? I really don’t know what to call them) receive in return for their labour? Everything required for their sub-sistence—“abundant and palatable food. 
” Mr. 
 Yuzhakov cal-culates it all to a nicety, on the basis of the rations “usually allowed an agricultural labourer. 
” True, he “does not propose to feed the gymnasium on these lines” (210), but he neverthe-less retains these rations, for after all the students will also *“A gymnasium farm, directed by an experienced and trained manager, equipped with all modern improvements and suppliedwith a contingent of skilled and educated workers, should be a prof-itable undertaking and justify the hire of the necessary contingentof workers, some of the more deserving (sic!) of whom might be given a share in the proceeds. 
 To a certain extent this method would prob-ably have to be practised, especially in regard to landless peasantsgraduated from this gymnasium” (204). 
 gather potatoes, peas and lentils from their land, will sow hemp and sunflower for vegetable oil, and in addition, on non-fast days will receive half a pound of meat and two glasses of milk each. 
 Don’t think, reader, that Mr. 
 Yuzhakov just touches lightly on this question, only by way of illustration. 
 No, he has it all calculated down to the last detail—the number of calves, yearlings and two-year-olds, the maintenance of the sick, feed for poultry, and all the rest. 
 He has forgot-ten neither the kitchen swill, nor the animal entrails, nor the vegetable peelings (212). 
 Nothing is overlooked. 
 Fur-thermore, clothes and footwear may be made in the gymnasium itself. 
 “But cotton goods for underwear, bed linen, table linen and summer clothes, and more substantial material for winter clothing, and skins—if only sheepskin—for win-ter top clothes will, of course, have to be bought. 
 Naturally, the teachers and other personnel and their families will have to provide their own materials, although they may be granted the services of the workshops. 
 Properly speaking, for the students and three-year workers, this expenditure may, without stinting, be calculated at 50 rubles a year, or about 60,000 rubles for the whole establishment annual-ly” (213). 
 We are positively beginning to be thrilled by the practical sense of our Narodnik. 
 Just imagine: “we,” “society,” are in-stituting organisation of labour on such a grand scale, we are endowing the people with universal secondary education; and all this without any expenditure whatever, and with such immense moral advantages! What a splendid lesson it will be to “our” present agricultural labourers—who, in their igno-rance, rudeness and boorishness, refuse to work for less than 61 rubles a year with board *—when they see labourers with a gymnasium education working for 50 rubles a year! We may be sure that even Korobochka132 herself will agree with Mr. 
 Yuzhakov that the theoretical basis of his plan is thoroughly “comprehensible. 
” *According to the Department of Agriculture and Rural In-dustry, the average annual wage of an agricultural labourer employedby the year in European Russia is 61 rubles 29 kopeks (average for the ten years 1881-91), plus board, valued at 46 rubles. 
 V How will the economy of the gymnasia be run, and how will they be administered? The economy, as we have already seen, will be mixed: part natural and part cash economy. 
 Mr. 
 Yuzhakov, of course, goes very thoroughly into this impor-tant question. 
 On page 216, he calculates minutely, item by item, that each gymnasium will need 160,000 to 170,000 rubles in cash, so that for all the 15,000 to 20,000 gym-nasia, a sum of about 3,000 million rubles will be required. 
 Well, of course, they will sell agricultural produce and receive money in return. 
 Our author is so provident as totake account of the general conditions of modern commodity-capitalist economy! “Gymnasia situated in the vicinity of towns or railway stations, on lines not remote from largecentres, would be of an entirely different type. 
 Vegetable and fruit growing, dairy farming and handicrafts may well re-place field cultivation” (228). 
 Trade, as we see, will be on nomean scale. 
 Who is to run it, the author does not say. 
 It is to be presumed that the pedagogical councils of the gymnasia will also act in part as commercial councils. 
 Sceptics maywant to know what is to happen if schools go bankrupt, and whether they are able to engage in trade at all. 
 But that, of course, would be unwarranted cavilling: if uneducated mer-chants can carry on trade, can success be doubted if repre-sentatives of our intellectual society get down to the job? The gymnasia will naturally require land for their farms. 
 Mr. 
 Yuzhakov writes: “I think ... that if this idea is destined to be put to practical test, for experimental purposes the first of these agricultural gymnasia should be granted plots of6,000 to 7,000 dessiatines each” (228). 
 For a population of 109 million—20,000 gymnasia—about 100 million dessia-tines would be required. 
 But it should not be forgotten thatonly 80 million persons are engaged in agricultural labour. 
 “It is only their children who should be put through the agricultural gymnasia. 
” Then, various categories of the population, * amounting *Here is a full list of these categories of fortunates who are to be exempted from the agricultural gymnasia: “people of means, people undergoing correction, Mahommedan girls, non-Russians belonging to nearly another 8 million, will have to be excluded, which will leave 72 million. 
 They will need only 60 million to 72 mil-lion dessiatines. 
 “And that, of course, is a lot” (231). 
 But Mr. 
Yuzhakov is not dismayed. 
 After all, the state, too, has lots of land; only it is not very conveniently situated. 
 “For example, in Northern Polesye there are 127,600,000 dessia-tines, and here, especially if, where necessary, a system of exchanging private and even peasant land for state land were adopted with the object of placing the former at the dispos-al of the schools, it would very likely not be difficult to supply our agricultural gymnasia with land gratis. 
 The situa-tion is equally good” ... in the south-east (231). 
 Hm ... “good”!So send them off to Archangel Gubernia! True, hitherto it has served more as a place of exile, and the state forests there for the most part have not even been “opened up”—but that’s a detail. 
 As soon as gymnasium students in the charge of learned teachers are sent there they will cut down all these forests, clear the ground, and implant civilisation! And in the central region a system of land redemption might be arranged; after all, not more than about 80 mil-lion dessiatines are required. 
 Issue a “guaranteed loan,”the payments on which, it need scarcely be said, to be appor-tioned among the “gymnasia receiving free land” (232)— and the trick’s done! Mr. 
 Yuzhakov assures us that there isno need to be alarmed at the “immensity of the financial operation. 
 It is neither a chimera nor a utopia” (232). 
 “Actual-ly speaking,” it will be “a gilt-edged mortgage. 
” We shouldsay so! But, once again, why talk about a “utopia”? And to small nationalities, members of fanatical sects, the blind, deaf and dumb, idiots, insane, chronic inebriates, the diseased, and crimi-nals” (231). 
 We read this list with a clutch at the heart. 
 Heavens,we thought, shall we manage to get at least our own kith and kinincluded in the list of exempted!—Under the first category, per-haps?—but no, our means will scarcely allow that. 
 Well, we might manage with a little cunning to get the womenfolk classed as Ma-hommedan girls; but what about the males? The only hope is thethird category. 
 Mr. 
 Yuzhakov’s fellow contributor to the magazineMr. 
 Mikhailovsky, as we know, has already simply classed P. 
 B. 
Struve as a non-Russian national, so perhaps he will be gracious enough to class us also at least as “non-Russians belonging to small nationalities,” and so exempt our kith and kin from the agriculturalgymnasia! does Mr. 
 Yuzhakov seriously think that our peasants are so downtrodden and ignorant as to give their consent to such a plan?? There are the redemption payments to be made for the land, and the “payments on the loan to cover inaugurationexpenditures,” * and to maintain the entire school, and to pay the salaries of all the teachers, and, to cap it all, in returnfor all this (in return for having hired paid teachers?), toperform labour service for a trifle of three years each! Isn’t this going it a little too strong, Mr. 
 Enlightened “Narodnik”? When, in 1897, you reprinted your creative effort that hadappeared in Russkoye Bogatstvo in 1895—did you think where your characteristic Narodnik fondness for finan-cial operations and instalment schemes would lead you?Let us recall, dear reader, that what he promised was univer-sal education “involving no expenditure by the state, Zem-stvo or people. 
”And our financial genius really does not de-mand a single ruble from state or Zemstvo. 
 But what about“the people”—or, more precisely, the peasants without means ? ** It is with their money that the land is bought, and the gymnasia inaugurated (for it is they who pay interest on and the redemption of the capital employed for the purpose), and it is they who pay the teachers and maintain all thegymnasia. 
 And labour service in addition. 
 What for? Be-cause—our inexorable financier answers—you paid nothing foryour education and maintenance in the junior classes (204). 
But, firstly, the non-working ages include only the “preparato-ry and first two gymnasium classes” (206)—and then come the semi-workers. 
 And, secondly, these children, after all,are maintained by their elder brothers, who also pay the teach-ers for the tuition of the young. 
 No, Mr. 
 Yuzhakov, such a planwould be absolutely unfeasible not only in our day, but even in Arakcheyev’s time, 133 for it is indeed a feudal “utopia. 
” Mr. 
 Yuzhakov has very little to say about the administra-tion of the gymnasia. 
 It is true that he enumerates the teach-ing staff in great detail and appoints a salary for each, a“comparatively small” one (for they get free quarters, mainte-*P. 
 216—10,000 rubles per gymnasium. 
 **Since those with means are excluded. 
 Mr. 
 Yuzhakov himself suspects that “a certain proportion of the agricultural population,too, will prefer to send their children to urban secondary schoolsthat charge fees” (230). 
 We should think so! nance of their children and “half the expenditures on cloth-ing”)—50 rubles per annum, you might think? No, a little more: “the head-master, head-mistress and chief agronomist 2,400 rubles each, the inspector,” etc. 
, according to rank,descending the hierarchic ladder down to 200 rubles for minoremployees (214). 
 Not a bad career, you see, for those representa-tives of educated society who have “preferred” the fee-charg-ing urban schools to the agricultural gymnasia! Pay attention to this “half the expenditures on clothing,” which the teach-ers are guaranteed. 
 According to our Narodnik’s plan, theyare to enjoy the services of the workshops (as we have alreadyseen), in other words, the right to have their apparel sewn orrepaired by the “gymnasium pupils. 
” How solicitous Mr. 
Yuzhakov is—for the welfare of the teachers! However, he is also solicitous for the welfare of the “gymnasium students”— just as a good farmer is solicitous for the welfare of hiscattle: they have to be fed, watered, housed and ... coupled. 
Listen to this: “If ... marriage is allowed between young people who have completed the course and remain at the gymnasium for another three years ... this three-year stay will be far less onerous than military service” (207). 
 “If marriage is al-lowed”!! That is, it may not be allowed? But in that case, wor-thy Mr. 
 Progressivist, a new law would be required to re-strict the civic rights of the peasants. 
 But need we be surprisedat this “slip of the pen”(?) on Mr. 
 Yuzhakov’s part, when all through his “utopia,” amidst the most minute examination of teachers’ salaries, labour service by the pupils, etc. 
, it neveronce occurred to him that it might not be amiss—at anyrate in the “utopia”—to allow a certain share in admin-istering the “gymnasium” and in managing the farmto the “pupils” themselves, who, after all, maintain the whole establishment and are graduated from it at from 23 to 25 years of age; that they are not only “gymnasiumpupils,” but also citizens . 
 Our Narodnik forgot all about this trifle! But on the other hand, he went very thoroughlyinto the problem of “pupils” guilty of bad conduct. 
 “A fourthtype” (of gymnasium) “would have to be instituted for stu-dents who have been expelled from the ordinary schools for bad conduct. 
 Since it is obligatory for the whole younger gener-ation to undergo a course of secondary education, it would be irrational to release students from it on the ground of bad conduct. 
 In the upper classes, this might be a direct tempta-tion and stimulus to bad conduct. 
” (Believe it or not, that is what is printed on page 229!!) “The institution of specialgymnasia for students expelled for bad conduct would be alogical complement to the whole system. 
” They would becalled “corrective gymnasia” (230). 
 Is it not incomparable, this “educational utopia” in the Russian taste, with its corrective gymnasia for ruffians who may be “tempted” by the prospect of obtaining “release”—from education!? VI The reader perhaps has not forgotten a certain project for the direction of industry which was rightly described as a revival of mercantilism, 134 as a project for a “bourgeois-bureaucratic-socialist organisation of home industry”135 (p. 
 238). 
 To describe Mr. 
 Yuzhakov’s “plan” an even morecomplex term is required. 
 It has to be called a feudal-bureau-cratic-bourgeois-socialist experiment. 
 A rather clumsy, four-storeyed term—but what would you have? The plan itself is clumsy. 
 But, on the other hand, this term accurately con-veys all the characteristic features of Mr. 
 Yuzhakov’s “uto-pia. 
” Let us begin the examination from the fourth storey. 
“One of the chief features of the scientific conception of social-ism is the planned regulation of social production,” quite rightly remarks the author just quoted. 
 * This feature is to be found in the “utopia,” since the enterprise of tens of millions ofworkers is to be organised in advance according to one generalplan. 
 The bourgeois character of the utopia is beyond doubt:firstly, according to Mr. 
 Yuzhakov’s “plan,” the second-ary school remains a class school. 
 And this after all the pom-pous phrases poured out by Mr. 
 Yuzhakov “against” the class school in his first article!! One school for the rich, anotherfor the poor, if you have money, pay for tuition—if you havenot, work! More: the schools for the rich, as we saw, are toretain their “present form. 
” In the present secondary schoolsof the Ministry of Public Education, for example, the tuition fees cover only 28. 
7% of the total expenditures; 40. 
0% is sup-*Novoye Slovo , April 1897. 
 Review of Home Affairs. 
 plied by the treasury; 21. 
8% by donations from individuals, institutions and societies; 3. 
1% is derived from interest on capital, and 6. 
4% from other sources (Productive Forces , Section XIX, p. 
 35). 
 Mr. 
 Yuzhakov, therefore, has accen-tuated the class character of the secondary schools as com-pared with what now exists : according to his “plan,” the rich will pay only 28. 
7% of the cost of their tuition, whilethe poor will pay the total cost of theirs, and per-form labour service into the bargain! Not bad for a “Narod-nik” utopia! Secondly, the plan envisages the hire of winterworkers by the gymnasia, especially from among landlesspeasants. 
 Thirdly, the distinction between town and country—that foundation of the social division of labour—is retained. 
Since Mr. 
 Yuzhakov is introducing the planned organi-sation of social labour, since he is devising a “utopia” for the combination of education and productive labour, the re-tention of this distinction is absurd, and shows that our au-thor has not the slightest conception of the subject he has un-dertaken to discuss. 
 Not only did the “teachers” of the present-day disciples criticise this absurdity in their writings, but so did the old utopians, and even our great Russian utopian. 
 136 But that is nothing to Mr. 
 Yuzhakov! Fourthly—and this is the major reason for calling this “utopia” a bourgeois one—side by side with attempting the planned organisation of so-cial production, it proposes to retain commodity production. 
The gymnasia will produce for the market . 
 Consequently, social production will be governed by the laws of the market, to which the “gymnasia” will also have to submit! But thatis nothing to Mr. 
 Yuzhakov! Where do you get the idea, hewill no doubt say, that production will be governed by certainlaws of the market? Sheer nonsense! Production will be gov-erned by the orders of the worthy directors of the agricul-tural schools, and not by the laws of the market. 
 Voilà tout. 
 Of the purely bureaucratic structure of Mr. 
 Yuzhakov’sutopian gymnasia we have already spoken. 
 The “EducationalUtopia,” it is to be hoped, will do a useful service by showingthe Russian reading public the full profundity of the “democ-racy of our contemporary Narodniks. 
 The feudal feature in Mr. 
 Yuzhakov’s “plan” is the labour service to be rendered by the poor in return for tuition. 
 Had this sort of project beendrafted by a consistent bourgeois, it would have contained neither a first nor a second storey, and it would have been far superior to this Narodnik utopia, and far more useful. 
 Labour service is the economic essence of the serf system. 
 In capital-ist society, a man who has no means has to sell his labour-power in order to buy the means of subsistence. 
 In feudal so-ciety, a man who has no means has to perform labour serv-ice in return for the means of subsistence he receives from hislord. 
 Labour service necessarily means that the one who performs it is compelled to work, has fewer rights; it in-volves what the author of Das Kapital called “ausserökonomi-scher Zwang” * (III, 2, 324). 
 Hence, in Russia as well, inas-much as labour service still survives, a necessary comple-ment to it is the peasant’s inferiority in respect of civicrights—the fact of his being tied to the land, corporal punish-ment, and the right to assign him to compulsory labour. 
 Mr. 
 Yuzhakov does not understand this connection betweenlabour service and inferiority of rights, but the shrewd senseof a “practical” man suggested to him that, since the gymna-sium students will have to perform labour service, it will notbe amiss to introduce corrective gymnasia for those who dare try to avoid education; and that adult “student” work-ers should be kept in the position of little schoolboys. 
 It would be interesting to know why our utopian needed the first three storeys of his creation? Had he left only thefourth, not a word of objection could have been raised, for,after all, the man himself told us frankly and in advance that he was writing a “utopia”! But here his Kleinbürger nature betrayed him. 
 On the one hand, a “utopia” is a goodthing, but, on the other, teachers’ salaries for our worthy in-tellectuals are not a bad thing either. 
 On the one hand, wehave “no expenditure for the people,” but, on the other—no,friend, just you pay the interest and return the debt in full, and do three years’ labour service in the bargain! On the one hand, we have grandiloquent declamations on the danger andharm of class division, while, on the other, a purely class“utopia. 
” Such perpetual vacillations between the old andthe now, such curious claims to reach above one’s ownstature, that is, to rise superior to all classes, are the essence of every Kleinbürger outlook. 
 * * * *Other than economic pressure. 
 Are you familiar, reader, with Mr. 
 Sergei Sharapov’s The Russian Farmer. 
 Some Thoughts on the Organisation of Farm-ing in Russia on New Lines (free supplement to the mag-azine Sever137 for 1894), St . 
Petersburg, 1894? We would strong-ly recommend Russkoye Bogatstvo contributors in general, and Mr. 
 Yuzhakov in particular, to acquaint themselves with it. 
The first chapter is entitled: “Moral Conditions for RussianFarming. 
” Here the author rehashes ideas very much akin to those of “Narodism”—that Russia and the West differ rad-ically, that pure commercial calculation prevails in the West,and that there masters and workers are not preoccupied withmoral questions. 
 Here, in Russia, on the contrary, thanks to theallocation of land to the peasants in 1861 “their exist-ence has acquired an aim entirely different from that in the West” (8). 
 “Our peasant who has obtained land has acquired an independent aim in life. 
” In a word, sanction was givento people’s production—as Mr. 
 Nikolai —on put it far more plainly. 
 The landlord in our country—Mr. 
 Sharapov goes onto develop his idea—is interested in the peasant’s welfarebecause this peasant cultivates the landlord’s estate with his own implements. 
 “His” (the landlord’s) “calculations include not only the profit he personally derives from his enterprise,but also a moral , or rather a psychological , element ” (12, au-thor’s italics). 
 And Mr. 
 Sharapov declares with fervour (notinferior to that of Mr. 
 Yuzhakov’s) that capitalism in our coun-try is impossible. 
 What is possible, and necessary, in our coun-try is not capitalism, but an “alliance of lord and muzhik” (the title of chapter II of Mr. 
 Sharapov’s book). 
 “Economy shouldbe based on a close solidarity between lord and muzhik” (25):it is the duty of the lord to spread enlightenment, and of themuzhik—well, the duty of the muzhik, of course, is to work!And so he, Mr. 
 Sergei Sharapov, “after repeated and painful mistakes, ” at last established on his own estate the “said alliance between lord and muzhik” (26). 
 He introduced a ra-tional crop rotation, etc. 
, etc. 
, and concluded a contract withthe peasants, under which the latter receive meadows, pas-ture and arable from the landlord, and also seed for so manydessiatines, etc. 
 The peasants, on their part, undertake to do all the work on the landlord’s farm (to cart manure, spread phosphates, plough, sow, reap, carry the sheaves to “mybarn, ” thresh, etc. 
, etc. 
, so many dessiatines of each crop), and over and above this to pay, at first 600 rubles, then 800, 850, 1,100, and finally 1,200 rubles (i. 
e. 
, an annual incre-ment). 
 These sums are payable in instalments—coinciding with the dates of payment of interest into the Nobles’ Bank(36, et seq. 
). 
 It goes without saying that the author is a “con-vinced supporter of the village community” (37). 
 We say,“it goes without saying,” because such farms would be impos-sible without laws that tie the peasants to their allotments and that secure the peasant community’s exclusiveness as a social estate. 
 Mr. 
 Sharapov is guaranteed the due receiptof payments from the peasants by the existence of a “prohibi-tion on the sale of produce without his consent, which makesit incumbent on them to store everything in my barns” (36). 
Since it would be extremely difficult to exact payment from the poor peasants, Mr. 
 Sharapov has arranged to receive it from the rich peasants: these rich peasants themselves se-lect a group of weaker ones, form an artel and place them-selves at the head of it (38), and pay the landlord with greatpromptitude, inasmuch as they can always get back what isdue from the poor peasants when they sell the produce (39). 
 “It is very hard for many of the poor peasants, especially those with small families, to work for me. 
 It is a very big strainon them, but evasion is out of the question, for the peasantswould refuse to accept the cattle of a defaulting householderinto the herd. 
 Nor would I, the peasants would insist on that,and willy-nilly the poor peasant has to work. 
 That, of course, is compulsion in a way, but do you know what the effect is? A year or two of renting land, and the poor peasant has paidoff his arrears of taxes, has redeemed his things from pawn,finds himself in possession of money, begins to rebuild hiscottage and—lo and behold! he has ceased to be a poorpeasant” (39). 
 And Mr. 
 Sharapov “points with pride” to the fact that “his” peasants (he keeps referring to them as “my peasants”) are flourishing, that he is spreading enlightenment,introducing clover, phosphates, and so on, whereas “left tothemselves, the peasants would have done nothing” (35). 
 “Allthe work, moreover, has to be done at my orders and instruc-tions. 
 I decide on the time for sowing, manuring and reaping. 
 All summer, serfdom is practically restored—except, of course, that there is no manhandling and no floggings inthe stable” (p. 
 29). 
 As you see, Mr. 
 Sharapov, the blunt squire, is a little more outspoken than Mr. 
 Yuzhakov, the enlightened publicist. 
 But is there much difference between the types of farming on the estate of the former and in the utopia of the latter? Inboth cases the whole essence lies in labour service; in bothcases we have compulsion , either by the pressure of the rich men who dominate the “village community,” or the threatof being consigned to a corrective gymnasium. 
 The reader may object that Mr. 
 Sharapov runs his farm for profit, whereas the officials in Mr. 
 Yuzhakov’s utopia do so from zeal for the com-mon good. 
 One moment. 
 Mr. 
 Sharapov says outright that hefarms from moral motives, that he surrenders half the proceedsto the peasants, and so on; and we have neither the reason northe right to believe him less than Mr. 
 Yuzhakov, who, after all, also provides his utopian teachers with by no means uto-pian “lucrative posts. 
” And if some landlord follows Mr. 
Yuzhakov’s advice and lets his land be used as an agricultur-al gymnasium, and receives interest from the “students”for payment into the Nobles’ Bank (a “gilt-edged mortgage,”in Mr. 
 Yuzhakov’s own words), the difference will practically disappear. 
 Of course, a tremendous difference in “educa-tional problems” still remains—but, heavens, would notMr. 
 Sergei Sharapov prefer to hire educated labourers at 50rubles than uneducated ones at 60 rubles? And so, if Mr. 
 Manuilov does not understand even now why the Russian (and not only the Russian) disciples consider it necessary, in the interests of labour, to support consistent bourgeois people and consistent bourgeois ideas, as against those survivals of the past which are responsible for farmslike Mr. 
 Sharapov’s and “utopias” like Mr. 
 Yuzhakov’s,then, we must confess, it is difficult even to argue with him,for we are evidently talking different languages. 
 Mr. 
 Manuilov presumably reasons on the lines of the celebrated recipe of the celebrated Mr. 
 Mikhailovsky: take what is good fromhere and from there—like Gogol’s young lady, 138 who want-ed to take the nose from one suitor and stick it above thechin of another. 
 To us, however, it seems that such reasoningis nothing but the Kleinbürger’s comic effort to rise superior to the definite classes that have fully evolved in our midst and that have assumed quite a definite place in the processof historical development going on before our eyes. 
 The “uto-pias” naturally and inevitably engendered by such reasoning are, however, no longer comic, but harmful, especially when they lead to utterly unbridled bureaucratic inventions. 
 For quite understandable reasons this phenomenon is to be metwith in Russia with particular frequency; but it is notconfined to Russia. 
 Not for nothing did Antonio Labriola,in his excellent book Essais sur la conception matérialiste de l’histoire (Paris, Giard et Brière, 1897), say in reference to Prussia, that the pernicious forms of utopia against which the “teachers” fought half a century ago have now been sup-plemented by one other: “a bureaucratic and fiscal utopia,a utopia of cretins” (l’utopie bureaucratique et fiscale,l’utopie des crétins. 
 Page 105, note). 
 VII In conclusion, let us revert once more to educational problems, but not to Mr. 
 Yuzhakov’s book, which has thattitle. 
 It has already been remarked that this title is too broad, for educational problems are by no means identical with questions of schooling; education is not confined to school-ing. 
 Had Mr. 
 Yuzhakov really dealt with “educational prob-lems” from the standpoint of principle, and examined therelations between the various classes, he could not have avoid-ed the part played by Russia’s capitalist development in the matter of educating the labouring masses. 
 This problem was touched upon by another Russkoye Bogatstvo contribu-tor, Mr. 
 Mikhailovsky, in No. 
 11, 1897. 
 Writing in referenceto the statement by Mr. 
 Novus 139 that Marx did not fear, and rightly so, to speak of the “idiocy of rural life,”140 and considered it one of the merits of capitalism and of the bour-geoisie that they had “rescued” a considerable part of the population from this “idiocy,” Mr. 
 Mikhailovsky says: “I do not know where Marx used this coarse (?) expression” —a characteristic confession that he is not acquainted with one of Marx’s cardinal writings ( Manifesto )! But what follows is even more characteristic: “...but it has long been known that there is no need to break furniture even if Alexan-der the Great was a hero. 
 Generally speaking, Marx was unfas-tidious in his expressions, and, of course, to imitate him in this respect would be, to say the least, unwise. 
 But even so, I am certain” (hear, hear!) “that this expression was simply a boutade on Marx’s part. 
 And if the generation that worried so much, along with Mr. 
 Zlatovratsky, over the intricate prob-lems of rural life suffered much woe in vain, no less—thoughdifferent—is the woe of the generation being educatedin a spirit of contempt for the idiocy of rural life’”(p. 
 139).... 
 It is highly characteristic of Mr. 
 Mikhailovsky that, having proclaimed his agreement with Marx’s economic doctrinetime and again, he is so utterly ignorant of this doctrine as toexpress the “certainty” that the words of Marx quoted by No-vus were due simply to his being carried away, simply to anunfastidious choice of expressions, and were simply a bou-tade! No, Mr. 
 Mikhailovsky, you are grievously mistaken. 
 These words of Marx are no boutade, but an expression of oneof the most cardinal and fundamental features of his wholeoutlook, both theoretical and practical. 
 These words clearlyexpress a recognition of the progressive nature of the diver-sion of the population from agriculture to industry, from country to town, one of the most characteristic features of capitalist development, that is to be observed both in theWest and in Russia. 
 In my article, “A Characterisation ofEconomic Romanticism,” I have already had occasion toshow how important is this view of Marx’s, which has beenadopted by all the “disciples,” and how sharply contradictory it is to absolutely all romantic theories, ranging from those of old Sismondi to those of Mr. 
 N. 
 —on. 
 There I pointed out (p. 
 39141) that this view is also quite definitely expressed by Marx in Das Kapital (I. 
 Band, 2-te Aufl. 
, S. 
 527-28142), and by Engels in his Condition of the Working Class in England . 
 To this might be added Marx’s Der Achtzehnte Brumaire des Louis Bonaparte (Hamb. 
 1885. 
 Cf. 
 S. 
 98143). 
* Both these *Mr. 
 Novus could not have guessed, of course, that Mr. 
 Mikhai-lovsky was so ignorant of the works of Marx, or else he would havequoted the passage in full: Die Bourgeoisie hat das Land der Herr-schaft der Stadt unterworfen. 
 Sie hat enorme Städte geschaflen, siehat die Zahl der städtischen Bevölkerung gegenüber der ländlichenin hohem Grade vermehrt und so einen bedeutenden Theil der Bevölker-ung dem Idiotismus des Landlebens entrissen. 
 (The bourgeoisiehas subjected the country to the rule of the towns. 
 It has created enor-mous cities, has greatly increased the urban population as compared writers expressed their views on this subject at such length, repeated them so often on the most varied occasions, that it could only have occurred to a man who is absolutely unfamil-iar with their teachings to declare that the word “idiocy”in the passage quoted is simply a piece of “coarseness” and a“boutade. 
” Lastly, Mr. 
 Mikhailovsky might also have recalledthe fact that all these writers’ followers have expressedthemselves on a large number of practical issues in the spirit of this doctrine, advocating, for example, complete freedom of movement, and protesting against plans to endow the work-er with a plot of land or a house of his own, and the like. 
 Further, in the tirade we have quoted, Mr. 
 Mikhailovsky accuses Novus and his supporters of educating the presentgeneration “in a spirit of contempt for the idiocy of rural life. 
” This is not true . 
 The “disciples” would, of course, be deserv-ing of censure if they were “contemptuous” of rural inhabi-tants, crushed as they are by want and ignorance, but Mr. 
Mikhailovsky could not prove a single one of them guiltyof such an attitude. 
 While speaking of the “idiocy of rurallife,” the disciples at the same time point the way out of this state of affairs opened up by the development of capitalism. 
 Let us repeat what we said above in the article on economicromanticism: “If the predominance of the town is necessarilyso, only the attraction of the population to the towns canneutralise (and, as history shows, does in fact neutralise)the one-sided character of this predominance. 
 If the town nec-essarily gains for itself a privileged position, only the influx of the village population into the towns, only this min-gling and merging of the agricultural with the non-agriculturalpopulation can lift the rural population out of its helpless-ness. 
 Therefore, in reply to the reactionary complaints andlamentations of the romanticists, the modern theory indicates exactly how this narrowing of the gap between the condi-tions of life of the agricultural and of the non-agriculturalpopulation creates the conditions for eliminating the distinc-tion between town and country. 
” * with the rural, and has thus rescued a considerable part of the popu-lation from the idiocy of rural life. 
— Manifesto of the Communist Party . 
—Ed. 
) *See p. 
 229 in this book. 
— Ed. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR This is not a contemptuous attitude towards the “idiocy of rural life” at all, but a desire to find a way out of it. 
 The only “contempt” that follows from these views is towards the doc-trines which recommend “seeking paths for the fatherland,”instead of seeking a way out along the existing path and its further course. 
 The difference between the Narodniks and the “disciples” as to the significance of the process of diversion of population from agriculture to industry is a difference in solving the practical issues connected with this process, and not only in theoretical principles and in assessing the facts of Russianhistory and realities. 
 The “disciples” naturally insist on theneed for abolishing all the antiquated restrictions on peasanttravel and migration from the countryside to the towns, where-as the Narodniks either openly uphold these restrictions, or cautiously avoid the subject altogether (which in practiceamounts to the same thing). 
 This example, too, might havehelped Mr. 
 Manuilov to understand the, to him, astonish-ing fact that the “disciples” express their solidarity withspokesmen of the bourgeoisie. 
 A consistent bourgeois will always stand for the abolition of these restrictions on move-ment—and as far as the worker is concerned, his most vitalinterests demand their abolition. 
 Hence, solidarity betweenthem is quite natural and inevitable. 
 On the other hand, theagrarians (big and small, down to the enterprising muzhikinclusive) find this process of diversion of population to indus-try a disadvantage, and zealously try to retard it, having Narodnik theories to back them. 
 To conclude: on this great question of the diversion of the population from agriculture by capitalism, Mr. 
 Mikhailovskybetrayed a complete misunderstanding of Marx’s teachings,and avoided the issue of the difference between the Russian “disciples” and the Narodniks both on the theoretical and practical aspects of the question, with the help of meaning-less phrases. 
 Published according to the text in the miscellanyWritten in exile at the end of 1897 First published in 1898 in the miscel-lany Economic Studies and Essays by Vladimir IlyinTHE HERITAGE WE RENOUNCE144 Referring, in Russkoye Bogatstvo , No. 
 10, 1897, to a com-ment by Mr. 
 Minsky on the “dialectical materialists,” Mr. 
 Mikhailovsky says: “He” (Mr. 
 Minsky) “must know that thesepeople do not acknowledge any continuity with the pastand emphatically renounce the heritage” (p. 
 179)—thatis, the “heritage of the 1860-70s,” which Mr. 
 V. 
 Rozanovsolemnly renounced in 1891 in Moskovskiye Vedomosti (p. 
 178). 
 Mr. 
 Mikhailovsky’s statement about the “Russian disciples” is a falsehood. 
 True, he is not the only, and not theindependent, author of the falsehood that “the Russian dis-ciples renounce the heritage”—it has been reiterated for quite along time now by practically all the representatives of the lib-eral-Narodnik press when fighting the “disciples. 
” As far as we remember, when Mr. 
 Mikhailovsky began his fierce war onthe “disciples” he had not yet invented this falsehood but oth-ers had done so before him. 
 Later he, too, chose to seizeupon it. 
 The further the “disciples” developed theirviews in Russian literature, the more minutely and thoroughly they set forth their opinions on a number of issues, both theoretical and practical, the more rarely did one find thehostile press objecting in substance to the fundamental ten-ets of the new trend, to the view that Russian capitalismis progressive, that the Narodnik idealisation of the smallproducer is absurd, that the explanation of trends of social thought and of legal and political institutions must be sought in the material interests of the various classes ofRussian society. 
 These fundamental tenets were hushed up, it was—and still is—thought best to say nothing about them, but fabrications to discredit the new trend were con-cocted with all the greater fertility. 
 One of these fabrica-tions—”shabby fabrications”—is the modish phrase that“the Russian disciples renounce the heritage,” that they havebroken with the best traditions of the best, the most progres-sive section of Russian society, that they have severed thedemocratic thread, etc. 
, etc. 
, and all the many other ways in which this is expressed. 
 The fact that such phrases are so widely used prompts us to undertake a detailed examina-tion and refutation of them. 
 In order that our exposition maynot appear unsupported, we shall begin by drawing an histor-ico-literary parallel between two “essayists of the coun-tryside,” chosen in order to describe the “heritage. 
” Let us say in advance that we shall confine ourselves exclusively to economic and social questions, that of the “heritage,” weshall examine only these, leaving aside philosophical, lit-erary, aesthetic and other problems. 
 I ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE “HERITAGE” Thirty years ago, in 1861, Otechestvenniye Zapiski145 began publishing a series of essays by Skaldin, under the title In the Backwoods and in the Capital . 
 The essays appeared over a period of three years, 1867-69. 
 In 1870 the author gathered them together in a single volume bearing thesame title. 
 * A perusal of this book, now almost forgotten, is extremely instructive from the angle of the subject underdiscussion, i. 
e. 
, the relation in which the representativesof the “heritage” stand to the Narodniks and the “Russian disciples. 
” The title of the book is inaccurate. 
 The author himself was conscious of this, and he explains in a forewordthat his theme is the attitude of the “capital” to the “coun-tryside,” in other words, that his book is a series of socialessays on rural conditions, and that he does not propose to *Skaldin, In the Backwoods and in the Capital , St. 
 Petersburg, 1870 (p. 
 451). 
 We have not been able to obtain copies of Oteches-tvenniye Zapiski for this period and have used only the book. 
 speak of the capital specifically. 
 Or rather, he might have proposed to do so, but does not find it expedient: /FL2020hς δ/FL00FAhναµαι — οû βο/FL00FAhλοµαι , /FL2020hς δ/FL00E8h βο/FL00FAhλοµαι —οû δ/FL00FAhναµαι (for I will not write as I may, and may not write as I will), Skaldin says,borrowing the words of a Greek writer to explain theinexpediency. 
 Let us give a brief exposition of Skaldin’s views. 
We shall begin with the peasant Reform 146—that ini-tial point from which all who wish to expound their gener-al views on economic and social problems must, even tothis day, inevitably begin. 
 Very much space is devoted to thepeasant Reform in Skaldin’s book. 
 He was perhaps thefirst writer who—on a broad basis of fact and a detailed exam-ination of all aspects of life in the countryside—systemati-cally showed the poverty-stricken state of the peasants after the Reform, the deterioration of their conditions, the new forms of their subjection, economic, legal and in dailylife—the first, in a word, to show all that has since beenelucidated and demonstrated in such detail and thorough-ness in numerous investigations and surveys. 
 Today all these truths are no longer new. 
 At that time they were not only new, but aroused distrust in liberal society, which feared thatbehind these references to the so-called “defects of the Re-form” lurked a condemnation of it and concealed supportfor serfdom . 
 Skaldin’s views are the more interesting becausehe was a contemporary of the Reform (and even perhaps had a hand in it. 
 We have no historical or literary informa-tion or biographical data about him at our disposal). 
 Con-sequently, his views are based on direct observation both ofthe “capital” and the “countryside” of the time, and not onan armchair study of printed material. 
 What first of all strikes the contemporary reader, who is accustomed to the Narodniks’ sickly gushing over the peas-ant Reform, is the extreme sobriety of Skaldin’s views on the subject. 
 He looks at the Reform without any illusionsor idealisation; he sees it as a transaction between two par-ties, the landlords and the peasants, who until then had usedthe land in common on definite terms and now had divided it, the division being accompanied by a change in the legal status of both parties. 
 The factor which determined the modeof division and the size of the share of each party was their respective interests. 
 These interests determined the ambitions of both parties, while the fact that one of them was able to have a direct hand in the Reform itself, and in the practical working-out of the various questions connected with its imple-mentation, determined, among other things, that party’s dom-inant position. 
 That is how Skaldin understands the Reform. 
He dwells in particular detail on the principal question of theReform, the allotments and land redemption payments, reverting to it time and again in the course of his essays. 
 (Skaldin’s book is divided into eleven essays, each of themself-contained, their form reminding one of letters fromthe countryside. 
 The first essay is dated 1866, and the last,1869. 
) It goes without saying that on the subject of the so-called “land-poor” peasants, there is nothing in Skaldin’s book that is new to the contemporary reader, but at the end of the sixties his testimony was both new and valuable. 
We shall not, of course, recapitulate it, but shall only remarkon that feature of his description of the facts which distin-guishes him—to his advantage—from the Narodniks. 
 Skal-din does not talk about “land poverty,” but about the “ex-cessive amount of land cut off from the peasants’ allotments” (p. 
 213, also p. 
 214 and many other places; cf. 
 title of thethird essay), and says that the largest allotments establishedby the Regulations 147 proved to be smaller than those they had before (p. 
 257), incidentally citing some extremelycharacteristic and typical opinions of peasants on this as-pect of the Reform. 
 * Skaldin’s explanations and proofs of this fact are very circumstantial, forceful and even vehementfor a writer who as a rule is extremely moderate and temper-ate, and whose general outlook is undoubtedly bourgeois. 
The fact, then, must have been too starkly evident, if sucha writer as Skaldin speaks of it so emphatically. 
 Skaldin also speaks very emphatically and circumstantially of the severe burden of the payments, and supports his statements with *“‘Our land has been so trimmed down by him ’”(author’s ital-ics) “‘that we can’t live without this cut-off land; he has surroundedus on all sides with his fields and we have nowhere to pasture ourcattle; so you have to pay for your allotment, and on top of thatyou have to pay for the cut-off land, just as much as he asks. 
’” “‘How does that better us?’ said one literate and experienced muzhik, a former quit-renter. 
 ‘We are paying the same quit-rent as before,though our land has been trimmed down. 
’” many facts. 
 “Inordinate taxation,” reads a sub-title to the third essay (1867), “is the chief cause of their” (the peasants’) “poverty,” and Skaldin shows that taxation is higher than the peasants’ returns from the land, and he cites from theProceedings of the Commission on Taxation data relative to the incidence of taxation of the upper and lower classes in Rus-sia which show that 76% of the taxation falls on the lowerclasses and 17% on the upper, whereas in Western Europe the correlation is everywhere incomparably more favourable to the lower classes. 
 A sub-title to the seventh essay (1868)reads, “Excessive money dues are one of the chief causesof poverty among the peasants,” and the author shows thatthe new conditions of life at once demanded money, moneyand more money of the peasant, that the Regulation made it a principle to compensate the landlords for the abolition of serfdom as well (252), and that the amount of the quit-rent was based “on sworn information supplied by the land-lords, their stewards and village elders, that is, on abso-lutely arbitrary data not deserving of the slightest credence”(255), in consequence of which the average quit-rents com-puted by the commissions were higher than the existing average quit-rents. 
 “Added to the burden of quit-rent borneby the peasants was the loss of land which they had usedfor centuries” (258). 
 “Had the redemption price of the landnot been assessed on the basis of the capitalised amount ofthe quit-rents, but on the basis of its actual value at the time of the emancipation, the redemption could have been paid off very easily and would not even have required theassistance of the government, or the issue of credit certifi-cates” (264). 
 “Redemption, which was designed by theRegulation of February 19 to make things easier for thepeasants and to consummate the work of improving their conditions, in reality often has the effect of putting them into even more straitened circumstances” (269). 
 We cite these excerpts—which, in themselves, are of little interest and are in part out-of-date—in order to show how energet-ically the peasants’ interests were defended by a writerwho was hostile to the village community and whose opinionson a whole number of questions were those of a true memberof the Manchester School. 
 It is very instructive to notethat nearly all the useful and non-reactionary precepts of Narodism fully coincide with those of this Mancunian. 
 It goes without saying that, such being Skaldin’s opinion of the Reform, he could not possibly sentimentally idealise it in the way the Narodniks did, and still do, when theysay that it sanctioned people’s production, that it wassuperior to the West-European peasant reforms, that it madea tabula rasa of Russia, and so on. 
 Skaldin did not and couldnot say anything of the kind; further, he said plainly that in our country peasant Reform was less advantageous, less beneficial to the peasants than in the West. 
 “The question willbe put plainly,” he wrote, “if we ask ourselves why thebeneficial consequences of the emancipation in our countryare not growing with the steady speed with which they did,say, in Prussia or Saxony in the first quarter of the present century” (221). 
 “In Prussia, and throughout Germany, the peasants paid not for the redemption of their allotments, whichhad long been recognised as their property by law, but for theredemption of their compulsory services to the landlords” (272). 
 Let us now pass from the economic to the legal aspect of the Reform, as Skaldin sees it. 
 Skaldin is a bitter foe of collective responsibility, of the passport system, and of the patriarchal power of the peasant “community” (and ofthe urban community) over its members. 
 In the thirdessay (1867) he insists on the abolition of collective respon-sibility, the poll tax and the passport system, on the neces-sity for an equitable property tax, and on the replacement of passports by free and permanent certificates. 
 “In no other civilised country is there a tax on internal passports” (109). 
We know that this tax was only abolished in 1897. 
 In the title to the fourth essay, we read: “arbitrary actions of vil-lage communities and urban dumas in sending out passportsand levying taxes on absentee payers. 
”... “Collective respon-sibility is a heavy burden which efficient and industrious husbandmen have to bear on account of idlers and wastrels”(126). 
 Skaldin is disposed to attribute the differentiation of the peasantry, which was already to be observed at that time, to the personal qualities of those who get on or go under. 
He describes in detail the difficulties peasants living in St. 
 Petersburg experience in obtaining or prolonging passports, and repudiates those who would retort that “thank God, allthis multitude of landless peasants have not been regis-tered in the towns, have not increased the numbers of prop-ertyless town-dwellers” (130).... 
 “This barbarous collective responsibility...” (131). 
 ... “Can people placed in such a posi-tion be called free citizens? Are they not the same oldglebae adscripti? *” (132). 
 The peasant Reform is blamed. 
 “But is the peasant Reform to blame for the fact that thelaw, having released the peasant from his bond to the land-lord has devised nothing to deliver him from his bond to his community and place of registration?... Where are the attributes of civil liberty, if the peasant is not free to decideeither his place of domicile or manner of occupation?”(132). 
 Skaldin very accurately and aptly calls our peasanta “settled proletarian” (231). 
 ** In the heading to the eighth essay (1868) we read: “the fact that the peasants are tied to their communities and allotments prevents improvement of their conditions.... 
 It is an obstacle to the development ofoutside industries. 
” “Apart from the ignorance of the peas-ants and the burden of progressively mounting taxation,one of the causes retarding the development of peasant la-bour and, consequently, of peasant prosperity, is the fact that they are tied to their communities and allotments. 
 The tying of the labourer to one place and the shackling ofthe rural community in unbreakable fetters—this in it-self is an extremely unfavourable condition for the develop-ment of labour, private enterprise and small landed property”(284). 
 “Bound to their allotments and communities, and una-ble to apply their labour where it would be more productive and of greater advantage to themselves, the peasants are,as it were, frozen in that congested, herdlike, unproductiveform of life in which they emerged from serfdom” (285). 
 *Peasants in the Roman Empire were bound to definite plots of land which they could not abandon however unprofitable their cultivation might be. 
— Ed. 
 **Skaldin very circumstantially demonstrates the correctness not only of the first, but also of the second part of this definition(proletarian). 
 He devotes much space in his essays to a descriptionof the peasants’ dependent status and their poverty, to a descriptionof the hard lot of the agricultural labourer, to a “description of the 1868 famine” (heading of the fifth essay) and of the diverse forms of peasant bondage and humiliation. 
 There were people in the sixtiesas there are in the nineties, who sought to hush up or deny the exist-ence of famine. 
 Skaldin passionately opposes them. 
 It would ofcourse be superfluous to give detailed excerpts on this point. 
 Skaldin, consequently, regards these aspects of peasant life from the purely bourgeois standpoint, but in spite of that (and, perhaps, because of it), his assessment of the harm caused to all social development and to the peasants them-selves by the fact that the latter are tied down is veryaccurate. 
 And it causes particular harm (let us add) to thelowest sections of the peasantry, the rural proletariat. 
 Skal-din says very aptly: “the concern of the law that the peas-ants shall not remain without land is admirable; but it should not be forgotten that the concern of the peasantsthemselves on this score is incomparably greater than thatof any legislator” (286). 
 “Apart from the fact that the peasantis bound to his allotment and his community, even his tempo-rary departure to earn something elsewhere involves consider-able difficulty and expense, owing to collective responsibil-ity and the passport system” (298). 
 “For many peasants, inmy opinion, a way out of their difficult situation would beopened if ... measures were taken to make it easier for peas-ants to give up their land” (294). 
 Here Skaldin is expressinga wish that runs sharply counter to the Narodnik projects, which all tend in the very opposite direction, namely, to perpetuate the village community, to make the allotmentsinalienable, etc. 
 There has been ample evidence since thento show that Skaldin was perfectly right: the fact that thepeasant remains tied to the land, and that the peasant com-munity is an exclusive social estate only worsens the position of the rural proletariat and retards the country’s economic development, while being unable in any degree toprotect the “settled proletarian” from the worst forms ofbondage and subjection, or from the decline of his wages andliving standards to the very lowest level. 
 The reader may have already seen from the above-quoted excerpts that Skaldin is a foe of the village community. 
 He objects to the community and to land redistribution becausehe favours private property, enterprise and so on (p. 
 142,et seq. 
). 
 To the defenders of the village community Skal-din retorts that “the ancient common law” has outlived itsday. 
 “In all countries,” he writes, “as the rural dwellers came into contact with a civilised environment, their common law lost its primeval purity and became subject to corrup-tion and distortion. 
 The same is to be observed in our coun-try: the power of the community is gradually being turned into the power of the village exploiters and rural clerks and, instead of protecting the person of the peasant, is a heavy burden upon him” (143)—a very true observation, corrobo-rated by endless facts in these thirty years. 
 In Skaldin’s opin-ion, “the patriarchal family, communal ownership of theland and common law” have been irrevocably condemned byhistory. 
 “Those who would preserve these venerable monu-ments of past centuries for us in perpetuity, show thereby that they are more capable of being carried away by an ideathan of penetrating into realities and grasping the irresisti-ble march of history” (162), and to this correct observationSkaldin adds hot Manchester School philippics. 
 “Commu-nity land tenure,” he says elsewhere, “places every peasant in slavish subjection to the whole community” (222). 
 There-fore, Skaldin’s unreserved hostility to the village com-munity from the purely bourgeois standpoint is combinedwith his consistent defence of the peasants’ interests. 
 Hostilethough he is to the village community, Skaldin does not ad-vance foolish projects for forcibly abolishing the commu-nity and forcibly introducing some other, similar system of land ownership, such as are usually concocted by the pres-ent-day opponents of the village community, who favourgross interferences in the peasants’ life and attack the vil-lage community from anything but the standpoint of the peas-ants’ interests. 
 Skaldin, on the contrary, strongly protests against being classed with the believers in “forcible aboli-tion of communal land tenure” (144). 
 “The Regulation ofFebruary 19,” he says, “very wisely left it to the peasantsthemselves ... to pass ... from communal to family tenure. 
Indeed, none but the peasants themselves can properly de-cide the best time for such passage. 
” Consequently, Skaldin is opposed to the village community only for the reason that it hampers economic development, prevents the peasant fromwithdrawing from the community and giving up his land,that is, for the same reason that the “Russian disciples” areopposed to it today; this hostility has nothing in commonwith defence of the selfish interests of the landlords, with defence of the survivals and the spirit of serfdom, with ad-vocacy of interference in the life of the peasants. 
 It is veryimportant to note this difference, because the present-day Narodniks, who are accustomed to seeing enemies of the village community only in the camp of Moskovskiye Vedo-mosti and the like, very willingly pretend to be oblivious to any other kind of hostility to the village community. 
 Skaldin’s general opinion about the causes of the peas-ants’ distressed condition is that they are all survivalsof serfdom. 
 Describing the famine of 1868, he remarks thatthe serf-owners pointed to it with malicious glee, ascribing it to the dissoluteness of the peasants, to the abolition of the landlords’ tutelage, and so on. 
 Skaldin heatedly refutesthese views. 
 “The causes of the impoverishment of the peas-ants,” he says, “ were inherited from serfdom (212), and are not the result of its abolition; they are the general causeswhich keep the majority of our peasants at a level bordering on that of the proletariat”—and he repeats the above-quot-ed opinions of the Reform. 
 It is absurd to attack thefamily division of the land: “Even if divisions do injurethe peasants’ material interests for a while, they save theirpersonal freedom and the moral dignity of the peasant fam-ily, that is, those higher human blessings without which no civil progress is possible” (217), and Skaldin rightly points to the real reasons for the campaign against land divisions:“many landlords highly exaggerate the harm caused by di-visions, blaming them, as well as drunkenness, for all theconsequences of the various causes of the peasants’ poverty,which the landlords are so unwilling to recognise” (218). 
 To those who say that much is being written today about the peasants’ poverty, but that formerly it was not so and thattherefore the peasants’ conditions must have deteriorated,Skaldin replies that: “In order to form a judgement of theresults of the peasants’ emancipation from the landlords’power, by comparing the peasants’ present with their for-mer condition, it would have been necessary, while serfdom still prevailed, to trim down the peasants’ allotments as theyhave been now trimmed down, and to tax the peasants withall the duties which have appeared since the emancipation,and then see how the peasant serfs would have borne suchconditions” (219). 
 It is a supremely characteristic and im-portant feature of Skaldin’s views that he reduces all the causes of the deterioration in the peasants’ condition tosurvivals of serfdom, to its legacy of labour service, quit-rent, cut-off land, and the peasants’ lack of rights, and im-mobility. 
 Skaldin not only does not see that the causes of the peasants’ impoverishment might be found in the very structure of the new socio-economic relations, in the very structureof the post-Reform economy; he absolutely refuses to enter-tain the thought, being profoundly convinced that the com-plete abolition of all these survivals of serfdom would usher inan era of universal well-being. 
 His views, in fact, are nega-tive: remove the obstacles to the free development of the peasantry, remove the shackles bequeathed by serfdom, andeverything will be for the best in this best of possible worlds. 
Skaldin writes: “Here” (i. 
e. 
, in relation to the peasantry)“there is only one course the government can follow: to elimi-nate steadily and unflaggingly the causes which have reduced our peasants to their present state of dullness and poverty and which do not allow them to rise to their feet” (224, my italics). 
Highly characteristic in this respect is the reply given by Skal-din to those who defend the “community” (that is, binding thepeasants to the village communities and allotments) on theground that, without it, “a rural proletariat will emerge. 
” “This objection,” Skaldin says, “falls to the ground when we remember what boundless tracts of land lie idle in ourcountry from lack of hands to cultivate them. 
 If the lawdid not hamper the natural distribution of manpower, theonly people who would be real proletarians in Russia wouldbe the professional beggars or the incorrigibly vicious and dissipated” (144)—the typical view of the eighteenth-cen-tury economists and “enlighteners,” who believed that aboli-tion of serfdom and all its survivals would usher in a reignof universal well-being on earth. 
 The Narodnik would nodoubt look down on Skaldin with disdain and say that he wassimply a bourgeois. 
 Yes, of course, Skaldin was a bourgeois, but he was a representative of the progressive bourgeois ideology which the Narodniks have replaced by one that ispetty-bourgeois and, on a whole number of points, reaction-ary. 
 And this “bourgeois” had a better idea than the Narod-nik of how to defend those practical and real interests of thepeasants which coincided, and coincide now, with the requirements of social development generally! * *And vice versa, all the progressive practical measures that we find the Narodniks advocating are, in substance, fully bourgeois , /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR To complete our account of Skaldin’s views, let us add that he is opposed to the system of social estates, advocates a single court of justice for all of them, sympathises “theoretical-ly” with the idea that the volost authorities should not be con-stituted on the basis of social estates, is an ardent advocate ofpublic education, especially general education, favours localself-government and Zemstvo institutions, and believes thatland credits, especially small, should be widely available, for there is a strong desire among the peasants to buy land. 
 Here, too, Skaldin is a true “Mancunian”: he says, for instance,that Zemstvo and municipal banks are “a patriarchal orprimitive form of bank” and should give way to privatebanks, which are “vastly superior” (80). 
 The land might beendowed with value “through the stimulation of industrial and commercial activity in our provinces” (71), and so on. 
 To sum up. 
 In outlook, Skaldin may be called a bour-geois enlightener. 
 His views are very reminiscent of thoseof the eighteenth-century economists (correspondingly re-fracted, of course, in the prism of Russian conditions), andhe reflected the general “enlightenment” character of the “heritage” of the sixties quite vividly. 
 Like the West-Euro-pean enlighteners and the majority of the literary represen-tatives of the sixties, Skaldin was imbued with a violenthostility to serfdom and all its economic, social and legal products. 
 That was the first characteristic feature of the “en-lightener. 
” The second characteristic feature common to all the Russian enlighteners was ardent advocacy of educa-tion, self-government, liberty, European forms of life and all-round Europeanisation of Russia generally~ And the third characteristic feature of the “enlightener” was his defence of the interests of the masses, chiefly of the peasants (who,in the days of the enlighteners, were not yet fully emanci-pated or only in process of being emancipated), the sincere belief that abolition of serfdom and its survivals would befollowed by universal well-being, and a sincere desire to help bring this about. 
 These three features constitute the that is, they conduce to the capitalist line of development, and no other. 
 Only petty-bourgeois people could concoct the theory that extension of peasant land tenure, tax reduction, resettlement, credits,technical progress, marketing arrangements and suchlike measureswould serve the interests of so-called “people’s production. 
” essence of what in our country is called “the heritage of the sixties,” and it is important to emphasise that there is nothing whatsoever of Narodism in this heritage . 
 There are quite a num-ber of Russian writers whose views are characterised by thesefeatures and who have never had anything in common withNarodism. 
 Where the outlook of a writer bears these fea-tures, he is always recognised by everyone as having “pre-served the traditions of the sixties,” quite irrespective of what his attitude to Narodism may be. 
 Nobody, of course, would think of saying that Mr. 
 M. 
 Stasyulevich, for instance, whosejubilee was recently celebrated, had “renounced the heritage”merely because he was an opponent of Narodism or was in-different to the questions advanced by Narodism. 
 We have tak-en Skaldin * as an example precisely because, while he was undoubtedly a representative of the “heritage,” he was at the same time a confirmed enemy of those ancient institu-tions which the Narodniks have taken under their protec-tion. 
 We have said that Skaldin was a bourgeois. 
 Ample proof of this description has been given above, but it must be ob-served that this word is often understood very incorrectly, narrowly and unhistorically, it being associated ( without distinction of historical period ) with a selfish defence of the interests of a minority. 
 It must not be forgotten that at thetime when the eighteenth-century enlighteners (who are bygeneral consent included among the leaders of the bour-*It might perhaps be objected that Skaldin is not typical of the sixties because of his hostility to the village community and because of his tone. 
 But it is not a question of the village community alone. 
 It is a question of the views common to all the enlighteners,which Skaldin shared. 
 As to his tone, it really is not typical in itscalm reasonableness, moderation, emphasis on gradualness, etc. 
 Itwas not without reason that Engels called Skaldin a Liberalkonser-vativ . 
 148 However, the selection of a representative of the heritage with a more typical tone would, firstly, be inconvenient for various reasons, and might, secondly, give rise to misunderstanding whencomparing him with the present-day Narodniks. 
 149 Because of the very character of our task, the tone (contrary to the proverb) does not make the music , and Skaldin’s untypical tone serves to bring out his “music,” that is, the substance of his views, more distinctly. 
 And it is only the substance that interests us. 
 It is only on the basis of the substance of writers’ views (and not of their tone) that weintend to draw the comparison between the representatives of theheritage and the present-day Narodniks. 
 geoisie) wrote, and at the time when our enlighteners of the forties and sixties wrote, all social problems amounted to the struggle against serfdom and its survivals. 
 At that time the new socio-economic relations and their contradic-tions were still in embryo. 
 No selfishness was therefore dis-played at that time by the ideologists of the bourgeoisie;on the contrary, both in the West and in Russia, they quitesincerely believed in universal well-being and sincerely desired it, they sincerely did not see (partly could not yet see) the contradictions in the system which was growing outof serfdom. 
 It is not for nothing that Skaldin in one part ofhis book quotes Adam Smith: we have seen that both hisviews and the character of his arguments in many respectsrepeat the theses of that great ideologist of the progressive bourgeoisie. 
 And so, if we compare Skaldin’s practical suggestions with the views of the present-day Narodniks, on the onehand, and with the attitude to them of the “Russian disci-ples,” on the other, we shall find that the “disciples” willalways support Skaldin’s suggestions, since the latter reflect the interests of the progressive social classes, and the vital interests of social development generally along the present,i. 
e. 
, capitalist, path. 
 The things that the Narodniks havechanged in Skaldin’s practical wishes, or in his presentationof problems, are a change for the worse , and are rejected by the “disciples. 
” It is not against the “heritage” that the dis-ciples “hurl themselves” (that is an absurd fabrication), but against the romantic and petty-bourgeois additions tothe heritage made by the Narodniks. 
 To these additions weshall now pass. 
 II NARODISM’S ADDITION TO THE “HERITAGE” From Skaldin, let us pass to Engelhardt. 
 His Letters from the Countryside are likewise essays on the social as-pects of rural life, so that in substance and even in form his book very much resembles that of Skaldin’s. 
 Engelhardt ismuch more talented than Skaldin, and his letters from thecountry are incomparably more lively and imaginative. 
The lengthy disquisitions of the serious author of In the Backwoods and in the Capital are not to be found in Engelhardt’s book, which, for its part, is replete with deft delineation and imagery. 
 It is not surprising that Engel-hardt’s book enjoys the steady sympathy of the reading public,and only recently appeared in a fresh edition, while Skal-din’s book is almost completely forgotten, although it wasonly two years after its publication that Otechestvenniye Zapiski began printing Engelhardt’s letters. 
 There is there-fore no need for us to acquaint the reader with the contents of Engelhardt’s book, and we shall confine ourselves to abrief exposition of two aspects of his views: first, views thatare characteristic of the “heritage” in general, and commonto Engelhardt and Skaldin in particular; and, second, viewsthat are specifically Narodnik. 
 Engelhardt is already a Na-rodnik , but his views still contain so much that is common to all the enlighteners, so much that has been discarded or al-tered by contemporary Narodism, that one is at a loss howto class him—with the representatives of the “heritage” ingeneral, without the Narodnik tinge, or with the Narodniks. 
 What makes Engelhardt akin to the former is, primarily, the remarkable sobriety of his views, his plain and direct descriptions of realities, his relentless exposure of allthe bad sides of the “foundations” in general, and of the peas-antry in particular—of those very “foundations,” the falseidealisation and embellishment of which is an essentialcomponent of Narodism. 
 Engelhardt’s very feebly and tim-idly expressed Narodism is therefore in direct and crying contradiction to the picture of rural realities that he paints with such talent, and if some economist or sociologist wereto base his opinions of the countryside on Engelhardt’sfacts and observations , * he would find it impossible to draw Narodnik conclusions from such material. 
 Idealisation of the peasant and his village community is one of the essen-*Incidentally, this would be not only extremely interesting and instructive, but also perfectly legitimate on the part of an eco-nomic investigator. 
 If scientists trust the data of questionnaires—the answers and opinions of numerous proprietors, who all too oftenare biassed and ill-informed, have not developed a consistent outlook or intelligently thought out their views—why not trust the obser-vations gathered for a full eleven years by a man with splendid powersof observation, who is unquestionably sincere and has made a superbstudy of what he is talking about. 
 tial components of Narodism, and Narodniks of all shades, from Mr. 
 V. 
 V. 
 to Mr. 
 Mikhailovsky, have given full rein to this effort to idealise and embellish the “community. 
” There is not the slightest trace of such embellishment inEngelhardt. 
 As against the fashionable talk about the com-munal spirit of our peasantry, the current contrasting of this“communal spirit” to the individualism of the town, the com-petition of capitalist economy, etc. 
, Engelhardt is absolutely relentless in exposing the amazing individualism of the small farmer. 
 He shows at length that our “peasants in matter ofownership have the keenest possible sense of property”(p. 
 62, 1885 ed. 
), that they cannot tolerate “gang work,”hate it from narrowly selfish and egoistic motives: in gangwork each is “afraid of doing more than the others” (p. 
 206). 
 This fear of doing more work than others goes to comical (or, rather, tragicomical) extremes; the author, for instance,tells of women living under one roof and bound by ties ofcommon residence and kinship, each of whom washes on-ly her particular part of the table at which they eat, or whomilk the cows in turn, each getting milk for her own child (for fear that others may hide some of the milk) and preparing porridge for her own child separately (p. 
 323). 
Engelhardt brings out these features in such detail, and cor-roborates them with such a mass of examples, that there canbe no question of their being exceptional instances. 
 One orthe other: either Engelhardt is a worthless observer who de-serves no credence, or the tale about the communal spirit and communal virtues of our muzhik are sheer imagination,which transfers to economic practice features abstracted from the form of land tenure (and from this form of landholding there are additionally abstracted all the fiscal and adminis-trative aspects). 
 Engelhardt shows that in his economic activ-ity the muzhik aims at becoming a kulak. 
 “There is a defi-nite dose of the kulak in every peasant,” he says (p. 
 491),“kulak ideals prevail among the peasants. 
”... “I have saidtime and again that individualism, egoism, the urge to ex-ploit are strongly developed among the peasants. 
”... “Eachprides himself on being a pike and strives to swallow the tiddler. 
” Engelhardt demonstrates superbly that the trend among the peasantry is not towards the “communal” system,not towards “people’s production,” but towards the most or-dinary petty-bourgeois system inherent in all capitalist so-cieties. 
 He describes and proves incontrovertibly the ten-dency of the well-to-do peasant to launch into trade (363), to loan grain in return for work, to buy the labour of the poormuzhik (pp. 
 457, 492, etc. 
)—or, in economic language, theconversion of enterprising muzhiks into a rural bourgeoisie. 
“If,” says Engelhardt, “the peasants do not adopt the artelform of economy and each continues to conduct his own farm in isolation, then, even if there is an abundance of land, there will be both landless peasants and farm labourersamong the peasant tillers. 
 Further, I believe that the differ-ence in status among the peasants will be even wider thanit now is. 
 Despite communal ownership of the land, side byside with the ‘rich,’ there will be many virtually landless farm labourers. 
 What benefit is it to me or my children if I have the right to land, but neither the capital nor the implementswith which to cultivate it? It is like giving a blind man landand saying—eat it!” (p. 
 370). 
 With a sort of melancholy iro-ny, the “artel form of economy” figures forlornly in this pas-sage as a pious and innocent wish which, far from following from the facts about the peasantry, is directly repudiated and ruled out by them. 
 Another feature which makes Engelhardt akin to the representatives of the heritage without any Narodnik tingeis his belief that the chief and fundamental cause of thedistressed condition of the peasantry is the survivals of serfdom and the reglementation characteristic of it. 
 Do away with these survivals and this reglementation, and allwill be well. 
 Engelhardt’s absolute hostility to reglemen-tation and his caustic scoffing at all attempts to conferhappiness on the muzhik through reglementation from above,are in the sharpest contrast to the Narodniks’ faith in “the reason and conscience, the knowledge and patriotism of the ruling classes” (the words of Mr. 
 Yuzhakov, in Russ-koye Bogatstvo , 1896, No. 
 12, p. 
 106), to their fantastic projects for “organising production,” etc. 
 Let us recall En-gelhardt’s sarcastic denunciation of the rule that vodkashould not be sold at flour-mills, a rule intended for the muzhik’s “good”; or the disgust with which he speaks of the obligatory order issued by several Zemstvos in 1880 forbid-ding the sowing of rye before August 15, of that gross in-terference by armchair “scientists”—also actuated by con-sideration for the muzhik’s good—in the farming of “mil-lions of peasant proprietors” (424). 
 Referring to such rules and orders as those forbidding smoking in pine forests,pike fishing in spring, cutting birch for the May festival,bird-nest pillaging and so on, Engelhardt sarcasticallyremarks: ... “solicitude for the muzhik is and always has beenthe principal concern of intellectual minds. 
 Who lives for himself? Everybody lives for the muzhik!... The muzhik is stupid, he cannot manage his own affairs. 
If nobody looks after him, he will burn down all theforests, kill off all the birds, denude the rivers of fish,ruin the land, and himself die out” (398). 
 Do you think,reader, that this writer could have had any sympathy for laws so dear to the hearts of the Narodniks, as, say, those for-bidding alienation of allotments? Could his pen have writtenanything like the phrase of one of the pillars of Russkoye Bogatstvo quoted above? Could he have shared the view of Mr. 
 N. 
 Karyshev, another pillar of the same journal, whoflung the reproach at our gubernia Zemstvos (in the nineties!) that they “find no room” “for regular large and substantial expenditure on the organisation of agricultural labour”? * Let us mention another feature which makes Engelhardt akin to Skaldin: his unconscious attitude to many purelybourgeois aspirations and measures. 
 Not that Engelhardttries to gild the petty bourgeois or to concoct excuses (à la Mr. 
 V. 
 V. 
) for not applying this designation to any particular entrepreneur—far from it. 
 As a practical farm-er, Engelhardt is simply infatuated with every progres-sive innovation, every improvement in farming methods,and completely fails to realise that the social form of theseimprovements is the most effective refutation of his own theory that capitalism is impossible in our country. 
 Let us recall, for instance, how delighted he was with the suc-cess he achieved on his farm thanks to the introduction ofthe piece-rate system of paying his workers (for flax scutching, threshing, etc. 
). 
 Engelhardt does not even suspect that thesubstitution of piece rates for time rates is one of the most * Russkoye Bogatstvo , 1896, No. 
 5, May. 
 Mr. 
 Karyshev’s article about gubernia Zemstvo expenditure on economic measures. 
 P. 
 20. 
 widespread methods by which a developing capitalist econ-omy heightens the intensification of labour and increases the rate of surplus-value. 
 Another example. 
 Engelhardt scoffs at the programme of Zemledelcheskaya Gazeta150: “discontinuation of leasing fields for cycle cultivation151; farming based on employment of labourers; introduction ofimproved machines, implements and cattle breeds and ofmulti-field system; improvement of meadows and pastures, etc. 
, etc. 
” “All this, however, is nothing but general talk!” En-gelhardt exclaims (128). 
 Yet it was this programme thatEngelhardt adopted in his own practical farming; he achievedtechnical progress on his own farm precisely by basingit on the employment of farm labourers: Or again: we knowhow frankly and faithfully Engelhardt exposed the real tendencies of the enterprising muzhik; but that did not prevent him from asserting that “it is not factoriesthat are needed, but small ” (Engelhardt’s italics) “rural distilleries, oil mills,” etc. 
 (p. 
 336), that is, what is “needed”is that the rural bourgeoisie should go in for agriculturalindustries—which has always and everywhere been one of the major indications of agricultural capitalism. 
 Here we have the influence of the fact that Engelhardt was not a theo-retician but a practical farmer. 
 It is one thing to argue thatprogress is possible without capitalism, and another thingto farm yourself. 
 Having set himself the aim of conductinghis farm on rational lines, Engelhardt was compelled , by vir-tue of surrounding circumstances, to strive for this by purely capitalistic methods and to leave aside all his theoreticaland abstract misgivings concerning the “employment offarm labourers. 
” In the field of theory Skaldin argued likea typical member of the Manchester School, completely fail -ing to realise both that his arguments were of just this char-acter, and that they corresponded to the needs of Russia’s capitalist evolution. 
 In the field of practice Engelhardt wascompelled to act as a typical Mancunian, despite his theo-retical protest against capitalism and his desire to believethat his fatherland was following a path of its own. 
 Engelhardt did believe this, and it is this that induces us to call him a Narodnik. 
 He had already clearly perceived the real trend of economic development in Russia, and sought to explain away the contradictions of this develop-ment. 
 He endeavoured to prove that agricultural capital-ism was impossible in Russia, that “there is no Knecht in our country” (p. 
 556)—though he himself refuted in thegreatest detail the story that our workers are expensive, and himself showed how miserably he paid his cattleman, Pyotr, who with his family, after their keep, had only6 rubles a year left “with which to buy salt, vegetable oil, clothing” (p. 
 10). 
 “Yet even he is envied, and if I turned him off, fifty others would immediately be found eager to takehis place” (p. 
 11). 
 Speaking of the success of his farm, and of the skilful way his workers handle the plough, Engelhardt tri-umphantly exclaims: “And who are these ploughmen?Ignorant, unconscientious Russian peasants” (p. 
 225). 
 Though his own farming experience and his exposure of the peasant’s individualism refuted all illusions concern-ing the “community spirit,” Engelhardt not only “believed” that the peasants could adopt an artel form of economy, but expressed the “conviction” that such would indeed be thecase, and that we, the Russians, would accomplish this great feat and introduce a new mode of farming. 
 “It is this that constitutes the exceptional character, the specific nature ofour economy” (p. 
 349). 
 Engelhardt the realist turns into Engelhardt the romanticist, who replaces the complete lack of “exceptional character” in his own methods of farming, and inthe peasants’ farming methods as he observed them by “faith” in a future “exceptional character”! From this faith it is only a stone’s throw to the ultra-Narodnik features which—thoughvery few—one finds in Engelhardt, to a narrow nationalism bordering on chauvinism (“We’ll give Europe a drubbing, and “in Europe, too, the muzhik will be on our side” (p . 
 387)—saidEngelhardt to a landlord with whom he was discussing the prospect of war), and even to idealisation of labour service! Yes, this selfsame Engelhardt who devoted so many su-perb pages of his book to describing the downtrodden and degraded condition of the peasant who has taken a loan of money or grain to be paid off in work and is compelled to toilalmost for nothing in the very worst conditions of personal dependence *—this selfsame Engelhardt goes to the length *Remember the picture of the village elder (i. 
e. 
, the landlord’s steward) summoning a peasant to work when the latter’s own grain of saying that “it would be a good thing if the doctor” (he was talking of the benefit of and need for doctors in the coun-tryside. 
 V. 
 I. 
 ) “had a farm of his own, so that the muzhik could pay for the treatment with his labour” (p. 
 41). 
 Comment is superfluous. 
 —All in all, comparing the above-enumerated good features of Engelhardt’s outlook (i. 
e. 
, those he has in com-mon with the representatives of the “heritage” without any Narodnik tinge) with the bad (i. 
e. 
, the Narodnik features)we have to admit that the former unquestionably predomi-nate in the author of Letters from the Countryside , while the latter are an extraneous and accidental admixture, as itwere, which has drifted in from without and is at odds with the general tone of his book. 
 III HAS THE “HERITAGE” GAINED ASSOCIATION WITH NARODISM? “But what do you understand by Narodism?” the reader will probably ask. 
 “The meaning attached to the concept ‘heritage’ was defined above, but no definition of the con-cept ‘Narodism’ has been given. 
” By Narodism we mean a system of views which comprises the following three features: 1) Belief that capitalism in Russia represents a deterioration , a retrogression . 
 Hence the urge and desire to “retard,” “halt,” “stop the break-up” of the age-old foundations by capitalism, and similar reac-tionary cries. 
 2) Belief in the exceptional character of the Rus-sian economic system in general , and of the peasantry , with its village community , artel , etc. 
, in particular . 
 It is not consid-ered necessary to apply to Russian economic relationships the concepts elaborated by modern science concerning the different social classes and their conflicts. 
 The village-community peasantry is regarded as something higher and is already overripe and spoiling, and he is compelled to go merely because, if he does not, the volost authorities will “take his pantsdown. 
” better than capitalism; there is a disposition to idealise the “foundations. 
” The existence among the peasantry of contradictions characteristic of every commodity and cap-italist economy is denied or slurred over; it is denied thatany connection exists between these contradictions and theirmore developed form in capitalist industry and capital-ist agriculture. 
 3) Disregard of the connection between the “intelligentsia ” and the country ’s legal and political insti-tutions , on the one hand , and the material interests of definite social classes , on the other . 
 Denial of this connection, lack of a materialist explanation of these social factors, induces thebelief that they represent a force capable of “dragginghistory along another line” (Mr. 
 V. 
 V. 
), of “diversionfrom the path” (Mr. 
 N. 
 —on, Mr. 
 Yuzhakov, etc. 
), and so on. 
 That is what we mean by “Narodism. 
” The reader will consequently see that we use this term in its broad sense,just as all the “Russian disciples” use it when opposing awhole system of views, and not individual representativesof this system. 
 Among these individual representatives there are differences, of course, and sometimes important ones. 
 Nobody ignores these differences. 
 But the afore-men-tioned views are common to all the most diverse represent-atives of Narodism, from—well, Mr. 
 Yuzov, let us say,to Mr. 
 Mikhailovsky. 
 To these objectionable features oftheir views, the Yuzovs, Sazonovs, V. 
 V. 
, etc. 
, add others, which are not shared, for instance, either by Mr. 
 Mikhai-lovsky or by other contributors to the present-day Russkoye Bogatstvo . 
 To deny these differences between the Narod-niks in the narrow sense and the Narodniks in general would,of course, be wrong; but it would be wronger still to ignorethe fact that the fundamental socio-economic views of all Narodniks coincide on the afore-mentioned major points. 
 And since it is these fundamental views that the“Russian disciples” reject, and not only “deplorable devia-tions” from them in a worse direction, they are obviouslyfully entitled to employ the term “Narodism” in its widermeaning. 
 Not only are they entitled to do so; they cannot do otherwise. 
 Turning to the fundamental views of Narodism outlined above, the first thing we must note is that the “heritage” has absolutely no part in them . 
 There are a whole number of undeniable representatives and guardians of the “heritage” who have nothing in common with Narodism, who do not pose the question of capitalism at all, who do not believe inthe exceptional character of Russia, the peasant community,etc. 
, and who do not regard the intelligentsia and our legaland political institutions as a factor capable of “diver-sion from the path. 
” Above we named in illustration the editor and publisher of Vestnik Yevropy , 152 who might be accused of anything save violation of the traditions of theheritage. 
 On the other hand, there are people whose viewsresemble the afore-mentioned fundamental principles ofNarodism, yet who plainly and frankly “renounce the her-itage”—we might mention, for example, the same Mr. 
 Y. 
 Ab-ramov to whom Mr. 
 Mikhailovsky refers, or Mr. 
 Yuzov. 
 The Narodism which the “Russian disciples” battle againstdid not even exist when the heritage was (to use a legal term)“bequeathed,” that is, in the sixties. 
 Germs, rudiments ofNarodism existed, of course, not only in the sixties, but inthe forties and even earlier *—but it is not the history of Narodism that concerns us here. 
 We repeat, what is impor-tant for us is to establish that the “heritage” of the sixties,in the sense outlined above, has nothing in common withNarodism, i. 
e. 
, that there is nothing in common in the sub-stance of their views, that they pose different problems. 
 Thereare guardians of the “heritage” who are not Narodniks, and there are Narodniks who “have renounced the heritage. 
” Of course, there are also Narodniks who guard the “heritage,”or who pretend to do so. 
 That is why we speak of a connec-tion between the heritage and Narodism. 
 Let us see whathas been the effect of this connection. 
 First, Narodism made a big step forward compared with the heritage by posing for the attention of society prob-lems which the guardians of the heritage were partly (intheir time) not yet able to pose, or partly did not, and donot, pose because of their inherent narrowness of outlook. 
In posing these problems the Narodniks performed a great historical service, and it is quite natural and understanda-*Cf. 
 Tugan-Baranovsky’s The Russian Factory (St. 
 Petersburg, 1898). 
 ble, that, having offered a solution (whatever it may be worth) for these problems, Narodism thereby occupied a foremost place among the progressive trends of Russian social thought. 
 But the solution of these problems proposed by Naro-dism proved to be worthless, to be based on backward theo-ries, long ago discarded in Western Europe, on a romanticand petty-bourgeois criticism of capitalism, on a disregard for the cardinal facts of Russian history and reality. 
 So long as the development of capitalism in Russia and of itsinherent contradictions was still very weak, this primitivecriticism of capitalism could hold its ground. 
 But Naro-dism is absolutely incapable of measuring up to the con-temporary development of capitalism in Russia, the contem-porary state of our knowledge of Russian economic history and reality, the contemporary demands made on sociologi-cal theory. 
 Once progressive, as the first to pose the prob-lem of capitalism, nowadays Narodism is a reactionary and harmful theory which misleads social thought and plays into the hands of stagnation and Asiatic backward-ness. 
 Today the reactionary character of its criticism of capitalism has even lent Narodism features; that make itinferior to the outlook which confines itself to faithful guardianship of the heritage. 
 * That this is so we shall now en-deavour to prove by analysing each of the three basic fea-tures of the Narodnik outlook mentioned above. 
 The first feature—the belief that in Russia capitalism represents a deterioration, a retrogression. 
 Very soon afterthe problem of capitalism in Russia had been posed, it be-came clear that our economic development was capital-istic, and the Narodniks proclaimed this development aretrogression, a mistake, a deviation from the path supposed-ly prescribed by the whole history of the nation’s life, from the path supposedly hallowed by age-old foundations,and so on and so forth. 
 The enlighteners’ ardent faith inthis course of social development was replaced by distrust *I have already had occasion to remark above in the article on economic romanticism that our opponents display remarkable short-sightedness in regarding the terms reactionary and petty-bour-geois as polemical abuse, when they have a perfectly definite histor-ico-philosophical meaning. 
 (See p. 
 217 of the present volume. 
— Ed. 
) of it; historical optimism and cheerfulness were replaced by pessimism and dejection founded on the fact that the farther matters proceeded as they were proceeding, the harder and more difficult would it be to solve the problemsraised by the new development; appeals were made to “re-tard” and “halt” this development; the theory was advancedthat Russia’s backwardness was her good fortune, and soforth. 
 All these features of the Narodnik outlook, far from having anything in common with the “heritage,” flatly contradict it. 
 The belief that Russian capitalism representsa “deviation from the path,” a deterioration, etc. 
, leads toa misrepresentation of Russia’s whole economic evolution,to a misrepresentation of that “change-over” which is takingplace before our eyes. 
 Carried away by their desire to retard and stop the break-up of the age-old foundations by capital-ism, the Narodniks display an amazing lack of historicaltact, they forget that antecedent to this capitalism there was nothing but the same exploitation combined with countlessforms of bondage and personal dependence, which burdenedthe position of the labourer, nothing but routine and stag-nation in social production and, hence, in all spheres of social life. 
 Contending against capitalism from their romantic,petty-bourgeois angle, the Narodniks throw all historicalrealism overboard and always compare the reality of capital-ism with a fiction of the pre-capitalist order. 
 The “heritage” of the sixties with their ardent faith in the progressive char-acter of the existing course of social development, their relentless enmity directed wholly and exclusively againstthe relics of the past, their conviction that these relics hadonly to be swept clean away and everything would go splen-didly—this “heritage,” far from having any part in the afore-mentioned views of Narodism, runs directly counter to them. 
 The second feature of Narodism is belief in Russia’s ex-ceptionalism, idealisation of the peasantry, the villagecommunity, etc. 
 The doctrine of Russia’s exceptionalisminduced the Narodniks to seize upon out-dated West-Europe-an theories, prompted them to regard many of the achieve-ments of West-European culture with amazing levity: the Narodniks reassured themselves with the thought that, ifwe lacked some of the features of civilised humanity, “we are destined,” on the other hand, to show the world new modes of economy, etc. 
 Not only was the analysis of capitalism and all its manifestations given by progressive West-Eu-ropean thought not accepted in relation to Holy Russia;every effort was made to invent excuses for not drawing thesame conclusions about Russian capitalism as were maderegarding European capitalism. 
 The Narodniks bowedand scraped to the authors of this analysis and calmly continued to remain romanticists of the same sort as these authors had all their lives contended against. 
 Again, thisdoctrine of Russia’s exceptionalism, which is shared by allthe Narodniks, far from having anything in common withthe “heritage,” runs directly counter to it. 
 The “sixties,”on the contrary, desired to Europeanise Russia, believed that she should adopt the general European culture, were concerned to have the institutions of this culture trans-ferred to our anything but exceptional soil. 
 Any doctrinethat teaches that Russia is exceptional is completely atvariance with the spirit and the tradition of the sixties. 
 Evenmore at variance with this tradition is Narodism’s ideali-sation and over-embellishment of the countryside. 
 This false idealisation, which desired at all costs to see some-thing specific in our rural system, something quite unlikethe rural system in every other country in the period ofpre-capitalist relations, is in naked contradiction to thetraditions of the sober and realistic heritage. 
 The wider and more deeply capitalism developed, the more distinctly did the countryside display the contradictions common to everycommodity-capitalist society, the more and more glar-ingly did the antithesis stand out between the Narodniks’honeyed talk about the peasant’s “community spirit,” “ar-tel spirit,” etc. 
, on the one hand, and the actual division of the peasantry into a rural bourgeoisie and a rural proletariat on the other; and the more rapidly didthe Narodniks, who continued to look upon things withthe eyes of the peasant, change from sentimental roman-ticists into ideologists of the petty bourgeoisie, because inmodern society the small producer changes into a commodity producer. 
 Their false idealisation of the countryside and romantic dreams about the “community spirit” led the Narod-niks to adopt an extremely frivolous attitude towards the peas-ants’ real needs arising from the existing course of economic development. 
 In theory one might talk to one’s heart’s content about the strength of the foundations, but in prac-tice every Narodnik sensed very well that the elimination ofthe relics of the past, the survivals of the pre-Reform sys-tem, which to this day bind our peasantry from head tofoot, would open the way to precisely the capitalist courseof development, and no other. 
 Better stagnation than capi-talist progress—this, essentially, is every Narodnik’s attitude to the countryside, although of course not every Narod-nik would venture to say so frankly and bluntly, withthe naïve forthrightness of a Mr. 
 V. 
 V. 
 “Tied to their allot-ments and communities, and unable to apply their labourwhere it would be more productive and of greater advantage to themselves, the peasants are, as it were, frozen in that congested, herd-like, unproductive form of life in whichthey emerged from serfdom. 
” That is how one of the repre-sentatives of the “heritage” saw it from his characteristic“enlightener’s” standpoint. 
 153 “Better that the peasants remain frozen in their routine, patriarchal form of life, than clear the way for capitalism in the countryside”— that, essentially, is how every Narodnik sees it. 
 Indeed,probably not a single Narodnik would venture to deny thatsocial-estate exclusiveness of the peasant community, withits collective responsibility and its ban on the sale of landand on the right to refuse an allotment, stands in the sharpest contradiction to contemporary economic realities , to contem-porary commodity-capitalist relations and their development. 
To deny this contradiction is impossible, but the whole pointis that the Narodniks are mortally afraid of this presentationof the question, of this contrasting of the legal status of thepeasantry with economic realities and the present course of economic development. 
 The Narodnik is stubbornly determined to believe in a non-existent non-capitalist de-velopment which is a figment of his romantic imagination,and therefore ... and therefore he is prepared to retardthe present development, which is proceeding along capital-ist lines. 
 The Narodnik’s attitude to such problems as the social-estate exclusiveness of the peasant community, col-lective responsibility, and the peasant’s right to sell andgive up his allotment, is not only one of extreme caution and fear for the fate of the “foundations” (the foundations of routine and stagnation); more than this, the Narodnik falls so low that he even welcomes the police rule forbidding the peasants to sell land. 
 To such a Narodnik, one might re-tort in the words of Engelhardt: “The muzhik is stupid, hecannot manage his own affairs. 
 If nobody looks after him,he will burn down all the forests, kill off all the birds, denudethe rivers of fish, ruin the land and himself die out. 
” Here the Narodnik quite definitely “renounces the heritage,” becomes a reactionary. 
 And note that with theprogress of economic development, this destruction of thesocial-estate exclusiveness of the peasant communityincreasingly becomes an imperative necessity for the ruralproletariat, while the inconveniences arising therefrom for the peasant bourgeoisie are not at all considerable. 
 The “enterprising muzhik” may easily rent land on the side, openan establishment in some other village, and travel on busi-ness wherever he likes and whenever he likes. 
 But for the“peasant” who lives chiefly from the sale of his labour-pow-er, being tied to his allotment and community is an enormous restriction on his economic activity, makes it impossible for him to find a better employer, and compels him to sell hislabour-power only to local purchasers, who invariably payless and seek all sorts of ways and means of reducing him tobondage. 
 Having surrendered to the sway of romanticdreaming and set himself the aim of maintaining and pre-serving the foundations despite the course of economic development, the Narodnik, without himself observing it,had slipped down this inclined plane until he found him-self side by side with the agrarian, who yearns with all hisheart and soul for the preservation and consolidation of the“peasant’s tie with the land. 
” It is worth recalling, for exam-ple, that this social-estate exclusiveness of the peasant community has bred specific methods of hiring workers:factory and farm owners send out agents to the villages,especially those heavily in arrears, to hire labourers on themost advantageous terms. 
 Fortunately, the developmentof agricultural capitalism, by breaking down the “settled state” of the proletarian (such is the effect of the so-called agricultural outside employments), is gradually substitut-ing free hire for this form of bondage. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR Another, and perhaps no less striking corroboration of our contention that the present-day Narodnik theories are per-nicious, is to be found in the common tendency among the Narodniks to idealise labour services . 
 We have already giv-en an example of how Engelhardt, consummating his Na-rodnik fall from grace, went so far as to say that “it wouldbe a good thing” to develop labour services in the country-side! We find the same thing in Mr. 
 Yuzhakov’s famous project for agricultural gymnasia ( Russkoye Bogatstvo , 1895, No. 
 5). 
 * In serious economic articles in the same journal, a fellow contributor of Engelhardt’s, Mr. 
 V. 
 V. 
,indulged in similar idealisation when he declared that thepeasant had scored a victory over the landlord, who hadsupposedly wanted to introduce capitalism; but the whole trouble was that the peasant undertook to cultivate the landlord’s land in return for land received from him “onlease”—in other words, was restoring the very same modeof economy as existed under serfdom. 
 These are some of themost glaring illustrations of the Narodniks’ reactionaryattitude to problems concerning our agriculture. 
 In less glaring form, you will find this idea advocated by every Narodnik. 
 Every Narodnik says that capitalism in our agri-culture is pernicious and dangerous, because capitalism,you see, substitutes the farm labourer for the independentpeasant. 
 The reality of capitalism (the “farm labourer”) is contrasted to the fiction of the “independent” peasant: and this fiction is based on the peasant ownership of means of production in the pre-capitalist era, the fact being mod-estly ignored that the peasant has to pay double theirvalue for these means of production; that these means ofproduction serve for the performance of labour service;that the living standard of this “independent” peasant is so low that in any capitalist country he would be classed as a pauper; and that added to the hopeless poverty and in-tellectual inertness of this “independent” peasant is the per-sonal dependence that inevitably accompanies pre-capital-ist forms of economy. 
 The third characteristic feature of Narodism—disregard of the connection between the “intelligentsia” and the *See pp. 
 73-80 and 459-89 of the present volume. 
— Ed. 
 country’s legal and political institutions, on the one hand, and the material interests of definite social classes, on the other—is bound up indissolubly with the previous ones: only this unrealistic attitude to sociological problemscould have bred the doctrine that Russian capitalism is a“mistake,” and that “diversion from the path” is possible. 
This Narodnik view, too, bears no relation to the “heritage”and traditions of the sixties; on the contrary, it runs di-rectly counter to these traditions . 
 A natural corollary to this view is the Narodniks’ attitude to the numerous sur-vivals of the pre-Reform reglementation of Russian life,an attitude which the representatives of the “heritage” couldnot possibly have shared. 
 To illustrate this attitude, weshall take the liberty of borrowing the excellent remarks of Mr. 
 V. 
 Ivanov in his article “A Shabby Fabrication” (Novoye Slovo , September 1897). 
 The author refers to Mr. 
 Boborykin’s novel A Different Way , and exposes his misconception of the dispute between the Narodniks andthe “disciples. 
” Mr. 
 Boborykin makes his hero, a Narodnik,reproach the “disciples” for supposedly dreaming of “a barrack regime with the intolerable despotism of reglementation. 
” Mr. 
 V. 
 Ivanov observes in this connectionthat: “Far from saying that the ‘dream’ of their opponents was the intolerable despotism of ‘reglementation,’ they” (theNarodniks) “ cannot and will not say so as long as they remain Narodniks . 
 The substance of their dispute with the ‘economic materialists’ in this respect is that, in the opinion of the Narodniks, the remaining survivals of the old regle-mentation may serve as the basis for its further develop-ment. 
 The intolerableness of the old reglementation isveiled from their eyes, on the one hand, by their conviction that the very ‘peasant soul (single and indivisible) is evolv-ing’ towards reglementation, and, on the other, by theirbelief in the existing or coming moral beauty of the ‘in-telligentsia,’ ‘society,’ or the ‘leading classes’ generally. 
They accuse the economic materialists of being infatuatednot with ‘reglementation,’ but, on the contrary, with the West-European system, which is based on freedom from regle-mentation. 
 And the economic materialists really do as-sert that the survivals of the old reglementation, which sprang from a natural form of economy, are daily becoming more ‘intolerable’ in a country that has passed over to a money economy, entailing countless changes both in the ac-tual status and in the mental and moral complexion of thevarious sections of its population. 
 They are therefore con-vinced that the conditions necessary for the rise of a newand beneficial ‘reglementation’ of the country’s economiclife cannot develop out of the survivals of a reglementation which was adapted to a natural economy and serfdom, and can only evolve in such an atmosphere of wide and compre-hensive freedom from the old reglementation as exists inthe advanced countries of Western Europe and America. 
That is how matters stand with the question of ‘reglementa-tion’ in the dispute between the Narodniks and their oppo-nents” (pp. 
 11-12, loc. 
 cit. 
). 
 This attitude of the Narod-niks to “the survivals of the old reglementation is, perhaps,their most flagrant departure from the traditions of the“heritage. 
” The representatives of this heritage were, as wehave seen, distinguished by their ineradicable and fierceaversion for every survival of the old reglementation. 
 Conse-quently, in this respect the “disciples” are incomparably closer to the “traditions” and “heritage” of the sixties thanthe Narodniks are. 
 In addition to the highly important error of the Narod-niks mentioned above, their lack of sociological realismimpels them to a specific manner of thinking and reasoning about social affairs and problems which might be called narrow intellectual self-conceit or, perhaps, the bureaucrat-ic mentality. 
 The Narodnik is always dilating on the path“we” should choose for our country, the misfortunes thatwould arise if “we” directed the country along such-and-such a path, the prospects “we” could ensure ourselves if we avoided the dangers of the path old Europe has taken, if we “take what is good” both from Europe and from our an-cient village-community system, and so on and so forth. 
Hence the Narodnik’s complete distrust and contempt forthe independent trends of the various social classes whichare shaping history in accordance with their own interests. 
 Hence the amazing levity with which the Narodnik (for-getting the conditions surrounding him) advances all sortsof social projects, from the “organisation of agricultural labour” to the “communalisation of production” through the good offices of our “society. 
” “Mit der Gründlichkeit der geschichtlichen Action wird also der Umfang der Masse zunehmen, deren Action sie ist” *—these words express one of the profoundest and most important precepts of that his-torico-philosophical theory which our Narodniks will notand cannot understand. 
 As man’s history-making activitygrows broader and deeper, the size of that mass of the popu-lation which is the conscious maker of history is bound to increase. 
 The Narodnik, however, always regarded the pop-ulation in general, and the working population in partic-ular, as the object of this or that more or less sensible measure,as something to be directed along this or that path, andnever regarded the various classes of the population as in-dependent history-makers on the existing path, never asked which conditions of the present path might stimulate (or,on the contrary, paralyse) the independent and consciousactivity of these history-makers. 
 And so, although Narodism, by posing the question of capitalism in Russia, made a big step forward compared with the “heritage” of the enlighteners, the solution of the question it offered has proved so unsatisfactory, becauseof its petty-bourgeois outlook and sentimental criticism ofcapitalism, that on a number of cardinal questions of sociallife it lags behind the “enlighteners. 
” Narodism’s association with the heritage and traditions of our enlighteners has proved in the end to be a drawback : the new questions with which Russian social thought has been confrontedby Russia’s post-Reform economic development, Narodismhas not solved, confining itself to sentimental and reaction-ary lamentations over them; while Narodnik romanticismhas obscured the old questions already posed by the en-lighteners, thus retarding their full solution. 
 *Marx, Die heilige Familie , p. 
 120. 
 Quoted from Beltov, p. 
 235. 
 (“With the thoroughness of the historical action, the size of the mass whose action it is will therefore increase. 
” Marx, The Holy Family . 
154— Ed. 
) IV THE “ENLIGHTENERS,” THE NARODNIKS, AND THE “DISCIPLES” We may now sum up the results of our comparisons. 
 Let us endeavour to give a brief description of the relationshipin which each of the trends of social thought enumerated in the sub-title stands to the others. 
 The enlightener believes in the present course of social development, because he fails to observe its inherent con-tradictions. 
 The Narodnik fears the present course of socialdevelopment, because he is already aware of these contradic-tions. 
 The “disciple” believes in the present course of so-cial development, because he sees the only earnest of a bet-ter future in the full development of these contradictions. 
 Thefirst and last trends therefore strive to support, accelerate,facilitate development along the present path, to removeall obstacles which hamper this development and retard it. 
Narodism, on the contrary, strives to retard and halt this development, is afraid of abolishing certain obstacles to the development of capitalism. 
 The first and last trends aredistinguished by what may be called historical optimism:the farther and the quicker things go as they are, the betterit will be. 
 Narodism, on the contrary, naturally tends tohistorical pessimism: the farther things go as they are, the worse it will be. 
 The “enlighteners” never posed questions concerning the character of post-Reform development andconfined themselves exclusively to warring against thesurvivals of the pre-Reform system, to the negative task ofclearing the way for a European type of development inRussia. 
 Narodism posed the question of capitalism in Rus-sia, but answered it in the sense that capitalism is reactiona-ry, and therefore could not wholly accept the heritage ofthe enlighteners: the Narodniks always warred against peoplewho in general strove to Europeanise Russia from the stand-point of a “single civilisation”; warred against them notonly because they, the Narodniks, could not confine them-selves to these people’s ideals (such a war would have been just), but because they did not want to go so far in thedevelopment of this, i. 
e. 
, capitalist, civilisation. 
 The “dis-ciples” answer the question of capitalism in Russia in the sense that it is progressive, and they therefore not only can, but must, accept the heritage of the enlighteners in its en-tirety, supplementing it with an analysis of the contradic-tions of capitalism from the standpoint of the property-less producers. 
 The enlighteners did not single out any oneclass of the population for special attention; they not onlyspoke of the people in general, but even of the nation in general. 
 The Narodniks were desirous of representing the interests of labour, but they did not point to any definitegroups in the contemporary economic system; actually,they always took the standpoint of the small producer,whom capitalism converts into a commodity producer. 
 The“disciples” not only take the interests of labour as their criterion, but in doing so point to quite definite econom-ic groups in the capitalist economy, namely, the property-less producers. 
 By the nature of their aims, the first and lasttrends correspond to the interests of the classes which arecreated and developed by capitalism; Narodism, by its na-ture, corresponds to the interests of the class of small produc-ers, the petty bourgeoisie, which occupies an intermediate position among the classes of contemporary society. 
 Con-sequently, Narodism’s contradictory attitude to the “heri-tage” is not accidental, but is a necessary result of the verynature of the Narodnik views: we have seen that one of thebasic features of the enlighteners’ views was the ardent de-sire to Europeanise Russia, but the Narodniks cannot pos-sibly share this desire fully without ceasing to be Narod-niks. 
 We have in the end arrived at the conclusion which we have repeatedly indicated above in particular instances,namely, that the disciples are much more consistent and faith-ful guardians of the heritage than the Narodniks . 
 Far from re-nouncing the heritage, they consider it one of their princi-pal duties to refute the romantic and petty-bourgeois fearswhich induce the Narodniks on very many and very impor-tant points to reject the European ideals of the enlighteners. 
But it goes without saying that the “disciples” do not guard the heritage in the way an archivist guards an old docu-ment. 
 Guarding the heritage does not mean confining one-self to the heritage, and the “disciples” add to their defence of the general ideals of Europeanism an analysis of the con-tradictions implicit in our capitalist development, and an assessment of this development from the specific standpoint indicated above. 
 V MR. 
 MIKHAILOVSKY ON THE “DISCIPLES’” RENUNCIATION OF THE HERITAGE Let us, in conclusion, return to Mr. 
 Mikhailovsky and exam-ine his statements on the subject under consideration. 
Not only does Mr. 
 Mikhailovsky declare that these people (the disciples) “do not acknowledge any continuity with the past and emphatically renounce the heritage” (loc. 
 cit. 
,179); he also affirms that “they” (together with other personsof the most diverse trends, up to and including Mr. 
 Abra-mov, Mr. 
 Volynsky and Mr. 
 Rozanov) “hurl themselvesagainst the heritage with the greatest fury” (180). 
 To which heritage is Mr. 
 Mikhailovsky referring? To the heritage of the sixties and seventies, the heritage which Moskovskiye Vedomosti solemnly renounced and renounces (178). 
 We have already said that if it is a question of the “heri-tage” that has fallen to the people of today, then one mustdistinguish between two heritages : one is the heritage of the enlighteners in general, of the people who were absolutely hostile to the whole pre-Reform order, who stood for Euro-pean ideals and for the interests of the broad mass of thepopulation. 
 The other heritage is Narodism. 
 We have al-ready shown that to confuse these two different thingswould be a gross error, for everyone knows that there have been, and still are, people who guard the “traditions of the sixties” but have nothing in common with Narodism. 
 AllMr. 
 Mikhailovsky’s observations are founded wholly and ex-clusively upon a confusion of these totally different heri-tages. 
 And since Mr. 
 Mikhailovsky must be aware ofthis difference, his sally is not only absurd, but defi-nitely slanderous. 
 Did Moskovskiye Vedomosti hurl itself against Narodism specifically? Not at all: it hurled itselfno less, if not more, against the enlighteners in general, and Vestnik Yevropy , which absolutely abhors Narodism, is in its eyes no less an enemy than the Narodnik Russkoye Bogatstvo . 
 Moskovskiye Vedomosti would, of course, disagree on many points with the Narodniks who most emphatically renouncethe heritage—Yuzov, for example—but it would hardlyhurl itself against him with fury, and in any case, it wouldpraise him for that which distinguishes him from the Na-rodniks who desire to guard the heritage. 
 Did Mr. 
 Abramov or Mr. 
 Volynsky hurl himself against Narodism? Not at all. 
 The former is himself a Narodnik; and both hurled them-selves against the enlighteners in general. 
 Did the “Russiandisciples” hurl themselves against the Russian enlighteners?Did they ever renounce the heritage which enjoins unre-served hostility to the pre-Reform way of life and its survi-vals? Far from hurling themselves against it, they denounced the Narodniks for desiring to maintain some of thesesurvivals out of a petty-bourgeois fear of capitalism. 
 Didthey ever hurl themselves against the heritage which en-joins European ideals generally? Far from hurling themselvesagainst it, they denounced the Narodniks because on many very important issues, instead of espousing general Euro-pean ideals, they concoct the most arrant nonsense aboutRussia’s exceptional character. 
 Did they ever hurl themselvesagainst the heritage which enjoins concern for the inter-ests of the labouring masses of the population? Far fromhurling themselves against it, they denounced the Narod-niks because their concern for these interests is inconsist-ent (owing to their confirmed tendency to lump togetherthe peasant bourgeoisie and the rural proletariat); becausethe value of their concern is diminished by their habit ofdreaming of what might be, instead of turning their atten-tion to what is; because their concern is extremely circum-scribed, since they have never been able properly to appraise the conditions (economic and other) which make it easieror harder for these people to care for their own intereststhemselves. 
 Mr. 
 Mikhailovsky may not agree with these denunciations —being a Narodnik, he certainly will not agree with them— but to assert that certain people “furiously” attack the “her-itage of the sixties and the seventies,” when, actually, they“furiously” attack only Narodism , and attack it for having failed to solve the new problems posed by post-Reform his-tory in the spirit of this heritage and without contradicting it—such an assertion is a direct misrepresentation of the truth. 
 Mr. 
 Mikhailovsky most amusingly complains that the “disciples” readily confuse “us” (i. 
e. 
, the Russkoye Bogat-stvo writers) with the “Narodniks” and other persons who have no connection with Russkoye Bogatstvo (p. 
 180). 
 This curious attempt at dissociation from the “Narodniks,” while at the same time preserving all the basic views of Narodism, canevoke nothing but laughter. 
 Everyone knows that all the“Russian disciples” employ the words “Narodnik” and “Nar-odism” in the broad sense. 
 That there are quite a number ofdifferent shades among the Narodniks has not been forgotten or denied by anybody: in their books neither P. 
 Struve nor N. 
 Beltov, for instance, “confused” Mr. 
 N. 
 Mikhailovsky withMr. 
 V. 
 V. 
, or even for that matter with Mr. 
 Yuzhakov; that is,they did not gloss over the differences between them, or ascribethe views of one to the other. 
 P. 
 B. 
 Struve even expressly drewattention to the difference between Mr. 
 Yuzhakov’s views and those of Mr. 
 Mikhailovsky. 
 It is one thing to confuse differ-ent views; it is another to generalise and class in one catego-ry writers who, despite their differences on many questions, areat one on the fundamental and principal points, points whichthe “disciples” oppose. 
 What is important for the “disciple”is not to show the worthlessness of the views which distin-guish, for instance, a Mr. 
 Yuzov from the other Narodniks, but to refute the views common to Mr. 
 Yuzov and Mr. 
 Mikhailovsky and all the Narodniks in general —that is, their attitude to Russia’s capitalist evolution, their discus-sion of economic and social problems from the stand-point of the small producer, their failure to understand so-cial (or historical) materialism. 
 These features are the com-mon property of a whole trend of social thought which hasplayed a big historical role. 
 This broad trend contains themost varied shades: right and left flanks, people who havesunk to nationalism and anti-semitism, etc. 
, and people whoare not guilty of these things; people who have been contemp-tuous of many of the behests of the “heritage,” and people who have striven their utmost (that is, the utmost possible toa Narodnik) to guard these behests. 
 Not one of the “Rus-sian disciples” has denied these differences of shade; not one of them has Mr. 
 Mikhailovsky been able to convict of ascrib-ing the views of a Narodnik of one shade to a Narodnik of another shade. 
 But since we oppose the fundamentalviews common to all these different shades, why should we be expected to speak of partial differences within the generaltrend? That, surely, is an absolutely senseless demand! Longbefore the appearance of the “disciples,” our literature had noted many times that writers who were far from unanimous on everything held common views on Russian capitalism, thepeasant “community,” the almighty power of so-called “so-ciety,” and not only noted it, but praised it as a happy pec-uliarity of Russia. 
 Again, in its broad sense, the term “Nar-odism” was employed in our literature long before the appear-ance of the “disciples. 
” Not only did Mr. 
 Mikhailovsky contribute for many years to a journal along with the “Nar-odnik” (in the narrow sense) Mr. 
 V. 
 V. 
, but the outlookof both bore the same fundamental features mentioned above. 
Though, both in the eighties and the nineties, he objectedto some of Mr. 
 V. 
 V. 
’s conclusions, and denied the correct-ness of his excursions into the field of abstract sociology, Mr. 
 Mikhailovsky, both in the eighties and the nineties, madethe reservation that his criticism was not directed againstMr. 
 V. 
 V. 
’s economic works, that he was at one with hisbasic views on Russian capitalism. 
 Consequently, if thepillars of Russkoye Bogatstvo , who have done so much to de-velop, reinforce and disseminate the views of Narodism (in the broad sense), now think that they can escape the criticismof the “Russian disciples” simply by declaring that theyare not “Narodniks” (in the narrow sense), that they con-stitute a quite specific “ethico-social school”—such sub-terfuges, of course, can only expose to justified ridicule people who are so brave and at the same time so diplo-matic. 
 On p. 
 182 of his article, Mr. 
 Mikhailovsky also levels the following phenomenal argument against the “disciples. 
”Mr. 
 Kamensky venomously attacks the Narodniks 155; that, you see, “indicates that he is angry, which he is not enti-tled (sic!!) to be. 
 We, the ‘subjective oldsters,’ as well as the ‘subjective youngsters,’ can permit ourselves this weaknesswithout being guilty of self-contradiction. 
 But the repre-sentatives of a doctrine which ‘prides itself on its inexorable objectivity’” (the expression of one of-the “disciples”) “are in a different position. 
” What is this?! If people insist that views on social phenom-ena must be based upon an inexorably objective analy-sis of realities and the real course of development, then it follows that they are not entitled to be angry?! Why, this is utter twaddle, the sheer gibberish! Have you not heard, Mr. 
 Mikhailovsky, that the famous work on Capital i s considered to be one of the finest specimens of inexorable objectivity in the investigation of social phenomena? It is precisely the inexorable objectivity of the work thatis regarded by many scientists and economists as its princi-pal and basic defect. 
 Yet rarely will you find in a scien-tific work so much “feeling,” so much heated and passionatepolemical attacks on representatives of backward views, on representatives of the social classes which, in the author’s convinced opinion, are hampering social development. 
 Awriter who shows with inexorable objectivity that the opin-ions of Proudhon, say, are a natural, understandable and inevitable reflexion of the views and sentiments of the Frenchpetit bourgeois, nevertheless “hurls himself” against that ideologist of the petty bourgeoisie with tremendous passion and fiery wrath. 
 Does Mr. 
 Mikhailovsky believe that Marxis here guilty of “self-contradiction”? If a certain doctrine demands of everyone taking part in public life an inexorably objective analysis of realities and of the relationships be-tween the various classes arising from these realities, by what miracle can the conclusion be drawn from this that they must not sympathise, are “not entitled” to sympathise withone or another class? It is ridiculous in this connection even to talk of duty, for no living person can help taking the side of one class or another (once he has understood their inter-relationships), can help rejoicing at the successes of that class and being disappointed by its failures, can help being angered by those who are hostile to that class, who hamperits development by disseminating backward views, and so on and so forth. 
 Mr. 
 Mikhailovsky’s nonsensical sally only shows that he still fails to grasp the very elementary distinc-tion between determinism and fatalism. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR “‘Capital is coming’!—that is certain,” writes Mr. 
 Mikhai-lovsky,—“but (sic!!) the question is, how shall we greet it” (p. 
 189). 
 Mr. 
 Mikhailovsky makes a great discovery, points to a “question” to which the “Russian disciples” have evidently given no thought whatever! As though it were not on thisquestion that the “Russian disciples” have parted ways with the Narodniks! One can “greet” the capitalism develop-ing in Russia only in two ways: one can regard it either asprogressive, or as retrogressive; either as a step forward on the right road, or as a deviation from the true path; one can assess it either from the standpoint of the class of small pro-ducers which capitalism destroys, or from the standpoint of the class of propertyless producers which capitalism cre-ates. 
 There is no middle way. 
 * Consequently, if Mr. 
 Mikhai-lovsky denies the correctness of the attitude to capitalism which the “disciples” insist on, it means that he accepts the Narodnik attitude which he has many a time expressed quitedefinitely in his earlier articles. 
 He has not made any addi-tions or amendments to his old views on this subject, and continues to remain a Narodnik. 
 But nothing of the kind!He is not a Narodnik, heaven forbid! He is a representative of an “ethico-sociological school. 
”... “Let no one talk,” Mr. 
 Mikhailovsky continues, “of those future (??) benefits which the further development of cap-italism will (?) bring. 
” Mr. 
 Mikhailovsky is no Narodnik. 
 He only reiterates all the Narodniks’ errors and fallacious methods of argu-ment. 
 How many times have the Narodniks been told that this talk of the “future” is wrong, that it is not a question of“future,” but of actual progressive changes already taking place in the pre-capitalist relationships changes which the development of capitalism in Russia is bringing (not,will bring). 
 By transplanting the question to the “future,” *We say nothing, of course, of the greeting given it by those who do not consider it necessary to be guided by the interests oflabour, or to whom the very generalisation denoted by the term “cap-italism” is incomprehensible and unintelligible. 
 However important such trends of thought may be in Russian life, they have nothingwhatever to do with the dispute between the Narodniks and theiropponents, and there is no point in bringing them into it. 
 Mr. 
 Mikhailovsky in point of fact takes for granted the very assertions which the “disciples” contest. 
 He takes it for grant-ed that in reality, in what is taking place under our eyes,the development of capitalism is not bringing any progres-sive changes into the old socio-economic relations. 
 This is what constitutes the Narodnik view, and it is against thisthat the “Russian disciples” argue and demonstrate that the contrary is true. 
 There is not a book put out by the “Russian disciples” which does not affirm and demonstrate that thereplacement of labour service by wage-labour in agricul-ture, and the replacement of what is called “handicraft” in-dustry by factory industry, is a real phenomenon which istaking place (and, moreover, at a tremendous speed) now, under our eyes, and not merely “in the future”; that this change is in all respects progressive, that it is breaking downroutine, disunited, small-scale hand production which has been immobile and stagnant for ages; that it is increasing the productivity of social labour, and thereby creating the possi-bility of higher living standards for the working man; that it is also creating the conditions which convert this pos-sibility into a necessity—namely, by converting the “set-tled proletarian” lost in the “backwoods,” settled physically and morally, into a mobile proletarian, and by converting Asiatic forms of labour, with their infinitely developedbondage and diverse forms of personal dependence, into European forms of labour; that “the European man-ner of thought and feeling is no less necessary (note, nec-essary. 
 V. 
 I. 
 ) for the effective utilisation of machines than steam, coal, techniques,” * etc. 
 All this, we repeat, is affirmed and demonstrated by every “disciple,” but, presumably,does not apply to Mr. 
 Mikhailovsky “and company”; all this is only written against “Narodniks” who are “not connected” with Russkoye Bogatstvo . 
 Russkoye Bogatstvo , you see, is an “ethico-sociological school,” whose essence is that it serves up the old rubbish under a new guise. 
 As we observed above, the purpose of this article is to re-fute the allegation so widespread in the liberal-Narodnik press that the “Russian disciples” abjure the “heritage,” *The words of Schulze-Gävernitz in an article on the Moscow-Vladimir cotton industry in Schmollers Jahrbuch ,156 1896. 
 break with the best traditions of the best section of Russian society, and so forth. 
 It is not without interest to observe that, in reiterating these hackneyed phrases, Mr. 
 Mikhai-lovsky in point of fact says exactly the same thing as was saidmuch earlier and much more emphatically by a “Narod-nik” “not connected” with Russkoye Bogatstvo —Mr. 
 V. 
 V. 
 Are you familiar, dear reader, with the articles which thiswriter contributed to Nedelya 157 three years ago, at the close of 1894, in reply to P. 
 B. 
 Struve’s book? If you are not, I must confess that, in my opinion, you have lost abso-lutely nothing. 
 The basic idea of these articles is that the“Russian disciples” are breaking the democratic thread whichruns through all the progressive trends of Russian socialthought. 
 Is this not exactly what Mr. 
 Mikhailovsky says, only in somewhat different terms, when he accuses the “disci-ples” of renouncing the “heritage,” against which Moskovskiye Vedomosti hurls itself with fury? Actually, as we have seen, the inventors of this allegation blame others for their ownsins when they assert that the “disciples’” irrevocable breakwith Narodism signifies a break with the best traditions of the best section of Russian society. 
 Is it not the other way round, sirs? Does not such a break signify that these besttraditions are being purged of Narodism ? N O T E S 1 2 3 4The obituary, “Frederick Engels,” written by Lenin In the autumn of 1895, was published in Rabotnik (The Worker ), No. 
 1-2, that appeared not earlier than March 1896. 
 The miscellany Rabotnik was published at irregular intervals outside of Russia by the League of Russian Social-Democrats inthe years 1896-99 and it was edited by the Emancipation of La-bour group. 
 Its actual initiator was Lenin, who in 1895, whileabroad, reached an agreement with G. 
 V. 
 Plekhanov and P. 
 B. 
Axelrod on the editing and publication of the miscellany by thegroup. 
 On his return to Russia Lenin did much to secure financialsupport for the publication, and to ensure the receipt of articlesand correspondence from Russia. 
 Before his arrest in December1895, Lenin prepared the “Frederick Engels” obituary and severalitems of correspondence, which he sent to the editors of Rabotnik . 
 Some of these appeared in Nos. 
 1-2 and 5-6 of the miscellany. 
 Altogether there were six issues of Rabotnik in three volumes, and ten numbers of Listok “Rabotnika . 
” p. 
 15 Lenin’s epigraph to the article “Frederick Engels” is taken from N. 
 A. 
 Nekrasov’s poem “In Memory of Dobrolyubov. 
” p. 
 19 Frederick Engels, Prefatory Note to “The Peasant War in Germany . 
” Marx and Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 I, Moscow, 1958, p. 
 652. 
 p. 
 21 The Deutsch-Französische Jahrbrücher (German-French Yearbooks ) appeared in Paris in the German language, edited by K. 
 Marx andA. 
 Ruge. 
 Only the first issue, a double number, appeared inFebruary 1844. 
 The magazine ceased publication chiefly because of differences of principle between Marx and Ruge, who was a bourgeois radical. 
 p. 
 24 5 6 7Frederick Engels, “Umrisse zu einer Kritik der Nationalöko-nomie. 
” Marx, Engels, Werke , Band 1, Dietz Verlag Berlin, 1956, S. 
 499-524. 
 p. 
 24 The Communist League —the first international organisation of the revolutionary proletariat. 
 Preparatory to the foundation of theLeague Marx and Engels did much to weld together the social-ists and the workers of all lands both ideologically and organisa-tionally. 
 In the early part of 1847, Marx and Engels joined the se-cret German society The League of the Just. 
 At the beginning ofJune 1847, a League of the Just congress took place in London,at which it was renamed The Communist League while itsformer hazy slogan “All Men Are Brothers” was replaced by themilitant internationalist slogan of “Working Men of All Countries,Unite!” The aims of The Communist League were the overthrow of the bourgeoisie, the abolition of the old bourgeois society based onclass antagonisms, and the establishment of a new society inwhich there would be neither classes nor private property. 
 Marxand Engels took part in the work of the Second Congress of theLeague, which was held in London in November and December1847, and on its instructions wrote the League’s programme—Manifesto of the Communist Party —which was published in February 1848. 
 The Communist League played a great historicalrole as a school of proletarian revolutionaries, as the embryo of the proletarian party and the predecessor of the International Working Men’s Association (First International); it existed untilNovember 1852. 
 The history of the League is contained in the arti-cle by F. 
 Engels “On the History of the Communist League”(Marx and Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 II, Moscow, 1958, pp. 
 338-57). 
 p. 
 24 Neue Rheinische Zeitung appeared in Cologne from June 1, 1848, until May 19, 1849. 
 The managers of this newspaper were K. 
 Marxand F. 
 Engels, and the chief editor was Marx. 
 As Lenin putit, the newspaper was “the best, the unsurpassed organ of the revo-lutionary proletariat”; it educated the masses, roused them to fightthe counter-revolution and its influence was felt throughout Ger-many. 
 From the first months of its existence, the Neue Rheinische Zeitung , because of its resolute and irreconcilable position, and of its militant internationalism, was persecuted by the feudal-mon-archist and liberal-bourgeois press, and also by the government. 
The deportation of Marx by the Prussian Government, and therepressive measures against its other editors were the cause of thepaper ceasing publication. 
 About the Neue Rheinische Zeitung see the article by Engels “Marx and the Neue Rheinische Zeitung (1848-1849). 
” Marx and Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 II, Moscow, 1958, pp. 
 328-37. 
 p. 
 24 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15Frederick Engels, Herr Eugen Dühring’s Revolution in Science (Anti-Dühring ). 
 p. 
 25 The Russian edition of F. 
 Engels’ Socialism: Utopian and Scien-tific , a pamphlet consisting of three chapters from his Anti-Düh-ring , appeared under this title in 1892. 
 Marx and Engels, Sele-cted Works , Vol. 
 II, Moscow, 1958, pp. 
 116-55. 
 p. 
 25 Frederick Engels, The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State. 
 Marx and Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 II, Moscow, 1958, pp. 
 170-327. 
 p. 
 25 Frederick Engels, Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy . 
 Marx and Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 II, Moscow, 1958, pp. 
 358—402. 
 p. 
 25 Frederick Engels’ article “The Foreign Policy of Russian Tsarism” appeared in two issues of the Sotsial-Demokrat (The Social-De-mocrat ). 
 Sotsial-Demokrat —a literary and political review, published by the Emancipation of Labour group in London and Geneva inthe years 1890-92. 
 Four issues appeared. 
 It played a big part inspreading Marxist ideas in Russia. 
 G. 
 V. 
 Plekhanov, P. 
 B. 
 Axelrod,and V. 
 I. 
 Zasulich were the chief figures associated with its publi-cation. 
 p. 
 25 Frederick Engels, The Housing Question . 
 Marx and Engels, Se-lected Works , Vol. 
 I, Moscow, 1958, pp. 
 546-635. 
 p. 
 25 Lenin refers to Frederick Engels’ article “On Social Relations in Russia,” and the postscript to it, contained in the bookFrederick Engels on Russia , Geneva, 1894. 
 p. 
 25 Volume IV of “Capital ” is the designation given by Lenin, in accord-ance with the view expressed by Engels, to Marx’s Theories of Surplus-Value written in the years 1862-63. 
 In the pref-ace to Volume II of Capital Engels wrote: “After eliminating the numerous passages covered by Books II and III, I intend to publishthe critical part of this manuscript as Book IV of Capital ” (Theories of Surplus-Value ) (Karl Marx, Capital , Vol. 
 II, p. 
 2). 
 Engels, however, did not succeed in preparing Volume IV for thepress and it was first published in German, after being edited byKautsky, in 1905 and 1910. 
 In this edition the basic principles ofthe scientific publication of a text were violated and there weredistortions of a number of the tenets of Marxism. 
 The Institute of Marxism-Leninism of the C. 
C. 
 of the C. 
P. 
S. 
U. 
 is 16 17 18 19issuing a new (Russian) edition of Theories of Surplus-Value (Vol-ume IV of Capital ) in three parts, according to the manuscript of 1862-63 (Karl Marx, Theories of Surplus-Value [Volume IV of Capital ]). 
 Part I appeared in 1955 and Part II in 1957. 
 p. 
 25 The letter from F. 
 Engels to I. 
 F. 
 Becker dated October 15, 1884. 
 p. 
 26 International Working Men’s Association (First International)— the first international organisation of the proletariat, foundedby K. 
 Marx in 1864 at an international workers’ meeting convenedin London by English and French workers. 
 The foundation of theFirst International was the result of many years of persistent strug-gle waged by K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Engels to establish a revolutionaryparty of the working class. 
 Lenin said that the First International“laid the foundation of an international organisation of the workersfor the preparation of their revolutionary onslaught on capital,”“laid the foundation for the proletarian, international strugglefor socialism” (V. 
 I. 
 Lenin, The Third International and Its Place in History . 
 See present edition, Vol. 
 29). 
 The central, leading body of the First International was the Gen-eral Council, of which Marx was a permanent member. 
 In the courseof the struggle against the petty-bourgeois influences and sectar-ian tendencies then prevalent in the working-class movement (narrowtrade unionism in England, Proudhonism and anarchism in theRomance countries), Marx rallied around himself the most class-conscious of the General Council members (F. 
 Lessner, E. 
 Dupont,G. 
 Jung, and others). 
 The First International directed the economicand political struggle of the workers of different countries, andstrengthened their international solidarity. 
 A tremendous partwas played by the First International in disseminating Marxism,in linking-up socialism with the working-class movement. 
 When the Paris Commune was defeated, the working class was faced with the problem of creating, in the different countries,mass parties based on the principles advanced by the First Inter-national. 
 “As I view European conditions,” wrote Marx in 1873,“it is quite useful to let the formal organisation of the Internation-al recede into the background for the time being” (Marx to F. 
 A. 
Sorge. 
 September 27, 1873). 
 In 1876 the First International wasofficially disbanded at a conference in Philadelphia. 
 p. 
 26 Marx and Engels, Manifesto of the Communist Party , and Karl Marx, General Rules of the International Working Men ’s Association . 
 Marx and Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 I, Moscow, 1958, pp. 
 32 and 386. 
 p. 
 27 The pamphlet Explanation of the Law on Fines imposed on Factory Workers was written by Lenin in the autumn of 1895. 
 It was print-ed in 3,000 copies in December of that year at the Lahta Press 20 21 22in St. 
 Petersburg. 
 This printshop was an illegal one belonging to the Narodnaya Volya group, which at that time had establishedrelations with the St. 
 Petersburg League of Struggle for the Emanci-pation of the Working Class, and printed the latter’s publications. 
The original of the pamphlet was burned, like all others, afterbeing set up in type. 
 For purposes of secrecy fictitious information was printed on the cover. 
 For example, it was stated that the pamphlet was pub-lished by A. 
 Y. 
 Vasilyev’s book warehouse in Kherson, that it wasprinted at K. 
 N. 
 Subbotin’s Press, Ekaterinoslav St. 
, on premisesbelonging to a certain Kalinin; that it was on sale in all bookshopsin Moscow and St. 
 Petersburg. 
 The title-page contained the in-scription: “Permitted by the Censor. 
 Kherson, November 14, 1895. 
”In 1897 the pamphlet was re-issued in Geneva by the League ofRussian Social-Democrats Abroad. 
 It had a wide circulation, as is shown by the fact that accord-ing to reports of the Police Department, copies of it were found inthe years 1895-1905 during searches and arrests in St. 
 Petersburg,Kiev, Yaroslavl, Ivanovo-Voznesensk, Kazan, Sormovo, Nizhni-Novgorod, Orekhovo-Zuyevo, Saratov, Krasnoyarsk, Perm, andother Russian towns. 
 p. 
 29 Novoye Vremya (New Times )—a daily newspaper that appeared in St. 
 Petersburg from 1868 to 1917. 
 It belonged to different publish-ers at different times and repeatedly changed its political line. 
At first it was moderately liberal, but in 1876, when A. 
 S. 
 Suvorinbegan to publish it, it became an organ of reactionary circlesamong the aristocracy and bureaucracy. 
 From 1905 it becamean organ of the Black Hundreds. 
 Following the Februarybourgeois-democratic revolution in 1917, it gave the fullest supportto the bourgeois Provisional Government’s counter-revolutionarypolicy and conducted a furious campaign of slander againstthe Bolsheviks. 
 It was closed down by the Revolutionary Mili-tary Committee of the Petrograd Soviet on October 26 (November 8,new style), in 1917. 
 Lenin called Novoye Vremya a typical example of the venal press. 
 p. 
 37 Moskovskiye Vedomosti (Moscow Recorder )—one of the oldest Russian newspapers, originally issued (in 1756) as a small sheetby Moscow University. 
 In the 1860s its line became monarchist-nationalist, reflecting the views of the most reactionary sectionsof the landlords and the clergy. 
 In 1905 it became one of the lead-ing papers of the Black Hundreds, and continued to appear untilthe October Revolution in 1917. 
 p. 
 37 Instructions to Factory Inspectorate Officials . 
 These contained a list of the duties of factory inspectors. 
 Endorsed by the Ministerof Finance S. 
 Y. 
 Witte, they were published in June 1894. 
 p. 
 51 23 24 25 26 27Council of State—a legislative-consultative body in tsarist Russia, whose members were appointed by the tsar. 
 It consistedin the main of big landowners and tsarist dignitaries. 
 p. 
 51 Ostsee gubernias —the name given in tsarist Russia to Estland, Courland and Lifland gubernias of the Baltic region. 
 They now con-stitute the territory of the Latvian and Estonian Soviet SocialistRepublics. 
 p. 
 67 “Gymnasium Farms and Corrective Gymnasia ” was written in the autumn of 1895 in answer to S. 
 N. 
 Yuzhakov’s article “An Educational Utopia. 
 A Plan for Universal, Compulsory SecondaryEducation,” published in Russkoye Bogatstvo (Russian Wealth ) for May 1895. 
 Lenin severely criticised the plan advanced by Yuzhakov who proposed compulsory secondary education in agricultural high schools (gymnasia), the poorer students having to cover the cost of their tuition by labour service, and showed its reactionarycharacter. 
 At the end of 1897, when in exile in Siberia, Lenin re-turned to this subject in the article “Gems of Narodnik Project-Mongering” (see pp. 
 459-89 of this volume). 
 The article was published over the signature of K. 
 T—in on No-vember 25 (December 7), 1895, in the Samarsky Vestnik (Samara Herald ). 
 The newspaper Samarsky Vestnik appeared in Samara (now the city of Kuibyshev) from 1883 to 1904. 
 From the end of 1896 to March 1897 it was controlled by the “legal Marxists” (P. 
 P. 
 Maslov,R. 
 Gvozdyov [R. 
 E. 
 Zimmerman], A. 
 A. 
 Sanin, V. 
 V. 
 Portu-galov and others). 
 In the 1890s it published occasional articles by Russian revolutionary Marxists. 
 p. 
 73 Russkoye Bogatstvo (Russian Wealth )—a monthly magazine pub-lished in St. 
 Petersburg from 1876 to the middle of 1918. 
 In the early 1890s it became the organ of the liberal Narodniks and was edited by S. 
 N. 
 Krivenko and N. 
 K. 
 Mikhailovsky. 
The journal advocated reconciliation with the tsarist government and waged a bitter struggle against Marxism and the Russian Marx-ists. 
 In 1906 it became the organ of the semi-Cadet “Popular Socialist” Party. 
 p. 
 73 Zemstvo —the name given to the local government bodies intro-duced in the central gubernias of tsarist Russia in 1864. 
 They weredominated by the nobility and their powers were limited to purely local economic problems (hospital and road building, statistics insurance, etc. 
) Their activities were controlled by the provincialGovernors and the Ministry of Internal Affairs, which could pre-28 29 30 31 32vent the implementation of any decisions disapproved by the government. 
 p. 
 74 The leaflet “ To the Working Men and Women of the Thornton Factory ” was written after November 7(19), 1895, in connection with a strike of about 500 weavers that broke out on November 6 (18) against bad conditions and the new oppressive measures in-troduced by the factory management. 
 The strike was directed by the St. 
 Petersburg League of Struggle for the Emancipation of the Working Class. 
 Before the strike broke out, the League of Struggleissued a leaflet, written by 0. 
 M. 
 Krzhizhanovsky, contain-ing the weavers’ demands, but so far it has not been possible to find a copy of it. 
 Lenin’s leaflet was issued several days later and circulated in the factory when the strike was over. 
 The facts about the workers’conditions were carefully collected by Lenin himself. 
 The leaflet was mimeographed, and in the spring of 1896 was reprinted abroad in No. 
 1-2 of the Rabotnik miscellany. 
 p. 
 81 Noils —short-staple combings separated from the long wool fibres by carding. 
 p. 
 82 Schmitz —a measure of 5 arshins (about 11 2 feet) used in fixing weavers’ rates. 
 p. 
 82 “Bieber ” and “ Ural ”—names of sorts of woollen cloth. 
 p. 
 84 intended for the newspaper Rabocheye Dyelo (The Workers ’ Cause ). 
 An issue of the paper was prepared by the St. 
 Petersburg Leagueof Struggle for the Emancipation of the Working Class by agree-ment with the Narodnaya Volya group. 
 The first issue of Rabocheye Dyelo was prepared and edited by Lenin, who wrote all the main articles, including the leading article “To the Russian Workers,”“What Are Our Ministers Thinking About?”, “Frederick Engels,” and “The Yaroslavl Strike in 1895. 
 ” Articles were also written by other members of the St. 
 Petersburg League of Struggle, G M. 
 Krzhizhanovsky, A. 
 A. 
 Vaneyev, P. 
 K. 
 Zaporozhets, L. 
 Martov (Y. 
 O. 
 Zederbaum), and M. 
 A. 
 Silvin. 
 Lenin wrote the followingregarding the first issue of Rabocheye Dyelo in his What Is To Be Done? : “This issue was ready to go to press when it was seized by the gendarmes, who, on the night of December 8, 1895, raided the house of one of the members of the group, Anatoly Alexeyevich Vaneyev, and so the original Rabocheye Dyelo was not destined to see the light of day. 
 The leading article in this issue (which per-“What Are Our Ministers Thinking About ?”—an article Lenin 33 34haps in some thirty years’ time some Russkaya Starina [The Rus-sian Antiquary ] will unearth in the archives of the Police Depart-ment) described the historical tasks of the working class in Rus-sia, and regarded the achievement of political liberty asthe most important. 
 This issue also contained an article entitled‘What Are Our Ministers Thinking About?’ which dealt with thebreaking-up of the elementary education committees by the po-lice. 
 In addition there was some correspondence not only from St. 
Petersburg but from other parts of Russia too (for example, aletter about the assault on the workers in Yaroslavl Gubernia)”(see present edition Vol. 
 5, What Is To Be Done? , chapter II). 
 With the exception of a copy of the article “What Are Our Ministers Thinking About?” discovered in January 1924 in thePolice Department records on the League of Struggle themanuscripts of these articles have not yet been found. 
 p. 
 87 Stepan Razin and Yemelyan Pugachov were the leaders of extensive peasant revolts in Russia in the seventeenth and eighteenth cen-turies. 
 p. 
 90 The “ Draft and Explanation of a Programme for the Social-Demo-cratic Party ” were written by Lenin while in prison in St. 
 Peters-burg. 
 The “Draft Programme” was written in December 1895, sometime after the 9th (21st) of that month. 
 The “Explanation of theProgramme” was written in June-July 1896. 
 The reminiscences ofN. 
 K. 
 Krupskaya and A. 
 I. 
 Ulyanova-Yelizarova show that thetext was written in milk between the lines of some book. 
 Lenin’soriginal text was evidently first developed and then copied. 
 In the Archives of the Institute of Marxism-Leninism of the C. 
C. 
 of the C. 
P. 
S. 
U. 
 there are three copies of the “Draft Programme. 
”The first one, found among Lenin’s personal papers for the periodof 1900-04, was written by an unknown hand in invisible ink be-tween the lines of S. 
 Chugunov’s article “The Human Cervical Ver-tebra from the Viewpoint of the Theory of Evolution” in issue No. 
 5,1900, of the magazine Nauchnoye Obozreniye . 
 There is no heading to this copy. 
 The pages are numbered in pencil in Lenin’s handwrit-ing and were placed in an envelope with the inscription, also inLenin’s handwriting: “Old (1895) Draft Programme. 
” The second copy was also found among Lenin’s personal pa-pers for the period 1900-04, it was typed on tissue paper andheaded: “Old (1895) Draft Programme for the Social-Democrat-ic Party. 
” The third copy, found in the Geneva archives of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, consists of 39 sheets of hectographed text. 
 As distinct fromthe other two copies, this one contains not only the “Draft Pro-gramme,” but also an “Explanation of the Programme,” whichtogether constitute one integral whole. 
 p. 
 93 35 36 37 38 39Nauchnoye Obozreniye (Science Review ) a journal that ap-peared in St. 
 Petersburg from 1894 to 1903, at first weekly, thenmonthly. 
 It had no definite line, but “to be in the fashion” (Lenin’sexpression) allowed Marxists to use its columns. 
 It published severalletters and articles by Marx and Engels, and also three articlesby V. 
 I. 
 Lenin: “A Note on the Question of the Market Theory,”“Once More on the Theory of Realisation,” “Uncritical Criticism. 
” p. 
 93 Land redemption payments were established by the Regulation Gov-erning Redemption by Peasants Who Have Emerged from SerfDependence..., adopted on February 19, 1861. 
 The tsarist govern-ment compelled the peasants, in return for the allotments assignedto them, to pay redemption to the landlords amounting to sev-eral times the real price of the land. 
 When the purchase deal wasconcluded, the government paid the landlords the purchase price,which was considered a debt owed by the peasants, to be repaidover a period of 49 years. 
 The instalments to be paid annually bythe peasants were called land redemption payments. 
 These werean intolerable burden on the peasants and caused their ruin and im-poverishment en masse. 
 The peasants formerly belonging to landlordsalone paid nearly 2,000 million rubles to the tsarist government,whereas the market price of the land that the peasants received didnot exceed 544 million rubles. 
 In view of the fact that the adoptionof the redemption scheme by the peasants did not take place atonce, but dragged on until 1883, the redemption payments wereonly to have ended by 1932. 
 However the peasant movement dur-ing the first Russian revolution, in 1905-07, compelled the tsar-ist government to abolish the redemption payments as from Jan-uary 1907. 
 p. 
 98 Collective responsibility was a compulsory measure making the peasants of each village community collectively responsible fortimely and full payments and for the fulfilment of all sorts of servicesto the state and the landlords (payment of taxes and of land re-demption instalments, provision of recruits for the army, etc. 
). 
 Thisform of bondage, which was retained even after serfdom had beenabolished, remained in force until 1906. 
 p. 
 98 The copyist apparently could not decipher several words follow-ing the word “refused. 
” The hectographed notebook continues asfollows: “[blank]* . 
 . 
 . 
 the rule of irresponsible officials than anyinterference by society in government affairs, the more readily doesit present the opportunity . 
 . 
 . 
 [blank II]. 
” p. 
 112 Lenin refers to the circular to factory inspectors issued by Minister of Finance S. 
 Y. 
 Witte following the strikes in the summer andautumn of 1895. 
 Comments on the circular are given on pp. 
 123-24of this volume. 
 p. 
 116 40 41 42 43Lenin wrote the leaflet “ To the Tsarist Government ” in prison at a date previous to November 25 (December 7), 1896. 
 It was mimeo-graphed by the League of Struggle for the Emancipation of theWorking Class. 
 The leaflet was a reply to S. 
 Y. 
 Witte’s circular addressed to factory inspectors, and to the report of the 1896 summer strikes inSt. 
 Petersburg published on July 19 (31), 1896, in issue No. 
 158 ofPravitelstvenny Vestnik (Government Herald ). 
 p. 
 122 Lenin called the strikes that took place in May-June 1896 “the fa-mous St. 
 Petersburg industrial war. 
” They were caused by the em-ployers’ refusal to pay the workers in full for holidays on the occa-sion of the coronation of Nicholas II. 
 A strike that broke out atthe Russian Cotton-Spinning Mill (Kalinkin) rapidly spread toall the main cotton-spinning and weaving mills of St. 
 Petersburg. 
For the first time the proletariat of that city undertook a struggleagainst their exploiters on a broad front, embracing over 30,000workers, who struck work under the leadership of the St. 
 Peters-burg League of Struggle for the Emancipation of the Working Class. 
The League issued leaflets and manifestoes calling on the workersto stand solidly and steadfastly in defence of their rights; it pub-lished and distributed the strikers’ main demands, which included the 10 2-hour working day, increased rates, and payment of wages on time. 
 The St. 
 Petersburg strikes gave an impetus to the working-class movement in Moscow and other Russian towns, and forcedthe government to speed up the review of the factory laws andthe issue of the law of June 2 (14), 1897, by which the working day at factories and mills was reduced to 11 2 hours. 
 The strikes, as Lenin subsequently wrote, “ushered in an era of steady advance in the working-class movement, that most powerful factor in thewhole of our revolution. 
” p. 
 123 Pravitelstvenny Vestnik (Government Herald )—a daily newspa-per, official organ of the tsarist government; appeared in St. 
 Pe-tersburg from 1869 to 1917. 
 p. 
 124 The League of Struggle for the Emancipation of the Working Class , organised by Lenin in the autumn of 1895, consisted of about twen-ty Marxist workers’ circles in St. 
 Petersburg. 
 The entire work ofthe League was based on the principles of centralism and strict dis-cipline. 
 The League was headed by a central group consisting ofV. 
 I. 
 Lenin, A. 
 A. 
 Vaneyev, N. 
 K. 
 Zaporozhets, G. 
 M. 
 Krzhizhanov-sky, N. 
 K. 
 Krupskaya, L. 
 Martov (Y. 
 O. 
 Zederbaum), M. 
 A. 
 Sil-vin, V. 
 V. 
 Starkov, and others. 
 The entire work of the League was,however, under the direct leadership of five members of the groupheaded by Lenin. 
 The League was divided into several dis-trict organisations. 
 Such front-rank class-conscious workers as I. 
 V. 
Babushkin, V. 
 A. 
 Shelgunov connected the groups with the facto-44ries, where there were organisers in charge of gathering information and distributing literature. 
 Workers’ study-circles were estab-lished in the big plants. 
 For the first time in Russia the League set about introducing so-cialism into the working-class movement, effecting a transition fromthe propagation of Marxism among small numbers of advanced wor-kers attending study-circles to political agitation among the broadmasses of the proletariat. 
 It directed the working-class movement,and linked up the workers’ struggle for economic demands with thepolitical struggle against tsarism. 
 A strike was organised in No-vember 1895 at the Thornton woollen mill. 
 It was under the lead-ership of the League that the famous St. 
 Petersburg textile work-ers’ strike, involving over 30,000 workers, took place in the sum-mer of 1896. 
 The League issued leaflets and pamphlets; and pre-pared the ground for the issue of the newspaper Rabocheye Dyelo(The Workers’ Cause). 
 The League publications were issued underV. 
 I. 
 Lenin’s editorship. 
 The League’s influence spread far beyondSt. 
 Petersburg, workers’ study-circles having united, on its initia-tive, into similar Leagues in Moscow, Kiev, Ekaterinoslav and othercities and parts of Russia. 
 Late in the night of December 8 (20), 1895, the tsarist govern-ment dealt a severe blow to the League by arresting a considerablenumber of its leading members, headed by Lenin. 
 An issue of Rabocheye Dyelo ready for the press was also seized. 
 The League replied to the arrest of Lenin and the other members byissuing a leaflet containing political demands, in which referencewas made for the first time to the existence of the League. 
 While in prison Lenin continued to lead the work of the League, helped it with his advice, got coded letters and leafletssmuggled out of prison, wrote the pamphlet On Strikes and the “Draft and Explanation of a Programme for the Social-Democ-ratic Party. 
” The League was significant, as Lenin put it, because it was the first real rudiment of a revolutionary party which had the sup-port of the working-class movement and directed the class struggleof the proletariat. 
 p. 
 127 The essay “ A Characterisation of Economic Romanticism ” was writ-ten by Lenin while in exile in Siberia in the spring of 1897. 
 Itappeared in four issues (Nos. 
 7-10) of the “legal Marxist” magazineNovoye Slovo (New Word ) for April-July 1897, over the signature K. 
 T—n. 
 It was included later in the miscellany entitled Economic Studies and Essays by Vladimir Ilyin which appeared in October 1898 (though the date given on the cover and the title-page is1899). 
 Early in 1908 it appeared, slightly amended and abridged,along with other items in The Agrarian Question by Vl. 
 Ilyin. 
 The parts of it omitted in this miscellany were section three, chap-ter II, “The Problem of the Growth of the Industrial Population atthe Expense of the Agricultural Population,” and the end of sec-tion five, chapter II, “The Reactionary Character of Romanticism. 
”A postscript was added to chapter I. 
 45 46 47 48 49 50 51When preparing the editions legally published in 1897 and 1898, Lenin was compelled for censorship reasons to substitute the term“modern theory” for “Marx’s theory” and “the well-known German economist” for “Marx,” “realist” for “Marxist” the word “paper” for Capital , and so on. 
 In the 1908 edition Lenin either altered a con-siderable number of these expressions in the text or added the neces-sary footnotes. 
 In the second and third Russian editions of the Collected Works , the corrections were given in footnotes. 
 In the present edition the corrections have been introduced into the text. 
 p. 
 129 Novoye Slovo (New Word )—a monthly scientific, literary and po-litical journal, published originally in St, Petersburg from 1894 by the liberal Narodniks. 
 In the early part of 1897 it was takenover by the “legal Marxists” (P. 
 B. 
 Struve, M. 
 I. 
 Tugan-Baranov-sky, and others). 
 Novoye Slovo published two of Lenin’s articles when he was in exile in Siberia—”A Characterisation of Econo-mic Romanticism” and “About a Certain Newspaper Article. 
” The journal also carried the writings of G. 
 V. 
 Plekhanov, V. 
 I. 
 Za-sulich, L. 
 Martov, A. 
 M. 
 Gorky, and others. 
 In December 1897 itwas closed down by the tsarist government. 
 p. 
 129 V. 
 V. 
 (pseudonym of V. 
 P. 
 Vorontsov) and N. 
—on (pseudonym of N. 
 F. 
 Danielson) were ideologists of liberal Narodism of the 1880s and 1890s. 
 p. 
 134 Lenin refers to MacCulloch’s polemical article “Mr. 
 Owen’s Plans for Relieving the National Distress,” published anonymously in 1819 in The Edinburgh Review (Vol. 
 XXXII), to which Sismondi replied. 
 The Edinburgh Review or Critical Journal was a scientific, liter-ary and political journal that appeared from 1802 to 1929. 
 p. 
 149 Karl Marx, Capital , Vol. 
 II, Moscow, 1957, p. 
 373; Vol. 
 III, Moscow 1959, p. 
 821. 
 p. 
 151 Karl Marx, Capital , Vol. 
 II, Moscow, 1957, pp. 
 351-523. 
 p. 
 152 In the 1897 and 1898 editions Lenin referred to M. 
 I. 
 Tugan-Baranovsky’s Industrial Crises , Part II. 
 In the 1908 edition Lenin introduced a change by referring instead to his own book, The Development of Capitalism in Russia , which appeared in 1899 (see present edition, Vol. 
 3). 
 p. 
 152 Karl Marx, Capital , Vol. 
 II, Moscow, 1957, p. 
 391. 
 p. 
 154 52 5354 55 56 57 58 59Karl Marx, Capital , Vol. 
 III, Moscow, 1959, p. 
 245. 
 p. 
 156 Karl Marx, Capital , Vol. 
 II, Moscow, 1957, p. 
 316. 
 p. 
 169 Katheder-Socialists —representatives of a trend in bourgeois po-litical economy of the 1870s and 1880s who, under the guise of so-cialism, advocated bourgeois-liberal reformism from university chairs. 
 ( Katheder in German). 
 The fear aroused among the exploiting classes by the spread of Marxism in the working-class movementand the growth of that movement brought Katheder-Socialism into being; it united the efforts of bourgeois ideologists to find fresh means of keeping the working people in subjugation. 
 Among the Katheder-Socialists were A. 
 Wagner, G. 
 Schmoller, L. 
 Brentano, and V. 
 Sombart who asserted that the bourgeois state is above classes, can reconcile mutually hostile classes, and cangradually introduce “socialism” without affecting the interests of the capitalists but at the same time taking the demands of the working people as far as possible Into consideration. 
 Theysuggested the legalisation of police-regulated wage-labour, and the revival of the medieval guilds. 
 Marx and Engels exposed Katheder-Socialism, showing how essentially reactionary it was. 
Lenin called the Katheder-Socialists the bed bugs of “police-bour-geois university science” who hated Marx’s revolutionary teach-ings. 
 In Russia the views of the Katheder-Socialists were advo-cated by the “legal Marxists. 
” p. 
 174 Marx and Engels, On Britain , Moscow. 
 1953. 
 p. 
 119. 
 p. 
 180 Karl Marx, Capital , Vol. 
 I, Moscow 1958, p. 
 642. 
 p. 
 180 Karl Marx, Capital , Vol. 
 I, Moscow 1958, p. 
 643. 
 p. 
 180 The quotations referred to were taken from the estimation of Sis-mondi’s petty-bourgeois socialism given in the Manifesto of the Communist Party (see Marx and Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 I, Moscow, 1958, p. 
 57). 
 N. 
 F. 
 Danielson used them in his arti-cle “Something About the Conditions of Our Economic Develop-ment” in Russkoye Bogatstvo , No. 
 6 1894. 
 p. 
 199 Zur Kritik —initial words of the title of Marx’s Zur Kritik der politischen Ökonomie . 
 Lenin cites passages from P. 
 P. 
 Rumyantsev’s Russian translation of this book published in 1896 (K. 
 Marx, Zur Kritik der politischen Ökonomie , Moskau-Leningrad, 1934, S. 
 49). 
 p. 
 199 60 61 62 63 6465 66 67 68 69Karl Marx, Critique of the Gotha Programme . 
 Marx and Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 II, Moscow, 1958, pp. 
 24-25. 
 In the 1897 and 1898 editions Lenin, in view of the censorship, did not refer directly to Marx, but to Struve. 
 In the 1908 edi-tion, however, he referred to Marx’s Critique of the Gotha Pro-gramme . 
 This correction has been made in the present edition. 
 p. 
 203 Karl Marx, Capital , Vol. 
 III, Moscow, 1959, pp. 
 856, 860, 861. 
 p. 
 204 Lenin refers to Narodnik polemical articles directed against the Marxists: N. 
 F. 
 Danielson, “An Apology for Money Power as aSign of the Times,” published under the pseudonym Nikolai-onin Russkoye Bogatstvo , No. 
 1-2, 1895; V. 
 P. 
 Vorontsov, “German Social-Democratism and Russian Bourgeoisism,” published underthe pseudonym V. 
 V. 
 in the newspaper Nedelya (Week ), Nos. 
 47-49, 1894. 
 p. 
 204 Karl Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy , Moscow, p. 
 55. 
 p. 
 205 Karl Marx, Capital , Vol. 
 III, Moscow, 1959, p. 
 819. 
 p. 
 205 G. 
 V. 
 Plekhanov (N. 
 Beltov), The Development of the Monist View of History , Moscow, 1956, p. 
 60. 
 p. 
 207 Karl Marx, Theorien über den Mehrwert , Bd. 
 I, Hb. 
 2, S. 
 304, 1923. 
 For pages cited here see pp. 
 309 and 313. 
 p. 
 207 “Progressive ” publicist of the late nineteenth century is an ironi-cal reference to the liberal Narodnik S. 
 N. 
 Yuzhakov. 
 An extractfrom his article “Problems of Hegemony at the End of the Nine-teenth Century,” published in Russkaya Mysl (Russian Thought ), Nos. 
 3-4, 1885, was quoted by P. 
 B. 
 Struve. 
 p. 
 211 Karl Marx, Poverty of Philosophy , Moscow, pp. 
 167-68. 
 Because of the censorship Lenin substituted the word “writers” for “socialists” (in the German original— Sozialisten ). 
 p. 
 213 Karl Marx, Poverty of Philosophy , Moscow, p. 
 74. 
 p. 
 216 70 71Karl Marx, Zur Kritik der politischen Ökonomie , Moskau-Lenin-grad, 1934, S. 
 85. 
 p. 
 218 The village (land) community (obshchina or mir) in Russia was the communal form of peasant use of the land, characterised bycompulsory crop rotation, and undivided woods and pastures. 
 Itsprincipal features were collective responsibility, the periodicalredistribution of the land with no right to refuse the allotmentgiven, and prohibition of its purchase and sale. 
 The Russian village community dates back to ancient times, and in the course of historical development gradually became oneof the mainstays of feudalism in Russia. 
 The landlords and the tsar-ist government used the village community to intensify feudal op-pression and to squeeze land redemption payments and taxes out ofthe people. 
 Lenin pointed out that the village community “does notsave the peasant from turning into a proletarian; actually it servesas a medieval barrier dividing the peasants, who are as if chainedto small associations and to categories which have lost all ‘reasonfor existence’. 
” (V. 
 I. 
 Lenin, The Agrarian Question in Russia Towards the Close of the Nineteenth Century . 
 See present edition, Vol. 
 15). 
 The problem of the village community aroused heated argu-ments and brought an extensive economic literature into exist-ence. 
 Particularly great interest in the village community was dis-played by the Narodniks, who saw in it the guarantee of Russia’ssocialist evolution by a special path. 
 By tendentiously gather-ing and falsifying facts and employing so-called “average figures,”the Narodniks sought to prove that the community peasantry inRussia possessed a special sort of “steadfastness,” and that thepeasant community protected the peasants against the penetrationof capitalist relations into their lives, and “saved” them fromruin and class differentiation. 
 As early as the 1880s G. 
 V. 
 Ple-khanov showed that the Narodnik illusions about “community so-cialism” were unfounded and in the 1890s Lenin completely refutedthe Narodnik theories. 
 Lenin made use of a tremendous amountof statistical material and countless facts to show how capitalistrelations were developing in the Russian village, and how capital,by penetrating into the patriarchal village community, was split-ting the peasantry into two antagonistic classes, the kulaks andthe poor peasants. 
 In 1906 tsarist minister Stolypin issued a law favouring the kulaks that allowed peasants to leave the community and to selltheir allotments. 
 This law laid the basis for the official abolitionof the village community system and intensified the differentiationamong the peasantry. 
 In nine years following the adoption of thelaw, over two million peasant families withdrew from thecommunities. 
 p. 
 219 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82Karl Marx, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte . 
 Marx and Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 I, Moscow, 1958, p. 
 275. 
 p. 
 222 Russkaya Mysl (Russian Thought )—a monthly literary and polit-ical journal published in Moscow from 1880 to 1918; up to 1905 it was liberal Narodnik in trend. 
 In the nineties, during the po-lemic between the Marxists and the liberal Narodniks, the editorsof the journal, while adhering to the Narodnik outlook, occasion-ally allowed articles by Marxists to be published in its columns. 
 Items by the progressive writers A. 
 M. 
 Gorky, V. 
 G. 
 Korolenko,D. 
 N. 
 Mamin-Sibiryak, G. 
 I. 
 Uspensky, A. 
 P. 
 Chekhov, and oth-ers were published in the journal’s literature section. 
 After the 1905 Revolution, Russkaya Mysl became the organ of the Right wing of the Cadet Party, and was edited by P. 
 B. 
 Stru-ve. 
 It was closed down in the middle of 1918. 
 p. 
 223 Kit Kitych —the nickname of Tit Titych, a rich merchant, one of the characters in A. 
 N. 
 Ostrovsky’s comedy Shouldering Anoth-er’s Troubles . 
 Lenin gives this epithet to the capitalist money-bags. 
 p. 
 225 Marx and Engels, Manifesto of the Communist Party . 
 Selected Works , Vol. 
 I, Moscow, 1958, p. 
 57. 
 p. 
 227 Karl Marx, Capital , Vol. 
 III, Moscow, 1959, p. 
 622. 
 p. 
 228 Karl Marx, Capital , Vol. 
 I, Moscow, 1958, p. 
 505. 
 p. 
 229 Marx and Engels, On Britain , Moscow, 1953, pp. 
 1-336. 
 p. 
 229 Frederick Engels, Anti-Dühring , Moscow, 1954, pp. 
 402-14. 
 p. 
 229 Sozialpolitisches Centralblatt (Central Social-Political Sheet )— organ of the Right wing of German Social-Democracy. 
 First ap-peared in 1892. 
 p. 
 230 Marx and Engels, On Britain , Moscow, 1953, pp. 
 49-50. 
 p. 
 237 Karl Marx, Capital , Vol. 
 I, Moscow, 1956, pp. 
 503-04. 
 In the 1897 and 1898 editions, because of the censorship, Lenin replaced the words social revolution” ( der sozialen Revolution ) 83 84 85 86 87 88by the words “social transformation. 
” In the 1908 edition Lenin translated the words as “social revolution. 
” This correction has beenmade in the present edition. 
 p. 
 245 Chinsh peasants —those entitled to the hereditary possession of the land in perpetuity, and who had to pay an almost fixed quit-rent, known as chinsh. 
 In tsarist Russia, the chinsh system operatedmainly in Poland, Lithuania, Byelorussia, and the Black Sea lit-toral of the Ukraine. 
 p. 
 246 Marx and Engels, Manifesto of the Communist Party . 
 Selected Works , Vol. 
 I, Moscow, 1958, p. 
 57. 
 p. 
 248 The Corn Laws , which were introduced in England in 1815, estab-lished high tariffs on imported corn, and at times prohibited cornimports. 
 They enabled the big landowners to increase grain prices on the home market and to secure enormous rents. 
 They also strengthened the political position of the landed aristocracy. 
There was a fierce and protracted struggle between the big land-owners and the bourgeoisie over the Corn Laws which ended in their repeal in 1846. 
 p. 
 253 “On the one hand , it cannot but be recognised , on the other hand , it must be admitted ”—an ironical expression used by M. 
 Y. 
 Sal-tykov-Shchedrin in his stories “The Diary of a Provincial in St. 
 Petersburg” and “Funeral. 
” p. 
 257 Karl Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy , Moscow, pp. 
 234-53. 
 p. 
 258 The Anti-Corn-Law League (this term is in English in the original) was founded in 1838 by the textile manufacturers Cobden and Bright. 
 Its headquarters were in Manchester, the centre of the Free-Trade movement. 
 The Anti-Corn-Law League, as its name indicates, fought to secure the repeal of the Corn Laws, and stood for Free Trade, demagogically asserting that it would improve the workers’ stand-ard of living, although reduced corn prices could only result in reduced wages for the workers and increased profits for the capital-ists. 
 The conflict over this issue between the industrial bourgeoi-sie and the landed aristocracy ended in the repeal of the Corn Laws in 1846. 
 Marx’s views on the anti-Corn-Law movement are given in his speech “On Free Trade” (see Appendix to The Poverty of Phi-losophy by Karl Marx, Moscow, pp. 
 234-53). 
 p. 
 258 89 90 91 92 93 9495 96Karl Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy , Moscow, p. 
 264. 
 p. 
 259 Marx and Engels, On Britain , Moscow. 
 1953. 
 p. 
 303. 
 p. 
 259 Die Neue Zeit (New Times )—theoretical journal of German So-cial-Democracy. 
 Appeared in Stuttgart from 1883 to 1923. 
 Priorto October 1917 was edited by K. 
 Kautsky, then by H. 
 Cunow. 
 In1885-95, articles by K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Engels appeared in its col-umns. 
 Engels frequently made suggestions to the editors of DieNeue Zeit, and severely criticised them for departing from Marx-ism. 
 The journal also published articles by F. 
 Mehring, P. 
 La-fargue, G. 
 V. 
 Plekhanov, and other leading figures of the interna-tional working-class movement. 
 In the late 1890s the journal madea practice of publishing articles by revisionists. 
 During the FirstWorld War (1914-18) the journal adopted a centrist, Kautskianposition in support of the soci al-chauvinists. 
 p. 
 259 The articles mentioned by V. 
 I. 
 Lenin are: “The Anti-Kriege Cir-cular” by K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Engels, and chapter IV, Vol. 
 II of Ger-man Ideology , both of which appeared in Das Westphälische Dampf-boot for July 1846 and August-September 1847, while extracts from them were reprinted in Nos. 
 27 and 28 of Die Neue Zeit , 1895-96 (MEGA, Erste Abteilung, Band 6, S. 
 10, 11, 12, 13; Band 5,S. 
 500, 501, 502). 
 Das Westphälische Dampfboot (Westphalian Steamer )—a month-ly magazine, organ of one of the trends of petty-bourgeois Ger-man, or “true, ” socialism; was edited by O. 
 Lüning in Bielefeld and Paderborn (Germany) from January 1845 to March 1848. 
 p. 
 259 Karl Marx, Capital , Vol. 
 I, Moscow, 1958, pp. 
 677-78. 
 p. 
 261 Karl Marx, Capital , Vol. 
 III, Moscow, 1959, p. 
 09. 
 p. 
 261 Marx and Engels, On Britain , Moscow. 
 1953. 
 pp. 
 302-03. 
 p. 
 265 Karl Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy , Moscow, p. 
 253. 
 For censorship reasons Lenin changed (or excluded) words from the section of Marx’s “On Free Trade ” cited here. 
 Thus, he tran-slated the words “hastens the social revolution” as “hastens this‘break-up’” and the phrase “in this revolutionary sense alone” as“in this sense alone. 
 ” p. 
 265 97 98 99 100 101 102 103Lenin wrote the pamphlet The New Factory Law in the summer of 1897 while in exile in Siberia, and the supplement in the autumnof the same year. 
 Judging from P. 
 B. 
 Axelrod’s preface to the firstedition of Lenin’s pamphlet The Tasks of the Russian Social-Democrats , the manuscript of the pamphlet appeared abroad only in autumn 1898. 
 It was printed in 1899 in Geneva by the Emanci-pation of Labour group at the press of The League of Russian So-cial-Democrats. 
 p. 
 267 Lenin refers to the notices that appeared at the beginning of Janu-ary 1897 in all St. 
 Petersburg spinning and weaving mills introduc-ing the 11 2-hour working day as from April 16 (28), i. 
e. 
, short-ly before May Day (April 19), the day of the international solidar-ity of the working people of all countries. 
 p. 
 271 Vestnik Finansov , Promyshlennosti i Torgovli (Finance , Industry and Trade Herald )—a weekly journal published by the Ministry of Finance in St. 
 Petersburg from November 1883 to 1917 (untilJanuary 1885 it was called Ukazatel Pravitelstvennykh Raspo-ryazheny po Ministerstvu Finansov [Record of Government In-structions—Ministry of Finance ]). 
 Government regulations, eco-nomic articles and reviews were published in its columns. 
 p. 
 275 Lenin paraphrases I. 
 A. 
 Krylov's fable “The Lion’s Share. 
” p. 
 313 Russkiye Vedomosti (Russian Recorder )—a newspaper published in Moscow from 1863 onwards; it expressed the views of the moderateliberal intelligentsia. 
 Among its contributors in the 1880s and 1890swere the democratic writers V. 
 G. 
 Korolenko, M. 
 Y. 
 Saltykov-Shchedrin and G. 
 I. 
 Uspensky. 
 It also published items written byliberal Narodniks. 
 In 1905 it became the organ of the Right wingof the bourgeois Cadet Party. 
 Lenin said that Russkiye Vedomosti was a peculiar combination of “Right-wing Cadetism and a strainof Narodism. 
” In 1918 it was closed down together with othercounter-revolutionary newspapers. 
 p. 
 316 Manilov —a character in Gogol’s Dead Souls , typifying the weak-willed, hollow dreamer and inert windbag. 
 p. 
 316 Sysoika —one of the chief characters in F. 
 M. 
 Reshetnikov’s Poliipovtsi , typifying the ignorant and rightless poor peasant who is weighed down by want and unbearable toil. 
 p. 
 318 104 105 106 107 108See Note 25. 
 p. 
 321 Lines from M. 
 Y. 
 Lermontov’s poem “To A. 
 O. 
 Smirnova. 
” p. 
 322 The pamphlet The Tasks of the Russian Social-Democrats was writ-ten by Lenin in exile (Siberia) at the close of 1897, and was firstpublished in 1898 by the Emancipation of Labour group in Geneva. 
It circulated widely among Russia’s advanced workers. 
 Accord-ing to Police Department data for the years 1898-1905, copiesof the pamphlet were discovered during searches and arrests madein St. 
 Petersburg, Moscow, Smolensk, Kazan, Orel, Kiev, Vilno,Feodosia, Irkutsk, Archangel, Sormovo, Kovno and other towns. 
 The original manuscript of the pamphlet has not been found but there is a copy made by some unknown hand. 
 In 1902 a secondedition of it appeared in Geneva, and in 1905 a third edition eachwith a preface by V. 
 I. 
 Lenin. 
 The pamphlet was also included inthe miscellany: Vl. 
 Ilyin, Twelve Years , published in November 1907 (the cover and title-page of which are dated 1908). 
 The 1902,1905 and 1907 editions do not contain the leaflet “To the St. 
 Peters-burg Workers and Socialists from the League of Struggle” included inthe copy of the manuscript, and as a supplement to the first editionof the pamphlet. 
 The leaflet was published in all the previous edi-tions of the Collected Works and is also included in the present edi-tion. 
 The copy made from the manuscript contains several slipsof the pen. 
 Inaccuracies also appeared in the first edition of thepamphlet, which was published abroad by the Emancipation ofLabour group, but these were corrected by Lenin in the subsequenteditions. 
 p. 
 323 Narodnoye Pravo (People’s Right)—an illegal organisation of Russian democratic intellectuals founded in the summer of 1893,its initiators including O. 
 V. 
 Aptekman, A. 
 I. 
 Bogdanovich,A. 
 V. 
 Gedeonovsky, M. 
 A. 
 Natanson, and N. 
 S. 
 Tyutchev who hadformerly belonged to the Narodnaya Volya. 
 The Narodopravtsi, asthe members of the party were called, set themselves the aim ofuniting all opposition forces to fight for political reforms. 
 Theirorganisation issued two programme documents, “Manifesto” and “AnUrgent Question. 
” In the spring of 1894 the group was broken up bythe tsarist government. 
 Lenin’s estimation of the Narodnoye Pravoas a political party will be found in his What the “Friends of the People ” Are and How They Fight the Social-Democrats (see present edition, Vol. 
 1) and on page 344 of the present volume. 
 Most of theNarodopravtsi subsequently joined the Socialist-RevolutionaryParty. 
 p. 
 327 The Narodnaya Volya (People’s Will) group (Narodovoltsi) came into existence In St. 
 Petersburg in the autumn of 1891 with its own pro-gramme. 
 Its original membership included M. 
 S. 
 Olminsky (Alexan-109drov), N . 
 L. 
 Meshcheryakov, Y. 
 M. 
 Alexandrova, A. 
 A. 
 Fedulov, and A. 
 A. 
 Yergin. 
 Pamphlets and Rabochy Sbornik (Workers ’ Mis-cellany ) and two issues of Letuchy Listok (The Leaflet ) were pub-lished illegally by the group’s press. 
 In April 1894 the group wasbroken up by the police, but soon renewed its activities. 
 At thatperiod it was in process of abandoning Narodnaya Volya views forSocial-Democracy. 
 The last issue of The Leaflet , No. 
 4, that appeared in December 1895, clearly bore traces of Social-Demo-cratic influence. 
 The group established contact with the St. 
 Peters-burg League of Struggle for the Emancipation of the WorkingClass, used its press to issue several of the League’s publications,for example, Lenin’s Explanation of the Law on Fines Imposed on Factory Workers (see pp. 
 29-72 of the present volume), and nego-tiated with the League about the joint publication of the newspaperRabocheye Dyelo . 
 It was intended to use the group’s press to issue Lenin’s pamphlet On Strikes , which was smuggled out of prison in May 1896. 
 But the suggestion fell through in view of thepolice discovery and destruction of the press, and the arrest ofmembers of the group in June 1896. 
 The group then went out ofexistence, and some of its members (P. 
 F. 
 Kudelli, N. 
 L. 
 Me-shcheryakov, M. 
 S. 
 Olminsky, and others) later became active fig-ures in the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party, although themajority joined the Socialist-Revolutionary Party. 
 p. 
 327 The League of Russian Social-Democrats Abroad was founded in 1894 in Geneva, on the initiative of the Emancipation of Labour group,and had its own press where it printed revolutionary literature. 
 Atfirst the Emancipation of Labour group guided the League and edit-ed its publications. 
 The League issued the Rabotnik miscellanies and the Listki “Rabotnika ,” and published Lenin’s Explanation of the Law on Fines Imposed on Factory Workers (1897), Plekhanov’s New Drive Against Russian Social-Democracy (1897), etc. 
 The First Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, held in March 1898, recognisedthe League as the Party’s representative abroad. 
 As time proceededthe opportunist elements—the “economists,” or so-called “young”group, secured the upper hand in the League. 
 At the First Congressof the League held in Zurich in November 1898, the Emancipationof Labour group announced their refusal to edit League publica-tions, with the exception of No. 
 5-6 of Rabotnik and Lenin’s pamphlets The Tasks of the Russian Social-Democrats and The New Factory Law , which the group undertook to publish. 
 From then on the League published Rabocheye Dyelo , a magazine of the “econo-mists. 
” The Emancipation of Labour group finally broke with theLeague and left its ranks in April 1900, at the League’s Second Con-gress held in Geneva, when the Emancipation of Labour groupand its supporters left the Congress and established an independent Sotsial-Demokrat organisation. 
 In 1903 the Second Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 adopted a decision to disband the League. 
 p. 
 327 110 111This passage refers to the policy pursued by N. 
 P. 
 Ignatyev, Min-ister of Internal Affairs in 1881-82, which was intended, as Leninput it, “to bamboozle” the liberals; by playing at democracy it washoped to hide the fact that the government of Alexander III hadgone over entirely to the side of reaction. 
 Part of the policy was thecalling of conferences of “knowledgeable people” which includedMarshals of the Nobility, representatives of the Zemstvo Adminis-trations and similar people to discuss problems relating to a reduc-tion in land redemption payments, the proper organisation ofmigration, and local government reform. 
 A suggestion was evenmade to convene a so-called Zemsky Sobor, to be attended bya crowd of three thousand strong. 
 All these devices, however, end-ed in Ignatyev’s resignation, followed by a period of “unbridled,incredibly senseless and brutal reaction” (see What the “Friends of the People ” Are and How They Fight the Social-Democrats , present edition, Vol. 
 1). 
 p. 
 335 The Emancipation of Labour group was the first Russian Marxist group. 
 It was founded in Geneva by G. 
 V. 
 Plekhanov in 1883, andincluded P. 
 B. 
 Axelrod, L. 
 G. 
 Deutsch, Vera Zasulich, and V. 
 N. 
Ignatov. 
 The group did much to spread Marxism in Russia. 
 It translated such Marxist works as Manifesto of the Communist Party by Marx and Engels, Wage-Labour and Capital by Marx, and So-cialism: Utopian and Scientific , by Engels, etc. 
, published them ab-road and organised their distribution in Russia. 
 Plekhanov andhis group seriously undermined Narodism. 
 In 1883 Plekha-nov drafted a programme for the Russian Social-Democratsand in 1885 made another draft. 
 The two drafts were published bythe Emancipation of Labour group and marked an important steptowards the establishment of a Social-Democratic Party in Russia. 
Plekhanov’s Socialism and the Political Struggle (1883), Our Dif-ferences (1885), The Development of the Monist View of History (1895) played a considerable part in disseminating Marxist views. 
The group, however, made some serious mistakes. 
 It clung to rem-nants of Narodnik views, underestimated the revolutionary roleof the peasantry, and overestimated the part played by the liberalbourgeoisie. 
 These errors were the germs of the future Menshe-vik views held by Plekhanov and other members of the group. 
 Thegroup played a great part in imbuing the Russian working classwith revolutionary class-consciousness but it had no practical tieswith the working-class movement. 
 Lenin pointed out that the Eman-cipation of Labour group “only theoretically founded the Social-Democracy and took the first step in the direction of the work-ing-class movement. 
” The group established ties with the inter-national labour movement, and represented Russian Social-Democ-racy at all congresses of the Second International from the firstheld in Paris in 1889 onwards. 
 At the Second Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P held in August 1903, the Emancipation of Labour group announced its dissolution. 
 p. 
 338 112 113 114 115 116 117 118Lenin refers to collections of articles entitled Material for a History of the Russian Social-Revolutionary Movement , published in Geneva in the years 1893-96 by the Group of Old NarodnayaVolya Members (P. 
 L. 
 Lavrov, N. 
 S. 
 Rusanov, and others). 
 In all,four collections appeared in five volumes (seventeen were origin-ally planned). 
 p. 
 339 Blanquism —a trend in the French socialist movement headed by the outstanding revolutionary and prominent representative ofFrench utopian communism, Louis-Auguste Blanqui (1805-81). 
 The Blanquists denied the class struggle, and awaited “man-kind’s emancipation from wage slavery by a conspiracy of a smallminority of intellectuals and not by the class struggle of the prole-tariat” (V. 
 I. 
 Lenin, Results of the Congress . 
 See present edition, Vol. 
 10). 
 They did not take account of the concrete situation requi-site for the victory of an uprising and showed their disdain for tieswith the masses, substituting the actions of a clandestine handfulof conspirators for the activity of a revolutionary party. 
 p. 
 340 The article “ The Handicraft Census of 1894-95 in Perm Gubernia and General Problems of ‘Handicraft ’ Industry ” was written by Lenin when in exile in Siberia in August and September 1897, notlater than the 7th (19th) of the latter month. 
 The material con-tained in this article was used by him in his book The Development of Capitalism in Russia . 
 The article was first published in 1898 in the miscellany Eco-nomic Studies and Essays , and reprinted in 1908 in the mis-cellany The Agrarian Question . 
 p. 
 355 In 1889 the tsarist government introduced the administrative post of Zemsky Nachalnik in order to increase the power of the land-lords over the peasants. 
 The Zemsky Nachalniks were appointedfrom among the local landed nobility, and were given enormouspower, not only administrative but also juridical, over the peasants,including the right to have peasants arrested and flogged. 
 p. 
 357 Karl Marx, Capital , Vol. 
 I, Moscow, 1958, p. 
 748. 
 p. 
 382 Karl Marx, Capital , Vol. 
 I, Moscow, 1958, p. 
 390. 
 p. 
 405 By a decree of Peter I issued in 1721 merchant factory owners were given the right to purchase peasants for work in their factories. 
The feudal workers attached to such enterprises under the posses-sional right were called “possessional peasants. 
” p. 
 418 119 120 121 122 123 124 125 126 127 128 129The Ministry of Finance Yearbook , Issue I, St. 
 Petersburg, 1869, p. 
 225. 
 p. 
 426 The truck system —the system of paying the workers wages in the shape of goods and foodstuffs from the employer’s shop. 
 Thissystem was additional exploitation of the workers, and in Russia,was particularly widespread in the areas where handicraft industryflourished. 
 p. 
 428 Karl Marx, Capital , Vol. 
 I, Moscow, 1958, pp. 
 336-68. 
 p. 
 435 Yuridichesky Vestnik (The Legal Messenger )—a monthly magazine, bourgeois-liberal in trend, published in Moscow from 1867 to1892. 
 p. 
 437 Lenin quotes from Heine’s poem “Du hast Diamanten und Perlen...” (“Thou hast diamonds and pearls”). 
 p. 
 441 Dyelovoi Korrespondent (Business Correspondent )—a commercial and industrial newspaper that appeared in Ekaterinburg (nowSverdlovsk) from 1886 to 1898. 
 Its columns contained informativeitems, announcements, articles on economic problems, and reviews. 
 p. 
 442 Vol. 
 X, part I, of the Code of Laws of the Russian Empire . 
 p. 
 443 Permskiye Gubernskiye Vedomosti (Perm Gubernia Record )—an official paper that appeared weekly, and then daily, in Perm from1838 to 1917. 
 p. 
 452 Cf. 
 I. 
 I. 
 Khemnitser’s fable “The Metaphysician,” in which the metaphysician is the embodiment of empty theorising. 
 p. 
 453 The article “ Gems of Narodnik Project-Mongering ” was written at the close of 1897 during Lenin’s exile in Siberia. 
 He wrote it forNovoye Slovo , being unaware that the government had closed that magazine down in December 1897. 
 In 1898 Lenin included the article in his miscellany Economic Studies and Essays . 
 p. 
 459 The “ disciples ”—the term used in the 1890s as a legal way of re-ferring to the followers of Marx and Engels. 
 p. 
 462 130 131 132 133 134 135In this passage Lenin refers to the historico-ethical school in polit-ical economy that grew up in Germany in the 1870s. 
 This schoolattached great importance to ethical (moral) principles in econom-ic life. 
 Its exponents were G. 
 Schmoller, L. 
 Brentano and otherKatheder-Socialists. 
 p. 
 466 Marx and Engels, On Britain , Moscow, 1953, p. 
 303. 
 p. 
 469 Korobochka —a character in N. 
 V. 
 Gogol’s Dead Souls . 
 A petty land-lady, tight-fisted, pettifogging and stupid, she was “block-head-ed,” to use Gogol’s expression. 
 The name Korobochka has becomean epithet indicating petty miserliness and stupidity. 
 p. 
 475 Lenin refers to the period of absolute police despotism and gross licence of the military associated with the name and activity ofA. 
 A. 
 Arakcheyev, the powerful favourite of Paul I and Alexander I. 
Characteristic of the Arakcheyev regime were the brutal meas-ures employed against the revolutionary movement of the oppressedmasses and against all free thinking. 
 Arakcheyev was particularly notorious for having established military settlements designed to cheapen the cost of maintainingthe army. 
 Besides fulfilling their military duties, the settlers hadto maintain themselves by farmwork. 
 Unparalleled brutality, rig-orous discipline, and regulation of the settlers’ lives down tothe smallest details prevailed in the military settlements. 
 p. 
 478 Mercantilism —a system of economic views and the economic poli-cy current in a number of European states from the fifteenth to theeighteenth century to assist the accumulation of capital and thedevelopment of commerce. 
 The advocates of mercantilism identi-fied the nation’s wealth with money, their opinion being that thepublic wealth is contained exclusively in money in the shape ofprecious metals. 
 The states that adhered to the mercantile systemtried to regulate trade in such a way as to ensure that exports ex-ceeded imports. 
 With this aim, they pursued a policy of protectinghome industry by regulating the import of foreign goods throughthe imposition of tariffs, the granting of subsidies to the manufac-tories, and so forth. 
 The mercantilist economic policy helped tointensify the exploitation of the working people. 
 p. 
 480 This was the expression used by P. 
 B. 
 Struve to describe the plan suggested by Guryev, a member of the Scientific Committee of theMinistry of Finance, in an article “Current Problems of our Coun-try’s Life,” signed P. 
 B. 
 (see Novoye Slovo , No. 
 7, April 1897, p. 
 238). 
 p. 
 480 By the great Russian utopian is meant N. 
 G. 
 Chernyshevsky (1828-89), the great Russian revolutionary democrat, scholar, writer and literary critic. 
 One of the outstanding predecessors of Russian Social-Democracy, Chernyshevsky was the ideological inspirer and leader of the revolutionary-democratic movement in Russia in the 1860s. 
 A utopian socialist, he considered the transition to socialism possible through the medium of the peasant community. 
 At the same time, as a revolutionary democrat he was able to exert a revolutionary influence on all the political events of his day, overcoming all the obstacles and obstructions of the censor-ship and advocating the idea of a peasant revolution, the idea of a mass struggle to overthrow all the old authorities (V. 
 I. 
 Lenin, “The ‘Peasant Reform’ and Proletarian-Peasant Revolution. 
” See pres-ent edition, Vol. 
 17). 
 Chernyshevsky wrathfully exposed the feudal character of the “peasant” Reform of 1861, and called on the peasants to revolt. 
 In 1862 he was arrested by the tsarist government and was confined to the Peter and Paul Fortress, where he spent nearly two years, after which he was sentenced to seven years penal servitude and to permanent exile in Siberia. 
 He was only allowed to return from exile towards the end of his life. 
 To the end of his days Chernyshevsky was a passionate fighter against social injus-tice, against all manifestations of political and economic oppres-sion. 
 Chernyshevsky’s services in developing Russian materialist philosophy were tremendous, his views being the summit of pre-Marxist materialist philosophy. 
 His materialism was of a revolu-tionary and active character. 
 He vigorously criticised idealist the-ories, and tried to refashion Hegelian dialectics in the materialist spirit. 
 Magnificent specimens of a dialectical approach to the study of reality are to be found in Chernyshevsky’s writings on political economy, aesthetics, art criticism, and history. 
 Marx made a study of Chernyshevsky’s works, had a very high opinion of them, and called Chernyshevsky a great Russian scholar. 
 Lenin wrote of him that he was “the only really great Rus-sian writer who, from the fifties up to 1888, succeeded in keeping to the level of an integral philosophic materialism.... 
 But, continued Lenin, “due to the backwardness of Russian life, Cher-nyshevsky was unable to, or rather, could not, rise to the heights of the dialectical materialism of Marx and Engels” (V. 
 I. 
 Lenin, Materialism and Empiriocriticism . 
 See present edition, Vol. 
 14). 
 Chernyshevsky’s literary and critical works exerted tremendous influence on the development of Russian literature and art. 
 His novel What Is To Be Done? (1863) helped to politically educate more than one generation of revolutionaries in Russia and other coun-tries. 
 p. 
 481 Sever (North )—a weekly literary and art journal that appeared in St. 
 Petersburg from 1888 to 1914. 
 p. 
 483136 137 Gogol ’s young lady —Agaphia Tikhonovna, a character in Gogol’s comedy Marriage . 
 p. 
 485 Novus —a pseudonym of P. 
 B. 
 Struve. 
 p. 
 486 Marx and Engels, Manifesto of the Communist Party . 
 Selected Works , Vol. 
 I, Moscow, 1958, p. 
 38. 
 Further on Lenin quotes this passage in greater detail (see footnote to p. 
 487 of the present volume). 
 p. 
 486 Lenin refers here to page 39 of the magazine Novoye Slovo , No. 
 9, June 1897, which contains a passage from his essay “Characteri-sation of Economic Romanticism” (see p. 
 229 of the present volume). 
 p. 
 487 Karl Marx, Capital , Vol. 
 I, Moscow, 1958, pp. 
 504-06. 
 p. 
 487 Karl Marx, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte . 
 Marx and Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 I, Moscow, 1958, p. 
 334. 
 p. 
 487 The article “ The Heritage We Renounce ” was written at the close of 1897 when in exile in Siberia. 
 In 1898 it was published in the miscellany Economic Studies and Essays . 
 p. 
 491 Otechestvenniye Zapiski (Fatherland Notes )—a literary-political magazine that began publication in St. 
 Petersburg in 1820. 
 From 1839 it became the best progressive journal of its day. 
 Among its contributors were V. 
 G. 
 Belinsky, A. 
 I. 
 Herzen, T. 
 N. 
 Granovsky, and N. 
 P. 
 Ogaryov. 
 Following Belinsky’s departure from the edito-rial board in 1846, the importance of Otechestvenniye Zapiski began to diminish. 
 In 1868 the journal came under the direction of N. 
 A. 
 Nekrasov and M. 
 Y. 
 Saltykov-Shchedrin. 
 This marked the onset of a period in which the journal flourished anew, gather-ing around itself the revolutionary democratic intellectuals of Russia. 
 When Nekrasov died (in 1877), the Narodniks gained dom-inant influence in the journal. 
 Otechestvenniye Zapiski was continually harassed by the censors, and in April 1884 was closed down by the tsarist government. 
 p. 
 494 The “peasant Reform ” of 1861 , which abolished serfdom in Russia, was effected by the tsarist government in the interests of the serf-owning landlords. 
 The Reform was made necessary by the entire course of Russia’s economic development and by the growth of a mass movement among the peasantry against feudal exploitation. 
 In138 139 140 141 142 143 144 145 146 its form the “peasant Reform” was feudal, but the force of economic development that had drawn Russia on to the capitalist path gavethe feudal form a capitalist content, and this content became the more evident the less land was filched from the peasants, the more fully the land of the peasants was separated from that of the landlords, the less the tribute” (i. 
e. 
, redemption) paid to the feudalists” (“The ‘Peasant Reform’ and Proletarian-Peasant Revolution. 
” See present edition, Vol. 
 17). 
 The “peasant Reform”marked a step towards Russia’s transformation into a bourgeois monarchy. 
 On February 10,1861, Alexander II signed a Manifesto and Regulations for the peasants, who had been freed fromfeudal dependence. 
 In all, 22,500,000 serfs, formerly belonging to landowners, were “emancipated. 
” Landed proprietorship, how-ever, remained. 
 The peasants’ lands were declared the propertyof the landlords. 
 The peasant could only get a land allotment according to the standard established by law (and even then by agreement with the landlord), and had to redeem it, that is,pay for it. 
 The peasants made their redemption payments to the tsarist government, that had paid the established sums to the landlords. 
 Approximate estimates show that after the Reform, thenobility possessed 71,500,000 dessiatines of land and the peasants 33,700,000 dessiatines. 
 The Reform enabled the landlords to cut off and appropriate one-fifth or even two-fifths of the land form-erly cultivated by the peasants. 
 The Reform merely undermined, but did not abolish, the old corvée system of farming. 
 The landlords secured possession of thebest parts of the peasants’ allotments (the “cut-off lands,” woods, meadows, watering places, grazing grounds, and so on), without which the peasants could not engage in independent farming. 
 Un-til the redemption arrangements were completed the peasants were considered to be “temporarily bound,” and rendered services to the landlord in the shape of quit-rent or corvée service. 
 The Russian revolutionary democrats, headed by N. 
 G. 
 Cher-nyshevsky, criticised the “peasant Reform” for its feudal character. 
 V. 
 I. 
 Lenin called the “peasant Reform” of 1861 the first mass act ofviolence against the peasantry in the interests of nascent capital-ism in agriculture—the landlords were “clearing the estates” for capitalism. 
 For material on the 1861 Reform, see F. 
 Engels’ article “Social-ism in Germany” ( Die Neue Zeit , Jg. 
 X, Bd. 
 I, 1891, H. 
 19) and V. 
 I. 
 Lenin’s “The Fiftieth Anniversary of the Downfall of Serfdom,”“The Jubilee,” “The ‘Peasant Reform’ and Proletarian-Peasant Revolution” (see present edition, Vol. 
 17). 
 p. 
 495 The Regulations of February 19, 1861, were legislative acts on the abolition of serfdom in Russia. 
 p. 
 496 Engels describes Skaldin as a moderate conservative in his article 147 148 “Soziales aus Russland” (“On Social Relations in Russia”). 
 Marx and Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 II, Moscow, 1958, p. 
 58. 
 p. 
 505 When speaking of the ideological “heritage” of the 1860s Lenin was compelled, for censorship reasons, to make reference to Skal-din. 
 Actually Lenin considered Chernyshevsky to be the principal representative of this “heritage. 
” In a letter to A. 
 N . 
 Potresov datedJanuary 26, 1899, from exile in Siberia, Lenin wrote: “...nowhere, however, do I suggest accepting the heritage from Skaldin. 
 There can be no doubt that it should be accepted from other people. 
I think that the footnote on p. 
 237” (p. 
 505 of the present volume), “in which I had Chernyshevsky in mind and explained why it was not convenient to take him for purposes of comparison, willmake it easier for me to defend myself (against possible attacks by opponents). 
” p. 
 505 Zemledelcheskaya Gazeta (Agricultural News )—organ of the Minis-try of State Properties (from 1894—of the Ministry of State Prop-erties and Agriculture); appeared in St. 
 Petersburg from 1834 to 1917. 
 p. 
 511 Cycle cultivation —an enslaving form of labour-service rendered to the landlord by the peasant as rental for land obtained from him. 
The landlord lent the peasant land or made him a loan in cash or kind for which the peasant undertook to cultivate a “cycle” using his own implements and draught animals: this meant cultivatingone dessiatine of spring crops and one of winter crops, occasional-ly supplemented by reaping a dessiatine of crops. 
 p. 
 511 Vestnik Yevropy (European Messenger )—a monthly historico-political and literary magazine, bourgeois-liberal in trend. 
 AppearedIn St. 
 Petersburg from 1866 to 1918. 
 The magazine published articles directed against the revolutionary Marxists. 
 The maga-zine’s editor and publisher until 1908 was M. 
 M. 
 Stasyulevich. 
 p. 
 515 These words are from Skaldin’s book, In the Backwoods and in the Capital , St. 
 Petersburg, 1870, p. 
 285. 
 p. 
 519 Marx and Engels, The Holy Family , Moscow, 1955, p. 
 110. 
 p. 
 524 N. 
 Kamensky was one of the pseudonyms used by G. 
 V. 
 Plekhanov. 
 The article referred to is his “Materialist Conception of History,” published in 1897 in issue No. 
 12 (September) of Novoye Slovo . 
 p. 
 530149 150 151 152 153 154 155 Schmollers Jahrbuch —its full title is Jahrbuch für Gesetzgebung , Verwaltung und Volkswirtschaft im Deutschen Reich (Legislative , Administrative and Economic Yearbook for the German Empire )— a magazine dealing with political economy, published from 1877onwards by the German bourgeois economists and Katheder-Socialists, F. 
 Holtzendorf and L. 
 Brentano, and from 1881 byG. 
 Schmoller. 
 p. 
 533 Nedelya (Week )—a liberal-Narodnik political and literary news-paper. 
 Appeared in St. 
 Petersburg from 1866 to 1901. 
 Was opposedto fighting the autocracy, and advocated the so-called theory of“minor matters,” i. 
e. 
, appealed to the intelligentsia to abstainfrom revolutionary struggle and to engage in “cultural activity. 
” p. 
 534156 157 THE LIFE AND WORK OF V. 
 I. 
 LENIN Outstanding Dates (1895 -1897 ) 1895 February 18 or Lenin participates in a meeting of members of 19 (March 2 or Social-Democratic groups in various Russian 3, new style ) towns held in St. 
 Petersburg. 
 The problems dis-cussed are: the transition from Marxist propagandain narrow study circles to political agitationamong the masses and the publication of popularliterature for workers. 
 April Lenin's The Economic Content of Narodism and the Criticism of It in Mr. 
 Struve's Book is published in the miscellany Material for a Characterisation of Our Economic Development under the pseudonym of K. 
 Tulin. 
 The miscellany was seized by thetsarist censors and almost the entire edition wasburned. 
 April 25 Lenin goes abroad to establish contact with the (May 7) Emancipation of Labour Group, and to acquaint himself with the West-European working-classmovement. 
 May While in Switzerland Lenin makes the acquaint-ance of members of the Emancipation of Labourgroup (G. 
 V. 
 Plekhanov and others), and arrangesfor regular contacts with them, and for the pub-lication abroad of the miscellany Rabotnik. 
 End of May -Lenin lives in Paris. 
 Becomes acquainted with June (June -Paul Lafargue. 
 beginning ofJuly July Lenin takes a cure at a Swiss sanatorium. 
 Latter half of During his stay in Berlin, Lenin works in the July -beginning public library, acquaints himself with Marxist of September literature, and attends workers’ meetings. 
 (first half of August -middle of September July 22 Lenin attends a Social-Democratic meeting held (August 3) in the Niederbarnim suburb of Berlin. 
 September 7 (19) Lenin returns to Russia carrying with him a port-manteau with a false bottom containing illegalMarxist literature. 
 Between 7 and Lenin visits Vilno Moscow and Orekhovo-Zuyevo 29 of September where he establishes contact with members of local (September 19 Social-Democratic groups and gets their agree-and October 11) ment to support the miscellany Rabotnik then being published abroad. 
 September 29 Lenin returns to St. 
 Petersburg. 
 (October 11) Autumn Lenin founds the League of Struggle for the Eman-cipation of the Working Class in St. 
 Petersburg. 
 November Lenin sends abroad a series of items dealing with the working-class movement in Russia, for publi-cation in the Rabotnik miscellany. 
 Not before The St. 
 Petersburg League of Struggle issues November 7 (19) the leaflet written by Lenin entitled “To the Work-ing Men and Women of the Thornton Factory. 
” November 25 Lenin’s article “ Gymnasium Farms and Corrective (December 7) Gymnasia ” is published in the newspaper Samarsky Vestnik . 
 November-Lenin prepares the publication of the first issue beginning of of the illegal newspaper Rabocheye Dyelo , organ December of the St. 
 Petersburg League of Struggle; he writes (November-the leading article “To the Russian Workers” middle of Decem-the article “What Are Our Ministers Thinking ber) About?” and others. 
 He edits the whole issue. 
 December 3 (15) The publication of Lenin's pamphlet Explana-tion of the Law on Fines Imposed on Factory Work-ers is begun. 
 December 8 (20) Meeting of the leading group of the League of Struggle headed by Lenin, at which the firstissue of Rabocheye Dyelo , prepared for the press is discussed. 
 In the night of Lenin and other members of the St. 
 Petersburg December 8-9 League of Struggle are arrested. 
 During the search ( 20-21) and arrest of A. 
 A. 
 Vaneyev the police seize the material for the first issue of Rabocheye Dyelo , then ready for the press. 
 Lenin is remanded under arrest. 
 December 21 Lenin’s first interrogation in prison. 
 (January 2 1896 ) End of the year Lenin drafts a programme for the Social-Democratic Party. 
 1896 1896 W hile in prison, Lenin establishes contact with members of the St. 
 Petersburg League of Strugglewho escaped arrest, helps the League with adviceand instruction, and has pamphlets and leafletswritten by him smuggled out. 
 Beginning of While in prison Lenin begins preparations for January his book The Development of Capitalism in Russia . 
 Not before March Lenin’s obituary “Frederick Engels,” written in 1895, is published in the miscellany Rabotnik , No. 
 1-2. 
 March 30 Lenin’s second interrogation in prison. 
 (April 11) May 7 (19) Third interrogation. 
 May 27 (June 8) Fourth interrogation. 
 Summer Lenin writes an explanation of the programme for the Social-Democratic Party. 
 Before November The St. 
 Petersburg League of Struggle issues 25 (December 7) a leaflet “To the Tsarist Government,” written by Lenin while in prison. 
 1897 January 29 The tsarist government issues an order exiling (February 10) Lenin to East Siberia under police surveillance for three years. 
 February 13 (25) Lenin is informed of his sentence to exile in East Siberia. 
 February 14 (26) Lenin is released from remand imprisonment and (February 26-allowed to remain in St. 
 Petersburg until the March 1) evening of February 17 (March 1). 
 February 14-17 Lenin has a meeting in St. 
 Petersburg with the other “old” League of Struggle members who havebeen released before being sent into exile and with“young” members. 
 At a meeting of “old” and “young”League members Lenin severely criticises the “econ-omism” trend that is beginning to appear amongthe “young” members. 
 February 17 Lenin leaves St. 
 Petersburg for exile in Siberia (March 1) via Moscow. 
 February 18-22 On his way to exile a halt is made in Moscow, (March 2-6) where Lenin has permission to stay for a while with his mother. 
 He stays two days longer thanallowed by the police. 
 February 22 Lenin leaves Moscow for Siberia, where he is to (March 6) live in exile. 
 March 4 (16) Lenin arrives in Krasnoyarsk. 
 March 9-April While in Krasnoyarsk Lenin studies problems 30 (March 21-relating to Russia’s economic development, using May 12) for this purpose books in the private library of G. 
 V. 
 Yudin, a local merchant. 
 April-July Lenin’s Characterisation of Economic Roman-ticism is published in Novoye Slovo , issues 7-10. 
 April 30 Lenin leaves Krasnoyarsk via Minusinsk for the (May 12) village of Shushenskoye, the place to which he has been exiled. 
 May 6 (18) Lenin arrives in Minusinsk. 
 May 8 (20) Lenin arrives in the village of Shushenskoye, Minusinsk Province, Yenisei Gubernia. 
 Summer and Lenin writes his pamphlet The New Factory Law Autumn and the appendix to it. 
 September 27-28 Lenin travels to Minusinsk, where he makes the (October 9-10) acquaintance of exiled members of the Narodnaya Volya and Narodnoye Pravo organisations. 
 September 29-From Minusinsk Lenin arrives in the village of October 4 Tesinskoye, where he spends five days among (October 11-16) exiled Social-Democrats. 
 November Lenin leaves Shushenskoye village and visits Minusinsk “without permission. 
” Second half of Lenin writes the pamphlet The Tasks of the Rus-the year sian Social-Democrats and the articles “The Hand-icraft Census of 1894-95 in Perm Gubernia andGeneral Problems of ‘Handicraft’ Industry,” “Gemsof Narodnik Project-Mongering,” and “The HeritageWe Renounce. 
” 1897 While in exile, Lenin maintains contact withthe leading bodies of the working-class movementin Russia and with the Emancipation of Labourgroup abroad, and also corresponds with Social-Democrats in other, places of exile; he continuespreparations for his book The Development of Capitalism in Russia . 
 Lenin gives legal advice to the peasants of Shushenskoye village and the surrounding region,and enjoys great prestige among them. 
 B. 
 n. 
 leHnH coЧnHeHnr Tom 2 На английскот языке