L E N I N COLLECTED WORKS 2/FL0103 A IN ACCORDANCE WITH A DECISION OF THE NINTH CONGRESS OF THE R . 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
) AND THE SECOND CONGRESS OF SOVIETS OF THE U . 
S. 
S. 
R. 
 B. 
 n. 
 l d H n H С О Ч И Н E Н И Я И з д a н u е ч е m в е p m o e ГОСУДАРСТВ ЕНН ОЕ ИЗ ДАТ ЕЛЬ СТВО ПОЛИТИЧЕ СКОЙ ЛИ ТЕРАТУ РЫ M О С К В А V. 
 I. 
 L E N I N cOLLEcTED WORKS VOLUME 2/FL0103 ?uly 1918 – March 1919 PROGRESS PUBLISHERS MOSCOW TRANSLATED THE RUSSIAN EDITED BY JIM RIORDAN First printing 1965 Second printing 1974 From Marx to Mao M L © Digital Reprints 2011 www. 
marx 2mao. 
com CONTENTS Preface ........................ 1918 SPEECH AT A JOINT SESSION OF THE ALL-RUSSIA CENTRAL EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE, THE MOSCOW SOVIET, FACTORY COM -MITEES AND TRADE UNIONS OF MOSCOW, July 29, 1918 .... 
 SPEECH AT A CONGRESS OF CHAIRMEN OF GUBERNIA SOVIETS, July 30, 1918 . 
 Newspaper Report ............. 
 SPEECH AT A MEETING OF THE WARSAW REVOLUTIONARY REGIMENT, August 2, 1918 . 
 Newspaper Report ....... 
. 
 SPEECH AT A MEETING IN BUTYRSKY DISTRICT, August 2, 1918. 
 Newspaper Report ................... 
 SPEECH AT A RALLY OF RED ARMY MEN AT KHODYNKA, August 2, 1918 . 
 Brief Newspaper Report ............. 
 THESES ON THE FOOD QUESTION . 
 For the Commissariats of Food, Agriculture , the Supreme Economic Council , Finance , Trade and Industry .................. ADMISSION TO HIGHER EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS OF THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION . 
 Draft Decision of the Council of People ’s Commissars .................. LETTER TO YELETS WORKERS ............... SPEECH AT A MEETING IN SOKOLNIKI DISTRICT. 
 August 9, 1918. 
 Brief Newspaper Report ................ 
. 
 COMRADE WORKERS, FORWARD TO THE LAST, DECISIVE FIGHT ........................ DRAFT OF TELEGRAM TO ALL SOVIETS OF DEPUTIES CONCERN-ING THE WORKER-PEASANT ALLIANCE.......... 
. 
 SPEECHES AT A MEETING OF THE MOSCOW PARTY COMMITTEEON ORGANISING GROUPS OF SYMPATHISERS. 
 August 16, 1918. 
 Minutes ........................13 17 35 3841 44 4548 49 5254 59 60Page SPEECH AT A MEETING IN THE ALEXEYEV PEOPLE’S HOUSE , August 23, 1918. 
 Brief Newspaper Report ......... SPEECH IN POLYTECHNICAL MUSEUM, August 23, 1918 .... 
 SPEECH AT THE FIRST ALL -RUSSIA CONGRESS ON EDUCATION , August 28, 1918 ................... 
. 
 SPEECH AT A MEETING IN BASMANNY DISTRICT , August 30, 1918. 
 Brief Newspaper Report ............. 
. 
 SPEECH AT A MEETING AT THE FORMER MICHELSON WORKS , August 30, 1918. 
 Brief Newspaper Report ......... GREETINGS TO THE RED ARMY ON THE CAPTURE OF KAZAN LETTER TO THE PRESIDIUM OF THE CONFERENCE OF PRO -LETARIAN CULTURAL AND EDUCATIONAL ORGANISATIONS ... TELEGRAM TO OFFICER CADETS IN PETROGRAD ....... 
 THE CHARACTER OF OUR NEWSPAPERS .......... 
. 
 TELEGRAM TO THE PENZA GUBERNIA EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE AND THE REVOLUTIONARY WAR COUNCIL OF THE FIRST ARMY LETTER TO RED ARMY MEN WHO TOOK PART IN THE CAPTURE OF KAZAN ...................... 
. 
 LETTER TO A JOINT SESSION OF THE ALL-RUSSIA CENTRALEXECUTIVE COMMITTEE. 
 THE MOSCOW SOVIET AND REPRESENT-ATIVES OF FACTORY COMMITTEES AND TRADE UNIONS , October 3, 1918 ................... 
. 
 THE PROLETARIAN REVOLUTION AND THE RENEGADE KAUTSKY REPORT AT A JOINT SESSION OF THE ALL-RUSSIA CENTRAL EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE. 
 THE MOSCOW SOVIET, FACTORY COM -MITTEES AND TRADE UNIONS, October 22, 1918 ....... 
 RESOLUTION ADOPTED AT A JOINT SESSION OF THE ALL -RUSSIA CENTRAL EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE, THE MOSCOW SOVIET,FACTORY COMMITTEES AND TRADE UNIONS, October 22, 1918 . 
 SPEECH AT A RALLY IN HONOUR OF THE AUSTRO -HUNGARIAN REVOLUTION, November 3, 1918 . 
 Brief Newspaper Report ... SPEECH AT A CEREMONIAL MEETING OF THE ALL-RUSSIACENTRAL AND MOSCOW TRADE UNION COUNCILS, November 3, 1918 . 
 Brief Newspaper Report ............. 
. 
62 76 79 858990 93 94 95 96 99 100 101 105 114128 131 132LETTER TO AMERICAN WORKER S............. 
. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR EXTRAORDINARY SIXTH ALL -RUSSIA CONGRESS OF SOVIETS OF WORKERS ’, PEASANTS ’, COSSACKS ’ AND RED ARMY DEPUTIES , November 6-9, 1918....... 
. 
 1. 
SPEECH ON THE ANNIVERSARY OF THE REVOLUTION, November 6................... 
 SPEECH AT THE UNVEILING OF A MEMORIAL TO AND ENGELS , November 8 , 1918................ 
 SPEECH AT THE UNVEILING OF A MEMORIAL PLAQUE TO THOSEWHO FELL IN THE OCTOBER REVOLUTION, November 8 , 1918 . 
 SPEECH AT A RALLY AND CONCERT FOR THE ALL -RUSSIA EXTRAORDINARY COMMISSION STAFF, November 8 , 1918 ... SPEECH AT A MEETING OF DELEGATES THE POORPEASANTS’ COMMITTEES OF CENTRAL GUBERNIAS, Novem -ber 8 , 1918 ...................... 
 TELEGRAM TO ALL SOVIETS OF DEPUTIES, TO EVERYONE ... SPEECH AT THE FIRST ALL -RUSSIA CONGRESS OF WORKING WOMEN, November 19, 1918 ............... SPEECH AT A RALLY IN LENIN’S HONOUR , November 20, 1918. 
 Brief Newspaper Report ................ 
. 
 THE VALUABLE ADMISSIONS OF PITIRIM SOROKIN ...... SPEECH ON RED OFFICERS’ DAY, November 24, 1918 .... 
. 
 SPEECH DELIVERED TO A MEETING OF DELEGATES THEMOSCOW CENTRAL WORKERS’ CO-OPERATIVE, November 26, 1918 MOSCOW PARTY WORKERS’ MEETING, November 27, 1918 ... 1. 
REPORT ON THE ATTITUDE OF THE PROLETARIAT TOPETTY-BOURGEOIS DEMOCRATS .......... 
. 
 2. 
REPLY TO THE DISCUSSION OF REPORT ON THE ATTITUDEOF THE PROLETARIAT TO PETTY-BOURGEOIS DEMOCRATS TELEGRAM TO COMMANDER-IN-CHIEF ............ THE PROLETARIAN REVOLUTION AND THE RENEGADE KAUTSKY Preface ...................... 
 How Kautsky Turned Marx into a Common Liberal . 
. 
135 137 151 165 167169 171 179 180183 185195 196 201 201 217 2252272292312. 
SPEECH ON THE INTERNATIONAL SITUATIO N, November 8 Bourgeois and Proletarian Democracy ......... Can There Be Equality Between the Exploited and the Exploiter? ................... 
 The Soviets Dare Not Become State Organisations ... The Constituent Assembly and the Soviet Republic ... The Soviet Constitution ............. 
. 
 What Is Internationalism? ............. 
. 
 Subservience to the Bourgeoisie in the Guise of “Eco -nomic Analysis” ................ 
. 
 Appendix I . 
Theses on the Constituent Assembly .... 
. 
 Appendix II . 
Vandervelde’s New Book on the State .... 
 DRAFT DECISION ON THE USE OF STATE CONTROL ...... SPEECH TO THE MOSCOW GUBERNIA CONGRESS OF SOVIETS, POOR PEASANTS’ COMMITTEES AND DISTRICT COMMITTEES OF THE RUSSIAN COMMUNIST PARTY (BOLSHEVIKS) December 8, 1918 . 
 Brief Newspaper Report ............. 
. 
 SPEECH TO THE THIRD WORKERS’ CO -OPERATIVE CONGRESS, December 9, 1918 ................... 
 SPEECH TO THE FIRST ALL -RUSSIA CONGRESS OF LAND DEPART -MENTS , POOR PEASANTS’ COMMITTEES AND COMMUNES , December 11, 1918 ................... 
 ROUGH DRAFT OF RULES FOR THE ADMINISTRATION OF SOVIET INSTITUTIONS ..................... 1. 
 ...................... 
. 
 2. 
 ...................... 
. 
 3. 
 ...................... 
. 
 DRAFT DECISION OF THE CENTRAL COMMITTEE OF THE RUSSIANCOMMUNIST PARTY (BOLSHEVIKS)............. 
 SPEECH AT A PRESNYA DISTRICT WORKERS’ CONFERENCE, December 14, 1918 ................... 
 TELEGRAM TO THE SAMARA UKRAINIANS .......... 
 “DEMOCRACY” AND DICTATORSHIP ............. 
 HEROISM OF THE PRESNYA WORKERS ............ SPEECH TO THE SECOND ALL-RUSSIA CONGRESS OF ECONOMIC COUNCILS, December 25, 1918. 
 ............. 
. 
242 250 257 263 271 280 294 319 319 326 327 329 338 349 349 350351 353 354 367 368 373 375 TASKS OF THE TRADE UNIONS ............. 
. 
 I...................... 
. 
 II...................... 
. 
 III ...................... 
. 
 A LITTLE PICTURE IN ILLUSTRATION OF BIG PROBLEMS .... 
 1919 TELEGRAM TO STALIN AND DZERZHINSKY .......... 
 SPEECH AT A JOINT SESSION OF THE ALL -RUSSIA CENTRAL EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE, THE MOSCOW SOVIET AND ALL -RUSSIA TRADE UNION CONGRESS, January 17, 1919 ......... SPEECH AT THE MOSCOW CITY CONFERENCE OF THE RUSSIAN COMMUNIST PARTY (BOLSHEVIKS) , January 18, 1919. 
 Brief Newspaper Report ................... 
 SPEECH AT THE SECOND ALL -RUSSIA CONGRESS OF INTER -NATIONALIST TEACHERS, January 18, 1919 ......... SPEECH AT A PROTEST RALLY FOLLOWING THE MURDER OF KARL LIEBKNECHT AND ROSA LUXEMBURG, January 19, 1919. 
 Brief Newspaper Report ................ 
. 
 REPORT AT THE SECOND ALL-RUSSIA TRADE UNION CONGRESS, January 20, 1919 ................... 
. 
 LETTER TO THE WORKERS OF EUROPE AND AMERICA .... 
. 
 SPEECH AT THE SECOND CONFERENCE OF HEADS OF ADULT EDUCATION DIVISIONS OF GUBERNIA EDUCATION DEPART -MENTS, January 24, 1919 ................ 
 EVERYBODY ON FOOD AND TRANSPORT WORK! ....... 
. 
 MEASURES GOVERNING THE TRANSITION BOURGEOIS -CO-OPERATIVE TO PROLETARIAN -COMMUNIST SUPPLY AND DISTRI -BUTION ........................ TELEGRAM TO UFA GUBERNIA REVOLUTIONARY COMMITTEE DRAFT WIRELESS MESSAGE PEOPLE’S COMMISSAR FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS ................... 
. 
 CLOSURE OF THE MENSHEVIK NEWSPAPER UNDERMINING THECOUNTRY’S DEFENCE. 
 All-Russia Central Executive Committee Draft Resolution ................... 
. 
382 382 382383 386 390 391 405 407 411 412 429 437 439 443 445 446 447 451 453 455 457 475476 478 481 486 487 535 16 -17 54-55 228-229 449TO THE PEOPLE’S COMMISSARIAT OF EDUCATION ....... 
 FIRST CONGRESS OF THE COMMUNIST INTERNATIONAL , March 2-6, 1919 ................... 
. 
 1. 
 SPEECH AT THE OPENING SESSION OF THE CONGRESS, March 2 ..................... 2. 
 THESES AND REPORT ON BOURGEOIS DEMOCRACY AND THE DICTATORSHIP OF THE PROLETARIAT, March 4... 3. 
 RESOLUTION TO THE THESES ON BOURGEOIS DEMOCRACY AND THE DICTATORSHIP OF THE PROLETARIAT .... 
. 
 4. 
 CONCLUDING SPEECH AT THE CLOSING SESSION OF THE CONGRESS, March 6................ 
 WON AND RECORDED .................. FOUNDING OF THE COMMUNIST INTERNATIONAL . 
 Speech at a Joint Meeting of the All -Russia Central Executive Commit -tee the Moscow Soviet , the Moscow Committee of the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks ), the All -Russia Central Council of Trade Unions , Moscow Trade Unions and Factory Committees to Mark the Founding of the Communist Interna-tional , March 6, 1919 .................. NOTE TO STALIN ON REORGANISATION OF STATE CONTROL . 
. 
 Notes ........................ The Life and Work of V . 
 I. 
 Lenin . 
 Outstanding Dates .... 
 ILLUSTRATIONS Portrait of V. 
 I. 
 Lenin. 
 October 1918 .......... 
 First page of the manuscript “Comrade Workers, Forward to the Last, Decisive Fight!” First part of August 1918 . 
. 
 Cover of the pamphlet The Proletarian Revolution and the Renegade Kautsky , 1918 ................ 
 First page of the manuscript “To the People’s Commissariat of Education”, February 1919 ............. 
 PREFACE Volume 28 contains works written by Lenin between July 29, 1918 and early March 1919, the initial period ofthe Civil War and foreign intervention. 
 In his classic The Proletarian Revolution and the Rene-gade Kautsky Lenin expounds his ideas on the Soviet state, analyses the essence of Soviet democracy as the highestform of democracy in class society, explains how Sovietdemocracy is diametrically opposed to bourgeois de-mocracy, and exposes opportunism and the servility of Kautsky and other leaders of the Second International to imperialism. 
 More on Soviet and bourgeois democracymay be found in “’Democracy’ and Dictatorship”, “Letter toAmerican Workers”, “Letter to the Workers of Europeand America”, “Won and Recorded”, and in the thesesand speeches on the founding of the Third International. 
 Many items here are reports and speeches deliv-ered at workers’ meetings, congresses of Soviets and tradeunions, sittings of the All-Russia Central Executive Com-mittee, the Moscow City Conference of the Russian Com-munist Party (Bolsheviks) and elsewhere. 
 All these speeches and reports centre on organisation of defence, all-out support for the Read Army and the bolster-ing of the army’s rear, thus illustrating Lenin’s work atthat time as Party and state leader. 
 Several works deal with promotion of the socialist revo-lution in the countryside and attitude towards the middlepeasants. 
 Among these are: “Letter to Yelets Workers”, “Comrade Workers, Forward to the Last, Decisive Fight!”, speech on the anniversary of the revolution to the Extra-ordinary Sixth All-Russia Congress of Soviets on November 6, 1918, speeches to delegates from Poor Peasants’ Commit-tees of central gubernias on November 8, 1918, and at the First All-Russia Congress of Land Departments, Poor Peasants’ Committees and Communes on December 11,1918. 
 In his well-known article “The Valuable Admissions of Pitirim Sorokin”, Lenin advocates the policy of agreementand alliance with the middle peasant; this is later approved by the Eighth Party Congress. 
 In the anniversary speech on November 6, 1918, in his report at a meeting of Moscow Party workers on November27, 1918, and elsewhere, Lenin justifies the proletariat’spolicy towards the petty-bourgeois democrats in connectionwith their turn to the Soviet side, and points the way to winning over the intellectuals and old specialists to the socialist cause. 
 In “Letter to American Workers”, speech on the interna-tional situation delivered to the Sixth Congress of Sovietson November 8, 1918, speech at the Third Congress ofWorkers’ Co-operatives on December 9, speech at a work-ers’ conference in Presnya District on December 14 (pub-lished in full for the first time in the fourth Russian editionof Lenin’s Collected Works ) and in many other works, Lenin exposes British and American imperialism which wouldnot stop at smothering weak nations and destroying Euro-pean culture to gain world supremacy. 
 The volume also contains a number of works published for the first time in the fourth Russian edition of the Col-lected Works , most of which are drafts of government deci-sions and letters and telegrams very relevant to the rest ofthe volume’s contents. 
 The items “Greetings to the Red Army on the Capture of Kazan”, “Letter to Red Army Men Who Took Part in the Capture of Kazan”, and telegrams to the Penza GuberniaExecutive Committee and the Revolutionary WarCouncil of the First Army and to officer cadets in Petrograddeal with defence matters. 
 More thoughts on strengthening the peasant-worker alli-ance are contained in the “Draft of Telegram to All Soviets of Deputies Concerning the Worker-Peasant Alliance” andin a speech delivered to the Moscow Gubernia Congress of Soviets, Poor Peasants’ Committees and District Committees of the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks) on December 8, 1918. 
 Lenin’s work in promoting culture and economic devel-opment is reflected in the documents: “Admission toHigher Educational Institutions of the Russian Federation. 
Draft Decision of the Council of People’s Commissars”,“Draft Decision on the Use of State Control”, “Speech at the Second Conference of Heads of Adult Education Divi-sions of Gubernia Education Departments, January 24, 1919”and in a letter “To the People’s Commissariat of Educa-tion” on the subject of setting up and running libraries. 
 The items first published in the fourth Russian edition of the Collected Works also include “Telegram to All Soviets of Deputies, to Everyone” concerning the beginning of revolution in Germany, the draft of the theses “Tasks of theTrade Unions”, the draft resolution of the All-Russia CentralExecutive Committee “Closure of the Menshevik NewspaperUndermining the Country’s Defence” and the “Draft WirelessMessage from People’s Commissar for Foreign Affairs”. 
 V. 
 I. 
 LENIN October 1918 SPEEC H AT A JOIN T SESSIO N OF THE ALL-RUSSIA CENTRA L EXECUTIV E COMMITTEE, THE MOSCO W SOVIET , FACTOR Y COMMITTEES AND TRAD E UNION S OF MOSCOW JUL Y 29, 19181 (Applause , which grows into ovation . 
) Comrades, this is not the first time we have pointed out in the Party press, in Soviet institutions and in our agitation among the people that the period up to the new harvest will be the mostdifficult, arduous and crucial phase in the socialist revo -lution that has begun in Russia. 
 Now, I think, we mustsay that this crucial situation has reached its climax. 
 Thatis because it has now become perfectly clear once and for all who are the supporters of the imperialist world, of the imperialist countries, and who are the supporters of theSoviet Socialist Republic. 
 It should first be said that from themilitary standpoint the position of the Soviet Republichas only now become quite clear. 
 Many at first regardedthe Czechoslovak revolt 2 as just one of the episodes in the chain of counter -revolutionary revolts. 
 We did not suffi -ciently appreciate the news in the papers about the partic -ipation in this revolt of British and French capital, ofthe British and French imperialists. 
 We must now recallhow events developed in Murmansk, among the Siberiantroops and in the Kuban, how the British and French, in alliance with the Czechs, with the closest co -operation of the British bourgeoisie, endeavoured to overthrow the Soviets. 
 All these facts now show that the Czechoslovak movement was one link in the chain long since forged by the systematic policy of the British and French imperialists to throttle Soviet Russia so as to again drag Russia into the ring of imperialist wars. 
 This crisis must now be resolvedby the broad mass of the people of Soviet Russia, for weare today faced not only with a struggle to preserve theSoviet Socialist Republic from the Czech attack, as oneparticular counter -revolutionary assault, and not even from counter -revolutionary assaults in general, but with a struggle against the onslaught of the whole imperialistworld. 
 I should like first of all to remind you of the fact that the direct participation of the British and French impe -rialists in the Czechoslovak revolt has long been estab -lished; I would remind you of an article printed by Pru-kopník Svobody , the central organ of the Czechoslovak Com -munist Party, on June 28 and reprinted in our press3: “On March 7, the Department of the National Council received the first instalment from the French Consul to the amount of three millionrubles. 
 This money was handed to a certain Mr. 
 "íp, an official of the Department of the National Council. 
 On March 9, this same "íp received another two million and on March 25 another million, and on March 26, Mr. 
 Bohumil -'ermák, Vice -President of the National Council, received one million; on April 3, Mr. 
 "íp received another million. 
 In all, from March 7 to April 4, the French Consul paid the De -partment of the National Council 8 million rubles. 
 No dates are indicated for the following payments: Mr. 
 "íp one million, Mr. 
 Bohumil -'ermák one million and Mr. 
 "íp another million. 
 I n addition, a sum of 188,000 rubles was paid to an unknown per -son. 
 Total: 3,188,000 rubles. 
 Together with the above -mentioned 8 million we get a total of 11,188,000 rubles paid by the French Government to the Department of the National Council. 
 From the British Consul the Department received £80,000. 
 Thus, from March 7 to the date of action, the leaders of the Czech NationalCouncil received about 15 million rubles from the French and Britishgovernments, and for this sum the Czechoslovak army was sold to the French and British imperialists. 
” T h e majority of you, of course, read this report in the newspapers at the time it was published. 
 We certainly neverdoubted that the imperialists and financial magnates of Britain and France would do their very utmost to overthrow the Soviet government and place every possible obstacle in its way. 
 But at that time the picture was not yet complete to show that what we are faced with here is a systematic,methodical and evidently long -planned counter -revolutionary military and financial campaign against the SovietRepublic, which all the representatives of British and Frenchimperialism had evidently been preparing for months. 
 The general trend of events becomes clear now when we review them as a whole, when we compare the Czechoslovakcounter -revolutionary movement with the Murmansk land -ing—where we know the British have disembarked overten thousand soldiers, and under the pretext of defendingMurmansk have actually begun to advance, have occupied Kem and Soroki, have moved to the east of Soroki, and have begun to shoot our Soviet officials—and when weread in the newspapers that many thousands of railwaymenand other workers of the Far North are fleeing from thesesaviours and liberators, or, to give them their true name,these new imperialist bandits who are rending Russia from another end. 
 And quite recently we received new confirma -tion of the character of the Anglo -French offensive against Russia. 
 For geographical considerations alone it is clear that the form of this imperialist offensive against Russia cannotbe the same as it was in the case of Germany. 
 There are no common frontiers with Russia, as in the case of Germany; troop strength is less. 
 In her wars of conquest, Britain hasbeen compelled for many decades, owing to the primarilycolonial and naval character of her military might, toemploy different methods of attack, to attempt chiefly tocut off her victim’s supply sources, and to prefer the method of strangulation, under pretext of aid, to open, direct, blunt and outright military force. 
 From informationrecently received, it is clear that Alexeyev, who has longbeen notorious among the Russian soldiers and workers andwho recently seized the village of Tikhoretskaya, has un -doubtedly been utilising the aid of British and French imperialism. 
 There the revolt was more clear -cut, again apparently because British and French imperialism had ahand in it. 
 Lastly, we received news yesterday that in Baku the British and French imperialists have succeeded in makinga very effective move. 
 They have managed to secure a major -ity of about thirty votes in the Baku Soviet, over ourParty, over the Bolsheviks, and those Left Socialist -Revo -lutionaries—unfortunately, very few in number—whorefused to fall in with the despicable gambles and treacheryof the Moscow Left Socialist -Revolutionaries,4 and who have remained loyal to the Soviet government in the strug -gle against imperialism and war. 
 Over this nucleus inthe Baku Soviet which is loyal to the Soviet govern -ment and which up to now constituted the majority, theBritish and French imperialists have now secured amajority of thirty votes, owing to the fact that the greaterpart of the Dashnaktsutyun Party, 5 the Armenian quasi -socialists, have sided with them against us. 
 ( Reads telegram . 
) “On July 26, on the orders of People’s Commissar Korganov, the Adji-Kabul detachment retired from Adji -Kabul to a position near Alyat. 
 After the withdrawal of the Shemakha detachment from She -makha and Maraza the enemy began to advance along the River Pirsagat valley; the first skirmish with the enemy’s vanguard occurred near the village of Kubala. 
 Simultaneously from the south, from the direction of the Kura, a large force of cavalry began to advance towards Pirsagat. 
Under the circumstances, to hold Adji -Kabul we would have had to deploy all our available forces on three sides: to the west of Adji -Kabul, and to the north and south of the Navagi -Pirsagat valley. 
 Such an extension of the front would have left us withoutreserves and would have made it impossible for us to strike at the ene -my as we have no cavalry, and would even have endangered the group atAdji -Kabul if the front had been broken from the north or south. 
 In view of this situation, and in order to conserve the strength of the troops, orders were given to the detachment to retreat from Adji -Kabul to a position near Alyat. 
 The retreat was carried out in good order. 
Important railway installations and the Adji -Kabul station, as well as the kerosene and oil tanks, have been blown up. 
 In Daghestan, theenemy is on the move as part of the general offensive. 
 On July24, the enemy advanced in large forces in four directions. 
 After twenty -four hours -fighting we occupied the enemy’s trenches; the foe dispersed into the woods and nightfall prevented further pursuit. 
 On July 24,news of successes was received from Shura, where fighting isgoing on around the town; the enemy is putting up a stubbornand organised resistance, and is commanded by former Daghestanofficers. 
 Daghestan peasants are taking an active part in the fighting around Shura. 
 The Right -wing parties in Baku have raised their heads and are vigorously campaigning to call in the British. 
 This campaign is strong -ly backed by the army officers and is being conducted among the forcesat the front. 
 Anglophile agitation has disorganised the army. 
 The Brit -ish orientation has recently been making great headway am ong the worn -out and despairing people. 
 Under the influence of the unscrupulous and provocative activities of the Right -wing parties, the Caspian flotilla has adopted several contradictory resolutions in regard to the British. 
 Deceived byBritish hirelings and volunteer agents, until quite recently it blindly believed in the sincerity of British support. 
 Latest reports say that the British are advancing in Persia and have occupied Resht (Giljan), where for four days they have been en -gaged against Kuchuk -Khan and the German and Turkish bands, who have joined forces with him, headed by Mussavatists6 who had fled from Baku. 
 After the Resht battle the British applied to us for assist -ance, but our representatives in Persia refused. 
 The British got theupper hand in Resht. 
 But they have practically no forces in Persia. 
We know they have only fifty men in Enzeli. 
 They need petrol, inexchange for which they are offering us cars. 
 Without petrol they arestuck. 
 On July 25, a second session of the Soviet was held to discuss the political and military situation, and at the insistence of the Right -wing parties the question of the British was raised. 
 Comrade Shahumyan,Commissar Extraordinary for the Caucasus, citing the resolution of theFifth Congress of Soviets and Stalin’s telegram on behalf of the CentralCouncil of People’s Commissars, spoke against inviting the Britishand demanded that this question be struck from the agenda. 
 Comrade Shahumyan’s move was defeated by a small majority, whereupon, as representative of the central government, he entered a vigorous pro -test. 
 The session heard the report of the delegates who had visited thefront. 
 By 259 votes of the Right Socialist -Revolutionaries, Right Dashnaks and Mensheviks against 236 votes of the Bolsheviks, LeftSocialist -Revolutionaries and Left Dashnaks, a resolution was adopted to invite the British and form a government comprising members of all parties represented in the Soviet and recognising the power of theCouncil of People’s Commissars. 
 The resolution was sharply condemnedby the Left wing. 
 Shahumyan declared that he regarded it as a shamefulbetrayal and stark ingratitude towards the workers and peasants ofRussia and that as the central government’s representative, he renounced all responsibility for the decision. 
 A statement was made on behalf of the group of the Bolsheviks, Left Socialist -Revolutionaries and Left Dashnaks to the effect that they would not join the coalition govern -ment and that the Council of People’s Commissars would resign. 
 Com -rade Shahumyan declared in the name of the three Left groups that agovernment which had in fact broken with the Russian Soviet govern -ment by inviting the British imperialists would receive no supportfrom Soviet Russia. 
 By its treacherous policy of inviting the British,the local Soviet had lost Russia and the parties supporting the sovietgovernment. 
 The Right -wing parties were thrown into utter confusion at the decision of the Council of People’s Commissars to resign. 
 When newsof this situation got around there was an abrupt change of sentiment inthe districts and at the front. 
 The sailors realised they had been duped by traitors who want to break with Russia and bring down the Soviet government. 
 The people are having second thoughts about the British. 
Yesterday, an urgent meeting of the Executive Committee was heldover the resignation of the Council of People’s Commissars. 
 It wasdecided that all the People’s Commissars should remain at their postsand continue their former functions pending decision of the question of power at the Soviet’s session on July 31. 
 The Executive Committee has decided to take urgent measures to combat the threatening counter -revolution. 
 The foe is carrying on activities under the wing of theAnglo -French parties. 
 Press Bureau of the Baku Council of People’s Commissars. 
” Not unlike the groups here who call themselves socialists but have never broken off relations with the bourgeoisie, there, too, these people came out in favour ofinviting the British troops to defend Baku. 
 7 We already know only too well the meaning of such an invitationto imperialist troops to defend the Soviet Republic. 
 Weknow the meaning of this invitation extended by the bourgeoisie, a section of the Socialist -Revolutionaries, and by the Mensheviks. 
 We know the meaning of this invita -tion extended by the Menshevik leaders in Tiflis, Georgia. 
 We may now say that the Bolshevik, the Communist Party is the only party which has never invited imperial -ists and has never entered into a rapacious alliance with them, but has only retreated before these cutthroats when they pressed too hard. 
 ( Applause . 
) We know our Communist comrades in the Caucasus were in a very difficult positionbecause the Mensheviks betrayed them everywhere byentering into direct alliance with the German imperialists,on the pretext, of course, of defending Georgia’s Independ -ence. 
 You are all aware that this independence of Georgia has become a sheer fraud. 
 In actual fact it amounts to theoccupation and complete seizure of Georgia by the Germanimperialists, an alliance of German bayonets with theMenshevik government against the Bolshevik workers and peasants. 
 And, therefore, our Baku comrades were a thousand times right in refusing to close their eyes to thedanger of the situation and saying: We would never be opposed to peace with an imperialist power on the basis of ceding part of our territory, provided this would not harm us, would not bind our troops in an alliance with the bayonets of the aggressors and would not prevent us from carryingon our socialist reconstruction. 
 But since, as the question now stands, by inviting the British, supposedly for the defence of Baku, they are invit -ing a power which has now swallowed up the whole of Persia and which has long been moving up its forces for seizing the Southern Caucasus—that is, surrenderingthemselves to British and French imperialism—we cannotdoubt or hesitate for a moment and must say that, howeverdifficult the position of our Baku comrades may be, byrefusing to conclude such a peace they have taken the only step worthy of true socialists. 
 This resolute rejection of any agreement whatsoever with the British and Frenchimperialists was the only true course for our Bakucomrades to take, for you cannot invite them withoutconverting your independent socialist government, eventhough on severed territory, into a slave of imperialist war. 
 We therefore do not entertain the slightest doubt as to the significance of the Baku events in the general schemeof things. 
 Yesterday, news was received that counter -revo -lutionary revolts have broken out in a number of towns inCentral Asia with the obvious complicity of the British entrenched in India, who, having brought Afghanistan com -pletely under their sway, long ago created a base for extending their colonial possessions, strangling nations, and attackingSoviet Russia. 
 And now, when these separate links havebecome quite clear to us, the present military andgeneral strategic position of our Republic has been fully revealed. 
 Murmansk in the North, the Czechoslovak front in the East, Turkestan, Baku and Astrakhan in theSouth -East—we see that practically all the links in the chain forged by British and French imperialism have beenjoined. 
 We now clearly see that the landowners, the capitalists and the kulaks, all of whom, of course, for perfectly natural reasons have a burning hatred for the Soviet government,are acting here, too, in ways greatly resembling those of the landowners, capitalists and kulaks in the Ukraine and in other regions severed from Russia. 
 As the lackeys of British and French imperialism, they have done their ut -most to undermine the Soviet government at all costs. 
 Realising they could not do it with forces inside Russiaalone, they decided to act not by words or appeals in thespirit of the Martov gentry, but by resorting to more effec -tive methods of struggle—military hostilities. 
 That is where our attention should be chiefly directed; that is where we should concentrate all our agitation and propa -ganda; and we should shift the centre of the whole of ourSoviet work accordingly. 
 The fundamental fact is that it is the imperialist forces of the other coalition that are now at work, not the German, but the Anglo -French, which have seized part of our territory and are using it as a base. 
 Up to now their geograph -ical position has prevented them from attacking Russiaby the direct route; now British and French imperialism,which for four years has been drenching the whole worldin blood in a bid for world supremacy, has by an indirect route approached within easy reach of Russia, with the object of strangling the Soviet Republic and once moreplunging Russia into imperialist war. 
 You are all perfectlyaware, comrades, that from the very beginning of the Octo -ber Revolution our chief aim has been to put a stop to theimperialist war; but we never harboured the illusion that the forces of the proletariat and the revolutionary people of any one country, however heroic and however organisedand disciplined they might be, could overthrow interna -tional imperialism. 
 That can be done only by the jointefforts of the workers of the world. 
 What we have done, however, is to sever all connections with the capitalists of the whole world in one country. 
 Our government is not tied by a single thread to any kind ofimperialist and never will be, whatever future course ourrevolution may take. 
 The revolutionary movement againstimperialism during the eight months of our rule has madetremendous strides, and in one of the chief centres of impe -rialism, Germany, matters in January 1918 came to anarmed clash and the bloody suppression of that movement. 
We have done our revolutionary duty as no revolutionary government in any country has ever done on an international, world -wide scale. 
 But we never deceived ourselves into thinking this could be done by the efforts of one country alone. 
 We knew that our efforts were inevitablyleading to a world -wide revolution, and that the war begun by the imperialist governments could not be stopped by theefforts of those governments themselves. 
 It can be stoppedonly by the efforts of all workers; and when we came to power, our task as the proletarian Communist Party, at a time when capitalist bourgeois rule still remained in theother countries—our immediate task, I repeat, was toretain that power, that torch of socialism, so that it mightscatter as many sparks as possible to add to the growingflames of socialist revolution. 
 This was everywhere an extremely difficult task; and what enabled us to accomplish it was the fact that theproletariat rallied to the defence of the gains of the SocialistRepublic. 
 This task has led to a particularly arduousand critical situation, for the socialist revolution, in thedirect sense of the term, has not yet begun in any country, although it is more imminent in countries like Italy and Austria. 
 But as it has not yet begun, we are faced with anew success to British and French, and therefore world,imperialism. 
 Whereas from the West, German imperialismcontinues to stand as a military, annexatory, imperialistforce, from the North -East and South of Russia, British and French imperialism has been able to dig itself in and is making it patently obvious to us that this force is preparedonce more to plunge Russia into imperialist war, is preparedto crush Russia, the independent socialist state that iscontinuing its socialist work and propaganda on a scalehitherto unparalleled anywhere in the world. 
 Against this, British and French imperialism has won a big victory, and, surrounding us on all sides, it is doing its utmost to crushSoviet Russia. 
 We are fully aware that British and Frenchimperialism’s victory is inseparably connected with theclass struggle. 
 We have always said—and revolutions bear it out— that when the foundations of the exploiters’ economic power are at stake, their property, which places the labour of tensof millions of workers and peasants at their disposal and enables the landowners and capitalists to enrich themselves, when, I repeat, the private property of the capitalists and landowners is at stake, they forget all talk about love for one’s country and independence. 
 We know full well thatthe Cadets, the Right Socialist -Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks have beaten the record in concluding allianceswith the imperialist powers, in concluding predatory treatiesand betraying the country to Anglo -French imperialism. 
 The Ukraine and Tiflis are good examples. 
 The alliance of the Mensheviks and Right Socialist -Revolutionaries with the Czechs is sufficient proof of this. 
 And theaction of the Left Socialist -Revolutionaries, when they tried to embroil the Russian Republic in war in theinterests of the Yaroslavl whiteguards, 8 shows quite clearly that when their class profits are at stake, the bourgeoisie will sell their country and strike a bargain with any foreigneragainst their own people. 
 This truth has time and againbeen borne out by the history of the Russian revolution,after the history of revolution over a hundred years hadshown that that is the law of the class interests, of the class policy of the bourgeoisie, at all times and in all countries. 
 It is therefore by no means surprising that the present aggra -vation of the Soviet Republic’s international position isconnected with the aggravation of the class struggle athome. 
 We have often said that, in this respect, in regard to the aggravation of the food crisis, the period until the new harvest will be the most difficult. 
 Russia is being flayedwith the scourge of famine, which has attained unparalleledproportions precisely because it is the plan of the imperialistrobbers to cut off her granaries. 
 Their calculations arewell founded and are aimed at getting social and class support in the grain -producing outlying regions; they seek areas where the kulaks predominate—the rich peasants,who have battened on the war and who live by the labourof others, the labour of the poor. 
 You know that thesepeople have piled up hundreds of thousands of rubles and thatthey have huge stocks of grain. 
 You know that it is these people who have battened on national misfortunes and who had greater opportunity to rob and increase their profitsthe more the population of the capital suffered—it is these kulaks who have constituted the chief and most formidable buttress of the counter -revolutionary movement in Russia. 
 Here the class struggle has reached its deepest source. 
 There is not a village left where the class struggleis not raging between a miserable handful of kulaks on theone hand and the vast labouring majority—the poor andthose middle peasants who have no grain surpluses, whohave consumed them long ago, and who did not go in for profiteering—on the other. 
 This class struggle has penetrated every village. 
 When we were determining our political plans and publishing our decrees—the vast majority of those presenthere are, of course, familiar with them—when, I repeat,we drafted and passed the decrees on the organisation of the poor peasants, 9 it was clear to us we were coming up against the most decisive and fundamental issue of the wholerevolution, the most decisive and fundamental issue, theissue of power—whether power would remain in the handsof the workers; whether they could gain the support of allthe poor peasants, with whom they have no differences; whether they would succeed in winning over the peasants with whom they have no disagreement, and unite this wholemass, which is dispersed, disunited and scattered throughthe villages—in which respect it lags behind the urbanworkers; whether they could unite them against the othercamp, the camp of the landowners, the imperialists and kulaks. 
 Before our very eyes the poor peasants have begun to rally together very quickly. 
 It is said that revolutionteaches. 
 The class struggle does indeed teach in practice thatany false note in the position of any party immediatelylands that party where it deserves to be. 
 We have clearly seen the policy of the Left Socialist -Revolutionary Party, who, because of their spinelessness and stupidity, startedto vacillate at a time when the food problem was at itsheight, and that party disappeared from the scene as aparty and became a pawn in the hands of the Yaroslavlwhiteguards. 
 ( Applause . 
) Comrades, the wave of revolts sweeping Russia is easy to understand in the light of this sharpening of the classstruggle over the food crisis at the very time when we know the new harvest is a bumper one but cannot yet be gathered, and when the hunger -tormented people of Petrograd and Moscow are being driven to revolt by the kulaks and the bourgeoisie, who are making the most desperate efforts,crying “Now or never!” There is the revolt in Yaroslavl. 
And we can see the influence of the British and French;we see the calculations of the counter -revolutionary landowners and bourgeoisie. 
 Wherever the question of grain arose, they obstructed the grain monopoly, without which there can be no socialism. 
 That is just where the bourgeoisieare bound to unite; here the bourgeoisie have a strongerbacking than the country yokel. 
 The decisive fight betweenthe forces of socialism and bourgeois society is bound tocome in any case, whatever happens, if not today, then tomorrow, on one issue or another. 
 Only pseudo -socialists, like our Left Socialist -Revolutionaries, for example, can waver. 
 When socialists waver over this question, overthis fundamental question, it means they are onlypseudo -socialists, and are not worth a brass farthing. 
 The effect of the revolution has virtually been to turn such socialists into mere pawns in the hands of the French generals, pawns whose role was demonstrated by theformer Central Committee of the former Left Socialist -Revolutionary Party. 
 Comrades, the result of these combined efforts of the counter -revolutionary Russian bourgeoisie and the British and French imperialists has been that the Civil War in our country is now coming from a quarter which not all of usanticipated and from which not all of us clearly realised itmight come, and it has merged with the war from withoutinto one indivisible whole. 
 The kulak revolt, the Czecho -slovak mutiny and the Murmansk movement are all part of one and the same war that is bearing down on Russia. 
 We escaped from war in one quarter by incurring tremendouslosses and signing an incredibly harsh peace treaty; weknew we were concluding a predatory peace, 10 but we said we would be able to continue our propaganda and ourconstructive work, and in that way cause the imperialist world’s disintegration. 
 We have succeeded in doing so. 
 Germany is now negotiating with us as to how manythousand millions to extort from Russia on the basis of the Brest -Litovsk Peace Treaty, but she has recognised all the acts of nationalisation we proclaimed under the decree of June 28. 
11 She has not raised the question of private ownership of land in the Republic; this point must bestressed as a counterblast to the fantastic lies spread bySpiridonova and similar leaders of the Left Socialist -Revolutionaries, lies that have brought grist to the mill ofthe landowners and are now being repeated by the most ignorant and backward Black-Hundred 12 elements. 
 These lies must be nailed. 
 The fact of the matter is that, burdensome as the peace treaty may be, we have won freedom to carry on socialist con -struction at home, and taken steps in this direc -tion which are now becoming known in Western Europe and constitute elements of propaganda that are incomparably more effective than any before. 
 So, having got out of war in one quarter, with one coali -tion, we have been at once subjected to an imperialistassault from another quarter. 
 Imperialism is a world -wide phenomenon; it is a struggle for the division of the whole world, of the whole earth, for the domination of one or another group of robbers. 
 Now another group of vultures,the Anglo -French, are hurling themselves at our throats and threatening to drag us into war again. 
 Their war ismerging with the Civil War into one continuous whole,and that is the chief source of our difficulties at present, when the question of war, of military hostilities, has again come to the fore as the cardinal and fundamental questionof the revolution. 
 There lies the whole difficulty, for thepeople are tired of war, exhausted by it as never before. 
The Russian people’s state of extreme war fatigue andexhaustion is rather like that of a man who has been thrashed within an inch of his life, and who cannot be expected to show any energy or working capacity. 
 And in the sameway this nearly four years’ war, overwhelming a countrywhich had been despoiled, tormented, and defiled bytsarism, by the autocracy, the bourgeoisie and Kerensky,has for many reasons naturally aroused a feeling of abhorrence in the Russian people, and is one of the chief sources of the tremendous difficulties we are nowexperiencing. 
 Yet such a turn of events definitely made for war. 
 We have again been plunged into war, we are in a state of war; and it is not only civil war, war against the kulaks, the landowners and the capitalists who have united againstus—now we are faced with British and French imperialism. 
The imperialists are still not in a position to throwtheir armies against Russia—they are prevented bygeographical conditions; but they are devoting all they can, all their millions, all their diplomatic connections and forces, to aid our enemies. 
 We are in a state of war, and wecan emerge triumphant. 
 But here we come up against aformidable enemy, one of the most difficult to cope with—war -weariness, hatred and abhorrence of war; and this must be overcome, otherwise we shall not be able to tackle this problem—the problem of war—which does not de -pend on our will. 
 Our country has again been plunged into war, and the outcome of the revolution will now entirelydepend on who is the victor. 
 The principal protagonists arethe Czechs, but the real directors, the real motive andactuating power are the British and French imperialists. 
 The whole question of the existence of the Russian Socialist Federative Soviet Republic, the whole question ofthe Russian socialist revolution has been reduced toa question of war. 
 There lie tremendous difficulties,considering the state in which the people have emergedfrom the imperialist war. 
 Our task is now perfectly clear. 
 Any deceit would be tremendously harmful; we consider it a crime to conceal this bitter truth from theworkers and peasants. 
 On the contrary, let the truth bebrought home to them all as clearly and graphically aspossible. 
 Yes, there have been cases when our troops displayed criminal weakness, as, for example, during the capture of Simbirsk by the Czechs, when our forces retreated. 
 We knowthe troops are tired of war and loathe it; but it is also naturaland inevitable that until imperialism is defeated inter -nationally, it should attempt to drag Russia into imperialistwar, endeavour to make a shambles of her. 
 Whether we like it or not, the question stands as follows: we are in a war, and on the outcome of that war hangs the fate of therevolution. 
 That should be the first and last word in our propaganda work, in all our political, revolutionary, and construction activities. 
 We have done very much in a short time, but the job is not yet over. 
 All our activities must be entirely and completely geared to this question,on which the fate and outcome of the revolution, thefate of the Russian and world revolution now depends. 
Of course, world imperialism cannot get out of the presentwar without a number of revolutions; this war cannot end otherwise than by the ultimate victory of socialism. 
 But our task now is to maintain, protect and upholdthis force of socialism, this torch of socialism, this sourceof socialism which is so actively influencing the wholeworld. 
 And as matters now stand, this task is a militarytask. 
 This is not the first time we have been in such a situation, and many of us have said that however severe the price wehad to pay for peace, however grave the sacrifices it demandedof us, however much the enemy was striving to rob usof more and more territory, Russia so far, in the face ofgreat odds, was enjoying peace and in a position to consolidate her socialist gains. 
 We have even gone farther in this direction than many of us expected. 
 For example,our workers’ control has advanced a long way from itsearly forms, and today we are about to witness the conver -sion of the state administration into a socialist system. 
 Wehave made great strides in our practical affairs. 
 We now have the workers completely running industry. 
 But cir -cumstances have prevented us from continuing that work in peace; they have once again plunged us into war, and wemust strain every nerve and summon everyone to arms. 
 Itwould be a disgrace for any Communist to be in two mindsover this. 
 Vacillation among the peasants does not surprise us. 
 The peasants have not been through the same school oflife as the workers, who have been accustomed for decadesto look upon the capitalist as their class enemy, and whohave learned to unite their forces to combat him. 
 We knowthe peasants have not been through such a university. 
 At one time they sided with the workers but today we are witnessing a period of vacillation, when the peasants aresplitting up. 
 We know any number of instances of kulaks selling grain to the peasants below the fixed prices in order to create the impression that they, the kulaks, are defending the peasants’ interests. 
 None of this surprises us. 
 But the Communist worker will not waver, the working class willstand firm; and if a kulak spirit prevails among thepeasants, it is quite understandable. 
 Where the Czechs ruleand the Bolsheviks no longer are, we have the followingpicture: at first the Czechs are hailed practically as deliverers; but after a few weeks of this bourgeois rule, a tremendous movement against the Czechs and infavour of the Soviet government arises, because the peasantsbegin to realise that all talk about freedom of trade and aConstituent Assembly means only one thing—the rule ofthe landowners and capitalists. 
 Our job is to get the workers to rally and to create an organisation under which within the next few weekseverything will be devoted to solving the war issue. 
 We arenow at war with British and French imperialism and witheverything bourgeois and capitalist in Russia, with everyoneendeavouring to frustrate the socialist revolution and embroil us in war. 
 The situation is one where all the gains of the workers and peasants are at stake. 
 We may be con -fident that we shall have the broad sympathy and supportof the proletariat, and then the danger will be completelyaverted, and new ranks of the proletariat will come forwardto stand up for their class and save the socialist revolution. 
 As matters now stand, the struggle is being fought over two major issues, and all the main party differences have beenobliterated in the fires of revolution. 
 The Left Socialist -Revolutionary who keeps insistently reminding us that heis on the left, concealing himself behind a cloud of revolu -tionary phrases, while actually revolting against the Soviet government, is just the same a hireling of the Yaroslav whiteguards. 
 That is what he is in history and the revolu -tionary struggle! Today only two classes confront eachother in the battle arena: the class struggle is between the. 
proletariat, which is protecting the interests of the workingpeople, and those protecting the interests of the landowners and capitalists. 
 All talk about a Constituent Assembly, about an independent state and so on, which is being usedto dupe the ignorant masses, has been exposed by the exper -ience of the Czech and Caucasian Menshevik movements. 
 Behind all this talk stand the same forces—the land -owners and capitalists; and the Czech mutiny brings inits train the rule of the landowners and capitalists,just as the German occupation does. 
 That is what the waris about! Comrades, the workers must close their ranks more firmly than ever and set an example of organisation and disci -pline in this struggle. 
 Russia is still the only country whichhas severed all ties with the imperialists. 
 True, we arebleeding from grave wounds. 
 We have retreated in the faceof the imperialist brute, playing for time, striking a blowat it here and there. 
 But, as the Socialist Soviet Republic,we have remained independent. 
 Performing our socialist work, we opposed the imperialism of the whole world; and this struggle is becoming clearer and clearer to the workersof the world, and their mounting indignation is bringingthem nearer and nearer to the future revolution. 
 It is overthis that the struggle is being waged, because our Repub -lic is the only country in the world not to march hand in hand with imperialism and not to allow millions of people to be slaughtered to decide whether the French or the Ger -mans will rule the world. 
 Our Republic is the only countryto have broken away by force, by revolutionary means,from the world imperialist war, and to have raised thebanner of socialist revolution. 
 But it is being dragged back into the imperialist war, and being forced into the trenches. 
 Let the Czechs fight the Germans, let the Russian bourgeoi -sie make their choice, let Milyukov decide, perhaps even inconcurrence with Spiridonova and Kamkov, which impe -rialists to side With. 
 But we declare we must be preparedto lay down our lives to prevent them deciding this ques -tion, for the salvation of the whole socialist revolution isat stake. 
 ( Applause . 
) I know there is a change of spirit among the peasants of the Saratov, Samara, and Simbirskgubernias, where fatigue was most marked and fitness formilitary action was lowest of all. 
 After experiencing theravages of the Cossacks and Czechs, and having a real taste of what the Constituent Assembly and the cries “Down with the Brest Peace Treaty!” mean, they have realisedthat all this only leads to the return of the landowner, to the capitalist mounting the throne—and they are now becoming the most ardent champions of Soviet power. 
 I have not the slightest doubt that the Petrograd and Moscow workers, who are marching at the head of the revolution,will understand the situation, will understand the gravityof the times and will act with greater determination thanever, and that the proletariat will smash both the Anglo -French and the Czech offensive in the interests of the social -ist revolution. 
 ( Applause . 
) Published in 1919 in the book Published according to All-Russia Central Executive the text of the book checked Committee , Fifth Convocation. 
 with the verbatim report Verbatim Report , Moscow SPEEC H AT A CONGRES S OF CHAIRME N OF GUBERNI A SOVIET S13 JULY 30, 1918 NEWSPAPER REPORT Comrades, your job is one of administration, which plays a dominant part in the affairs of the Council of People’s Commissars. 
 Quite naturally, many difficulties lie aheadof you. 
 In the majority of gubernia Executive Committeesit is evident that the masses are at last beginning to tacklethe work of administration themselves. 
 There are certainly bound to be difficulties. 
 One of our greatest short -comings has been that we still draw too little on the work -ers for our staffs. 
 But it was never our intention to adapt the old apparatus to the new system of administration, andwe do not regret that with the abolition of the old appara -tus everything has to be built anew with so much difficulty. 
 The workers and peasants possess greater constructive abilities than might have been expected. 
 It is to the revolu -tion’s credit that it swept away the old administrative appa -ratus. 
 Yet at the same time we must admit that the people’schief shortcoming is their timidity and reluctance to takethings into their own hands. 
 Some of our gubernia Soviets have been inefficient, but now the work is steadily improving. 
 Information has beencoming in from many parts of the country stating that thework is progressing without any misunderstandings orconflicts. 
 Although only eight months have elapsed, theRussian revolution has proved that the new class which has taken administration into its own hands is capable of coping with the task. 
 Although it is short -staffed, the admin -istrative apparatus is running more smoothly every day. 
 Our apparatus is still at a stage where no definite results are visible, a fact which the enemy keeps harping on. 
 Nevertheless, quite a lot has already been done. 
 The transfer of land and industry to the working people, the exchangeof goods and the organisation of food supply are beingcarried into effect in face of fantastic difficulties. 
 The workingpeople must be promoted to independent work in buildingup and running the socialist state. 
 Only practice will teach them that the old exploiting class is finished and done with. 
 Our chief and most urgent task is administration, organ -isation and control. 
 This is a thankless and inconspicuousjob; but it is in doing this job that the managerial andadministrative talents of the workers and peasants willdevelop more and more effectively. 
 Now to the new Constitution. 
 14 It embodies what experience has already given, and will be corrected and supplementedas it is being put into effect. 
 The main thing about theConstitution is that the Soviet government is completelydissociating itself from the bourgeoisie, preventing them fromparticipating in building up the state. 
 The workers and peasants, upon whom the government has called to run the country, and who have remainedremote from such affairs for so long, were bound to want tobuild the state by their own experience. 
 The effect of theslogan “All Power to the Soviets! ” was that the people in the localities wanted to gain experience in building the state by learning from their own mistakes. 
 Such a transitional period was unavoidable, and it has proved beneficial. 
 Inthis tendency towards separatism, there was much that washealthy and wholesome in the sense that it displayed a crea -tive spirit. 
 The Soviet Constitution has defined the relationsbetween the volost authority and the uyezd authority, between the uyezd authority and the gubernia authority, and between the latter and the centre. 
 Only large -scale, planned construction, which aims at evenly utilising economic and business values, deserves tobe called socialist. 
 The Soviet government certainly doesnot intend to belittle the importance of the local authorities or kill their autonomy and initiative. 
 Even the peasants realise through their own experience the need forcentralism. 
 Now that the Constitution has been endorsed and is being put into effect, an easier period in our state affairs is beginning. 
 But, unfortunately, it is hard for us just now to devote ourselves to an economic, business and agricul -tural policy. 
 We have to divert all our attention to moreelementary things—the food question. 
 The condition ofthe working class in the hungry provinces is really drastic. 
Until the new harvest is brought in, every effort must be made to overcome somehow the food difficulties and other troubles. 
 Besides this, there are military tasks. 
 You know that the Czech movement, financed and instigated by the Britishand French imperialists, has caught Russia in a semicircle. 
You also know that the counter -revolutionary bourgeoisie and the kulak peasants are joining this movement. 
 We have received news from the localities that Soviet Russia’srecent reverses have convinced the workers and the revolu -tionary peasants by their own experience that control isneeded in the military sphere as well as in state develop -ment. 
 I am convinced that things will get better in future. 
 I am convinced that the gubernia Executive Committeeswill create a strong socialist army by organising controlover the commanding staff with the help of the peasants. 
The lessons of the revolution have at last taught the classesof the workers and exploited peasants the need to take up arms. 
 The peasants and workers, besides having won the land, control, etc. 
, have learnt to understand the need tocontrol the army. 
 By carrying their efforts into the sphereof military affairs, they will make the army of their crea -tion fully worthy of the title of a socialist army, an armywhich will successfully fight the counter -revolutionary bourgeoisie and the imperialists until the international revolutionary proletariat comes to our aid. 
 ( Comrade Lenin ’s speech is greeted with stormy applause from all delegates . 
) Izvestia No. 
 161, Published according to July 31, 1918 the Izvestia text SPEEC H AT A MEETIN G OF THE WARSA W REVOLUTIONAR Y REGIMENT AUGUS T 2, 191815 NEWSPAPER REPORT (Comrade Lenin ’s appearance in the hall is greeted with enthusiastic applause and the “Internationale ”. 
) We Pol -ish and Russian revolutionaries are now burning with one desire—to do everything to defend the gains of the first mightysocialist revolution, which will inevitably be followed by aseries of revolutions in other countries. 
 Our difficulty is that we had to take action much earlier than the workers of the more cultured, more civilised countries. 
 The world war was caused by the forces of international capital, of two coalitions of vultures. 
 For four years theworld has been drenched in blood in order to settle whichof these two rapacious imperialist groups shall rule the globe. 
 We feel and sense that this criminal war cannot end in victory for either of them. 
 It is becoming clearer every daythat a victorious workers’ revolution, not the imperialists,can end it. 
 And the worse the position of the workers nowbecomes in all countries, and the more ferociously prole -tarian free speech is persecuted, the more desperate the bourgeoisie get, for they cannot cope with the growing movement. 
 We have for a time forged ahead of the main bodyof the socialist army, which is full of hope as it watches usand says to its bourgeoisie: however much you rant andrage, we shall follow the Russian example and do what theRussian Bolsheviks have done. 
 We wanted peace. 
 It was just because Soviet Russia pro -posed peace to the whole world that in February Germantroops attacked us. 
 Now, however, we see with our own eyes that one imperialism is no better than the other. 
 Both of them have lied, and lie now when they say they are waging a war of liberation. 
 Anglo -French capital is showing itself up just as robber Germany once did with the utterly shame -ful Brest Peace. 
 The British and French are now makingtheir last bid to draw us into the war. 
 For fifteen million,through generals and other officers, they have now boughtnew lackeys, the Czechs, so as to involve them in the rash adventure and turn the Czechoslovak revolt into a white -guard -landlord movement. 
 And strange to say, all this is apparently being done to “defend” Russia. 
 The “freedom -loving” and “fair” British oppress all and sundry, seizeMurmansk, British cruisers come right up to Archangeland bombard the coastal batteries—all to “defend” Rus -sia. 
 Quite obviously they want to encircle Russia in a ringof imperialist plunderers and crush her for having exposedand torn up their secret treaties. 
 Our revolution has resulted in the workers of Britain and France indicting their governments. 
 In Britain, wherecivil peace has prevailed and where the workers’ resistance to socialism has been strongest, for they too have had a hand in plundering the colonies, the workers are now veeringround and breaking the civil peace with the bourgeoise. 
 The workers of France are condemning the policy of intervention in Russia’s affairs. 
 That is why the capitalistsof these countries are staking everything they have. 
 The fact of Soviet Russia’s existence and vitality is driving them mad. 
 We know the war is coming to an end; we know they cannot finish it; we know we have a reliable ally. 
 We must there -fore exert all our energy and make a last effort. 
 Eitherthe rule of the proletariat or the rule of the kulaks, capitalists and the tsar, as was the case in the unsuccessful revolutions in the West. 
 As you go to the front youmust remember above all that this war alone, the warof the oppressed and exploited against the violators andplunderers, is legitimate, just and sacred. 
 An alliance is coming into being between the revolution -aries of different nations—something that the finestpeople have dreamt of; a real alliance of workers, and notintellectual dreamers. 
 The guarantee of victory lies in overcoming national hatred and mistrust. 
 It is your great privilege to uphold sacred ideas arms in hand, and to make international brotherhood of nations areality by fighting together with your front -line enemies of yesterday—Germans, Austrians and Magyars. 
 And, comrades, I am confident that if you muster all your military forces and set up a mighty international Red Army, and hurl these iron battalions against the exploiters and oppressors, against the reactionary thugs of the wholeworld, making your battle cry “Victory or Death!”—noimperialist force will be able to hold us! ( Lenin’s concluding words are drowned in prolonged and stormy applause . 
) Published in Vecherniye Izvestia Published according to Moskovskovo Soveta No. 
 15 the newspaper text August 3, 1918 SPEECH AT A MEETING IN BUTYRSKY DISTRICT AUGUST 2, 1918 NEWSPAPER REPORT Comrades, today socialist Russia’s destiny is being dis -cussed all over Moscow. 
16 The enemies of Soviet Russia surround us in a tight ring of iron to try to deprive the workers and peasants of every -thing they gained from the October Revolution. 
 The high -flying banner of the Russian social revolution is a thorn inthe side of the imperialist vultures and they have gone to war against us, gone to war against the Soviet government, against the workers’ and peasants’ government. 
 You will remember, comrades, that at the beginning of the revolution the French and British never tired of insist -ing they were the “allies” of free Russia. 
 And here we havethese “allies” today in their true colours. 
 By lies and deceit, saying they had no intention of fighting Russia, these people occupied Murmansk, then captured Kem and began toshoot our comrades, members of the Soviets. 
 True enough,they are not fighting the Russian bourgeoisie, they are notfighting the Russian capitalists, they have declared war onthe Soviets, they have declared war on the workers and peasants. 
 The French and Russian bourgeoisie have found ready accomplices in the Czechs. 
 These mercenaries had reason tofight us. 
 We know whose millions induced the Czechs to goto war against the Soviet government. 
 It was Anglo -French gold. 
 But besides the Czechs, there are other people who did not think twice about bringing down the Soviet govern -ment. 
 Like the Czechs, our own “saviours of the fatherland”, Dutov, Alexeyev and the rest, are lining their pockets with British and French gold and waiting for a Russian shower of gold. 
 The Soviet government has a lot of enemies. 
 But are we alone, comrades? You will recall what it was like in January, when the flame of social revolution had just been lit—there hadbeen a mass strike movement in Germany; now, eightmonths later, we see mass strike movements in variouscountries: there is a mass strike movement among the Austrian workers, our comrades in Italy are on strike. 
 The end is near for the oppressors of the workers. 
 The imperial -ists of the world are digging their own graves. 
 War for mutual plunder does not abate. 
 Two serpents are grappling in the war of plunder: Anglo -French and Ger -man imperialism. 
 To please them, for one side’s triumph, ten million peasants and workers have already been killed and twenty million maimed, and many millions of peopleare engaged in manufacturing weapons of death. 
 In everycountry the strongest and healthiest people are being calledup, the flower of humanity is perishing.... 
 And for what?Just for one of these vultures to lord it over the other.... 
 The Soviet government said we do not want to fight the Germans, the British or the French. 
 We do not want to killworkers and peasants like ourselves. 
 They are not ourenemies. 
 We have a different enemy—the bourgeoisie,whether it be the German, the French, or the Russian whohave now joined up with the British and French. 
 And, like our revolutionary banner, our slogans are being taken up all over the world. 
 In America, the country thatused to be called the land of the free, socialists are filling thegaols to overflowing. 
 In Germany, the words of the Germansocialist Friedrich Adler are being spread far and wideamong the workers and soldiers: “Turn your bayonets on your own bourgeoisie instead of on the Russian workers and peasants. 
” There is no end in sight to the slaughter startedby the capitalists. 
 The more Germany wins, the more thesavages like her who tag on to the other side. 
 America, too,is now fighting together with the British and French. 
 Onlythe workers can put an end to the war: world revolution is inevitable. 
 A “defeatist” movement like the one we had has already begun in Germany, mass strikes are taking placein Italy and Austria; and socialists are being arrested whole -sale in America. 
 Sensing their doom, the capitalists and landowners are making a last effort to crush the revolution -ary movement. 
 The Russian capitalists are stretchingout a hand to the British and French capitalists and land -owners. 
 Now there are two fronts: the workers and peasants on one side, and the capitalists on the other. 
 The last, decisivebattle is near. 
 Now there can be no compromise with the bourgeoisie. 
 Either them or us. 
 In 1871, the bourgeoisie overthrew the power of the Paris workers. 
 But in those days there were very few class -conscious workers or revolutionary fighters. 
 This time theworkers are backed by the poor peasants and this time thebourgeoisie will not triumph as they did in 1871. 
 The workers are keeping a firm grip on the mills and fac -tories, and the peasants will not surrender the land to the landowners. 
 And in defence of these achievements we alsodeclare war on all marauders and profiteers. 
 Besidesmachine -guns and cannons, they are threatening us with famine. 
 As we declare war on the rich, we say: “Peace to the cot -tages!” We shall take all the stocks from the profiteers and never abandon the labouring poor to the mercy of fate. 
(Comrade Lenin ’s speech is greeted with stormy applause . 
) Brief report published Published according to the August 3, 1918 text in the newspaper in Izvestia No. 
 164 Soldat Revolutsii (Tsaritsyn) No. 
 14, August 23, 1918 SPEECH AT A RALLY OF RED ARMY MEN AT KHODYNKA AUGUST 2, 1918 BRIEF NEWSPAPER REPORT (Enthusiastic applause . 
) The Russian revolution has charted the road to socialism for the whole world and hasshown the bourgeoisie that their triumph is coming to anend. 
 Our revolution is taking place amidst the frightfulhardships of world slaughter. 
 Revolutions are not made to order; but there are sure signs that the whole world is ready for great events. 
 We are surrounded by enemies who have concluded a holy alliance for the overthrow of the Soviet government, butthey will not get power themselves. 
 The rejoicing of the whiteguard bands is premature— their success will be short -lived; unrest is already spreading among them. 
 The Red Army reinforced by the revolutionary proletar -iat will help us raise on high the banner of the world so -cial revolution. 
 Victory or death!We shall vanquish the world kulak and uphold the social -ist cause! Izvestia No. 
 164, Published according to August 3, 1918 the Izvestia text THESE S ON THE FOO D QUESTI ON17 FOR THE COMMISSARIATS OF FOOD, AGRICULTURE, THE SUPREME ECONOMIC COUNCIL, FINANCE, TRADE AND INDUSTRY I propose that these Commissariats hurry to debate and formulate the following measures no later than today (August 2) so that they can be put through the Council of People’sCommissars today or tomorrow. 
 (Some of these measures should be in decrees, others in unpublished decisions. 
) (1) Out of the two schemes—lowering prices on manu -factured and other goods or raising the purchasing price ofgrain—we must certainly choose the latter for, thoughthe two are essentially the same, only the latter can helpus in quickly getting more grain from a number of grain -growing provinces like Simbirsk, Saratov, Voronezh, etc. 
, and help us neutralise as many peasants as possible in the Civil War. 
 (2) I suggest raising the grain prices to 30 rubles a pood, and correspondingly (and even more) to raise prices onmanufactured and other goods. 
 (3) I suggest for discussion: whether to make this a tem -porary rise (so that we can sum up the practical indicationsas to the correct principle on which our trade exchangeshould be organised), say, for a month or month and ahalf, promising to lower prices afterwards (thereby offering bonuses for quick collection). 
 (4) To enact several very urgent measures for requisitioning all the products of urban industry for exchange (and put up their prices after requisitioning to a greater extent than the rise in grain prices). 
 (5) To preface the decree on grain price rise with a popu -lar elucidation of the measure connected with the trade exchange and the establishment of the correct correlation between the prices of grain, manufactured and other goods. 
 (6) The decree should immediately compel the co -opera -tives a) to set up a grain -collection point in each village shop; b) to give goods only according to the customers’ ration books; c) not to give a single item to peasant farmers except in exchange for grain. 
 To establish forms and means of control over the implementation of these measures and introduce sternpunishment (confiscation of all property) for their violation. 
 (7) To confirm (or to formulate more precisely) the rules and regulations concerning property confiscation for not handing over to the state ( or the co -operatives ) grain surpluses and all other food products for registration. 
 (8) To impose a tax in kind , in grain, on the rich peasants. 
 This category should include those whose amount of grain(including the new harvest) is double or more than doubletheir own consumption (taking into account needs for their family, livestock and sowing). 
 This is to be designated as an income and property tax and made progressive. 
 (9) To establish for workers of the hungry regions tempo -rarily, let’s say for one month, preferential carriage of 1. 
5 poods of grain on condition of special certificate and special control. 
 The certificate must contain the exact address and authority a) from a factory committee; b) from a house commit -tee; c) from a trade union; and control must establishthat it is for personal consumption, with a very severe penalty to anyone who cannot prove the impossibility of its reselling. 
 (10) To make it a rule to issue a receipt, two or three copies, for literally every requisition (particularly in the countryside and on the railway). 
 To print forms of thereceipt. 
 Shooting to be the penalty for not giving a receipt. 
 (11) To e nforce the same penalty for members of all kinds of requisitioning, food and other teams for any blatantly unjust action towards the working people or anyinfringement of the rules and regulations or actions liable /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR to rouse the indignation of the population, as well as for failure to keep a record and to hand over a copy to anyone who has already suffered requisitioning or punishment. 
 (12) To make it a rule that the workers and poor peasants in the hungry regions should have the right to havea goods train delivered to their station directly, under certain conditions: a) authorisation of local organisations(Soviet of Deputies plus the trade union without fail and others); b) making up a responsible team; c) inclusion in it of teams from other regions; d) participation of an inspectorand Commissar from the Food, War, Transport and otherCommissariats; e) their control of the train load and thedistribution of grain. 
 They must see that a compulsory part (a third to a half or more) goes to the Food Commissariat. 
 (13) As an exce ption, in view of the acute hunger among some railway workers and the particular importance of railways for grain delivery, to establish temporarily that: requisitioning or anti -profiteering teams, in requisition -ing the grain, shall issue receipts to those from whom ithas been taken, and put the grain into the goods waggons and dispatch these waggons to the Central Food Bureau , while observing the following forms of control: a) sending atelegram to the Food and Transport Commissariats noti -fying them about each goods waggon; b) summoning offi -cials from both Commissariats to meet the goods waggonand distribute the grain under the Food Commissariat’s supervision. 
 Written August 2, 1918 First published in 1931 Published according to the manuscript ADMISSION TO HIGHER EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS OF THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION DRAFT DECISION OF THE COUNCIL OF PEOPLE’S COMMISSARS18 The Council of People’s Commissars instructs the Commis -sariat of Education at once to prepare several decisions and measures so that in the event of the number of appli -cants to the higher educational institutions exceeding theusual number of places, extra -special measures be taken to ensure a chance to study for all who so desire, and to ensure there be no actual or legal privileges for the proper -tied classes. 
 Priority must certainly go to workers and poor peasants, who are to be given grants on an extensivescale. 
 Written August 2, 1918 Published August 6, 1918 Published according to in Izvestia No. 
 166 the manuscript LETTE R TO YELET S WORKE RS19 I have received a clipping from a Yelets newspaper con-taining a report of a special meeting of the Yelets branch of the Left Socialist -Revolutionary Party held on July 27. 
 I see from it that Mochenov reported on the Saratovconference of the Socialist -Revolutionaries, where eight branches approved their Central Committee’s tactics whichhad been defended by Mr. 
 Kolegayev, while thirteen branchesdemanded the party’s reorganisation and a change of tactics. 
 I note that at the Yelets meeting Comrade Rudakov insisted that “our party [the Left Socialist -Revolutionaries] be reorganised” and its name changed, that it be purged andthat under no circumstances should it be allowed to fallapart and disappear. 
 A certain Kryukov then alleged thathe had spoken to representatives of the central government inMoscow and that Comrades Avanesov, Sverdlov and Bonch -Bruyevich had declared that the Soviet government favouredthe existence of the Left Socialist -Revolutionary Party. 
 He also alleged that in a conversation with him I had saidthe same thing and had stated that the Communists too hadcome so far from their former theories, from their books,that they had no programme at all at present, while in their policies a great deal was being indirectly borrowed from Narodnik theory, and so on and so forth. 
 I consider it my duty to say this is pure fiction and that I have never spoken to this Kryukov. 
 I earnestly request ourcomrades, the workers and peasants of the Yelets Uyezd,to be extremely wary of the Left Socialist -Revolutionaries, who all too frequently tell lies. 
 A few words about my view of them. 
 Types like Kole -gayev and the others are certainly just pawns in the hands of the whiteguards, the monarchists and the Savinkovs, who in Yaroslavl showed who was “profiting” by the Left Socialist -Revolutionary revolt. 
 Their stupidity and spinelessness brought Kolegayev and his friends to thisdegradation, and good riddance! They will go down in historyas “Savinkov lackeys”. 
 But the facts show that among theLeft Socialist -Revolutionaries there are people (and in Saratov they are in the majority) who were ashamed of this stupidity and spinelessness, of this servility to mon -archism and the interests of the landowners. 
 We can only welcome it if these people desire to change even their party’sname (I have heard they want to call themselves “Village -Commune Communists” or “Narodnik Communists”, etc. 
). 
 The pure ideological basis of this Narodism, an alliance with which the Bolshevik Communists have never rejected, is, firstly, disagreement with Marxism, and, secondly, com -plete agreement with the theory of “equal land tenure” (andwith the law of equal land tenure). 
 We favour such an alliance, an agreement with the mid -dle peasants, for we worker Communists have no grounds for quarrelling with the middle peasants and are prepared to make them a number of concessions. 
 We have proved this,and proved it in deed, because we have been carrying outthe law on the socialisation of land with absolutely goodfaith, despite the fact that we do not entirely agree withit. 
 20 Generally, we have been and are in favour of ruthless war on the kulaks, but we favour an agreement with the middle peasants and union with the poor peasants. 
 Anagreement with the middle peasants must not be construedas necessarily implying agreement with the Left Socialist -Revolutionaries. 
 Nothing of the kind. 
 We passed the socialisation law at a time when we had no agreement with the Left Socialist -Revolutionaries; and this law, in fact, is an expression of our agreement withthe middle peasants, with the peasant masses, and not withthe Left Socialist -Revolutionary petty intellectuals. 
 Comrade workers and peasants, don’t seek an agreement with the Left Socialist -Revolutionaries, for we have seen and experienced their unreliability. 
 Spread communism among the poor peasants; the majority will be on our side. 
Try to make concessions to the middle peasants. 
 Treat them as tactfully and as fairly as possible. 
 We can and should make concessions to them. 
 Be ruthless in your attitude towards the tiny handful of exploiters, including the kulaks and the grain profiteers, who are growing rich on thepeople’s misfortunes and the starvation of the workers—to -wards the handful of kulaks who are sucking the blood ofthe working people. 
 V. 
 Ulyanov (N. 
 Lenin ) Moscow, August 6, 1918 Sovetskaya Gazeta (Yelets) No. 
 73, Published according to August 11, 1918 the newspaper text SPEEC H AT A MEETING IN SOKOLNIK I DISTRICT AUGUS T 9, 191821 BRIEF NEWSPAPER REPORT (Prolonged applause . 
) The war is already in its fifth year, and by now everyone can see who wanted it. 
 The rich have grown richer, and the poor are literally choking under theyoke of capitalism. 
 This war has cost the poor people manya bloody sacrifice, and all they have received in return ishunger, unemployment and the noose drawn tighter than ever around their necks. 
 The war was started by the British and German vultures who found themselves too cramped living together, and so each of them decided to drown the other in the blood of theworkers of the world. 
 Each of these vultures assures us heis inspired by the people’s interests, but in fact he is working in the interests of his own pocket. 
 Britain is plundering the German colonies she has seized, part of Palestine and Mesopotamia, while Germany, in turn, is plundering Poland, Courland, Lithuania and theUkraine. 
 The millionaires of these countries have grownten times richer; but, all the same, they have miscalculated. 
 Locked in mortal combat, these vultures are on the edge of a precipice. 
 They can no longer stop the war, which isinevitably driving the peoples to revolution. 
 The Russian revolution has cast sparks into every country of the world, and has pushed the imperialists, who havegone too far, nearer to the edge of the precipice. 
 Comrades, we are in a very difficult position, but we must overcome every difficulty and hold fast the banner of social -ist revolution we have raised aloft. 
 The workers of the world are looking hopefully towards us. 
 We can hear their cry: “Hold on a little longer! You are surrounded by enemies, but we shall come to your aid, and by our joint effort we shall finally hurl the imperialistvultures over the precipice. 
” We hear this cry, and we swear we shall hold on, we shall stick to our post fighting with all our strength andnot lay down our arms in face of the onslaught of world counter -revolution! Izvestia No. 
 171, Published according to August 11, 1918 the Izvestia text COMRADE WORKERS, FORWARD TO THE LAST, DECISIVE FIGHT! The Soviet Republic is surrounded by enemies. 
 But it will defeat its enemies at home and abroad. 
 A rising spirit which will ensure victory is already perceptible among the working people. 
 We already see how frequent the sparks andexplosions of the revolutionary conflagration in WesternEurope have become, inspiring us with the assurance that thetriumph of the world workers’ revolution is not far off. 
 The external foe of the Russian Soviet Socialist Republic at present is British, French, American and Japanese imperialism. 
 This foe is attacking Russia, is plundering ourterritory, has seized Archangel and (if the French newspapersare to be believed) has advanced from Vladivostok to Nikolsk -Ussuriisky. 
 This foe has bribed the generals and officersof the Czechoslovak Corps. 
 This enemy is attacking peaceful Russia with the ferocity and voracity of the Germans in February, the only difference being that the British andJapanese are out to seize and plunder Russian territoryand to overthrow the Soviet government so as to “restorethe front”, i. 
e. 
, to draw Russia again into the imperialist(or more simply, the predatory) war between Britain and Germany. 
 The British and Japanese capitalists want to restore the power of the landowners and capitalists in Russia in orderto share with them the booty captured in the war; they wantto shackle the Russian workers and peasants to British andFrench capital, to squeeze out of them interest on the billions advanced in loans, and to extinguish the fire of socialist revolution which has broken out in our country and which isthreatening to spread across the world. 
 First page of the manuscript “Comrade Workers, Forward to the Last, Decisive Fight!” Early August 1918 Reduced The British and Japanese imperialist savages are not strong enough to occupy and subjugate Russia. 
 Even neigh -bouring Germany is not strong enough for that, as was shownby her “experience” in the Ukraine. 
 The British and Japanesecounted on taking us unawares. 
 They failed. 
 The Petrogradworkers, followed by the Moscow workers, and after Moscowthe workers of the entire central industrial region, are risingmore unitedly, with growing persistence and courage and in ever larger numbers. 
 That is a sure sign we shall win. 
 In launching their attack on peaceful Russia the British and Japanese capitalist robbers are also counting on alliancewith the internal enemy of the Soviet government. 
 We allknow who that internal enemy is. 
 It is the capitalists, the land -owners, the kulaks, and their offspring, who hate the govern -ment of the workers and working peasants—the peasantswho do not suck the blood of their fellow -villagers. 
 A wave of kulak revolts is sweeping across Russia. 
 The kulak hates the Soviet government like poison and is preparedto strangle and massacre hundreds of thousands of workers. 
We know very well that if the kulaks were to gain the upper hand they would ruthlessly slaughter hundreds of thousands of workers, in alliance with the landowners andcapitalists, restore back -breaking conditions for the workers, abolish the eight -hour day and hand back the mills and factories to the capitalists. 
 That was the case in all earlier European revolutions when, as a result of the weakness of the workers, the kulaks succeed -ed in turning back from a republic to a monarchy, from a working people’s government to the despotism of the exploit -ers, the rich and the parasites. 
 This happened before ourvery eyes in Latvia, Finland, the Ukraine and Georgia. 
Everywhere the avaricious, bloated and bestial kulaks joined hands with the landowners and capitalists against the work -ers and against the poor generally. 
 Everywhere the kulaks wreaked their vengeance on the working class with incredibleferocity. 
 Everywhere they joined hands with the foreign capitalists against the workers of their own country. 
 That is the way the Cadets, the Right Socialist -Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks have been acting: we have only to remem -ber their exploits in “Czechoslovakia”. 
22 That is the way the Left Socialist -Revolutionaries, in their crass stupidity and spinelessness, acted too when they revolted in Moscow, thus assisting the whiteguards in Yaroslavl and the Czechs and the Whites in Kazan. 
 No wonder these Left Socialist -Revolutionaries were praised by Kerensky and his friends, the French imperialists. 
 There is no doubt about it. 
 The kulaks are rabid foes of the Soviet government. 
 Either the kulaks massacre vast numbersof workers, or the workers ruthlessly suppress the revolts of the predatory kulak minority of the people against the working people’s government. 
 There can be no middlecourse. 
 Peace is out of the question: even if they havequarrelled, the kulak can easily come to terms with thelandowner, the tsar and the priest, but with the workingclass never . 
 That is why we call the fight against the kulaks the last, decisive fight. 
 That does not mean there may not be manymore kulak revolts, or that there may not be many moreattacks on the Soviet government by foreign capitalism. 
 Thewords, the last fight, imply that the last and most numer -ous of the exploiting classes has revolted against us in our country. 
 The kulaks are the most brutal, callous and savage exploit -ers, who in the history of other countries have time andagain restored the power of the landowners, tsars, priests andcapitalists. 
 The kulaks are more numerous than the land -owners and capitalists. 
 Nevertheless, they are a minority. 
 Let us take it that there are about fifteen million peasant families in Russia, taking Russia as she was before the rob -bers deprived her of the Ukraine and other territories. 
 Ofthese fifteen million, probably ten million are poor peasantswho live by selling their labour power, or who are in bond -age to the rich, or who lack grain surpluses and have been most impoverished by the burdens of war. 
 About three mil -lion must be regarded as middle peasants, while barely two million consist of kulaks, rich peasants, grain profiteers. 
These bloodsuckers have grown rich on the want sufferedby the people in the war; they have raked in thousands andhundreds of thousands of rubles by pushing up the price of grain and other products. 
 These spiders have grown fat at the expense of the peasants ruined by the war, at the expenseof the starving workers. 
 These leeches have sucked the blood of the working people and grown richer as the workers in the cities and factories starved. 
 These vampires have been gathering the landed estates into their hands; they continue to enslave the poor peasants. 
 Ruthless war on the kulaks! Death to them! Hatred and contempt for the parties which defend them—the RightSocialist -Revolutionaries, the Mensheviks, and today’s Left Socialist -Revolutionaries! The workers must crush the revolts of the kulaks with an iron hand, the kulaks who are forming an alliance with the foreign capitalists against theworking people of their own country. 
 The kulaks take advantage of the ignorance, the disunity and isolation of the poor peasants. 
 They incite them againstthe workers. 
 Sometimes they bribe them while permitting them to “make a bit”, a hundred rubles or so, by profiteering in grain (at the same time robbing the poor peasants of manythousands of rubles). 
 The kulaks try to win the support ofthe middle peasants, and they sometimes succeed. 
 But there is no reason why the working class should quar -rel with the middle peasant. 
 The workers cannot come to terms with the kulak, but they may seek, and are seeking, an agreement with the middle peasant. 
 The workers’ govern -ment, the Bolshevik government, has proved that in deed. 
 We proved it by passing the law on the “socialisation of land” and strictly carrying it into effect. 
 That law contains numerous concessions to the interests and views of the middle peasant. 
 We proved it (the other day) by trebling grain prices23; for we fully realise that the earnings of the middle peasantare often disproportionate to present -day prices for manufac -tured goods and must be raised. 
 Every class -conscious worker will explain this to the middle peasant and will patiently, persistently, and repeat -edly point out to him that socialism is infinitely morebeneficial for him than a government of the tsars, landownersand capitalists. 
 The workers’ government has never wronged and never will wrong the middle peasant. 
 But the government of the tsars, landowners, capitalists and kulaks not only alwayswronged the middle peasant, but stifled, plundered, and ruined him outright. 
 And this is true of all countries without exception, Russia included. 
 The class -conscious worker’s programme is the closest alliance and complete unity with the poor peasants; conces -sions to and agreement with the middle peasants; ruthlesssuppression of the kulaks, those bloodsuckers, vampires,plunderers of the people and profiteers, who batten on famine. 
That is the policy of the working class. 
 Written in the first part of August 1918 First published Published according to January 17, 1925 the manuscript in Rabochaya Moskva No. 
 14 DRAF T OF TELEGRA M TO ALL SOVIETS OF DEPUTIES CONCERNIN G THE WORKE R-PEASAN T ALLIANC E24 The Poor Peasants’ Committees are necessary to fight the kulaks, the rich, the exploiters, who shackle the working peasants. 
 But between the kulaks, who are a small minority,and the poor or semi -proletarians there is the section of the middle peasants. 
 The Soviet government has never declaredor conducted any struggle against them. 
 Any steps or meas -ures to the contrary must be condemned most vigorouslyand stopped. 
 The socialist government must pursue a policyof agreement with the middle peasants. 
 The Soviet govern -ment has time and again shown by its actions that it isfirmly resolved to pursue this policy. 
 The most importantof such actions are the adoption by a Communist (Bolshevik) majority of the law on the socialisation of land and its strictly faithful enforcement, followed by the trebling ofgrain prices (decree of August ..., 1918). 
 The purport of thedecree on agricultural machinery, 25 etc. 
, is the same. 
 The policy set forth above is strictly binding on everyone. 
 Written August 16, 1918 First published in 1931 Published according to the manuscript SPEECHE S AT A MEETING OF THE MOSCO W PARTY COMMITTEE ON ORGANISIN G GROUP S OF SYMPATHISERS AUGUS T 16, 191826 MINUTES 1 We are experiencing a great shortage of forces, yet forces are to be had among the people, forces that can be utilised. 
 Greater confidence must be shown in the working people andwe must learn to draw forces from their midst. 
 This can be done by enlisting sympathisers among the young people and the trade unions into the Party. 
 Never mind if their member -ship dues are in arrears—there is no danger in that. 
 There isno great danger in assigning six thousand for the front andtaking on twelve thousand others in their place. 
 We mustutilise our moral influence to enlarge our Party. 
 All too few new people get up and speak at our meetings, yet we want new people because there would be a live note intheir speeches. 
 We should organise this in some way or other. 
The young people must be taken from among the workersso that there is control by the workers. 
 The exigencies ofthe situation demand that large numbers of Party members be sent to the front, before the Japanese and the Americans can consolidate their position in Siberia. 
 These old forces mustbe replaced by new forces, by young people. 
 2 Party members must carry on energetic agitation among the workers. 
 Comrades who are capable of doing anything atall must not be kept in office jobs. 
 We must broaden our sphere of influence among the work -ers. 
 The nuclei are displaying too little initiative; their activ -ities could be very useful in influencing non -Party people on the spot. 
 Attention should be paid to the clubs, Partyworkers recruited from the masses. 
 We must not accept people who try to join from careerist motives; people like this should be driven out of the Party. 
 First published January 22, 1928 Published according to in Pravda No. 
 19 the handwritten copy of the minutes LETTE R TO AMERICA N WORKER S27 Comrades! A Russian Bolshevik who took part in the 1905 Revolution, and who lived in your country for many years afterwards, has offered to convey my letter to you. 
 I have accepted his proposal all the more gladly because just at the present time the American revolutionary workers have toplay an exceptionally important role as uncompromisingenemies of American imperialism—the freshest, strongestand latest in joining in the world -wide slaughter of nations for the division of capitalist profits. 
 At this very moment, the American multimillionaires, these modern slaveowners have turned an exceptionally tragic page in the bloody his -tory of bloody imperialism by giving their approval—whetherdirect or indirect, open or hypocritically concealed, makesno difference—to the armed expedition launched by thebrutal Anglo -Japanese imperialists for the purpose of throt -tling the first socialist republic. 
 The history of modern, civilised America opened with one of those great, really liberating, really revolutionary warsof which there have been so few compared to the vast numberof wars of conquest which, like the present imperialist war,were caused by squabbles among kings, landowners or capi -talists over the division of usurped lands or ill -gotten gains. 
 That was the war the American people waged against theBritish robbers who oppressed America and held her incolonial slavery, in the same way as these “civilised” blood -suckers are still oppressing and holding in colonial slaveryhundreds of millions of people in India, Egypt, and all parts of the world. 
 About 150 years have passed since then. 
 Bourgeois civili -sation has borne all its luxurious fruits. 
 America has taken first place among the free and educated nations in level of development of the productive forces of collective human endeavour, in the utilisation of machinery and of all the wonders of modern engineering. 
 At the same time, Americahas become one of the foremost countries in regard to thedepth of the abyss which lies between the handful of arro -gant multimillionaires who wallow in filth and luxury, andthe millions of working people who constantly live on the verge of pauperism. 
 The American people, who set the world an example in waging a revolutionary war against feudalslavery, now find themselves in the latest, capitalist stage ofwage -slavery to a handful of multimillionaires, and find themselves playing the role of hired thugs who, for the bene -fit of wealthy scoundrels, throttled the Philippines in 1898 on the pretext of “liberating” them, and are throttling the Rus -sian Socialist Republic in 1918 on the pretext of “protecting” it from the Germans. 
 The four years of the imperialist slaughter of nations, however, have not passed in vain. 
 The deception of thepeople by the scoundrels of both robber groups, the British and the German, has been utterly exposed by indisputable and obvious facts. 
 The results of the four years of war haverevealed the general law of capitalism as applied to warbetween robbers for the division of spoils: the richest andstrongest profited and grabbed most, while the weakest wereutterly robbed, tormented, crushed and strangled. 
 The British imperialist robbers were the strongest in num -ber of “colonial slaves”. 
 The British capitalists have not lost an inch of “their” territory (i. 
e. 
, territory they have grabbedover the centuries), but they have grabbed all the Germancolonies in Africa, they have grabbed Mesopotamia andPalestine, they have throttled Greece, and have begun to plunder Russia. 
 The German imperialist robbers were the strongest in organisation and discipline of “their” armies, but weaker inregard to colonies. 
 They have lost all their colonies, butplundered half of Europe and throttled the largest number ofsmall countries and weak nations. 
 What a great war of “liberation” on both sides! How well the robbers of both groups, the Anglo -French and the German capitalists, together with their lackeys, the social -chauvinists, i. 
e. 
, the socialists who went over to the side of “their own” bourgeoisie, have “defended their country”! The American multimillionaires were, perhaps, richest of all, and geographically the most secure. 
 They have profitedmore than all the rest. 
 They have converted all, even therichest, countries into their tributaries. 
 They have grabbedhundreds of billions of dollars. 
 And every dollar is sulliedwith filth: the filth of the secret treaties between Britain and her “allies”, between Germany and her vassals, treaties for the division of the spoils, treaties of mutual “aid” foroppressing the workers and persecuting the internationalistsocialists. 
 Every dollar is sullied with the filth of “profitable”war contracts, which in every country made the rich richerand the poor poorer. 
 And every dollar is stained with blood— from that ocean of blood that has been shed by the ten million killed and twenty million maimed in the great, noble,liberating and holy war to decide whether the British or theGerman robbers are to get most of the spoils, whether theBritish or the German thugs are to be foremost in throttling the weak nations all over the world. 
 While the German robbers broke all records in war atroc -ities, the British have broken all records not only in the number of colonies they have grabbed, but also in the sub -tlety of their disgusting hypocrisy. 
 This very day, the Anglo -French and American bourgeois newspapers are spreading, inmillions and millions of copies, lies and slander about Russia, and are hypocritically justifying their predatory expedition against her on the plea that they want to “protect” Russiafrom the Germans! It does not require many words to refute this despicable and hideous lie; it is sufficient to point to one well -known fact. 
 In October 1917, after the Russian workers had over -thrown their imperialist government, the Soviet government,the government of the revolutionary workers and peasants,openly proposed a just peace, a peace without annexationsor indemnities, a peace that fully guaranteed equal rights toall nations—and it proposed such a peace to all the belliger -ent countries. 
 It was the Anglo -French and the American bourgeoisie who refused to accept our proposal; it was they who even re -fused to talk to us about a general peace! It was they who betrayed the interests of all nations; it was they who prolonged the imperialist slaughter! It was they who, banking on the possibility of dragging Russia back into the imperialist war, refused to take partin the peace negotiations and thereby gave a free hand to theno less predatory German capitalists who imposed the anne -xationist and harsh Brest Peace upon Russia! It is difficult to imagine anything more disgusting than the hypocrisy with which the Anglo -French and American bourgeoisie are now “blaming” us for the Brest Peace Treaty. 
 The very capitalists of those countries which could haveturned the Brest negotiations into general negotiations fora general peace are now our “accusers”! The Anglo -French imperialist vultures, who have profited from the plunder of colonies and the slaughter of nations, have prolonged the war for nearly a whole year after Brest, and yet they“accuse” us, the Bolsheviks, who proposed a just peace to all countries, they accuse us, who tore up, published and exposed to public disgrace the secret, criminal treaties concludedbetween the ex -tsar and the Anglo -French capitalists. 
 The workers of the whole world, no matter in what country they live, greet us, sympathise with us, applaud us for break -ing the iron ring of imperialist ties, of sordid imperialisttreaties, of imperialist chains—for breaking through to free -dom, and making the heaviest sacrifices in doing so—for, as asocialist republic, although torn and plundered by the impe -rialists, keeping out of the imperialist war and raising the banner of peace, the banner of socialism for the whole worldto see. 
 Small wonder that the international imperialist gang hates us for this, that it “accuses” us, that all the lackeys of theimperialists, including our Right Socialist -Revolutionaries and Mensheviks, also “accuse” us. 
 The hatred these watchdogs of imperialism express for the Bolsheviks, and the sympathyof the class -conscious workers of the world, convince us more than ever of the justice of our cause. 
 A real socialist would not fail to understand that for the sake of achieving victory over the bourgeoisie, for the sake of power passing to the workers, for the sake of starting the world proletarian revolution, we cannot and must not hesi -tate to make the heaviest sacrifices, including the sacrifice of part of our territory, the sacrifice of heavy defeats at the hands of imperialism. 
 A real socialist would have proved by deeds his willingness for “his” country to make the greatest sacrifice to give a real push forward to the cause of the social -ist revolution. 
 For the sake of “their” cause, that is, for the sake of win -ning world hegemony, the imperialists of Britain and Germanyhave not hesitated to utterly ruin and throttle a whole num -ber of countries, from Belgium and Serbia to Palestine andMesopotamia. 
 But must socialists wait with “their” cause,the cause of liberating the working people of the whole worldfrom the yoke of capital, of winning universal and lastingpeace, until a path without sacrifice is found? Must theyfear to open the battle until an easy victory is “guaranteed”? Must they place the integrity and security of “their” bour -geois -created “fatherland” above the interests of the world socialist revolution? The scoundrels in the internationalsocialist movement who think this way, those lackeys whogrovel to bourgeois morality, thrice stand condemned. 
 The Anglo -French and American imperialist vultures “accuse” us of concluding an “agreement” with German imperialism. 
 What hypocrites, what scoundrels they are toslander the workers’ government while trembling because ofthe sympathy displayed towards us by the workers of “theirown” countries! But their hypocrisy will be exposed. 
 Theypretend not to see the difference between an agreement entered into by “socialists” with the bourgeoisie (their own or foreign) against the workers , against the working people, and an agreement entered into for the protection of the work -ers who have defeated their bourgeoisie, with the bourgeoisie of one national colour against the bourgeoisie of another colour in order that the proletariat may take advantage of the antagonisms between the different groups of bour -geoisie. 
 In actual fact, every European sees this difference very well, and, as I shall show in a moment, the American peoplehave had a particularly striking “illustration” of it in theirown history. 
 There are agreements and agreements, there are fagots et fagots , as the French say. 
 When in February 1918 the German imperialist vultures hurled their forces against unarmed, demobilised Russia, who had relied on the international solidarity of the prole -tariat before the world revolution had fully matured, I did not hesitate for a moment to enter into an “agreement” with the French monarchists. 
 Captain Sadoul, a French armyofficer who, in words, sympathised with the Bolsheviks, butwas in deeds a loyal and faithful servant of French imperial -ism, brought the French officer de Lubersac to see me. 
 “I ama monarchist. 
 My only aim is to secure the defeat of Ger -many,” de Lubersac declared to me. 
 “That goes without saying(cela va sans dire ),” I replied. 
 But this did not in the least prevent me from entering into an “agreement” with deLubersac concerning certain services that French army offic -ers, experts in explosives, were ready to render us by blowingup railway lines in order to hinder the German invasion. 
 This is an example of an “agreement” of which every class -conscious worker will approve, an agreement in the interests ofsocialism. 
 The French monarchist and I shook hands, althoughwe knew that each of us would willingly hang his “partner”. 
But for a time our interests coincided. 
 Against theadvancing rapacious Germans, we, in the interests of the Rus -sian and the world socialist revolution, utilised the equally rapacious counter -interests of other imperialists. 
 In this way we served the interests of the working class of Russia and ofother countries, we strengthened the proletariat and weakenedthe bourgeoisie of the whole world, we resorted to themethods, most legitimate and essential in every war, of manoeuvre, stratagem, retreat, in anticipation of the moment when the rapidly maturing proletarian revolution in a num -ber of advanced countries completely matured . 
 However much the Anglo -French and American imperial -ist sharks fume with rage, however much they slander us, nomatter how many millions they spend on bribing the Right Socialist -Revolutionary, Menshevik and other social -patriotic newspapers, I shall not hesitate one second to enter into a similar “agreement” with the German imperialist vultures if an attack upon Russia by Anglo -French troops calls for it. 
 And I know perfectly well that my tactics will be approvedby the class -conscious proletariat of Russia, Germany, France, Britain, America—in short, of the whole civilised world. 
 Such tactics will ease the task of the socialist revolu -tion, will hasten it, will weaken the international bourgeoisie, will strengthen the position of the working class which is defeating the bourgeoisie. 
 The American people resorted to these tactics long ago to the advantage of their revolution. 
 When they waged theirgreat war of liberation against the British oppressors, theyhad also against them the French and the Spanish oppressorswho owned a part of what is now the United States of NorthAmerica. 
 In their arduous war for freedom, the American people also entered into “agreements” with some oppressors against others for the purpose of weakening the oppressorsand strengthening those who were fighting in a revolutionarymanner against oppression, for the purpose of serving theinterests of the oppressed people . 
 The American people took advantage of the strife between the French, the Spanish and the British; sometimes they even fought side by side with the forces of the French and Spanish oppressors against theBritish oppressors; first they defeated the British and thenfreed themselves (partly by ransom) from the French and theSpanish. 
 Historical action is not the pavement of Nevsky Prospekt, said the great Russian revolutionary Chernyshevsky. 
 28 A revolutionary would not “agree” to a proletarian revolutiononly “on the condition” that it proceeds easily and smoothly,that there is, from the outset, combined action on the partof the proletarians of different countries, that there are guar -antees against defeats, that the road of the revolution is broad, free and straight, that it will not be necessary during the march to victory to sustain the heaviest casualties, to“bide one’s time in a besieged fortress”, or to make one’s wayalong extremely narrow, impassable, winding and dangerousmountain tracks. 
 Such a person is no revolutionary, he hasnot freed himself from the pedantry of the bourgeois intellec -tuals; such a person will be found constantly slipping intothe camp of the counter -revolutionary bourgeoisie, like our Right Socialist -Revolutionaries, Mensheviks and even (although more rarely) Left Socialist -Revolutionaries. 
 Echoing the bourgeoisie, these gentlemen like to blame us for the “chaos” of the revolution, for the “destruction” of industry, for the unemployment and the food shortage. 
 How hypocritical these accusations are, coming from thosewho welcomed and supported the imperialist war, or who entered into an “agreement” with Kerensky who continued this war! It is this imperialist war that is the cause of all these misfortunes. 
 The revolution engendered by the war can-not avoid the terrible difficulties and suffering bequeathed it by the prolonged, ruinous, reactionary slaughter of the nations. 
 To blame us for the “destruction” of industry, or for the “terror”, is either hypocrisy or dull-witted pedantry; it reveals an inability to understand the basic conditions of the fierce class struggle, raised to the highest degree of intensity that is called revolution. 
 Even when “accusers” of this type do “recognise” the class struggle, they limit themselves to verbal recognition; actually, they constantly slip into the philistine utopia of class “agreement” and “collaboration”; for in revolutionary epochs the class struggle has always, inevitably, and in every country, assumed the form of civil war, and civil war is inconceivable without the severest destruction, terror and the restriction of formal democracy in the interests of this war. 
 Only unctuous parsons—whether Christian or “secu -lar” in the persons of parlour, parliamentary socialists— cannot see, understand and feel this necessity. 
 Only a life-less “man in the muffler ”29 can shun the revolution for this reason instead of plunging into battle with the utmost ardour and determination at a time when history demands that thegreatest problems of humanity be solved by struggle and war. 
 The American people have a revolutionary tradition which has been adopted by the best representatives of the Americanproletariat, who have repeatedly expressed their completesolidarity with us Bolsheviks. 
 That tradition is the war ofliberation against the British in the eighteenth century andthe Civil War in the nineteenth century. 
 In some respects,if we only take into consideration the “destruction” of some branches of industry and of the national economy, America in 1870 was behind 1860. 
 But what a pedant, what an idiot would anyone be to deny on these grounds the immense, world -historic, progressive and revolutionary significance of the American Civil War of 1863 -65! The representatives of the bourgeoisie understand that for the sake of overthrowing Negro slavery, of overthrowingthe rule of the slaveowners, it was worth letting the countrygo through long years of civil war, through the abysmal ruin, destruction and terror that accompany every war. 
 But now, when we are confronted with the vastly greater task of overthrowing capitalist wage -slavery, of overthrowing the rule of the bourgeoisie—now, the representatives and defend -ers of the bourgeoisie, and also the reformist socialists whohave been frightened by the bourgeoisie and are shunningthe revolution, cannot and do not want to understand thatcivil war is necessary and legitimate. 
 The American workers will not follow the bourgeoisie. 
 They will be with us, for civil war against the bourgeoisie. 
The whole history of the world and of the American labourmovement strengthens my conviction that this is so. 
 I alsorecall the words of one of the most beloved leaders of theAmerican proletariat, Eugene Debs, who wrote in the Appeal to Reason , 30 I believe towards the end of 1915, in the article “What Shall I Fight For” (I quoted this article at the begin -ning of 1916 at a public meeting of workers in Berne, Switz -erland) *—that he, Debs, would rather be shot than vote credits for the present criminal and reactionary war; thathe, Debs, knows of only one holy and, from the proletarian standpoint, legitimate war, namely: the war against the capitalists, the war to liberate mankind from wage -slavery. 
 I am not surprised that Wilson, the head of the American multimillionaires and servant of the capitalist sharks, hasthrown Debs into prison. 
 Let the bourgeoisie be brutal to thetrue internationalists, to the true representatives of the revolutionary proletariat! The more fierce and brutal they are, the nearer the day of the victorious proletarian revolu -tion. 
 We are blamed for the destruction caused by our revolu -tion.... 
 Who are the accusers? The hangers -on of the bourgeoi -sie, of that very bourgeoisie who, during the four years of the imperialist war, have destroyed almost the whole of European culture and have reduced Europe to barbarism,brutality and starvation. 
 These bourgeoisie now demandwe should not make a revolution on these ruins, amidst thiswreckage of culture, amidst the wreckage and ruins createdby the war, nor with the people who have been brutalised by the war. 
 How humane and righteous the bourgeoisie are! *See present edition, Vol. 
 22, p. 
 125. 
— Ed. 
 Their servants accuse us of resorting to terror.... 
 The British bourgeoisie have forgotten their 1649, the French bourgeoisie have forgotten their 1793. 
 Terror was just and legitimate when the bourgeoisie resorted to it for their ownbenefit against feudalism. 
 Terror became monstrous andcriminal when the workers and poor peasants dared to use itagainst the bourgeoisie! Terror was just and legitimate whenused for the purpose of substituting one exploiting minority for another exploiting minority. 
 Terror became monstrous and criminal when it began to be used for the purpose ofoverthrowing every exploiting minority, to be used in the interests of the vast actual majority, in the interests of theproletariat and semi -proletariat, the working class and the poor peasants! The international imperialist bourgeoisie have slaughtered ten million men and maimed twenty million in “their”war, the war to decide whether the British or the German vul -tures are to rule the world. 
 If our war, the war of the oppressed and exploited against the oppressors and the exploiters, results in half a million or a million casualties in all countries, the bourgeoisie will say that the former casualties are justified, while the latterare criminal. 
 The proletariat will have something entirely different to say. 
Now, amidst the horrors of the imperialist war, the proletariat is receiving a most vivid and striking illustration of the great truth taught by all revolutions and bequeathed to the workers by their best teachers, the founders of modernsocialism. 
 This truth is that no revolution can be successfulunless the resistance of the exploiters is crushed . 
 When we, the workers and toiling peasants, captured state power, it becameour duty to crush the resistance of the exploiters. 
 We are proud we have been doing this. 
 We regret we are not doing it with sufficient firmness and determination. 
 We know that fierce resistance to the socialist revolution on the part of the bourgeoisie is inevitable in all countries,and that this resistance will grow with the growth of this revolution. 
 The proletariat will crush this resistance; during the struggle against the resisting bourgeoisie it will finally mature for victory and for power. 
 Let the corrupt bourgeois press shout to the whole world about every mistake our revolution makes. 
 We are not daunted by our mistakes. 
 People have not become saints because the revolution has begun. 
 The toiling classes who for centu -ries have been oppressed, downtrodden and forcibly held in the vice of poverty, brutality and ignorance cannot avoidmistakes when making a revolution. 
 And, as I pointed outonce before, the corpse of bourgeois society cannot be nailedin a coffin and buried. 
 * The corpse of capitalism is decaying and disintegrating in our midst, polluting the air and poi -soning our lives, enmeshing that which is new, fresh, young and virile in thousands of threads and bonds of that which isold, moribund and decaying. 
 For every hundred mistakes we commit, and which the bourgeoisie and their lackeys (including our own Mensheviks and Right Socialist -Revolutionaries) shout about to the whole world, 10,000 great and heroic deeds are performed,greater and more heroic because they are simple and incon -spicuous amidst the everyday life of a factory district or aremote village, performed by people who are not accustomed(and have no opportunity) to shout to the whole world about their successes. 
 But even if the contrary were true—although I know such an assumption is wrong—even if we committed 10,000 mis -take for every 100 correct actions we performed, even in thatcase our revolution would be great and invincible, and so it will be in the eyes of world history , because, for the first time , not the minority, not the rich alone, not the educated alone, but the real people, the vast majority of the workingpeople, are themselves building a new life, are by their own experience solving the most difficult problems of socialist organisation . 
 Every mistake committed in the course of such work, in the course of this most conscientious and earnest work of tens of millions of simple workers and peasants in reorganisingtheir whole life, every such mistake is worth thousands andmillions of “lawless” successes achieved by the exploitingminority—successes in swindling and duping the workingpeople. 
 For only through such mistakes will the workers and peasants learn to build the new life, learn to do without *See present edition, Vol. 
 27, p. 
 434. 
— Ed. 
 capitalists; only in this way will they hack a path for themselves—through thousands of obstacles—to victorious socialism. 
 Mistakes are being committed in the course of their revolutionary work by our peasants, who at one stroke, in onenight, October 25 -26 (old style), 1917, entirely abolished the private ownership of land, and are now, month aftermonth, overcoming tremendous difficulties and correcting their mistakes themselves, solving in a practical way the most difficult tasks of organising new conditions of economiclife, of fighting the kulaks, providing land for the working people (and not for the rich), and of changing to communist large -scale agriculture. 
 Mistakes are being committed in the course of their revolutionary work by our workers, who have already, after a few months, nationalised almost all the biggest factoriesand plants, and are learning by hard, everyday work the newtask of managing whole branches of industry, are setting thenationalised enterprises going, overcoming the powerfulresistance of inertia, petty -bourgeois mentality and selfish -ness, and, brick by brick, are laying the foundation of new social ties, of a new labour discipline, of a new influence of the workers’ trade unions over their members. 
 Mistakes are committed in the course of their revolution -ary work by our Soviets, which were created as far back as1905 by a mighty upsurge of the people. 
 The Soviets of Work -ers and Peasants are a new type of state, a new and higher type of democracy, a form of the proletarian dictatorship, a means of administering the state without the bourgeoisie and against the bourgeoisie. 
 For the first time democracy is here serving the people, the working people, and has ceased to bedemocracy for the rich as it still is in all bourgeois republics, even the most democratic. 
 For the first time, the people are grappling, on a scale involving one hundred million, with theproblem of implementing the dictatorship of the proletariatand semi -proletariat—a problem which, if not solved, makes socialism out of the question . 
 Let the pedants, or the people whose minds are incurably stuffed with bourgeois -democratic or parliamentary prejudices, shake their heads in perplexity about our Soviets, aboutthe absence of direct elections, for example. 
 These people have forgotten nothing and have learned nothing during the period of the great upheavals of 1914 -18. 
 The combination of the proletarian dictatorship with the new democracy for the working people—of civil war with the widest participation ofthe people in politics—such a combination cannot be broughtabout at one stroke, nor does it fit in with the outworn modesof routine parliamentary democracy. 
 The contours of a newworld, the world of socialism, are rising before us in the shape of the Soviet Republic. 
 It is not surprising that this world does not come into being ready -made, does not spring forth like Minerva from the head of Jupiter. 
 The old bourgeois -democratic constitutions waxed elo -quent about formal equality and right of assembly; but ourproletarian and peasant Soviet Constitution casts aside the hypocrisy of formal equality. 
 When the bourgeois repub -licans overturned thrones they did not worry about formal equality between monarchists and republicans. 
 Whenit is a matter of overthrowing the bourgeoisie, only traitorsor idiots can demand formal equality of rights for the bour -geoisie. 
 “Freedom of assembly” for workers and peasants is not worth a farthing when the best buildings belong to the bour -geoisie. 
 Our Soviets have confiscated all the good buildings in town and country from the rich and have transferred all of them to the workers and peasants for their unions and meet -ings. 
 This is our freedom of assembly—for the working people! This is the meaning and content of our Soviet, our socialist Constitution! That is why we are all so firmly convinced that no matter what misfortunes may still be in store for it, our Republicof Soviets is invincible . 
 It is invincible because every blow struck by frenzied imperialism, every defeat the international bourgeoisie inflict on us, rouses more and more sections of the workers and peasants to the struggle, teaches them at the cost ofenormous sacrifice, steels them and engenders new heroismon a mass scale. 
 We know that help from you will probably not come soon, comrade American workers, for the revolution is developing in different countries in different forms and at different tempos (and it cannot be otherwise). 
 We know that althoughthe European proletarian revolution has been maturing very rapidly lately, it may, after all, not flare up within the next few weeks. 
 We are banking on the inevitability of the world revolution, but this does not mean that we are such fools as to bank on the revolution inevitably coming on adefinite and early date. 
 We have seen two great revolutions in our country, 1905 and 1917, and we know revolutions arenot made to order, or by agreement. 
 We know that circum -stances brought our Russian detachment of the socialist proletariat to the fore not because of our merits, but because of the exceptional backwardness of Russia, and that before the world revolution breaks out a number of separate revolu -tions may be defeated. 
 In spite of this, we are firmly convinced that we are invin -cible, because the spirit of mankind will not be broken by the imperialist slaughter. 
 Mankind will vanquish it. 
 And the first country to break the convict chains of the impe -rialist war was our country. 
 We sustained enormously heavy casualties in the struggle to break these chains, butwe broke them. 
 We are free from imperialist dependence, we have raised the banner of struggle for the complete overthrow of imperialism for the whole world to see. 
 We are now, as it were, in a besieged fortress, waiting for the other detachments of the world socialist revolutionto come to our relief. 
 These detachments exist , they are more numerous than ours, they are maturing, growing, gaining more strength the longer the brutalities of imperialism continue. 
 The workers are breaking away from their social -traitors—the Gomperses, Hendersons, Renaudels, Scheide -manns and Renners. 
 Slowly but surely the workers are adopt -ing communist, Bolshevik tactics and are marching towards the proletarian revolution, which alone is capable of savingdying culture and dying mankind. 
 In short, we are invincible, because the world proletarian revolution is invincible. 
 N. 
 Lenin August 20, 1918 Pravda No. 
 178 Published according to August 22, 1918 the Pravda text checked with the manuscript SPEECH AT A MEETING IN THE ALEXEYEV PEOPLE’S HOUSE AUGUST 23, 1918 BRIEF NEWSPAPER REPORT (Comrade Lenin ’s appearance is greeted with stormy , prolonged applause . 
) Comrades, today our Party is arrang -ing meetings to explain what we Communists are fighting for. 
 The most concise answer to this question would be that we are fighting for the termination of the imperialist warand for socialism. 
 Right at the very outbreak of the war, when reaction and tsarism held sway, we called the war criminal and saidthat the only way out was to convert it from imperialistinto civil war. 
 In those days many were uncertain about the connection between the imperialist war and socialism; even many social -ists thought that this war, like any other, would end by theconclusion of peace. 
 But four years of war have taught people a lot. 
 It is now becoming clearer and clearer that there is no other way out. 
The Russian revolution is being followed by the growthof revolution in all the belligerent countries. 
 Why is this so? To answer that question we must explain the attitude of Communists towards war, give our appraisal of it. 
 We regardall wars which are the result of the rapacious ambitions ofkings and capitalists as criminal, because they are fatal tothe labouring classes and bring rich spoils to the ruling bour -geoisie. 
 But there are some wars which the working class must re -gard as the only just wars. 
 These are wars for emancipation from slavery, from capitalist oppression. 
 And such wars are bound to occur, for we cannot secure our emancipation without struggle. 
 When the war broke out in 1914 between the Germans on the one hand and the British and French on the other todetermine how they were to divide up the earth among them -selves, who was to have the right to oppress the whole world,the capitalists of both camps tried to disguise their predatoryaims by talking about “national defence”; that is how they tried to pull the wool over the eyes of the people. 
 Millions of people have been killed and millions crippled in this war. 
 It has become world -wide. 
 And more and more insistenly people are asking what is the purpose of theseunnecessary sacrifices. 
 Britain and Germany are drenched in blood, yet there is no way out of the war; even if some of the imperialist countries were to stop fighting, others would continue. 
 The capitalists have overreached themselves, they have grabbed more than they can hold. 
 Meanwhile, the armiesare becoming demoralised; there are deserters everywhere. 
The mountains of Italy are swarming with them; in France soldiers are refusing to fight, and even in Germany the old discipline has fallen apart. 
 French and German soldiers are beginning to realise they must reverse their front and turn their guns against theirown governments, as it is impossible to end this bloody warunder the capitalist system. 
 Hence the realisation that the workers of the world must take up the struggle against the capitalists of the world. 
 It is no easy matter to create a socialist system. 
 The Civil War is bound to continue for many a long month, perhaps formany a long year. 
 This should be clear to a Russian, for heknows how difficult it is to overthrow the ruling class and what desperate resistance the Russian landowners and capi -talists are putting up. 
 There is no country in Europe in which the workers are not in sympathy with the Bolsheviks and are not convinced thatthe time will come when they will overthrow their owngovernment, just as the Russian workers have overthrown theirs. 
 We Russian Communists so far stand alone, because our detachment has proved to be ahead of all the others. 
 We have been cut off from our comrades; but we had to act first because our country was the most backward. 
 Our revolution was begun as a general revolution, and we shall tackle our tasks with the help of the workers and peasants ofthe world. 
 Our tasks are hard and difficult; many undesirable and pernicious elements are joining our ranks. 
 But the work hasbegun, and even if we do make mistakes, we should remember that every mistake is an education and a lesson. 
 Capitalism is an international force, and it can therefore be completely destroyed only through victory in all countries,not in one alone. 
 The war against the Czechs is a waragainst the capitalists of the whole world. 
 The workers are rising and joining this struggle; the Petrograd and Moscow workers are joining the army and bringing with them the idea of fighting for the victory ofsocialism. 
 The workers will ensure the victory of the Soviet Republic over the Czechs and give it a chance to hold out until theworld socialist revolution breaks out. 
 ( Comrade Lenin con-cludes his speech amidst stormy applause . 
) Izvestia No. 
 182 Published according to August 24, 1918 the Izvestia text SPEECH IN POLYTECHNICAL MUSEUM AUGUST 23, 1918 (Stormy applause . 
) What is the essence of our programme? Winning socialism. 
 There is no way out of the world war atthis moment except by the victory of socialism. 
 But many do not realise this. 
 Most people all over the world now oppose this bloody slaughter, but they cannot see its direct connec -tion with the capitalist system. 
 The horrors of this war areobvious even to the bourgeoisie, but you cannot expect themto associate the end of the war with the end of capitalism.... 
This, however, is the fundamental idea which has always distinguished the Bolsheviks, and the revolutionary social -ists of all other countries, from those who would like to bring peace on earth while leaving the capitalist systemintact. 
 What are wars fought for? We know the majority of wars were fought in the interests of dynasties, and were called dynastic wars. 
 But some wars were fought in the inter -ests of the oppressed. 
 Spartacus set off a war in defence of the enslaved class. 
 Wars of this nature were waged in theperiod of colonial oppression continuing to this day, in theperiod of slavery, etc. 
 These wars were just wars and must notbe condemned. 
 But when we talk about the present European war and condemn it, we do so only because it is being waged by theoppressor class. 
 What is the aim of the present war? If we are to believe the diplomats of all countries, it is being fought by Franceand Britain to defend the small nations from the barbarians, the German Huns. 
 Germany, for her part, is fighting the Cos -sack barbarians who are menacing the civilised German people, and is defending the fatherland from the enemy attack. 
 But we know this war was carefully prepared, it matured and became inevitable. 
 It was just as inevitable as war is between America and Japan. 
 Why? Because capitalism has concentrated the earth’s wealth in the hands of a few states and divided the world up to thelast little bit. 
 Any further division, any further enrichmentcould take place only at the expense of others, as the enrich -ment of one state at the expense of another. 
 The issue could only be settled by force—and, accordingly, war between the world marauders became inevitable. 
 This war has up to now been headed by two principal firms—Britain and Germany. 
 Britain was the strongest of thecolonialist countries. 
 Although her population is not morethan 40,000,000, that of her colonies exceeds 400,000,000. 
 Long ago she took by force the colonies of others; she seized vast territories and exploited them. 
 But economicallyshe fell behind Germany during the last fifty years. 
 Germanindustry overhauled British industry. 
 Germany’s large -scale state capitalism combined with the bureaucracy—and Ger -many beat all records. 
 The rivalry for supremacy between these two giants could only be settled by force. 
 There was a time when Britain, by dint of her might, seized territory from Holland, Portugal and other countries. 
Then Germany appeared on the scene and declared thatit was now her turn to enrich herself at the expense of others. 
 That is the root of the matter—the struggle between the strongest powers for the division of the world. 
 And as bothsides possess hundreds of millions of capital, their strugglehas become world -wide. 
 We know how many secret crimes have been committed in connection with this war. 
 The secret treaties we have pub -lished show that the lofty reasons given for the war are just a lot of empty talk, and that, just like Russia, all the stateswere involved in sordid treaties for getting rich at the expenseof small and weak nations. 
 The result was that those who werestrong grew richer still, while those who were weak were crushed. 
 Individuals cannot be blamed for starting the war; it would be wrong to blame kings and tsars for having brought about this holocaust—it was brought about by capital. 
 Capitalism has turned into a blind alley. 
 This blind alley is imperialism, which dictated war among the rivals for world supremacy. 
 The claim that the war is being waged for the liberation of small nations is a monstrous lie. 
 Both sets of marauderscontinue to stand glaring bloodthirstily at each other, whileabout them many a small nation lies crushed. 
 And we say there is no way out of the imperialist holocaust except by civil war. 
 When we said this in 1914 we were told it was like a straight line extending into space; but our analysis has beencorroborated by the whole subsequent course of events. 
 Todaywe find chauvinism’s generals being left without an army. 
 In France, which suffered most from the war and was most responsive to the call to defend the fatherland—for the enemystood at the gates of Paris—the defence advocates haverecently suffered a fiasco. 
 True enough, it was at the handsof people like Longuet, who do not know whether they arecoming or going, but that is not important. 
 We know that in the early days of the revolution in Russia power fell into the hands of people who spouted all sorts ofwords but kept the old tsarist treaties in their pockets. 
 Andif in Russia parties veered to the left more rapidly, this wasdue to the accursed regime that existed before the revolutionand to our Revolution of 1905. 
 In Europe, though, where a shrewd and calculating capi -talism rules, where it possesses a powerful and well -knit organisation, the fumes of nationalism are wearing offmore slowly. 
 Nevertheless, we can unmistakably seethat the imperialist war is dying a slow and painfuldeath. 
 There is quite reliable information to show that the German army is becoming demoralised, and has taken toprofiteering. 
 It could hardly be otherwise. 
 The moment thesoldier wakes up and begins to understand that he is beingmaimed and killed solely in the interests of the bourgeoisie,demoralisation is bound to spread among the mass of soldiers. 
 The French army, which kept its morale longer and more persistently than any of the others, likewise shows that it is not immune to demoralisation. 
 The Malvy trial has some -what lifted the curtain over the scene in France, too, and has revealed that thousands of soldiers have refused to go to the front. 
31 All this is but the herald of events similar to those in Russia, except that in the civilised countries the civil warwill be far more brutal than in Russia. 
 We can see thatin the case of Finland, the most democratic country in Europe, the first country to give women the vote. 
 Yet this country took savage and ruthless reprisals on the Red Army men;and the latter did not surrender easily. 
 This shows what aterrible fate awaits these civilised countries. 
 You can see for yourselves how absurd it was to accuse the Bolsheviks of demoralising the Russian army. 
 We represent only one detachment, a detachment which has advanced some way ahead of the other workers’ detach -ments—not because it is any better than the others, butbecause the stupid policy of our bourgeoisie enabled the work -ing class of Russia to throw off its chains sooner. 
 Today, infighting for a socialist system in Russia, we are fighting for socialism all over the world. 
 Today, the Bolsheviks are the sole subject of discussion at all workers’ meetings andgatherings in all countries. 
 They know us; they know thatwhat we are now doing is furthering the cause of the wholeworld, that we are working for them. 
 When we abolish private ownership of land, nationalise the factories and the banks, which are now engaged in organising industry, cries are raised on all sides that we arecommitting hosts of mistakes. 
 That may be true, but theworkers are creating socialism themselves, and no matterwhat mistakes we make we are learning from experienceand paving the way for the art of making revolution without mistakes. 
 That is why we are the objects of such savage hatred. 
 That is why the French imperialists do not begrudgehundreds of millions to support counter -revolution, since this would bring the repayment to France of the Russiandebts, running into billions, which the workers and peasants have annulled. 
 Today the whole bourgeois press is amusing itself by filling its columns with such lies as that the Council of People’s Commissars has moved to Tula, that it was seen ten days ago in Kronstadt, and so on, that Moscow is about to fall and that the Soviet Government has fled. 
 The whole bourgeoisie, all the Romanovs, all the capi -talists and landowners support the Czechs, whose revoltthey associate with the possible fall of the Soviet govern -ment. 
 The Allies know this, and they are launching one oftheir fiercest attacks. 
 What they lacked in Russia was a nucleus, and now they have found it in the Czechs. 
 The Czech revolt therefore must not be treated lightly. 
 Thisrevolt was the signal for a number of counter -revolutionary risings; our revolutionary history has recently been markedby many kulak and whiteguard revolts. 
 The position of the Soviet government is grave, and we must not close our eyes to the fact. 
 But you have only to look around you to be filled with confidence in ourvictory. 
 Germany has suffered a number of defeats, and it is nosecret that these defeats are the result of “treason” on thepart of German soldiers; French soldiers refused to go to the front at a very critical moment because of the arrest of Comrade Andrieux whom the government was compelledto release to get the troops to move, and so on and soforth. 
 We have made many sacrifices. 
 The Brest -Litovsk Peace was one painful wound; we expected a revolution in Germany, but the time for it was not yet ripe. 
 It is ripening now; revolution is undoubtedly brewing and is inevitable. 
 Butonly a fool can ask when revolution will break out in theWest. 
 Revolution can never be forecast, it cannot be fore -told; it comes of itself. 
 Revolution is brewing and is bound toflare up. 
 Did anybody know a week before the February revolution it was about to break out? When the mad priest led the people to the palace, 32 did anybody think the Revo -lution of 1905 was about to break out? But revolutionis brewing and is bound to come. 
 And we must keep the Soviet government intact until it begins. 
 Our mistakes must serve as a lesson to the proletariat in the West, to the world socialist movement. 
 The salvation of the world revolution as well as of the Russian revolutionlies on the Czech front. 
 And we already have news that the army which time and again was betrayed by the gener -als, which is terribly exhausted, that this army, with the coming of our comrades, the Communists, the workers, is beginning to win victories, is beginning to display revolu -tionary enthusiasm in the struggle against the world bour -geoisie. 
 We believe that victory will be ours and that by our victory we shall save the cause of socialism. 
 ( Stormy ap-plause . 
) Short report published in Izvestia No. 
 182, August 24, 1918 First published in full in 1926 Published according to the verbatim report SPEECH AT THE FIRS T ALL-RUSSI A CONGRESS ON EDUCATI ON33 AUGUST 28, 1918 (All rise as Comrade Lenin appears in the hall. 
 Stormy , prolonged applause . 
) Comrades, we are passing through one of the most critical, important and interesting moments of history—a moment when the world socialist revolution is inthe making. 
 It is now becoming apparent even to those who stood remote from socialist theories and forecasts that this war will not end as it began, that is, by the conclusion of peacein the usual way between the old imperialist governments. 
The Russian revolution has shown that the war is inevitablyleading to the disintegration of capitalist society in general,that it is being converted into a war of the working people against the exploiters. 
 Therein lies the significance of the Russian revolution. 
 The workers of the world feel that the cause of the Russian revolution is their own cause no matter how great the obstaclesin our way, no matter how many tens of millions in money arelavished in all countries to disseminate lies and slander about the Russian revolution. 
 Parallel with the war between the two groups of imperialists, another war is beginning every -where, the war which the working class, inspired by the exam -ple of the Russian revolution, is declaring against its ownbourgeoisie. 
 All the signs go to show that Austria and Italyare on the verge of revolution. 
 The old order in these countries is disintegrating rapidly. 
 In the stronger and more stable countries such as Germany, Britain and France, the sameprocess is going on, although in a somewhat different and /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR less noticeable form. 
 The collapse of the capitalist system and the capitalist war is inevitable. 
 The German imperialists have been unable to stifle the socialist revolution. 
 The price Germany had to pay for crush -ing the revolution in Red Latvia, Finland and the Ukraine wasthe demoralisation of her army. 
 The defeat of Germany onthe Western front is largely due to the fact that her old armyno longer exists. 
 What the German diplomats joked about— the “Russification” of the German soldiers—now turns out to be no joke at all, but the bitter truth. 
 The spirit of protestis rising, “treason” is becoming a common thing in the Ger -man army. 
 On the other hand, Britain and France are making a last effort to save their own situation. 
 They are hurling them -selves on the Russian Republic and straining capitalism tobreaking point. 
 Even the bourgeois papers have to admit thata definite change of spirit has appeared among the workingpeople: in France, the idea of “national defence” is breakingdown; in Britain, the working class is denouncing the “civiltruce”. 
 That means the British and French imperialists have staked their last card—and we can say with the utmost con -fidence that that card will be trumped. 
 ( Stormy applause . 
) No matter how loudly certain groups cry that the Bolshe -viks are backed by a minority, they have to admit they can -not find the forces inside Russia to fight the Bolsheviks,and are compelled to resort to foreign intervention. 
 The work -ing class of France and Britain is thus being forced to takepart in a blatant war of conquest, whose purpose is to crushthe Russian revolution. 
 That means that British and French,and, consequently, world imperialism is at its last gasp. 
( Stormy applause . 
) We have surmounted all difficulties, even though it was hard to declare martial law again in a country where the people themselves had suppressed the war and smashed theold army, and even though it was hard to form an army in themidst of acute civil war. 
 The army has been formed, andvictory over the Czechs, the whiteguards, the landowners,the capitalists and the kulaks is assured. 
 ( Stormy applause . 
) The working people realise they are fighting for their own cause and not in the interests of a handful of capitalists. 
 TheRussian workers and peasants have for the first time got a chance to run the factories and dispose of the land them -selves, and that experience was bound to have its effect. 
 Our army has been formed from chosen people, from the class -conscious peasants and workers. 
 Each of them goes to the front aware that he is fighting for the destiny of the worldrevolution as well as the Russian revolution; for we may restassured that the Russian revolution is only a sample, onlythe first step in the series of revolutions in which the war is bound to end. 
 Education is one of the component parts of the struggle we are now waging. 
 We can counter hypocrisy and lies withthe complete and honest truth. 
 The war has shown plainlyenough what the “will of the majority” means, a phrase usedas a cover by the bourgeoisie. 
 It has shown that a handful of plutocrats drag whole nations to the slaughter in their own interests. 
 The belief that bourgeois democracy servesthe interests of the majority has now been utterly discredited. 
Our Constitution, our Soviets, which were something new toEurope, but with which we were already acquainted from theexperience of the 1905 Revolution, serve as splendid agitation and propaganda material, completely exposing the lying and hypocritical nature of bourgeois democracy. 
 We have openlyproclaimed the rule of the working and exploited people—and there lies the source of our strength and invincibility. 
 The same is true of education: the more cultured the bour -geois state, the more subtly it lied when declaring that schools could stand above politics and serve society as a whole. 
 In fact the schools were turned into nothing but an instru -ment of the class rule of the bourgeoisie. 
 They were thorough -ly imbued with the bourgeois caste spirit. 
 Their purpose wasto supply the capitalists with obedient lackeys and able work -ers. 
 The war has shown that the marvels of modern technologyare being used as a means of exterminating millions of workersand creating fabulous profits for the capitalists who aremaking fortunes out of the war. 
 The war has been internallyundermined, for we have exposed their lies by counteringthem with the truth. 
 We say that our work in the sphere of education is part of the struggle for overthrowing the bourgeoi -sie. 
 We publicly declare that education divorced from life and politics is lies and hypocrisy. 
 What was the meaning of the sabotage resorted to by the best educated representatives of the old bourgeois culture? This sabotage showed better than any agitator, better than all our speeches, better than thousands of pamphlets that these people regard learning astheir monopoly and have turned it into an instrument of theirrule over the so -called common people. 
 They used their education to frustrate the work of socialist construction, andcame out openly against the working people. 
 The revolutionary struggle has been the finishing school for the Russian workers and peasants. 
 They have seen thatour system alone assures their genuine rule, they have beenable to convince themselves that the state is doing every -thing to assist the workers and the poor peasants in complete -ly crushing the resistance of the kulaks, the landowners and the capitalists. 
 The working people are thirsting for knowledge because they need it to win. 
 Nine out of ten of the working peoplehave realised that knowledge is a weapon in their strugglefor emancipation, that their failures are due to lack ofeducation, and that now it is up to them really to give everyone access to education. 
 Our cause is assured because the people have themselves set about building a new, social -ist Russia. 
 They are learning from their own experience,from their failures and mistakes, and they see how indispens -able education is for the victorious conclusion of theirstruggle. 
 In spite of the apparent collapse of many institu -tions and the jubilation of the intellectuals carrying outsabotage, we find that experience in the struggle has taughtthe people to take their fate into their own hands. 
 All whoreally sympathise with the people, all the best teacherswill come to our aid, and that is a sure pledge that the so -cialist cause will triumph. 
 ( Ovation . 
) Short report published August 29, 1918 in Vecherniye Izvestia Moskovskovo Soveta No. 
 35 First published in full in Published according to the 1919 in the book the text of the book Minutes of the First All-Russia Congress on Education , Moscow SPEECH AT A MEETING IN BASMANNY DISTRICT AUGUST 30, 191834 BRIEF NEWSPAPER REPORT The bourgeoisie made themselves masters of revolutionary Russia for a time, ruling from February to October with thesupport of the social -compromisers. 
 With the first steps taken by the Milyukov -Guchkov government, the people began to realise where the bourgeoisie were leading them. 
 But the dirty work of the Russian capital -ists and landowners, who were in fact continuing the policyof the tsar the people had overthrown, was covered up by theMensheviks and the Socialist -Revolutionaries, who pretended to be socialists while actually betraying socialism in the interests of the British and French stock exchanges. 
 Swept aside by the October uprising, and ousted from the revolution, the compromisers set about their customary workin the Ukraine, the Caucasus, in Siberia and on the Volga. 
They eventually succeeded in getting the local Soviets over -thrown and the Bolshevik members turned over to the tender mercies of the Czech hirelings and the Russian whiteguards. 
 But what do we find in these places rising out of the ruins of the Soviets? The complete triumph of the capitalistsand landowners, and groans and curses from the workers andpeasants. 
 The land has been returned to the nobility and themills and factories to their former owners. 
 The eight -hour day has been abolished, the workers’ and peasants’ organisations suppressed, and the tsarist Zemstvos35 and the old police regime restored instead. 
 Let every worker and peasant who is still undecided about his choice of government take a look at the Volga, Siberia,and the Ukraine, and the answer will be clear and unmis -takable. 
 ( Stormy , prolonged applause . 
) Pravda No. 
 185 Published according to August 31, 1918 the Pravda text SPEEC H AT A MEETING AT THE FORME R MICHELSO N WORKS AUGUS T 31), 191836 BRIEF NEWSPAPER REPORT (Stormy applause passing into ovation . 
) We Bolsheviks are constantly being accused of forsaking the slogans of equal -ity and fraternity. 
 Let us now put things straight. 
 What government replaced the tsar? The Guchkov -Milyu -kov government, which set about convening a Constituent Assembly in Russia. 
 What was behind these activities supposed to be in favour of the people liberated from their millennial oppression? It was that Guchkov and other cham -pions were backed by a gang of capitalists pursuing their ownimperialist ends. 
 And when Kerensky, Chernov and Co. 
 werein the saddle, this government, tottering and without anyfoundation, was only concerned with the vested interests of their friends, the bourgeoisie. 
 Power in fact passed into the hands of the kulaks, and the working people got nothing. 
We find the same thing in other countries. 
 Take America, thefreest and most civilised country. 
 There you have a democraticrepublic. 
 But what do we find? The brazen rule of a hand -ful, not even of millionaires, but multimillionaires, while the people are in slavery and servitude. 
 Where is your much -vaunted equality and fraternity if the mills, factories, banks, and all the country’s wealth belong to the capital -ists, and side by side with the democratic republic you havefeudal servitude for millions of workers and unrelieved des -titution? No, wherever “democrats” are in power, you have real, barefaced robbery. 
 We know the true nature of the so -called democracies. 
 The secret treaties of the French Republic, of Britain and the other democracies have clearly revealed the under -lying nature and essence of this whole business. 
 Their aimsand interests are as criminal and predatory as Germany’s. 
The war has opened our eyes, and we clearly see the barefacedrobber and plunderer in the guise of the defender of thefatherland. 
 This robbers’ raid must be countered by revolu -tionary action, by revolutionary creative effort. 
 True, it is not easy to achieve unity at such a difficult time, especially among the revolutionary peasants; but we believe in the cre -ative power and public -mindedness of the industrial work -ers, the vanguard of the revolution. 
 The workers are nowfully aware that as long as minds are swayed by the fairy -tale of a democratic republic and a Constituent Assembly, fifty million rubles will continue to be spent daily for war purposes that are disastrous to them, and they will neversecure their liberation from capitalist oppression. 
 It wasbecause they realised this that the workers created theirSoviets. 
 Similarly, the realities of life have taught the workers to realise that as long as the landowners are snugly installed in their mansions and magic castles, the right of assemblywill not exist, and will mean, if anything, the right to assem -ble only in the world to come. 
 You will agree that to promisethe workers freedom while leaving the mansions, the land,the factories and all wealth in the hands of the capitalists and landowners has hardly anything to do with liberty and equality. 
 We have only one maxim, one slogan: All whowork have the right to enjoy the benefits of life. 
 Idlers andparasites who suck the blood of the working people must bedeprived of these benefits. 
 And we proclaim: Everything forthe workers, everything for the working people! We know how hard all this is to achieve, we know the furious resistance the bourgeoisie are putting up, but webelieve in the ultimate victory of the workers, for they arebound to win if they were capable of extricating themselvesfrom the terrible hardships of the imperialist holocaustand of erecting the edifice of socialist revolution on the ruins of the edifice they destroyed. 
 And, in fact, forces are uniting everywhere. 
 Now that we have abolished private ownership of land, the workers of town and country are rapidly coming together. 
 And in the West, too, we see the workers’ class -consciousness awakening. 
 The British, French, Italian and other workers are making more and more appeals and demands indicating theapproaching triumph of the world revolution. 
 And ourtask today is to carry on our revolutionary work and toscorn the hypocrisy, the insolent outcries and lamen -tations of the predatory bourgeoisie. 
 We must pit all we have on the Czech front so as to crush this whole gang who put up liberty and equality as a smokescreen to conceal the shootingdown of hundreds and thousands of workers and peasants. 
 We have only one alternative: victory or death! Izvestia No. 
 188 Published according to September 1, 1918 the Izvestia text GREETINGS TO THE RED ARMY ON THE CAPTURE OF KAZAN Hearty greetings to the Red Army on its wonderful victory. 
 May it serve as a pledge that the alliance of workers and revolutionary peasants will finish off the bourgeoisie,break down all and every resistance by the exploiters andensure the victory of socialism all over the world. 
 Long live the world workers’ revolution! Lenin Written September 11, 1918 Published September 12, 1918 Published according to in Pravda No. 
 195 the manuscript LETTE R TO THE PRESIDIU M OF THE CONFERENCE OF PROLETARIA N CULTURA L AND EDUCATIONAL ORGANISATIO NS37 17. 
9. 
18 Dear Comrades, Many thanks for your good wishes, and the very best of luck in your work. 
 One of the chief conditions for the socialist revolution’s victory is that the working class must realise it has to ruleand that its rule should be carried through during the transi -tion period from capitalism to socialism. 
 The rule of theproletariat, the vanguard of all the working and exploited people, is essential in this transition period if classes are to be completely abolished, if the resistance of the exploitersis to be suppressed, and if the entire mass of the working andexploited people—crushed, downtrodden and disunited bycapitalism—are to be united around the urban workers andbrought in close alliance with them. 
 All our successes have been due to the workers grasping this and governing the state through their Soviets. 
 But the workers have not yet grasped this sufficiently and are often too timid in promoting workers to governing the state. 
 Fight for this, comrades! Let the proletarian cultural and educational organisations help in this. 
 That will be apledge of further success and the final victory of thesocialist revolution. 
 Greetings, V. 
 Ulyanov (Lenin ) Pravda No. 
 201, Published according to September 19, 1918 the manuscript TELEGRAM TO OFFICER CADETS IN PETROGRAD 18. 
9. 
18 To the District Commissar, 3 Cadet Line, Vasilyevsky Island, Petrograd Greetings to the 400 comrade workers who pass out today as Red Army officers and go to join the ranks. 
 The success of the Russian and world socialist revolution depends on the degree of energy the workers display in running the stateand commanding the army of working and exploited peoplefighting to overthrow the rule of capital. 
 I am sure there -fore that thousands and thousands of workers will followthe example of the four hundred; with such administrators and commanders the victory of communism is assured. 
 Lenin , Chairman of the Council of People’s Commissars Pravda No. 
 201, Published according to September 19, 1918 the manuscript THE CHARACTER OF OUR NEWSPAPERS Far too much space is being allotted to political agitation on outdated themes—to political ballyhoo—and far toolittle to the building of the new life, to the facts about it. 
 Why, instead of turning out 200 -400 lines, don’t we write twenty or even ten lines on such simple, generally known,clear topics with which the people are already fairly wellacquainted, like the foul treachery of the Mensheviks—thelackeys of the bourgeoisie—the Anglo -Japanese invasion to restore the sacred rights of capital, the American multi -millionaires baring their fangs against Germany, etc. 
, etc. 
?We must write about these things and note every new fact inthis sphere, but we need not write long articles and repeatold arguments; what is needed is to condemn in just a fewlines, “in telegraphic style”, the latest manifestation ofthe old, known and already evaluated politics. 
 The bourgeois press in the “good old bourgeois times” never mentioned the “holy of holies”—the conditions inprivately -owned factories, in the private enterprises. 
 This custom fitted in with the interests of the bourgeoisie. 
 Wemust radically break with it. 
 We have not broken with it. 
 So far our type of newspaper has not changed as it should in a society in transition from capitalism to socialism. 
 Less politics. 
 Politics has been “elucidated” fully and reduced to a struggle between the two camps: the insurrec -tionary proletariat and the handful of capitalist slaveowners(with the whole gang, right down to the Mensheviks andothers). 
 We may, and, I repeat, we must, speak very briefly about these politics. 
 More economics. 
 But not in the sense of “general” discus -sions, learned reviews, intellectual plans and similar piffle, for, I regret to say, they are all too often just piffle and noth -ing more. 
 By economics we mean the gathering, careful checking and study of the facts of the actual organisation of the new life. 
 Have real successes been achieved by big facto -ries, agricultural communes, the Poor Peasants’ Committees, and local Economic Councils in building up the new econ -omy? What, precisely, are these successes? Have they beenverified? Are they not fables, boasting, intellectual prom -ises (“things are moving”, “the plan has been drawn up”, “weare getting under way”, “we now vouch for”, “there is undoubt -ed improvement”, and other charlatan phrases of which “we”are such masters)? How have the successes been achieved?What must be done to extend them? Where is the black list with the names of the lagging facto -ries which since nationalisation have remained modelsof disorder, disintegration, dirt, hooliganism and parasit -ism? Nowhere to be found. 
 But there are such factories. 
 We shall not be able to do our duty unless we wage war against these “guardians of capitalist traditions”. 
 We shallbe jellyfish, not Communists, as long as we tolerate such fac -tories. 
 We have not learned to wage the class struggle in thenewspapers as skilfully as the bourgeoisie did. 
 Remember theskill with which it hounded its class enemies in the press, ridiculed them, disgraced them, and tried to sweep them away. 
And we? Doesn’t the class struggle in the epoch of the transi -tion from capitalism to socialism take the form of safeguard -ing the interests of the working class against the few, the groups and sections of workers who stubbornly cling to capi -talist traditions and continue to regard the Soviet state inthe old way: work as little and as badly as they can and grabas much money as possible from the state. 
 Aren’t there manysuch scoundrels, even among the compositors in Soviet printing works, among the Sormovo and Putilov workers, etc. 
? How many of them have we found, how many have weexposed and how many have we pilloried? The press is silent. 
 And if it mentions the subject at all it does so in a stereotyped, official way, not in the manner of arevolutionary press, not as an organ of the dictatorship of a class demonstrating that the resistance of the capitalists and of the parasites—the custodians of capitalist traditions—will be crushed with an iron hand. 
 The same with the war. 
 Do we harass cowardly or ineffi -cient officers? Have we denounced the really bad regiments to the whole of Russia? Have we “caught” enough of the bad types who should be removed from the army with the greatestpublicity for unsuitability, carelessness, procrastination,etc. 
? We are not yet waging an effective, ruthless andtruly revolutionary war against the specific wrongdoers. 
 We do very little to educate the people by living, concrete examples and models taken from all spheres of life, although that is the chief task of the press during the transition fromcapitalism to communism. 
 We give little attention to thataspect of everyday life inside the factories, in the villages and in the regiments where, more than anywhere else, the newis being built, where attention, publicity, public criticism, condemnation of what is bad and appeals to learn from the good are needed most. 
 Less political ballyhoo. 
 Fewer highbrow discussions. 
 Closer to life. 
 More attention to the way in which the workersand peasants are actually building the new in their everyday work, and more verification so as to ascertain the extent to which the new is communistic . 
 Pravda No. 
 202, Published according to September 20, 1918 the Pravda text Signed: N. 
 Lenin TELEGRA M TO THE PENZ A GUBERNI A EXECUTIVE COMMITTE E AND THE REVOLUTIONARY WAR COUNCI L OF THE FIRS T ARMY38 Moscow 22. 
9. 
18 The capture of Simbirsk, my home town, is a wonderful tonic, the best treatment for my wounds. 
 I feel a new lease of life and energy. 
 Congratulations to the Red Army men ontheir victory, and, on behalf of all working people, thanksfor all their sacrifices. 
 Published (without address, date and Published according to signature) September 25, 1918 in the Petrogradskaya Pravda Petrogradskaya Pravda No. 
 209 text checked with the Krasnaya Zvada textPublished in full January 27, 1935 in Krasnaya Zvezda No. 
 22 LETTE R TO RED ARM Y MEN WH O TOOK PAR T IN THE CAPTUR E OF KAZA N39 Comrades, You already know what tremendous significance Kazan’s capture has acquired for the whole Russian revolution. 
 It marked a turning -point in the soldiers’ mood, their change -over to firm, resolute and victorious actions. 
 The immensesacrifices you bore in battle are saving the Soviet Republic. 
The Republic’s strength in the fight against the imperialists depends on the army’s fortification. 
 So does the victory of socialism in Russia and all over the world. 
 With all my heartI greet the heroic Soviet troops, the army of the vanguard ofthe exploited fighting for the overthrow of the exploiters. 
Very best wishes for the future. 
 Comradely and communist greetings, V. 
 Ulyanov (Lenin ) Znamya Revolutsii (Kazan) No. 
 177, Published according to September 29, 1918 the Znamya Revolutsii text LETTE R TO A JOIN T SESSION OF THE ALL-RUSSI A CENTRA L EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE , THE MOSCO W SOVIE T AND REPRESENTATIVE S OF FACTORY COMMITTEE S AND TRAD E UNIONS OCTOBE R 3, 191840 Germany is in the throes of a political crisis. 
 The panicky bewilderment both of the government and of all the exploit -ing classes in genaral has become abundantly clear to the whole people. 
 The hopelessness of the military situation and the lack of support for the ruling classes among the working people have been exposed at one go. 
 This crisismeans either that the revolution has begun or at any ratethat the people have clearly realised it is inevitable andimminent. 
 The government has morally resigned and is in a state of hysterical indecision, wavering between a military dictator -ship and a coalition cabinet. 
 But a military dictatorship has,virtually speaking, been under test ever since the outbreakof the war, and now it has ceased to be feasible because thearmy has become unreliable. 
 And the admission of Scheide -mann and Co. 
 to the cabinet would only hasten the revolu -tionary outburst and make it more widespread, moreconscious, more firm and determined after the thoroughexposure of the pitiful impotence of these lackeys of thebourgeoisie, of these corrupt individuals, who are just likeour Mensheviks and Socialist -Revolutionaries, like the Hen -dersons and Sidney Webbs in Britain, the Albert Thomas and Renaudels in France, and so on. 
 The crisis in Germany has only begun. 
 It will inevitably end in the transfer of political power to the German proletar -iat. 
 The Russian proletariat is following events with the keenest attention and enthusiasm. 
 Now even the blindest workers in the various countries will see that the Bolsheviks were right in basing their whole tactics on the support of theworld workers’ revolution, and in not fearing to bear allsorts of heavy sacrifices. 
 Today even the most ignorant willsee how unspeakably vile the betrayal of socialism by theMensheviks and Socialist -Revolutionaries was when they formed an alliance with the predatory British and French bourgeoisie, ostensibly to secure the annulment of theBrest -Litovsk Peace Treaty. 
 And the Soviet government will certainly not help the German imperialists by attempt -ing to violate the Brest -Litovsk Peace Treaty, to tear it up at a moment when the anti -imperialist forces in Germany are beginning to seethe and boil, and when the spokesmen for the German bourgeoisie are beginning to excusethemselves to their people for having concluded such apeace treaty, and to search for a way of “changing” theirpolicy. 
 But the workers of Russia are not merely following events with attention and enthusiasm. 
 They are demanding that everything be done to help the German workers , who have the gravest trials ahead of them, a most difficult transition fromslavery to freedom, a most stubborn struggle against their own and British imperialism . 
 The defeat of German impe -rialism will for a while have the effect of increasing the insolence, brutality, reaction, and annexatory attempts of British and French imperialism. 
 The Bolshevik working class of Russia has always been internationalist in action, unlike those scoundrels, the heroesand leaders of the Second International, who either resortedto outright betrayal by forming an alliance with their bour -geoisie, or tried, by phrase -mongering and excuses (as Kaut -sky, Otto Bauer and Co. 
 did), to avoid revolution, and op -posed all bold and great revolutionary action, all sacrifice ofnarrow national interests for the sake of furthering the work -ers’ revolution. 
 The Russian workers will understand that very soon they will have to make the greatest sacrifices in the cause of internationalism. 
 The time is approaching whencircumstances may require us to come to the aid of the German people, who are struggling for their liberation from their own imperialism, against British and French imperialism. 
 Let us begin to prepare at once. 
 Let us show that the Russian worker is capable of working much harder, offighting and dying much more self -sacrificingly, when the world workers’ revolution is at stake, as well as the Russianrevolution. 
 First of all, let us multiply our efforts in storing up grain stocks. 
 Let us resolve that every large elevator will put asidesome grain to help the German workers should they be hardpressed in their struggle for emancipation from the imperial -ist monsters and brutes. 
 Let every Party organisation, everytrade union, every factory and workshop, etc. 
, form special connections with several rural areas of their own selection with the object of strengthening the alliance with thepeasants, helping and enlightening them, vanquishing thekulaks, and gathering up all surpluses of grain to the lastounce. 
 Let us, similarly, multiply our efforts in creating a prole -tarian Red Army. 
 The turning -point has arrived—we all know it, we all see and feel it. 
 The workers and labouringpeasants have had a respite from the horrors of imperialistslaughter, they have realised and learnt from experience thatwar must be waged against the oppressors in defence of thegains of their revolution, the revolution of the working people, of their government, the Soviet government. 
 An army is being created, a Red Army of workers and poor peasants,who are prepared to make any sacrifice in defending social -ism. 
 The army is growing in strength and is being temperedin battle with the Czechs and whiteguards. 
 A firm foundationhas been laid, and we must now hurry to erect the edifice itself. 
 We had decided to have an army of one million men by the spring; now we need an army of three million. 
 We can haveit. 
 And we shall have it . 
 In these past few days world history has given tremendous momentum to the world workers’ revolution. 
 The most kaleidoscopic changes are possible, there may be attempts to form an alliance between German and Anglo -French imperialism against the Soviet government. 
 And we too must speed up our preparations. 
 We must mul -tiply our efforts. 
 Let this be the slogan for the anniversary of the Great October Workers’ Revolution! Let it be a pledge to the coming victories of the world workers’ revolution! N. 
 Lenin Pravda No. 
 213, Published according to October 4, 1918 the Pravda text THE PROLETARIAN REVOLUTION AND THE RENEGADE KAUTSKY This is the title of a pamphlet * I have begun to write in criticism of Kautsky’s pamphlet, The Dictatorship of the Proletariat , which has just appeared in Vienna. 
 But as this work is taking longer than I had anticipated, I have decidedto ask Pravda to find space for a short article on the subject. 
 Over four years of a most exhausting and reactionary war have done their work. 
 One can feel the impending proletarianrevolution in Europe—in Austria, Italy, Germany, France and even in Britain (very significant, for example, is the article “Confessions of a Capitalist” in the July numberof the arch -opportunist Socialist Review ,41 edited by the semi -liberal Ramsay MacDonald). 
 And at a time like this, Mr. 
 Kautsky, leader of the Second International, comes out with a book on the dictatorship of the proletariat—in other words, on the proletarian revolu -tion—that is a hundred times more disgraceful, outrageous and renegade than Bernstein’s notorious Premises of Social-ism. 
 Nearly twenty years have elapsed since the appearance of that renegade book, and now Kautsky repeats this rene -gacy in an even grosser form! Only a very small part of the book deals with the Russian Bolshevik revolution as such. 
 Kautsky repeats every one ofthe Mensheviks’ pearls of wisdom in a way that would makethe Russian worker split his sides laughing. 
 Just imagine, forexample, what goes by the name of “Marxism”: the argu -ment—peppered with quotations from the semi -liberal works by the semi -liberal Maslov—that the rich peasants are *See present volume, pp. 
 227 -325. 
— Ed. 
 trying to appropriate the land (novel!), that they find high grain prices profitable, and so on. 
 Then our “Marxist” makes the following contemptuous, and utterly liberal, statement: “The poor peasant is recognised here [that is,by the Bolsheviks in the Soviet Republic] to be a permanentand wholesale product of the socialist agrarian reform underthe ‘dictatorship of the proletariat’. 
” (P. 
 48 of Kautsky’spamphlet. 
) Fine. 
 Here is a socialist, a Marxist, who tries to prove to us the bourgeois nature of the revolution, and who at the same time scoffs at the organisation of the poor peasants,quite in the spirit of Maslov, Potresov and the Cadets . 
 “The expropriation of the rich peasants only introduces a new ele -ment of unrest and civil war into the production process, which urgent -ly needs peace and security for its recovery. 
” (P. 
 49. 
) Incredible, but there we are. 
 These are the very words, not of Savinkov or Milyukov, but of Kautsky! Kautsky does not surprise us since we in Russia have seen so many cases of “Marxism” being used as a screen by defend -ers of the kulaks. 
 For the benefit of the European reader, Ishould perhaps dwell in greater detail on this despicable kow -towing to the bourgeoisie and the liberal fear of civil war. 
But for the Russian worker and peasant it is enough to pointone’s finger at Kautsky’s renegacy—and pass on. 
 * * * Nearly nine -tenths of Kautsky’s book is devoted to a general theoretical question of the utmost importance, thequestion of the relation between the dictatorship of the pro -letariat and “democracy”. 
 And it is here that Kautsky’s complete break with Marxism is particularly evident. 
 Kautsky assures his reader—in a perfectly serious and extremely “learned” tone—that what Marx meant by “revo -lutionary dictatorship of the proletariat” was not a “ form of governing ” that precludes democracy, but a state , namely, “a state of rule”. 
 And the rule of the proletariat, as the major -ity of the population, is possible with the strictest observanceof democracy, and, for instance, the Paris Commune,which was in fact a dictatorship of the proletariat, was elected by universal suffrage. 
 “The fact that Marx thought that in England and America the transition [to communism] might take place peacefully, i. 
e. 
, in a democratic way, proves” that when he spoke of the dictatorship of the proletariat Marx didnot have in mind a “form of governing” (or a form of govern -ment, Regierungsform ) (pp. 
 20 -21). 
 Incredible, but there we are! That is exactly the way Kautsky argues and he angrily accuses the Bolsheviks of violating “democracy” in their Constitution and throughout their policy; and he takes every opportunity to energetical -ly preach “the democratic instead of the dictatorial method”. 
 This is a complete desertion to the opportunists (those like David, Kolb and other pillars of German social -chauvinism, or the English Fabians42 and Independents,43 or the French and Italian reformists), who have declared more frankly andhonestly that they do not accept Marx’s doctrine of the dic -tatorship of the proletariat on the ground that it runscounter to democracy. 
 It is a complete reversion to the views of the pre -Marxist German socialists, who used to claim they wanted a “free people’s state”, to the views of the petty -bourgeois democrats, who did not understand that every state is a machine for the suppression of one class by another. 
 It is a complete renunciation of the proletarian revolution, which is replaced by the liberal theory of “winning a major -ity” and “utilising democracy”! Kautsky the renegade hascompletely forgotten, distorted and thrown overboard every -thing Marx and Engels taught for forty years, from 1852 to 1891, demonstrating the need for the proletariat to “smash”the bourgeois state machine. 
 To analyse Kautsky’s theoretical mistakes in detail would mean repeating what I have said in The State and Revolu -tion. 
* There is no need for that. 
 I shall only say briefly: Kautsky has renounced Marxism by forgetting that every state is a machine for the suppression of one class by another,and that the most democratic bourgeois republic is a machine for the oppression of the proletariat by the bourgeoisie. 
 The dictatorship of the proletariat, the proletarian state, which is a machine for the suppression of the bourgeoisie by *See present edition, Vol. 
 25, pp. 
 385 -497. 
— Ed. 
 the proletaria t, is not a “form of governing”, but a state of a different type. 
 Suppression is necessary because the bourgeo i-sie will always furiously resist being expropriated. 
 (The argument that Marx in the seventies allowed for the possibility of a peaceful transition to socialism in England and Americ a44 is completely fallacious, or, to put it bluntly, dishonest in that it is juggling with quotations and refer -ences. 
 Firstly, Marx regarded it as an exception even then. 
 Secondly, in those days monopoly capitalism, i. 
e. 
, imperial -ism, did not exist. 
 Thirdly, in England and America there was no militarist clique then— as there is now —serving as the chief apparatus of the bourgeois state machine. 
) You cannot have liberty, equality and so on where there is suppression. 
 That is why Engels said: “So long as the pro -letariat still needs the stale, it does not need it in the inter -ests of freedom but in order to hold down its adversaries,and as soon as it becomes possible to speak of freedom thestate as such ceases to exist. 
” 45 Bourgeois democracy, which is invaluable in educating the proletariat and training it for the struggle, is always narrow, hypocritical, spurious and false; it always remains democracy for the rich and a swindle for the poor. 
 Proletarian democracy suppresses the exploiters, the bour -geoisie—and is therefore not hypocritical, does not promise them freedom and democracy—and gives the working people genuine democracy . 
 Only Soviet Russia has given the prole -tariat and the whole vast labouring majority of Russia afreedom and democracy unprecedented, impossible and incon -ceivable in any bourgeois democratic republic, by, forexample, taking the palaces and mansions away from the bour -geoisie (without which freedom of assembly is sheer hypocri -sy), by taking the print -shops and stocks of paper away from the capitalists (without which freedom of the press for thenation’s labouring majority is a lie), and by replacing bour -geois parliamentarism by the democratic organisation of the Soviets , which are a thousand times nearer to the people and more democratic than the most democratic bourgeois parlia -ment. 
 And so on . 
 Kautsky has thrown overboard ... the “class struggle” as applied to democracy! Kautsky has become a downrightrenegade and a lackey of the bourgeoisie. 
 * * * I must mention, in passing, a few gems of his renegacy. 
 Kautsky has to admit that the Soviet form of organisation is of world -wide, and not only of Russian significance, that it is one of the “most important phenomena of our times”,and that it promises to acquire “decisive significance” in the future great “battles between capital and labour”. 
 But, imitating the wisdom of the Mensheviks, who have happilysided with the bourgeoisie against the proletariat, Kautsky“deduces” that the Soviets are all right as “battle organisa -tions”, but not as “state organisations”. 
 Marvellous! Form up in Soviets, you proletarians and poor peasants! But, for God’s sake, don’t you dare win! Don’t even think of winning! The moment you will and van -quish the bourgeoisie, that will be the end of you; for youmust not be “state” organisations in a proletarian state. 
 Infact, as soon as you have won you must break up! What a marvellous Marxist this man Kautsky is! What an inimitable “theoretician” of renegacy! Gem No. 
 2. 
 Civil war is the “mortal enemy” of “social revolution”, for, as we have already heard, the latter “needspeace [for the rich?] and security” (for the capitalists?). 
 Workers of Europe, don’t think of revolution until you have found a bourgeoisie who will not hire Savinkov and Dan, Dutov and Krasnov, Czechs and kulaks to wage civil war on you! Marx wrote in 1870 that the chief hope lay in the practice in arms that the war had given the French workers. 
 46 What Kautsky the “Marxist” expects of four years of war is not theuse of arms by the workers against the bourgeoisie (Heaven forbid, that wouldn’t really be “democratic”!), but ... the conclusion of a nice little peace by the nice little capitalists! Gem No. 
 3. 
 Civil war has another unpleasant side to it: whereas “democracy” provides for the “protection of the minor -ity” (as—we might note in parenthesis—those in France whostood up for Dreyfus, and people like Liebknecht, Maclean or Debs in more recent times, have learned so well from their own experience), civil war (mark that!) “threatens the van -quished with complete annihilation”. 
 Well, isn’t this man Kautsky a real revolutionary? He is heart and soul for revolution ... provided there is no seri -ous struggle threatening annihilation! He has completely“overcome” the old errors of old Engels, who so enthusiasti -cally lauded the educational value of violent revolutions. 
47 Like the “serious” historian he is, he has completely renouncedthe delusions of those who said that civil war steels the ex -ploited and teaches them to build a new society without exploiters. 
 Gem No. 
 4. 
 Viewed historically, was the dictatorship of the workers and petty bourgeoisie in the 1789 Revolutiongreat and beneficial? Certainly not. 
 For along came Napoleon. 
“The dictatorship of the lower sections of the populationpaves the way for the dictatorship of the sword” (p. 
 26). 
 Like all liberals, to whose camp lie has deserted, our “seri -ous” historian is firmly convinced that in countries which have not known the “dictatorship of the lower sections”—Germany,for example—there has never been a dictatorship of thesword. 
 Germany has never been distinguished from Franceby a grosser and viler dictatorship of the sword—that is all slander thought up by Marx and Engels, who brazenly lied when they said that there have so far been a greater love offreedom and a greater pride of the oppressed among the“people” in France than in England or Germany, and that itwas precisely her revolutions that France has to thank for this. 
 ...But enough! One would have to write a whole pamphlet to enumerate all the gems of renegacy of that despicable rene -gade Kautsky. 
 * * * I must say a word or two about Mr. 
 Kautsky’s “internation -alism”. 
 He inadvertently cast light upon it himself by his most sympathetic way of portraying the internationalism ofthe Mensheviks, who, dear Mr. 
 Kautsky assures us, were alsoZimmerwaldists 48 and, if you please, are “brothers” of the Bolsheviks! Here is his lovely little picture of the “Zimmerwaldism” of the Mensheviks: “The Mensheviks wanted universal peace. 
 They wanted all those in the war to accept the slogan: no annexations or indemnities. 
 Until this would have been achieved, the Russian army, in their opinion, should have maintained itself in a stale of fighting readiness But the wretched Bolsheviks “disorganised” the army and concluded thewretched Brest -Litovsk Peace Treaty .... 
 And K autsky says as clear as clear can he that the Constituent Assembly shouldhave been preserved, and the Bolsheviks should not havetaken power. 
 So internationalism means supporting one ’s “own ” impe -rialist government, as the Mensheviks and Socialist -Revolu -tionaries supported Kerensky, it means concealing its secret treaties, hoodwinking the people with fancy phrases, such asthat we “demand” the savage beasts be tame, we “demand”the imperialist governments “accept the slogan of no annexa -tions or indemnities”. 
 That, in Kautsky’s opinion, is internationalism. 
In our opinion it is sheer renegacy. 
Internationalism means breaking with one’s own social -chauvinists (i. 
e. 
, defence advocates) and with one’s own imperialist government; it means waging a revolutionary struggle against that government and overthrowing it, and being ready to make the greatest national sacrifices (evendown to a Brest -Litovsk Peace Treaty), if it should benefit the development of the world workers’ revolution. 
 We all know very well that Kautsky and his friends (Ströbel, Bernstein, and the rest) were greatly “put out” by the Brest -Litovsk Peace: they would have liked us to have made a “gesture” ... that would at once have turned overpower in Russia to the bourgeoisie! These dim -witted but all too nice and kind German petty bourgeois were not interest -ed in the proletarian Soviet Republic—the first countryin the world to overthrow its imperialism by revolutionary means—maintaining itself until the revolution took place in Europe, fanning the flames of the conflagration in othercountries (the petty bourgeoisie dread a conflagration in Eu -rope, they dread civil war, which would disturb “peace and security”). 
 No, what interested them was to maintain in all countries the petty-bourgeois nationalism which calls itself “internationalism” because of its “moderation and propriety”. 
 If only the Russian Republic had remained bourgeoisand ... had waited ... then everybody on earth would have been a good, moderate, non -predatory, petty -bourgeois nationalist—and that, in fact, would have been interna -tionalism! That is the line of thought of the Kautskyites in Germany, the Longuetists in France, the Independents (I. 
L. 
P. 
) inEngland, Turati and his “comrades” in renegacy in Italy,and the rest of the crowd. 
 By now only an utter idiot can fail to see that we were not only right in overthrowing our bourgeoisie (and their lackeys, the Mensheviks and Socialist -Revolutionaries), but also in concluding the Brest -Litovsk Peace Treaty after our open appeal for universal peace, backed by the publica -tion and annulment of the secret treaties, had been rejectedby the bourgeoisie of the Entente. 
 In the first place, if we had not concluded the Brest -Litovsk Peace Treaty, we would at once have surrendered power to the Russian bourgeoisieand thus have done untold damage to the world socialistrevolution. 
 In the second place, at the cost of national sacri -fices, we preserved such an international revolutionary influence that today we have Bulgaria directly imitating us, Austria and Germany in a state of ferment, both imperialist systems weakened, while we have grown stronger and begun to create a real proletarian army. 
 From the tactics of Kautsky the renegade it follows that the German workers should now defend their homelandtogether with the bourgeoisie and dread a German revolution most of all, for the British might impose a new edition of the Brest -Litovsk Peace on it. 
 There’s renegacy for you. 
 There’s petty -bourgeois nationalism. 
 We, however, say that while the loss of the Ukraine was a grave national sacrifice, it helped to steel and strengthenthe workers and poor peasants of the Ukraine as revolution -ary fighters for the world workers’ revolution. 
 The Ukraine’ssuffering was the world revolution’s gain, for the Germantroops were corrupted, German imperialism was weakened,and the German, Ukrainian and Russian revolutionary work -ers were drawn closer together . 
 It would of course he “nicer” if we could overthrow both Wilhelm and Wilson simply by war. 
 But that is utter nonsense. 
 We cannot overthrow them by a war from without. 
But we can speed up their internal disintegration. 
 We have achieved that on an immense scale by the Soviet, proletarian revolution. 
 The German workers would do it even more successfully if they began a revolution disregarding national sacrifices (that alone is internationalism), if they said (and backedtheir word by actions ) that they prize the interests of the world workers’ revolution higher than the integrity, security and peace of any national state, and of their own in partic -ular . 
 * * * Europe’s greatest misfortune and danger is that it has no revolutionary party. 
 It has parties of traitors like theScheidemanns, Renaudels, Hendersons, Webbs and Co. 
, and of servile souls like Kautsky. 
 But it has no revolutionary party. 
 Of course, a mighty, popular revolutionary movement may rectify this deficiency, but it is nevertheless a seriousmisfortune and a grave danger. 
 That is why we must do our utmost to expose renegades like Kautsky, thereby supporting the revolutionary groups of genuine internationalist workers, who are to be found inall countries. 
 The proletariat will very soon turn away fromthe traitors and renegades and follow these groups, drawingand training leaders from their midst. 
 No wonder the bour -geoisie of all countries are howling about “world Bolshe -vism”. 
 World Bolshevism will conquer the world bourgeoisie. 
 9. 
10. 
18 Pravda No. 
 219, October 11, 1918 Published according to Signed: N. 
 Lenin the manuscript REPOR T AT A JOIN T SESSIO N OF THE ALL-RUSSIA CENTRA L EXECUTIV E COMMITTEE, THE MOSCO W SOVIET , FACTORY COMMITTEE S AND TRAD E UNIONS OCTOBE R 22, 191849 (Storm y, prolonged applause and shouts of “hurra h”. 
) Com-rades, I think our present situation for all its contradictions, might be expressed by saying, firstly, that never before havewe been so near the world workers’ revolution, and, secondly, that never have we been in such a perilous position. 
 It is these two propositions, especially the second, that I want togo into today. 
 I think the people at large scarcely realisethe full danger bearing down on us, and as we can only actwith popular support, the chief task of the representativesof the Soviet government is to bring home to the people the full truth of the present situation, however difficult this may sometimes be. 
 As far as our being near the world social -ist revolution is concerned, I shall be brief since it has beenspoken about time and again. 
 Indeed, one of the chiefreproaches levelled at the Soviet government both by thebourgeoisie and the petty bourgeoisie who have lost faith in socialism, as well as by many so -called socialists who are used to times of peace and never did believe in socialism, is that we are taking a rash step in carrying through thesocialist revolution in Russia, for the revolution in theWest is not yet ripe. 
 Comrades, this is the fifth year of the war and the universal collapse of imperialism is as plain as can be; everyone cannow see revolution must come in every country in the war. 
And we, who were not given more than a few days or weeks at the beginning, have done more in this year of revolution than any proletarian party in the world has ever done. 
 Our revolution has become a world -wide phenomenon. 
 Even the entire bourgeoisie say that Bolshevism is a world -wide phenomenon. 
 This admission goes to show that our revolu -tion has spread from the East to the West and is falling onmore and more receptive soil. 
 You know that revolution hasflared up in Bulgaria. 
 The Bulgarian soldiers have begun to form Soviets. 
 And now news has come that Soviets are being set up in Serbia too. 
 Even though the Anglo -French Entente is promising the peoples thousands of blessings if theyrebel and break with Germany, even though the capitalistsof America, Britain and France, the richest and most power -ful in the world, are so lavish with their promises, it is becoming obvious that the bourgeoisie of the various small countries into which Austria is now disintegrating cannothold out under any circumstances, that their rule and powerin these countries will be short -lived and transitory, for the workers’ revolution is knocking on the door everywhere. 
 The bourgeoisie of individual countries know that the only way they can hold on to power in their states is with the help of foreign bayonets. 
 And we see that revolution hasbegun not only in Austria, but even in Germany, both ofwhose positions seemed so stable only a little while ago. 
News has come that the German press is already talking aboutthe Kaiser’s abdication and that the press of the Independent Social -Democratic Party50 has already received permission from the Chancellor to talk about a German republic. 
 Thatcertainly is something. 
 We know demoralisation is increasingamong the troops and that there are direct appeals for anarmy mutiny. 
 We know that revolutionary military commit -tees have been set up in Eastern Germany and that they are issuing revolutionary publications which are stirring up the soldiers. 
 There is therefore every justification to say thatrevolution is growing in leaps and bounds. 
 And we are notthe only ones to say so; it is being said by all Germans in thewar party and among the bourgeoisie who feel that the mini -sters are tottering, that the people do not trust them, and that they and their government will not hold on much longer. 
 That is what everybody who knows anything about the state ofaffairs is saying, which just goes to show how inevitable a popular revolution, and perhaps a proletarian revolution, has become in Germany. 
 We know very well what an immense workers’ movement has sprung up in other countries as well. 
 We saw how Gompers went to Italy and, with Entente money and the help of all the Italian bourgeoisie and socia l-patriots, toured every town in Italy calling upon the Italian workers to carry on the imperialist war. 
 We saw how the Italian socialist papers wrote articles about this in which all that was left was Gompers’s name, after the censor had deleted everything else; or articles which jeered: “Gompers is banqueting and tongu e-wagging. 
” And the bourgeois papers admitted Gompers was hissed everywhere. 
 The bourgeois papers wrote: “The Italian workers are behaving as if they would allow only Lenin and Trotsky to tour Italy. 
” During the war the Italian Socialist Part y51 has made tremendous strides forward, that is, to the left. 
 We know there have been too many patriots among the workers in France; they were told that Paris and French territory were in grave danger. 
 But there, too, the workers’ attitude is changing. 
 There were cries of “Hurrah for the Socialist Republic! ” at the last congress ,52 when a letter was read about what the Allies, the British and French im -perialists, were doing. 
 And yesterday news was received that a meeting had been held in Paris attended by two thousandmetalworkers, which hailed the Soviet Republic in Russia. 
We see that of the three socialist parties in Great Britain, 53 only one, the Independent Socialist Party, is not openly sup -porting the Bolsheviks, whereas the British Socialist Partyand the Socialist Labour Party of Scotland have definitelyproclaimed their support for the Bolsheviks. 
 Bolshevism isalso beginning to spread in Britain. 
 And the Spanish partiesare hailing the Russian Bolsheviks at their congresses 54 although they had formerly sided with British and Frenchimperialism and had had only one or two men on the out -break of the war with even a remote conception of whatinternationalists were. 
 Bolshevism has become the world -wide theory and tactics of the international proletariat!(Applause . 
) It has accomplished a thoroughgoing socialist revolution for all the world to see. 
 To be for or against theBolsheviks is actually the dividing line among socialists. 
As a result of what Bolshevism has done, a programme for the creation of a workers’ state is the vital question of the day. 
 Workers who had no idea of what was going on in Rus -sia, because they only read the bourgeois papers which werefull of lies and slander, began to realise, on seeing the work -ers’ government winning one victory after another over itscounter -revolutionaries, that our tactics and the revolution -ary form of action of our workers’ government was the onlyway out of this war. 
 Last Wednesday there was a demonstra -tion in Berlin, and the workers expressed their disgust withthe Kaiser by trying to march past his palace; then they pro -ceeded to the Russian Embassy to express their solidaritywith the actions of the Russian Government. 
 That is what Europe has come to in this fifth year of war! That is why we say we have never been so near the world revolution, it has never been so obvious that the Russian workers have established their might. 
 It is clear that mil -lions and scores of millions of workers of the world willfollow our example. 
 That is why, I repeat, we have never beenso near the world revolution, and never have we been in sucha perilous position, because this is the first time Bolshevism has been regarded as a world force. 
 It had seemed to be only a result of the fatigue of the Russian soldiers, an outburstof discontent on the part of the war -weary Russian soldiers; it had seemed that as soon as this discontent had passed andpeace had been established, even a peace of the most coercivecharacter, all steps towards building a new state and towards socialist reforms would have been crushed. 
 Everyone had been certain of that, but it turned out that as soon as weemerged from the imperialist war, which ended in very harshpeace terms, to take the first steps in building our state, assoon as we were able to give the peasants a real chance of liv -ing without landowners, of establishing relations against the landowners, and of convincing themselves in practice that they were building their own lives on the expropriated land,really for the labouring people and not for the kulaks or thenew capitalists; as soon as the workers saw they had a chanceto build their lives without capitalists and learn thatdifficult but great business without which they will never escape from exploitation—it became obvious to all, and was shown in practice, that no force, no counter -revolution could overthrow the Soviet government. 
 It took months before we in Russia arrived at this convic -tion. 
 It is said that in the countryside it was only in the summer of 1918, only towards autumn, that the peasants came to realise the meaning and significance of our revolu -tion. 
 In the town this was realised some time ago, but it tookmany a long month for it to reach every district, every remoterural area and village, for the peasant to see from his ownexperience, not from books or speeches, that the land has to go to those who till it, and not to the kulak, and that the kulak has to be fought, has to be defeated by organisation, thatthe revolts which swept over the country this summer weresupported by the landowners, kulaks and whiteguards; tolearn from his own bitter experience, at his own cost, whatthe rule of the Constituent Assembly meant. 
 And now, the countryside is emerging steeled and tempered, and the mass of poor peasants, who do not exploit the labour of others, haveonly now learnt from their own experience, not from books,from which the working people will never derive firm convic -tions, that Soviet government means the government of theexploited working people, and that now every village can proceed to lay the foundations of a new, socialist Russia. 
 It took many long months for us to be able to say with conviction, basing ourselves on the reports of people withpractical experience, that after 1918 in the rest of Russia,too, in every village, however remote, the people know whatSoviet government means and uphold it. 
 For the peasants have seen what a menace the capitalists and landowners are. 
 They have also seen the difficulties of the socialist transfor -mation, yet were not deterred; they said: “We shall put ourmillions of hands to this work; we have learnt a lot in ayear, and we shall learn even more. 
” This is what scores ofmillions in Russia are now saying with full conviction, on the basis of their own experience. 
 This is just getting through to the West -European bour -geoisie as well. 
 Up to now they had not taken the Bolshe -viks seriously; now they begin to realise that the only stableform of state has been set up here, a state which workshand in hand with the working people and can rouse them to real heroic self -sacrifice. 
 And when this workers’ state began to infect Europe, it turned out that this was by no meanssomething peculiar to Russia alone, and that four years of war had caused demoralisation of the armies all over the world. 
 Before, they used to say that owing to her backward -ness and inefficiency, only Russia had reached such a stagewhen her army had fallen to pieces in the fourth year of war,and that this could never happen in civilised, parliamentarycountries. 
 Now, however, everybody can see that after four years of world war, when millions have been slaughtered and crippled for the profit of the capitalists, and when there are tens of thousands of deserters, this extraordinary thingis happening in Austria as well as Russia, and even in Ger -many, which boasts of her good order. 
 When that happened,the world bourgeoisie realised they had to contend with amore serious enemy, and they began to rally together; and the nearer we approached the world workers’ revolution, the more the counter -revolutionary bourgeoisie rallied together. 
 In some countries people are still ignoring revolution, just as in October the coalition ministers ignored the Bolshe -viks and said Russia would never fall under Bolshevik rule. 
 In France, for example, they say the Bolsheviks are a gang of traitors who are selling their people to the Germans. 
The French bourgeoisie are more to be excused for sayingthat than the Left Socialist -Revolutionaries, for it is only to be expected that the bourgeoisie will spend millions onfabricating lies. 
 But when the French bourgeoisie saw Bolshe -vism developing in France and even non -revolutionary parties backing the Bolsheviks with revolutionary slogans, theysaw they were confronted with a more formidable enemy—the collapse of imperialism and the superiority of the workersin the revolutionary struggle. 
 Everyone knows that the danger to the workers’ revolu -tion is particularly great just now owing to the imperialistwar, because the workers’ revolution develops unevenly indifferent countries, since the conditions of political lifediffer. 
 In one country the proletariat is too weak and inanother it is stronger. 
 In one country the top section ofworkers is weak, and in other countries the bourgeoisie are able to split the ranks of the workers for a time as was the case in Britain and France. 
 That is why the workers’ revolu -tion develops unevenly, and that is why the bourgeoisie recognised that their most powerful enemy is the revolution -ary proletariat. 
 They are rallying together to ward off the collapse of world imperialism. 
 Now our situation has changed and events are moving tremendously fast. 
 At first there were two groups of imperial -ist marauders who tried to annihilate each other, but nowthey see—especially by the example of German imperialism,which had only recently considered itself the match of Britain and France—that their chief enemy is the revolutionary proletariat. 
 Now, when Germany is being torn apart by therevolutionary movement at home, the British and Frenchimperialists consider themselves masters of the world. 
They are convinced their chief enemy is the Bolsheviks andthe world revolution. 
 The more the revolution develops, the more the bourgeoisie rally together. 
 That is why some of us, and many especially among the people at large, whoare now convinced they can defeat our counter -revolutiona -ries—the Cossacks, officers and Czechs—and think that set -tles everything, do not realise this is not enough for us now,that there is a new enemy, a far more formidable one: British and French imperialism. 
 So far this enemy has not had very much success in Russia, as, for example, in the case ofthe Archangel landing. 
 A French writer who published anewspaper called La victoire 55 said that victory over the Germans was not enough for France, that she also neededvictory over Bolshevism, and that the campaign against Russia was not an attack on Germany, but a campaign against the Bolshevik revolutionary proletariat and againstthe contagion that is spreading all over the world. 
 That is why a new danger has appeared, a danger which has not yet fully developed and is not yet fully apparent, adanger which the British and French imperialists are plotting surreptitiously and which we must clearly realise so as to open the people’s eyes to it through their leaders. 
For although it is true the British and French have notachieved any great success in Siberia or in Archangel—infact they have suffered a number of setbacks—they are nowdirecting their efforts for an attack on Russia from the South, either through the Dardanelles and the Black Sea, or else overland, through Bulgaria and Rumania. 
 As they keeptheir moves a military secret, we cannot tell how far advanced the preparations for this campaign are, and which of the two plans, or perhaps even a third, has been selected; there lies the danger, for we cannot know for certain. 
 But we do know absolutely for certain that these preparations arebeing made, for the newspapers of these countries are notalways very cautious, and now and again some journalistopenly announces the chief aims, and discards all the falsetalk about a league of nations. 
 Among the German ruling circles, we now clearly perceive two tendencies, two plans of salvation—if salvation is stillpossible. 
 Some say: Let us play for time and keep going untilspring, and perhaps we may yet be able to put up militaryresistance along the fortified line. 
 Others see their chief hopeof salvation in Britain and France; they concentrate on reach -ing an agreement with Britain and France against the Bol -sheviks; their attention is centred on this. 
 And while it is truethat Wilson now replies to peace overtures with a blunt andcontemptuous refusal, this is scarcely enough to induce theparty of the German capitalists who are seeking agreementwith Britain to renounce their plans. 
 They know that agree -ments are sometimes reached tacitly, and that they may berewarded if they are of service to the British and Frenchcapitalists against the Bolsheviks. 
 In capitalist society theydo pay for services rendered. 
 They think: “Perhaps if we helpthe British and French capitalists grab something, they willleave a portion of the spoils for us. 
 ” One good turn deserves another—such are the ethics of the capitalist world. 
 And I think that in laying claim to a certain share of British andFrench capital, these people know what they are up to andare counting on billions, no less. 
 Some of these gentlemenare past masters at this sort of calculations. 
 A tacit bargain has most definitely been struck between the German bourgeoisie and that of the Entente powers. 
 The gist of it is that the British and French say to the Germans:“We shall get to the Ukraine, but don’t withdraw yourtroops until our occupational forces arrive, otherwise theworkers will take power and the Soviet government willtriumph there too. 
 ” That is the way they reason, for they realise that the bourgeoisie of all the occupied countries— Finland, the Ukraine, Poland—know they cannot hold out for asingle day if the German army of occupation withdraws. 
 And that is why the bourgeoisie of these countries—which yester -day sold themselves to the Germans, went cap in hand to the German imperialists and concluded an alliance with them against their own workers, just as the Ukrainian Mensheviksdid and the Socialist -Revolutionaries did in Tiflis— are now ready to sell their country to anybody. 
 Yesterdaythey sold it to the Germans, and today they are selling it tothe British and French. 
 That is the sort of bargaining going on behind the scenes. 
 Seeing that the British and French bour -geoisie are winning, they are all going over to them and pre -paring to make a deal with the British and French imperial -ists against us and at our expense. 
 When they tell their future Anglo -French multimillionaire master they are siding with him, they say: “Your Excellency will defeat the Bolsheviks, you must help us, because the Germans will not save us. 
” This conspiracy by the bourgeoi -sie of all countries against the revolutionary workers and theBolsheviks is increasingly taking shape and becoming openlyblatant. 
 And it is our direct duty to indicate this danger to theworkers and peasants of all countries in the war. 
 Take the Ukraine as an example. 
 Imagine her position and what the workers and intelligent Communists must do inthe present situation. 
 On the one hand they see the indigna -tion against the German imperialists, against the dreadfulplunder of the Ukraine, and on the other they see that some ofthe German troops, the greater part perhaps, have been with -drawn. 
 They may think of giving vent to their pent -up hatred and resentment by attacking the German imperialists atonce, regardless of everything. 
 But others say: “We are inter -nationalists, we must look at things from the point of viewboth of Russia and of Germany; even from Germany’s pointof view we know that the government there cannot hold out; we are firmly convinced that if the victory of the work -ers and peasants in the Ukraine is accompanied by the consol -idation and success of the government of Russia, then social -ist proletarian Ukraine will not only win but will be invin -cible!” Such intelligent Ukrainian Communists say: We must be very cautious. 
 Tomorrow we may have to exert every effort and stake everything in the struggle against imperial -ism and the German troops. 
 That may be so for tomorrow, but not for today; and today we know that the troops of the German imperialists are being demoralised, we know that beside the Ukrainian troops, the East -Prussian and German troops are publishing revolutionary literature. 
56 At the same time, our chief task is to carry on propaganda for a revoltin the Ukraine. 
 That is correct from the standpoint of theworld revolution because Germany is the main link in thischain, since the German revolution is already ripe; and thesuccess of the world revolution most of all depends on it. 
 We shall take care that our interference will not harm their revolution. 
 One must understand the changes andgrowth of every revolution. 
 The revolution proceeds in itsown way in every country—we ought to know after seeing andexperiencing it—and these ways are so diverse that it may bedelayed for a year or two. 
 World revolution is not so smooth as to proceed in the same way everywhere, in all countries. 
 If it were, we should have been victorious long ago. 
 Everycountry has to go through definite political stages. 
 Every -where we find the compromisers making the same efforts, thesame attempts “to save the people from the bourgeoisie”—in conjunction with the bourgeoisie. 
 Tsereteli and Chernov did it here, and the Scheidemannites are doing it in Germany; in France they are doing it in their own way. 
 And now thatthe revolution is making its way into Germany, the countrywhere the workers’ movement is strongest, and where it isdistinguished for its organisation and endurance, where theworkers have been patient longest of all—but perhaps have accumulated more revolutionary hatred and are better able to settle scores with their enemies—interference in theseevents by people who do not know how fast the revolution isgrowing may hamper those intelligent Communists who say: “My prime purpose is to make this a deliberate process. 
” Now that the German soldier has seen that he is being driven to the slaughter on the pretext that he is going to defend his country, while in fact going to defend the German imperial -ists, the time is coming when the revolution will break out inGermany with such force and organisation as to solve ahundred international problems. 
 That is why intelligentUkrainian Communists say: “We must make every sacrifice for the victory of the world revolution, but we should realise that the future depends on us and we must march in stepwith the German revolution. 
” Those are the difficulties I wanted to point out, using the reasoning of the Ukrainian Communists as an example. 
 These difficulties also affect Soviet Russia’s position. 
 We can now say that the workers of the world have awoken andare making immense strides; but this makes our position allthe more difficult, for our “ally” of yesterday is attacking usas his chief enemy. 
 He is now out to fight international Bol -shevism, not hostile armies. 
 Now that Krasnov’s troops are mustering on the Southern Front (and we know they have received ammunition from the Germans), now that we have ex -posed imperialism in the eyes of the world, the people whoblamed us for the Brest -Litovsk Peace and sent Krasnov to get ammunition from the Germans with which to bombard the Rus -sian workers and peasants, are currently getting ammunition from the British and French imperialists, auctioning off Rus -sia to the highest millionaire bidder. 
 That is why our general conviction that a change has set in is now not enough. 
 We haveour old enemies, and behind them new forces are now rallyingto their aid. 
 We know and see all that. 
 Six months ago, inFebruary or March, we had no army. 
 The army could not fight. 
 The army which had been through four years of imperialist war, without knowing what it was fighting for, but vaguelyfeeling that it was fighting in the interests of others, thatarmy took to its heels, and no force on earth could stop it. 
 No revolution is worth anything unless it can defend itself; but a revolution does not learn to defend itself at once. 
 The revolution has awakened millions to a new life. 
 In February and March these millions did not know why theywere being sent to continue the slaughter to which the tsarsand the Kerenskys had driven them, and whose aim wasexposed by the Bolshevik Government only in December. 
 Allthey knew was that it was not their war, and nearly six months were required before a turn in the tide. 
 This turn has now come; it is changing the force of the revolution. 
 InFebruary and March, the people, exhausted and tormentedby four years of war, abandoned everything and said theremust be peace and the war terminated. 
 They were in nostate to ask what the war was about. 
 If these people have now created a new discipline in the Red Army, not the discipline of the rod and of the landowner but the discipline of theSoviets of Workers’ and Peasants’ Deputies; if they are now ready to make the greatest sacrifices; if a new unity has sprung up among them, it is because for the first time a new discipline, a socialist discipline, has been born in the minds and experience of tens of millions, a Red Army has beenborn. 
 It was born only when these tens of millions of peoplesaw from their own experience that they had overthrown thelandowners and capitalists, that a new life was being built,that they had begun to build it themselves, and that they would get it built if they were not prevented by foreign invasion. 
 When the peasants saw who their chief enemy was and began the struggle against the village kulaks, when theworkers overthrew the manufacturers and began to organisethe factories in accordance with a proletarian principle of national economy, they saw all the difficulty this work of reorganisation entailed, but they proved equal to the task. 
It took months to get things going. 
 These months have passed,and the turn has come. 
 Gone is the time when we wereimpotent. 
 We have begun to advance with giant strides. 
Gone is the time when we had no army and no discipline; a new discipline has been created, and new people are joining the army and laying down their lives by the thousand. 
 That means that the new discipline, the comradely alli -ance, has re -educated us in the struggle at the front and in the struggle in the countryside against the kulak. 
 Thisturning -point has been a difficult one, but now we feel that things are beginning to move, and that we are passing from unorganised, decree -made socialism to true socialism. 
 The chief task facing us is to fight imperialism, and this fightwe must win. 
 We make no secret of all the difficulty anddanger this fight entails. 
 We know that the tide of feelinghas changed in the Red Army; it has begun to win victories, it is promoting from its ranks thousands of officers who have been through training courses in the new proletarian mili -tary colleges and thousands of other officers who have beenthrough no other training than the hard training of war. 
Thus, without the least exaggeration, and fully recognisingthe danger, we can now say that we have an army; and this army has created discipline and has achieved fighting efficiency. 
 Our Southern Front is not just a front—it is afront against British and French imperialism, against the most powerful foe in the world. 
 But we are not afraid, for we know the foe will be unable to cope with its own enemy at home. 
 Three months ago, people used to laugh when we said there might be a revolution in Germany. 
 They said that onlyhalf -crazy Bolsheviks could believe in a German revolution. 
 Not only the entire bourgeoisie, but the Mensheviks and LeftSocialist -Revolutionaries as well, called the Bolsheviks traitors to patriotism and said that revolution in Germany was impossible. 
 But we knew that our help was needed there,and that to render that help we had to sacrifice everythingand consent even to the most onerous terms of peace. 
 Thatwas how these people were talking and trying to prove theirpoint to us only a few months ago, but in these few months Germany, from a mighty empire, has become a rotten hulk. 
 The force which has corroded it is operating in America andEngland as well; today it is weak, but with every step theBritish and French try to take in Russia, with every stepthey try to take to occupy the Ukraine, as the Germans did,this force will loom larger and larger and become even more formidable than the Spanish ’flu. 
 That, comrades, is why I repeat that the chief task of every class -conscious worker now is to reveal the whole truth, not to conceal anything from the people, who may not fullyrealise the acuteness of the situation. 
 The workers are matureenough to be told the truth. 
 We have to defeat world imperial -ism as well as the whiteguards. 
 We have to defeat, and weshall defeat, not only that enemy, but an enemy even moreformidable. 
 And for this we need the Red Army more thananything else. 
 Every organisation in Soviet Russia mustalways give its prime attention to the army. 
 Today, wheneverything is clear, the war and the strengthening of the army must take first place. 
 We are absolutely confident we shall cope with the counter -revolution. 
 We know we have the forces, but we also know that British and French imperialismis stronger than we are, and we want the working people torealise this quite clearly. 
 We say that the army must be tentimes stronger, and more; we must go on strengthening discipline, and every class -conscious, enlightened, organised and genuine leader must show ten times more attention andconcern for this. 
 Then this growth of the world revolution will not be confined to the defeated countries. 
 Revolution is now beginning in the victor countries as well. 
 Our forces must grow daily, and this constant growth is, as it was, our chief and complete guarantee that world socialism will triumph!(Comrade Lenin ’s speech is repeatedly interrupted by loud applause and ends in ovation. 
 All rise and greet the leader ofthe world revolution . 
) Newspaper reports published October 23, 1918 in Pravda No. 
 229 and Izvestia No. 
 231 Published in full in 1919 Published according to the in the book All-Russia book checked Central Executive Committee , with the verbatim report and Fifth Convocation. 
 Verbatim the newspaper texts Report , Moscow RESOLUTION ADOPTED AT A JOINT SESSION OF THE ALL-RUSSIA CENTRAL EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE, THE MOSCOW SOVIET, FACTORY COMMITTEES AND TRADE UNIONS OCTOBER 22, 1918 The proletarian and peasant revolutionary movement against the imperialist war has recently had tremendous suc -cesses in all countries, especially in the Balkans, Austria andGermany. 
 These successes, however, have particularly embit -tered the international bourgeoisie, now headed by the Anglo -American and French bourgeoisie, and have forced them tomake hasty efforts to organise themselves as a counter -revo-lutionary force for crushing the revolution and, above all,for crushing Soviet power in Russia, which is the chiefhotbed of revolution at present. 
 The German bourgeoisie and the German Government, defeated in the war and threatened by a mighty revolution -ary movement from within, are threshing about in their search for salvation. 
 One trend in the ruling circles of Germa -ny still hopes by delays to gain time before the winter and toprepare for the country’s military defence on a new line offortifications. 
 Another trend is feverishly seeking agreement with the Anglo -French bourgeoisie against the revolutiona -ry proletariat and the Bolsheviks. 
 Since this trend is running up against the flat refusal of the victors, the Anglo -French imperialists, to strike a bargain, it is trying to frighten themwith the Bolshevik danger and bribe them by offering itsservices against the Bolsheviks, against the proletarian revolution. 
 The bourgeoisie of the countries subordinated to Germany or occupied by her are still more eagerly seeking agreement with the Entente, especially in those cases—as, for example, in Finland, the Ukraine, etc. 
—where they are aware that it is completely impossible for them to maintain power over the exploited working people without the aid of foreign bayo -nets. 
 Owing to these circumstances, Soviet power finds itself in the following peculiar situation: on the one hand, we havenever been so close to an international proletarian revolution as we are now; on the other hand, we have never been in such a perilous position as we are now. 
 There are no longertwo approximately equal groups of imperialist plunderers,devouring and weakening each other. 
 There remains asingle group of victors, the Anglo -French imperialists, which intends to divide the whole world among the capital -ists. 
 It intends to overthrow Soviet power in Russia at allcosts and replace it by bourgeois power. 
 It is preparing nowto attack Russia from the South, through the Dardanellesand the Black Sea, for example, or through Bulgaria andRumania. 
 Moreover, at least a part of the Anglo -French im -perialists evidently hope that the German Government, by a direct or tacit agreement with them, will withdraw its troops from the Ukraine only as the latter becomes occupied byAnglo -French troops, so as not to allow the otherwise inevi -table victory of the Ukrainian workers and peasants andtheir establishment of a Ukrainian workers’ and peasants’government. 
 Behind the back of the Krasnov and whiteguard counter -revolutionaries, preparations are being made for an attack against us by a much more dangerous force, the force of theinternational counter -revolutionary bourgeoisie, with the Anglo -American and French bourgeoisie in first place. 
 This is a fact that is not realised everywhere and the awareness of which has not penetrated deep down among the broad mass of the workers and peasants. 
 We must therefore tirelesslyimbue this awareness in the people. 
 The most assiduousattention must be devoted to strengthening the Southern Frontand establishing and arming an incomparably mightierRed Army than we have now. 
 Every workers’ organisation, every union of poor peasants, every Soviet institution must again and again give priority to the question of strengtheningthe army, and repeatedly re -examine whether we have done enough, and what new measures we could and should under -take. 
 A marked change has taken place in the mood of our work -ers and peasants. 
 The people have overcome their extreme war-weariness. 
 An army is being created and has been creat -ed. 
 A new, communist discipline, a class -conscious discipline of the working people, has developed. 
 And this fact givesus every reason to confidently expect that we can and will defend our socialist homeland and secure the victory of the international proletarian revolution. 
 Izvestia No. 
 231 Published according to October 23, 1918 the manuscript SPEECH AT A RALLY IN HONOUR OF THE AUSTRO -HUNGARIAN REVOLUTION NOVEMBER 3, 1918 BRIEF NEWSPAPER REPORT (Storm of applause . 
) Events have shown that the people’s sufferings have not been in vain. 
 We are not only fighting Russian capitalism. 
 We are fighting the capitalism of all countries, world capitalism— we are fighting for the freedom of all workers. 
 Hard as it was for us to cope with famine and our enemies, we now see that we have millions of allies. 
 They are the workers of Austria, Hungary and Germany. 
 While we are gathered here, Friedrich Adler is very likely on his way to Vienna after his release from prison. 
 The first day of the Austrian workers’ revolution is probablybeing celebrated on the squares of Vienna. 
 The time is near when the first day of the world revolution will be celebrated everywhere. 
 Our labour and sufferings have not been in vain! The world revolution will triumph! Long live the world proletarian revolution! ( Storm of ap -plause . 
) Pravda No. 
 240 Published according to November 5, 1918 the Pravda text SPEEC H AT A CEREMONIA L MEETING OF THE ALL-RUSSI A CENTRAL AND MOSCO W TRAD E UNIO N COUNCILS NOVEMBE R 6, 191857 NEWSPAPER REPORT (Those present rise and greet Comrade Lenin with stormy , prolonged applause . 
) People today are gathering at hundreds of meetings to celebrate the anniversary of the October Revo -lution. 
 To those who have been in the workers’ movement for some time, who were connected with the workers in the old days, and who had close contacts with the factories, it is clear that this past year has been one of genuine proletariandictatorship. 
 This concept used to be mysterious bookLatin, a mouthful of incomprehensible words. 
 Intellectualssought an explanation of the concept in learned works, whichonly gave them a hazy notion of what the proletarian dicta -torship was all about. 
 The chief thing that stands to ourcredit during this past year is that we have translated thesewords from abstruse Latin into plain Russian. 
 During thispast year the working class has not been engaged in idle phi -losophising, but in the practical work of creating and exercis -ing a proletarian dictatorship, despite the excited mental state of the intellectuals. 
 Capitalism still rules the roost in the West. 
 But now the day of great upheavals is dawning there too. 
 Today the West -European workers, too, are approaching the difficult period of transition from capitalism to socialism. 
 They, likeourselves, will have to smash the entire old apparatus and build a new one. 
 We have not been able to utilise the whole store of experi -ence, knowledge and technical training the bourgeois intel -lectuals had. 
 The bourgeoisie sneered at the Bolsheviks and said the Soviet government would scarcely hold out for a fortnight; so they not only shirked co -operation, but wher -ever they could and with every means in their power put up resistance to the new movement, the new construction whichwas destroying the old order. 
 The resistance of the bourgeoisie has by no means ceased. 
 It is growing more vindictive every day; the nearer the end of the old capitalist world approaches, the faster it grows. 
 Due to Bolshevism’s growing strength and the world -wide dimensions it is assuming, the international situation todaycould well cause an alliance of imperialists of all shades toattack the Soviet Republic; then bourgeois resistance wouldbe international rather than national. 
 Germany, as you know, has expelled our Ambassador from Berlin on the pretext that our mission in Germany was con -ducting revolutionary propaganda. 
 As if the German Govern -ment did not know before that our Embassy was a carrierof the revolutionary contagion. 
 If Germany said nothingabout it before, it was because she was still strong and not afraid of us. 
 But now, after her military collapse, she has begun to dread us. 
 The German generals and capitalists areturning to the Allies and saying: “You may have beaten us,but don’t carry your experiments on us too far, for weare both menaced by world Bolshevism; and we might beuseful in the fight against it. 
” It is quite possible that the Allied imperialists may unite with the German imperialists for a joint campaign againstRussia, provided, of course, the German imperialists stillsurvive. 
 That is why the danger that has surrounded us allthrough the past year is now looming larger than ever. 
But now we are not alone. 
 We now have friends in the people who have already rebelled and those who are about to rebel and who are making it plain enough to theirgovernments that they refuse to go on fighting for rapaciousaims. 
 Although a new stretch of very dangerous periods liesahead, we shall continue our socialist construction. 
 Past ex -perience will help us avoid mistakes and lend us fresh strength in our further work. 
 The part played by the trade unions in the building of a new apparatus has been tremendous. 
 The working class has shown that it is capable of organising industry without intel -lectuals or capitalists. 
 Much has been done, but much still remains to be done. 
 Comrades, carry on boldly along the path you have been following, and get more and more peopleto join in the work! Give all workers who are connected withthe people and sincerely want the new system to take firmroot, even though they may be illiterate, inexperienced anduntrained—give them all, whether Party members or not, a chance to work and learn in the new proletarian state, to govern and create wealth. 
 The workers of the world will rise up, overthrow capital -ism everywhere and consummate our work, which will leadto the complete victory of socialism! ( Stormy applause . 
) Izvestia No. 
 244 Published according to November 9, 1918 the Izvestia text EXTRAORDINAR Y SIXTH ALL-RUSSI A CONGRES S OF SOVIETS OF WORKER S’, PEASANT S’, COSSACK S’ AND RED ARM Y DEPUTIE S 58 NOVEMBER 6 -9, 1918 EXTRAORDINARY SIXTH ALL -RUSSIA CONGRESS OF SOVIETS OF WORKERS ’, PEASANTS ’, COSSACKS ’ AND RED ARMY DEPUTIES NOVEMBER 6 -9, 1918 1 SPEECH ON THE ANNIVERSARY OF THE REVOLUTION NOVEMBER 6 (Comrade Lenin ’s appearance in the hall is greeted with pro -longed ovation . 
) Comrades, we are celebrating the anniversary of our revolution at a time when events of the utmost im -portance are taking place in the international working -class movement. 
 It has become obvious even to the most scepticaland doubting elements of the working class and working people in general that the world war will end neither by agreements nor by coercion on the part of the old government and the oldruling bourgeois class, that this war is leading the wholeworld as well as Russia to a world proletarian revolutionand to the workers’ triumph over capital. 
 Capital drenchedthe earth in blood, and, after the violence and outrages of German imperialism, Anglo -French imperialism, support -ed by Austria and Germany, is pursuing the same policy. 
 Today, when celebrating the anniversary of the revolu -tion, it is fitting that we cast a glance back along the pathtraversed by the revolution. 
 We began our revolution in unusually difficult conditions, such as no other workers’ revolution in the world will ever have to face. 
 It is there -fore particularly important that we endeavour to reviewthe path we have covered as a whole, to take stock of ourachievements during this period, and see to what extent wehave prepared ourselves during the past year for our chief, our real, our decisive and fundamental task. 
 We must be one of the detachments, one of the units of the world prole -tarian and socialist army. 
 We have always realised that it was not on account of any merit of the Russian proletariat, or because it was in advance of the others, that we happened to begin the revolution, which grew out of world -wide strug -gle. 
 On the contrary, it was only because of the peculiar weakness and backwardness of capitalism, and the peculiarpressure of military strategic circumstances, that we hap -pened in the course of events to move ahead of the otherdetachments, while not waiting until they had caught us up and rebelled. 
 We are now making this review so as to take stock of our preparations for the battles that will face us inthe coming revolution. 
 And so, comrades, when we ask ourselves what big changes we have made over the past year, we call say thefollowing: from workers’ control, the working class’s first steps, and from disposing of all the country’s resources, we are now on the threshold of creating a workers’ administra -tion of industry; from the general peasants’ struggle forland, the peasants’ struggle against the landowners, a strug -gle that had a national, bourgeois -democratic character, we have now reached a stage where the proletarian and semi -proletarian elements in the countryside have set themselvesapart: those who labour and are exploited have set them -selves apart from the others and have begun to build a newlife; the most oppressed country folk are fighting thebourgeoisie, including their own rural kulak bourgeoisie,to the bitter end. 
 Furthermore, from the first steps of Soviet organisation we have now reached a stage where, as Comrade Sverdlovjustly remarked in opening this Congress, there is no place inRussia, however remote, where Soviet authority has notasserted itself and become an integral part of the SovietConstitution, which is based on long experience gained in the struggle of the working and oppressed people. 
 We now have a powerful Red Army instead of being utterly defenceless after the last four years’ war, whichevoked hatred and aversion among the mass of the exploitedand left them terribly weak and exhausted, and which con -demned the revolution to a most difficult and drastic period when we were defenceless against the blows of German and Austrian imperialism. 
 Finally, and most important of all,we have come from being isolated internationally, from which we suffered both in October and at the beginning of the year, to a position where our only, but firm allies, the working and oppressed people of the world, have at last rebelled. 
 We have reached a stage where the leaders of the West -European proletariat, like Liebknecht and Adler, leaderswho spent many months in prison for their bold and heroicattempts to gather opposition to the imperialist war, havebeen set free under the pressure of the rapidly developing workers’ revolutions in Vienna and Berlin. 
 Instead of being isolated, we are now in a position where we are marchingside by side, shoulder to shoulder with our internationalallies. 
 Those are the chief achievements of the past year. 
I want to say a few words about the road we have covered,about this transitional stage. 
 At first our slogan was workers’ control. 
 We said that despite all the promises of the Kerensky government, thecapitalists were continuing to sabotage production andincrease dislocation. 
 We can now see that this would haveended in complete collapse. 
 So the first fundamental stepthat every socialist, workers’ government has to take is workers’ control. 
 We did not decree socialism immediately throughout industry, because socialism can only take shapeand be consolidated when the working class has learnt howto run the economy and when the authority of the workingpeople has been firmly established. 
 Socialism is mere wish -ful thinking without that. 
 That is why we introduced workers’ control, appreciating that it was a contradictory and incomplete measure, but an essential one so that theworkers themselves might tackle the momentous tasks ofbuilding up industry in a vast country without and opposedto exploiters. 
 Everyone who took a direct, or even indirect, part in this work, everyone who lived through all the oppression and brutality of the old capitalist regime, learned a great deal. 
We know that little has been accomplished. 
 We know thatin this extremely backward and impoverished country whereinnumerable obstacles and barriers were put in the workers’way, it will take them a long time to learn to run industry. 
 But we consider it most important and valuable that the workers have themselves tackled the job, and that we havepassed from workers’ control, which in all the main branches of industry was bound to be chaotic, disorganised, primitive and incomplete, to workers’ industrial administration on a national scale. 
 The trade unions’ position has altered. 
 Their main func -tion now is to send their representatives to all managementboards and central bodies, to all the new organisations whichhave taken over a ruined and deliberately sabotaged indus -try from capitalism. 
 They have coped with industry without the assistance of those intellectuals who from the very out -set deliberately used their knowledge and education—the result of mankind’s store of knowledge—to frustrate thecause of socialism, rather than assist the people in buildingup a socially -owned economy without exploiters. 
 These men wanted to use their knowledge to put a spoke in the wheel, to hamper the workers who were least trained for tackling the job of administration. 
 We can now say that the main hindrance has been removed. 
 It was extremely difficult, but the sabotage of all peoplegravitating towards the bourgeoisie has been checked. 
 Theworkers have succeeded in taking this basic step, in laying the foundations of socialism, despite tremendous handicaps. 
 We are not exaggerating and are not afraid to tellthe truth. 
 It is true that in terms of our ultimate goal,little has been accomplished. 
 But a great deal, a very greatdeal, has been done to strengthen the foundations. 
 Whenspeaking of socialism, we cannot say that great sections of workers have laid the foundations in a politically -con-scious way in the sense that they have taken to reading books and pamphlets. 
 By political consciousness we mean thatthey have tackled this formidable task with their ownhands and by their own efforts. 
 And they have committedthousands of blunders from each of which they have them -selves suffered. 
 But every blunder trained and steeled them inorganising industrial administration, which has now beenestablished and put upon a firm foundation. 
 They saw theirwork through. 
 From now on the work will be different, fornow all workers, not just the leaders and advanced workers,but great sections of workers, know that they themselves, with their own hands, are building socialism and have already laid its foundations, and no force in the countrycan prevent them from seeing the job through. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR We may have had great difficulties in industry, where we had to cover a road which to many seemed long, but which was actually short and led from workers’ control to workers’ administration, yet far greater preparatory work had to bedone in the more backward countryside. 
 Anyone who hasstudied rural life and come into contact with the peasantswould say that it was only in the summer and autumn of 1918that the urban October Revolution became a real rural October Revolution. 
 And the Petrograd workers and the Petrograd garrison soldiers fully realised when theytook power that great difficulties would crop up in ruralorganisational work, and our progress there would have tohe more gradual and that it would be the greatest folly totry to introduce socialised farming by decree, for only an insignificant number of enlightened peasants might support us, while the vast majority had no such object in view. 
 Wetherefore confined ourselves to what was absolutely essentialin the interests of promoting the revolution—in no case toendeavour to outrun the people’s development, but to waituntil a movement forward occurred as a result of their own experience and their own struggle. 
 In October we confined ourselves to sweeping away at one blow the age -old enemy of the peasants, the feudal landowner, the big landed proprie -tor. 
 This was a struggle in which all the peasants joined. 
 Atthis stage the peasants were not yet divided into proletarians,semi -proletarians, poor peasants and bourgeoisie. 
 We socialists knew there would be no socialism without such a struggle, but we also realised that knowing it was not enough—it had to be brought home to the millions, and throughtheir own experience, not through propaganda. 
 And for thatreason, since the peasants as a whole could only conceive ofthe revolution on the basis of equal land tenure, we openly declared in our decree of October 26, 1917, that we would take the Peasant Mandate on the Land as our starting -point. 
 * We said frankly that it did not accord with our views, that it was not communism, but we were not imposing on thepeasants something that was merely in accord with ourprogramme and not with their views. 
 We said we were march -ing alongside them, as with fellow -workers, fully confident *See present edition, Vol. 
 26, pp. 
 258 -60. 
— Ed. 
 that the development of the revolution would lead them to the conclusions we ourselves had drawn. 
 The result of this policy is the peasant movement. 
 The agrarian reform began with the socialisation of the land which we voted for and carriedout, though openly declaring that it did not accord with ourviews. 
 We knew that the idea of equal land tenure had thesupport of the vast majority, and we had no desire to forceanything upon them. 
 We were prepared to wait until the peasants themselves abandoned the idea and advanced fur -ther. 
 So we waited and we have been able to prepare our forces. 
 The law we then passed was based on general demo -cratic principles, on that which unites the rich kulak peasantwith the poor peasant—hatred for the landowner. 
 It was based on the general idea of equality which was undoubtedly a revolutionary idea directed against the old monarchistsystem. 
 From this law we had to pass to differentiation ofthe peasants. 
 The land socialisation law was universallyaccepted; it was unanimously adopted both by us and bythose who did not subscribe to Bolshevik policy. 
 We gave the agricultural communes the biggest say in deciding who should own the land. 
 We left the road open for agricul -ture to develop along socialist lines, knowing perfectly wellthat at that time, October 1917, it was not yet ready for it. 
Our preparatory work cleared the way for the gigantic andepoch -making step we have now taken, one that has not been taken by any other country, not even by the most democratic republic. 
 That step was taken this summer by all thepeasants, even in the most remote villages of Russia. 
 Whenfood difficulties arose and famine threatened, when theheritage of the past and the aftermath of the accursed fouryears of war made themselves felt, when counter -revolution and the Civil War had deprived us of our richest grain region, when all this reached a climax and the cities were menacedby famine, the only, the most reliable and firm bulwark ofour government, the advanced workers of the towns andindustrial regions, went en masse to the countryside. 
 It isslander to say the workers went there to provoke an armed conflict between workers and peasants. 
 Events expose that slander. 
 The workers went to put down the rural exploiters,the kulaks, who were making huge fortunes out of grain profiteering at a time when people were starving. 
 They went to help the poor peasants, that is, the majority of the rural population. 
 The July crisis, when kulak revolts swept the whole of Russia, clearly showed that their mission had notbeen in vain, that they had extended the hand of alliance,and that their preparatory work had merged with the effortsof the peasants. 
 The working and exploited country peoplesettled the July crisis by rising up everywhere and coming out in alliance with the urban proletariat. 
 Today Comrade Zinoviev told me over the telephone that 18,000 people areattending the regional congress of Poor Peasants’ Committeesin Petrograd and that there is remarkable enthusiasm andhigh spirits. 
 59 As events unfolding throughout Russia became more evident, the village poor realised from their own experience when they went into action what the struggle against thekulaks meant, and that to keep the cities supplied withfood and to re -establish commodity exchange, without which the countryside cannot live, they must part company withthe rural bourgeoisie and the kulaks. 
 They have to organise separately. 
 And we have now taken the first and most momentous step of the socialist revolution in the countryside. 
We could not have taken that step in October. 
 We gaugedthe moment when we could approach the people. 
 And we havenow reached a point where the socialist revolution in therural areas has begun, where in every village, even the most remote the peasant knows that his rich neighbour, the kulak, if he is engaged in grain profiteering, sees everythingin the light of his old, backwoods mentality. 
 And so the countryside, the rural poor, uniting with their leaders, the city workers, are only now providing uswith a firm and stable foundation for real socialist con -struction. 
 Socialist construction will only now begin in thecountryside. 
 Only now are Soviets and farms being formedwhich are systematically working towards large -scale socialised farming, towards making full use of knowledge,science and technology, realising that even simple, elemen -tary human culture cannot be based on the old, reactionary, ignorant way of life. 
 The work here is even more difficult than in industry, and even more mistakes are being madeby our local committees and Soviets. 
 But they learn from their mistakes. 
 We are not afraid of mistakes when they are made by ordinary people who take a conscientious attitude to socialist construction, because we rely only on the experience and effort of our own people. 
 And now the tremendous upheaval that in so short a time has led us to socialism in the countryside shows that thisfight has been crowned with success. 
 The Red Army is themost striking proof of that. 
 You know the state we were in during the imperialist world war when conditions in Russia made life unbearable for the common people. 
 We know that atthat time we were in an utterly helpless state. 
 We franklytold the working people the whole truth. 
 We exposed thesecret imperialist treaties, the fruits of a policy whichserves as a massive instrument of deception, and which in America today, the most advanced of the bourgeois imperial -ist democratic republics, is more than ever deceiving the people and leading them by the nose. 
 When the imperialistcharacter of the war became patent to all, the RussianSoviet Republic was the only country that completely shat -tered the bourgeoisie’s secret foreign policy. 
 We exposed the secret treaties and declared, through Comrade Trotsky, to all countries of the world: We appeal to you to put an endto this war in a democratic way, without annexations andindemnities, and frankly and proudly declare the truth, abitter truth but the truth nevertheless, that only a revolutionagainst the bourgeois governments can put an end to this war. 
 But we stood alone. 
 So we had to pay the price of that terribly excruciating peace which was forced upon us by theBrest -Litovsk Treaty and which drove many of our sympathis -ers to gloom and despair. 
 That was because we were alone. 
But we did our duty and showed up the aims of the war foreveryone to see! The onslaught of German imperialism was able to overwhelm us because it took some time before our workers and peasants could organise properly. 
 We had noarmy then; all we had was the old, disorganised, imperialistarmy which had been driven to fight in the war for aims whichthe soldiers did not support and with which they did notsympathise. 
 So we had to go through a very painful period. 
 It was a time when the people needed a respite from the terrible imperialist war, and had to realise that a new warwas beginning. 
 We are entitled to regard the war we shall wage in defence of our socialist revolution as our war. 
 That is what millions and tens of millions of people had to learn to appreciate from their own experience. 
 It took months. 
 It took a long and hard battle for this realisation to getthrough. 
 By this summer, however, everyone saw that it hadgot through at last, and that the breakthrough had come. 
Everyone realised that to have the army fight for the SovietRepublic, the army that comes from the people, that is sacrificing itself, and that after four years of bloody slaughter is again prepared to go to war, our country had toreplace the weariness and despair of the people going to warby a clear realisation that they go to their death for theirown cause: for the workers’ and peasants’ Soviets andthe socialist republic. 
 That has been achieved. 
 The victories we gained over the Czechs in the summer, and the news of big victories now coming in go to show thata turning -point has come, and that the hardest task—organ -ising the people in a politically -conscious, socialist way after four years of terrible war—has been achieved. 
 Thatpolitical consciousness has penetrated a long way among the people. 
 Tens of millions of people have come to realise they are tackling a difficult job. 
 And that gives us assurancethat we shall not despair, even though the forces of worldimperialism, stronger than us today, are being musteredagainst us, even though we are surrounded by the soldiers ofthe imperialists, who realise that the Soviet government is a danger, and are eager to strangle it, and even though we truthfully say they are stronger than us. 
 We say we are growing, the Soviet Republic is growing. 
 The cause of the proletarian revolution is growing fasterthan the imperialist forces are closing in upon us. 
 We arefull of hope and assurance that we are fighting in the interests of the world socialist revolution as well as the Rus -sian socialist revolution. 
 Our hopes of victory are growing faster because our workers are becoming more politically -conscious. 
 What was the state of Soviet organisation lastOctober? Only the first steps were being taken. 
 We couldnot make it perfect or put it on a proper basis. 
 But now we have the Soviet Constitution. 
 The Soviet Constitution, ratified in July, is, as we know, not the invention of a commis -sion, nor the creation of lawyers, nor is it copied from other constitutions. 
 The world has never known such a constitu -tion as ours. 
 It embodies the workers’ experience of struggle and organisation against the exploiters both at home and abroad. 
 We possess a fund of fighting experience. 
 ( Applause . 
) And this fund of experience has provided a striking corrobo -ration of the fact that the organised workers created a Sovietgovernment without civil servants, without a standingarmy and without privileges (privileges in practice for the bourgeoisie), and that they created the foundations of a newsystem in the factories. 
 We are getting down to work and drawing in new helpers, who are essential if the Soviet Consti -tution is to be carried into effect. 
 We now have ready new recruits, young peasant, who must be drawn into the work and help us carry the job through. 
 The last question I want to touch upon is the international situation. 
 We are standing shoulder to shoulder with our international comrades, and we have now seen for ourselves the resoluteness and enthusiasm they put into their convic -tion that the Russian proletarian revolution will go along with them as the world revolution. 
 As the revolution’s international significance grew, the imperialists of the whole world banded even closer and more furiously together against us. 
 In October 1917 they regarded our Republic as a curiosity not worth seriousattention. 
 In February they regarded it as an experiment in socialism not to be taken seriously. 
 But the Republic’s army grew and gained in strength until the very difficulttask of creating a socialist Red Army had been accomplished. 
 As our cause gained in strength and its successes multiplied, the opposition and the hatred of the imperialists of allcountries grew more rabid. 
 Things have reached a state where British and French capitalists, who had proclaimed they were Wilhelm’s enemies, are now on the verge of joining forceswith this same Wilhelm in an effort to strangle the Socialist Soviet Republic. 
 For they have come to realise that it is no longer a curiosity or an experiment in socialism, but thehotbed, the really genuine hotbed, of the world socialist revolution. 
 Hence, the number of our enemies has increased along with the successes of our revolution. 
 We must realisewhat is lying in store for us, without in any way concealing the gravity of the situation. 
 We shall go to meet it not alone but with the workers of Vienna and Berlin, who are moving into the same fight, and who will perhaps bring greater discipline and class -consciousness to our common cause. 
 To give you an idea of how the clouds are gathering over our Soviet Republic and what dangers are threatening us,I shall read you the full text of a Note sent to us by theGerman Government through its consulate: “G. 
 V. 
 Chicherin, People’s Commissar for Foreign Affairs, Moscow, November 5, 1918. 
 On the instructions of the German Imperial Government, the Impe-rial German Consulate has the honour to notify the Russian FederativeSoviet Republic of the following: The German Government has alreadyhad occasion to protest twice against the impermissible campaignthat is being conducted against German state institutions through declarations made by official Russian authorities in contravention of Article 2 of the Treaty of Brest -Litovsk. 
 It can no longer confine itself to protests against this campaign, which is not only a violation of thesaid stipulations of the Treaty, but a serious departure from normalinternational practice. 
 When the Soviet Government established its Diplomatic Legation in Berlin after the conclusion of the Peace Treaty, Herr Joffe, the ap-pointed Russian representative, received a clear reminder of the needto refrain from any agitation or propaganda in Germany. 
 To this hereplied that he was acquainted with Article 2 of the Brest -Litovsk Treaty and was aware that in his capacity as representative of a foreignPower he must not interfere in Germany’s internal affairs. 
 Herr Joffe and the departments in his charge accordingly enjoyed in Berlin the attention and confidence normally accorded to extraterritorial foreignlegations. 
 This confidence was, however, betrayed. 
 It has been clear forsome time that the Russian Legation has been in close contact withcertain people working for the overthrow of the political order inGermany, and, by employing such people in its service, has been interested in a movement aimed at overthrowing the existing system in Germany. 
 The following incident, which occurred on the 4th instant, revealed that the Russian Legation, by importing leaflets calling for revolution,is even taking an active part in movements aimed at overthrowing theexisting order, thereby abusing the privilege of employing diplomatic couriers. 
 Because one of the boxes in the official baggage of the Russian courier who arrived in Berlin yesterday was damaged during transpor-tation, it was ascertained that the boxes contained revolutionaryleaflets printed in German and, judging by their contents, design-ed for dissemination in Germany. 
 The German Government has further grounds for complaint because of the attitude taken by the Soviet Government towards the expiation to be made for the assassination of Count Mirbach, the Imperial Am-bassador. 
 The Russian Government solemnly declared that it would doeverything in its power to bring the criminals to court. 
 But the German Government has not observed any signs of the prosecution and punish-ment of the criminals having been undertaken, or even of any intentionof it being done. 
 The murderers escaped from a house surrounded on allsides by Public Security men of the Russian Government. 
 The instiga-tors of the assassination, who have publicly admitted they were behindthe whole affair, to this day go unpunished and, according to informa-tion received, have even been pardoned. 
 The German Government protests against such violations of the Treaty and of public law. 
 It is obliged to demand guarantees from theRussian Government that no further agitation and propaganda runningcounter to the Peace Treaty will be conducted. 
 It must furthermoreinsist on the expiation of the assassination of the Ambassador, CountMirbach, by the punishment of the perpetrators and instigators of themurder. 
 Until such time as these demands are satisfied, the GermanGovernment must request the Government of the Soviet Republic towithdraw its diplomatic and other representatives from Germany. 
 TheRussian plenipotentiary in Berlin was today informed that a specialtrain for the departure of the diplomatic and consular representativesin Berlin and of other Russian officials in the city will be ready tomor-row evening, and that measures will be taken to secure the unhamperedtransit of all Russian personnel to the Russian frontier. 
 The SovietGovernment is requested to enable the German representatives inMoscow and Petrograd to leave at the same time, with the observanceof all the demands of courtesy. 
 Other Russian representatives in Ger-many, and likewise German officials in other parts of Russia, will beinformed they must leave within a week, the former for Russia,the latter for Germany. 
 The German Government concludes in antici-pation that all the rules of courtesy will be similarly observed towardsthe latter German officials in relation to their departure and that otherGerman subjects or persons under German protection will be allowedthe opportunity of unhampered departure should they request it. 
” We all know perfectly well, comrades, that the German Government has been fully aware that German socialists enjoyed the hospitality of the Russian Embassy and that nosupporters of German imperialism ever crossed the thresholdof the Russian Embassy. 
 Its friends were those socialistswho opposed the war and who sympathised with Karl Lieb -knecht. 
 They have been guests of the Embassy ever since it opened, and we have had dealings with them alone. 
 The German Government was perfectly aware of that. 
 It followedthe movements of every representative of our government aszealously as the government of Nicholas II used to followthe movements of our comrades. 
 The German Government isnow making this move not because the situation has in any way changed, but because it formerly felt stronger, and was would set all Germany alight. 
 The German Government has lost its head, and now that the whole of Germany is ablaze, it thinks it can put out the fire by turning its police hose on a single house. 
 ( Stormy applause . 
) That is simply ridiculous. 
 If the German Government is going to break off diplomatic relations, all we call sayis that we knew it would, and that it is doing all it can toget an alliance with the British and French imperialists. 
 We know Wilson’s government has received telegram after telegram requesting that German troops be left in Poland,the Ukraine, Estonia and Latvia. 
 Although they are enemiesof German imperialism, the German troops are doing theirjob: they are putting down the Bolsheviks. 
 * They can clear out when pro -Entente “armies of liberation” appear on the scene to strangle the Bolsheviks. 
 We are perfectly aware of what is going on and none of it is unexpected. 
 We merely repeat that now that Germany ison fire and Austria is all ablaze, now that they have had toliberate Liebknecht and allow him to visit the RussianEmbassy, where a joint meeting of Russian and German socialists with Liebknecht at their head was held, such a step on the part of the German Government shows not somuch that they want to fight as that they have completelylost their heads. 
 It shows they are at a loss for a decisionbecause Anglo -American imperialism, the most brutal enemy of all, is advancing upon them, an enemy that has crushed Austria with peace terms a hundred times more onerous than those of the Brest -Litovsk Peace Treaty. 
 Germany sees that these liberators want to strangle, crush and torture her too. 
But at the same time the workingman’s Germany is rebel -ling. 
 The German army proved to be useless and unfit foraction not because discipline was weak but because the soldiers who refused to fight were transferred from the Eastern front to the German Western front and carriedwith them what the bourgeoisie call world Bolshevism. 
 That is why the German army was unfit for action and why this document is the best proof of Germany’s utter confusion. 
We say it will lead to a diplomatic rupture, and perhaps even to war if they can find the strength to lead the white -guard troops. 
 We have therefore sent a telegram to all the Soviets of Deputies,60 which concludes by warning them to be on their guard, to hold themselves in readiness and muster all their forces, for this is just another sign that the chief aim of international imperialism is the overthrowof Bolshevism. 
 That does not mean defeating Russia alone. 
It means defeating their own workers in every country. 
But they will not succeed, no matter what brutalities andoutrages may follow this decision. 
 These vultures are pre -paring to swoop down on Russia from the South, throughthe Dardanelles, or by way of Bulgaria and Rumania. 
 Theyare negotiating for the formation of a White Army in Germanyto be pitted against Russia. 
 We are fully aware of this danger,and say quite plainly that we have not worked a year fornothing; we have laid the foundations, we are coming up to decisive battles, battles which will indeed be decisive. 
 But we are not alone: the proletariat of Western Europe hasgone into action and has not left anything standing inAustria -Hungary. 
 The government of the country is just about as helpless, as wildly confused, has lost its head ascompletely as Nicholas Romanov’s government at the end of February 1917. 
 Our slogan must be: Put every effort into the fight once more, and remember that we are coming up tothe last, decisive fight, not for the Russian revolution alone,but for the world socialist revolution. 
 We know that the imperialist vultures are still stronger than us. 
 They can still inflict wholesale damage, brutalities and atrocities upon our country. 
 But they cannot defeat the world revolution. 
 They are full of savage hatred, so wetell ourselves that come what may, every Russian worker andpeasant will do his duty and will face death if the interestsof defence of the revolution demand it. 
 No matter whatmiseries the imperialists may still inflict upon us, it will not save them. 
 Imperialism will perish and the world socialist revolution will triumph in face of all odds! ( Stormy applause passing into prolonged ovation . 
) Newspaper reports published November 9, 1918 in Pravda No. 
 242 and Izvestia No. 
 244 First published in full in Published according to the 1919 in the book Extraordinary book checked with Sixth All-Russia Congress of the verbatim report Soviets . 
 Verbatim Report , and the Pravda text Moscow 2 SPEECH ON THE INTERNATIONAL SITUATION NOVEMBER 8 (Prolonged applause . 
) Comrades, from the very beginning of the October Revolution, foreign policy and internationalrelations have been the main questions facing us. 
 Not merelybecause from now on all the states in the world are beingfirmly linked by imperialism into a single system, or rather,into one dirty, bloody mass, but because the complete victory of the socialist revolution in one country alone is inconceiv -able and demands the most active co -operation of at least several advanced countries, which do not include Russia. 
Hence one of the main problems of the revolution is now theextent to which we succeed in broadening the revolution inother countries too, and the extent to which we succeed mean -while in warding off imperialism. 
 I should like to remind you briefly of the main stages of our international policy over the past year. 
 As I havealready had occasion to point out in my speech on the anni -versary of the revolution, the main feature characterisingour position a year ago was that we were on our own. 
 * No matter how sound our conviction that a revolutionaryforce was being and had been created throughout Europeand that the war would not end without revolution, therewere no signs at the time that a revolution had begun orwas beginning. 
 In these circumstances we could do nothingbut direct our foreign policy efforts to enlightening the working people of Western Europe. 
 This was not because *See pp. 
 138 -39 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 we claimed to be more enlightened than they, but because so long as the bourgeoisie of a country have not been overthrown, military censorship and that fantastically bloodthirsty atmosphere which accompanies every war, particularly areactionary one, predominate in that country. 
 You wellappreciate that in the most democratic, republican countries,war means military censorship and unprecedented methodsemployed by the bourgeoisie and the bourgeois military staffs to deceive the people. 
 We set out to share our achieve-ments in this respect with other nations. 
 We did everythingpossible for this when we annulled and published thedisgraceful secret treaties which the ex-tsar had concludedwith the British and French capitalists to the benefit ofthe Russian capitalists. 
 You know that these were downright predatory treaties. 
 You know that the government of Kerensky and the Mensheviks kept these treaties secretand upheld them. 
 By way of exception, we come acrossstatements in that section of the British and Frenchpress which is to any degree honest that, thanks only tothe Russian revolution, the French and the British learned much that was material to them as regards their diplomatic history. 
 We have certainly done very little from the point of view of the social revolution as a whole, but whatwe have done has been one of the greatest steps in itspreparation. 
 If we now make a general survey of the results gained by the exposure of German imperialism, we shall see that itis now obvious to the working people of all countries thatthey were made to wage a bloody and predatory war. 
 And atthe end of this year of war the behaviour of Britain andAmerica is beginning to be exposed in the same way, since the people are opening their eyes and begin to see through the evil designs. 
 That is all we have done, but we have doneour bit. 
 The exposure of these treaties was a blow toimperialism. 
 The terms of the peace treaty which we werecompelled to conclude proved to be a powerful weapon ofpropaganda and agitation; we did more with them than any other government or nation has done. 
 But while it is true that the attempt we made to awaken the people did notproduce immediate results, we never even assumed that the revolution would begin immediately, or that all would be lost. 
 During the past fifteen years we have brought about two revolutions, and we have clearly seen how much time must elapse before they grip the people. 
 Recent events in Austriaand Germany confirm this. 
 We said that we had no intentionof allying ourselves with robbers and becoming robbersourselves; no, we expected to arouse the proletariat of theenemy countries. 
 We were jeered at and told we were pre-paring to arouse the German proletariat which would strangle us while we were preparing to launch a propaganda attack. 
But facts have shown we were right to assume that theworking people in all countries are equally hostile to impe-rialism. 
 They only need to be given a certain period forpreparation; the Russian people, too, despite memories of the 1905 Revolution, took some time before they again came up for revolution. 
 Before the Brest-Litovsk Peace we did everything in our power to hit at imperialism. 
 If the history of the growthof the proletarian revolution did not completely wipe thisout, and if the Brest-Litovsk Peace forced us to retreat before imperialism, this was because we were insufficiently prepared in January 1918. 
 Fate condemned us to isolation,and we went through an agonising period after the Brest-Litovsk Peace. 
 Comrades, the four years which we spent in world war ended in peace, but on onerous terms. 
 In the final analysis, however, even these onerous peace terms proved that we were right and that our hopes were not built on sand. 
 With everypassing month we grew strong while West-European imperial-ism grew weak. 
 Now, as a result, we see that Germany, whosix months ago completely ignored our Embassy and thoughtthere could be no Red institution there, recently, at any rate, has been weakening. 
 The latest telegram informs us of the German imperialists’ appeal to the people to keep calm,saying that peace is near at hand. 
 We know what is meantwhen monarchs appeal for calm and promise to do the impos-sible in the near future. 
 If Germany gets peace soon, it willbe a Brest-Litovsk Peace, which instead of peace will bring the working people more misery than ever. 
 The results of our international policy shaped in such a way that six months after the Brest-Litovsk Peace we were a devastated country to the bourgeoisie, but, to the prole-tariat, we were rapidly developing and now head the prole-tarian army which has begun to shake Austria and Germany. 
 This success vindicated and fully justified all our sacrifices inany worker’s eyes. 
 If we were to be suddenly wiped out, ifour activities were to be cut short—this is impossible sincemiracles do not happen—yet if this were to happen we wouldbe justified in saying, without concealing our mistakes, that we had made full use of the period, offered us by fate, for the world socialist revolution! We have done everythingpossible for the working people of Russia, and we have donemore than anyone else for the world proletarian revolution. 
(Applause . 
) In recent months, and in-recent weeks, the international situation has begun to change sharply; now German imperial-ism is almost completely defeated. 
 All designs on the Ukrainewhich the German imperialists fostered among their work-ing people proved to be empty promises. 
 It turned out thatAmerican imperialism was ready, and a blow was struck atGermany. 
 A totally different situation has arisen. 
 We have been under no illusions. 
 After the October Revolution we were considerably weaker than imperialism and even now weare weaker than international imperialism. 
 We must repeatthis now so as not to deceive ourselves: following the OctoberRevolution we were weaker and could not fight. 
 Now we areweaker too and must do everything we can to avoid a clash with imperialism. 
 That we were able to survive a year after the October Revolution was due to the split of international imperialisminto two predatory groups: Anglo-French-American on theone hand, and German on the other, which were locked inmortal combat, and which had no time for us. 
 Neither group could muster large forces against us, which they would have done had they been in a position to do so. 
 They were blindedby the bloodthirsty atmosphere of war. 
 The material sacri-fices required to carry on the war demanded the utmostconcentration of their efforts. 
 They had no time for us, notbecause by some miracle we were stronger than the imperial-ists—no, that would be nonsense—but only because international imperialism had split into two predatorygroups which were at each other’s throats. 
 Only thanks to this the Soviet Republic was able to openly declare war on the imperialists of all countries, depriving them of their capital in the shape of foreign loans, slapping them in the face and openly emptying their plunder-ladenpockets. 
 An end has come to the period of declarations which we then made over the correspondence started by the Germanimperialists, even though world imperialism could not tear into us as it should have done in line with its hostility and thirst for capitalist profits, which had been fantasticallyexpanded by the war. 
 Until the moment of the Anglo-Ameri-can imperialists’ victory over the other group they were fullyoccupied fighting among themselves, and so had no chanceto launch a decisive campaign against the Soviet Republic. 
 There is no longer a second group. 
 Only one group of victors remains. 
 This has completely altered our internationalposition, and we must take this change into account. 
 Thefacts show how this change bears on the development of theinternational situation. 
 The workers’ revolution is nowwinning in the defeated countries; everyone can clearly see what tremendous advances it has made. 
 When we took power in October we were nothing more in Europe than a singlespark. 
 True, the sparks began to fly, and they flew from us. 
This is our greatest achievement, but even so, these wereisolated sparks. 
 Now most countries within the sphere ofGerman-Austrian imperialism are aflame (Bulgaria, Austria and Hungary). 
 We know that from Bulgaria the revolution has spread to Serbia. 
 We know how these worker-peasantrevolutions passed through Austria and reached Germany. 
Several countries are enveloped in the flames of workers’revolution. 
 In this respect our efforts and sacrifices havebeen justified. 
 They were not reckless adventures, as our enemies slanderously claimed, but an essential step towards world revolution, which had to be taken by the countrythat had been placed in the lead, despite its underdevelop-ment and backwardness. 
 This is one result, and the most important from the point of view of the final outcome of the imperialist war. 
 The other result is the one to which I referred earlier, that Anglo-American imperialism is now exposing itself in thesame way as Austro-German did in its time. 
 We can see that if, at the time of the Brest-Litovsk negotiations, Germany had been somewhat level-headed, able to keep herself in check and to refrain from making gambles, she would have been able to maintain her domination and undoubtedlycould have secured an advantageous position in the West. 
She did not do this because when a machine like a war involv-ing millions and tens of millions, a war which inflamedchauvinist passions to the utmost, a war bound up with capitalist interests totalling hundreds of billions of rubles— when such a machine has gathered full speed there are nobrakes that can stop it. 
 This machine went farther than theGerman imperialists themselves desired, and they werecrushed by it. 
 They were stuck; they ended up like a man whohad gorged himself to death. 
 And now, before our very eyes, British and American imperialism is in this extremely ugly, but, from the viewpoint of the revolutionary proletariat,extremely useful position. 
 You might have thought theywould have had much greater political experience than Ger-many. 
 Here are people used to democratic rule, not to therule of some Junker or other, people who went through the hardest period of their history hundreds of years ago. 
 You might have thought these people would-have retained theirpresence of mind. 
 If we were to speak as individuals, fromthe point of view of democracy in general, as bourgeoisphilistines, professors, who have understood nothing fromthe struggle between imperialism and the working class, whether or not they were capable of level-headedness, if we reasoned from the point of view of democracy in general,then we would have to say that Britain and America arecountries with a centuries-old tradition of democracy, thatthe bourgeoisie there would be able to hold their ground. 
If by some means they were to succeed now in holding on, this would at any rate be for a fairly long period. 
 But it seems that the same thing is happening to them as happenedto the militarist-despotic Germany. 
 In this imperialist warthere is a tremendous difference between Russia and therepublican countries. 
 The imperialist war is so steeped inblood, so predatory and bestial, that it has effaced even these important differences, and in this respect it has brought the freest democracy of America to the level of semi-mili-tarist, despotic Germany. 
 We see that Britain and America, countries which had greater opportunities than others for remaining democratic republics, have overdone things as savagely and insanely as Germany did in her time, and so they are heading, just asquickly, and perhaps even faster, towards the end sosuccessfully arrived at by German imperialism. 
 It swelledout fantastically over three-quarters of Europe, becamedistended and then burst, leaving behind it an awful stench. 
 Now British and American imperialism is racing to the same end. 
 You only have to take a cursory glance at the armisticeand peace terms which the British and Americans, the“liberators” of the people from German imperialism, arepresenting to the defeated nations. 
 Take Bulgaria. 
 Youwould have thought that a country like Bulgaria could hold no terror for the Anglo-American imperialist colossus. 
 Nevertheless, the revolution in this small, weak, absolutelyhelpless country caused the Anglo-Americans to lose theirheads and present armistice terms that are tantamount tooccupation. 
 In this country where a peasants’ republic hasbeen proclaimed, in Sofia, an important railway junction, the whole railway is now in the hands of Anglo-American troops. 
 They are forced to fight this little peasants’ repub-lic. 
 From the military point of view this is a walkover. 
People who take the view of the bourgeoisie, of the oldruling class, of old military relations, merely smile con-temptuously. 
 What does this pigmy Bulgaria signify in comparison with the Anglo-American forces? Nothing from the military standpoint, but a great deal from the revolution-ary standpoint. 
 This is not a colony where they are used toexterminating the defeated people in their millions. 
 TheBritish and Americans consider this is only establishing lawand order, bringing civilisation and Christianity to African savages. 
 But this is not Central Africa. 
 Here the soldiers, no matter how strong their army, become demor-alised when they come up against a revolution. 
 Germany isproof enough of this. 
 In Germany, at any rate as regards dis-cipline, the soldiers were model army men. 
 Yet when theGermans marched into the Ukraine, factors other than dis-cipline came into play. 
 The starving German soldier marched for bread, and it would have been unrealistic to demand thathe should not steal too much bread. 
 Moreover, we know that in this country he was most of all infected by the spirit of the Russian revolution. 
 The German bourgeoisie were well aware of this and it caused Wilhelm to panic. 
 The Hohen-zollerns are mistaken if they imagine that Germany willshed a single drop of blood for them. 
 This is the result of thepolicy of bellicose German imperialism. 
 The same thing isrepeating itself in regard to Britain. 
 The Anglo-Americanarmy is already becoming demoralised; this began as soon as it launched the ferocious campaign against Bulgaria. 
 And this is only the beginning. 
 Austria followed Bulgaria. 
 Permitme to read you some of the clauses of the terms dictated by theAnglo-American imperialist victors. 
 These are the people whomost of all shouted to the working people that they wereconducting a war of liberation, that their chief aim was to crush Prussian militarism which threatened to spread the despotic regime over all countries. 
 They shouted loudestthat they were conducting a war of liberation. 
 This was adeception. 
 You know that bourgeois lawyers, these par-liamentarians who have spent their whole lives learningthe art of deception without blushing, find it easy to deceive each other—but they don’t get away with it when they have to deceive the workers in the same way. 
 British and Americanpoliticians and parliamentarians are past masters at thisart. 
 But they will not get away with deception. 
 The workingpeople, whom they incited in the name of freedom, will cometo their senses straight away, and even more so when, on a mass scale, not from proclamations (which help, but do not really move the revolution), but from their own experience,they see they are being deceived, when they become awareof the peace terms with Austria. 
 These are peace terms now being forced on a compara-tively weak, disintegrating state by people who shouted that the Bolsheviks were traitors because they signed the Brest-Litovsk Peace Treaty. 
 When the Germans wanted to sendtheir soldiers to Moscow, we said we would rather all die inbattle than agree to this. 
 ( Applause . 
) We told ourselves great sacrifices would have to be made in the occupied areas,but everybody knows how Soviet Russia helped and kept them supplied with necessities. 
 Now the democratic troops of Britain and France will have to serve to “maintain law andorder”, and this when there are Soviets of Workers’ Deputies in Bulgaria and Serbia, when there are Soviets of Workers’ Deputies in Vienna and Budapest. 
 We know what kind of order this means. 
 It means that the Anglo-American troops are to be the throttlers and executioners of the world revolu-tion. 
 Comrades, when the Russian serf troops were sent to suppress the Hungarian Revolution in 1848, 61 they were able to get away with it because they were serfs; they were able to get away with it in relation to Poland. 
62 But people who have known freedom for a century and who were incited tohate German imperialism because it was a beast which had tobe destroyed, must understand that Anglo-American imperi-alism is the same sort of beast whom it would be onlyright to destroy as well! And now history, with its usual malicious irony, has arrived at the point where, after the exposure of Germanimperialism, it is the turn of Anglo-French imperialism toutterly expose itself. 
 We declare to the Russian, Germanand Austrian working people that these are not the Russianserf troops of 1848! They will not get away with it! They are out to stop people getting from capitalism to freedom and to suppress the revolution. 
 We are absolutely convinced thatthis bloated monster will fall into the same abyss as did theGerman imperialist monster. 
 I now turn to matters which affect us most of all. 
 I shall begin with the peace terms which Germany will have to agree to. 
 The comrades from the Commissariat for Foreign Affairs told me that The Times , the chief mouthpiece of the fabulously rich British bourgeoisie who actually shape theentire policy, has already published the terms to be imposedon Germany. 
 She is expected to hand over Heligoland andthe Wilhelmshaven Canal, Essen, where practically all military equipment is manufactured, disband her merchant fleet, immediately hand over Alsace-Lorraine and payindemnities totalling 60 thousand-million, a great part ofwhich must be paid in kind because money has depreciatedeverywhere and British merchants too have begun to calculatein another currency. 
 We can see that the peace terms they are preparing for Germany will be completely devastating, far harsher than the Brest-Litovsk terms. 
 They are strongenough materially and physically to do so if it were not for the existence of that awful Bolshevism. 
 By imposing these peace terms they are preparing their own doom. 
 For this is happening in civilised countries in the twentieth century, not in Central Africa. 
 The once disciplined Ger-man soldier who put down the illiterate Ukrainian peoplehas now buried his discipline. 
 So it is all the more certainthat the British and American imperialists will bury them-selves when they make the gamble, which will bring about their political downfall, of making their troops throttlers and gendarmes of all Europe. 
 They have been trying todestroy Russia for some time, and have been thinking ofattacking her for some time. 
 You only have to recall theMurmansk occupation, the millions they squandered onthe Czechs, the treaty they concluded with Japan. 
 And now Britain has a treaty with the Turks which gives her Baku so that she may strangle us by depriving us of rawmaterials. 
 British troops are ready to attack Russia from the South, through the Dardanelles or through Bulgaria and Rumania. 
They are closing in around the Soviet Republic, they are trying to cut off our economic contacts with the whole world. 
 For this reason they compelled Holland to break off diplomaticrelations with us. 
 63 When Germany expelled our Am-bassador she acted, if not in direct agreement with Anglo-French policy, then hoping to do them a service so that theyshould be magnanimous to her. 
 The implication was that we are also fulfilling the duties of executioner against the Bol-sheviks, your enemies. 
 The main point about the international situation is (as I mentioned the other day) that we have never been sonear to world proletarian revolution as we are now. 
 Wehave proved we were not mistaken in banking on world proletarian revolution. 
 Our great national and economic sacrifices were not made in vain. 
 We achieved successes. 
Yet if we have never previously been so close to worldrevolution, then it is also true to say that we have neverbeen in such a dangerous situation as we are now. 
 The im-perialists were busy among themselves, but now one group has been wiped out by the Anglo-French-American group, which considers its main task to be the extermination ofworld Bolshevism and the strangulation of its main centre, the Russian Soviet Republic. 
 To do this, they intend to sur-round themselves with a Great Wall of China so as to keep out the plague, the plague of Bolshevism. 
 These people are trying to rid themselves of Bolshevism by going into quaran-tine, but this cannot be done. 
 Even if these Anglo-Frenchimperialist gentlemen, who possess the best techniquesin the world, succeed in building this Great Wall around theRepublic, the germ of Bolshevism will still penetrate the wall and infect the workers of the world. 
 ( Applause . 
) The West-European press, the press of Anglo-French imperialism, tries its hardest to keep silent about the stateof imperialism. 
 No lie or slander is vile enough to useagainst the Soviet government. 
 It is true to say now thatall the Anglo-French and American papers, with financial backing running into billions, are in capitalist hands and that they act in one syndicate to suppress the truth aboutSoviet Russia, to spread lies and slander about us. 
 Yetdespite the fact that for years there has been a military censor-ship which has prevented a word of truth about the SovietRepublic from appearing in the newspapers of the democratic countries, not a single large workers’ meeting held anywhere goes by without the workers siding with the Bolsheviks,because it is impossible to hide the truth. 
 The enemy accusesus of implementing the dictatorship of the proletariat. 
 Theyare right and we do not hide it. 
 The fact that the SovietGovernment is not afraid and openly admits this attracts more millions of workers to its side, because the dictatorship is directed against the exploiters, and the working people seeand are convinced that the struggle we are waging against theexploiters is a serious one and will be brought to a seriousconclusion. 
 Although the European papers surround us witha conspiracy of silence, they have so far announced that they regard it their duty to attack Russia because Russia sur-rendered to Germany, because Russia is in fact a Germanagent, because government leaders in Russia, they claim,are German agents. 
 New forged documents, for whicha good price is paid, appear every month proving thatLenin and Trotsky are downright traitors and German agents. 
 Despite all this they cannot hide the truth, and from time to time there are open signs that the imperialist gentlemenfeel uneasy. 
 L’Echo de Paris 64 admits: “We are going into Russia to break the power of the Bolsheviks. 
” Their official line is that they are only fighting German domination, not conducting a war with Russia and not interfering in military matters. 
 Our French internationalists who publish theIII-me Internationale 65 in Moscow cited this quotation, and although we have been cut off from Paris and France by anextremely elaborate Great Wall of China, we tell the Frenchimperialist gentlemen that they cannot defend themselves from their own bourgeoisie. 
 Indeed, hundreds of thousands of French workers know this small quotation, and otherstoo, and see that all the declarations of their rulers, of theirbourgeoisie, are nothing but lies. 
 Their own bourgeoisie letthe cat out of the bag; they acknowledge that they want tobreak the power of the Bolsheviks. 
 After four years of bloody war they have to tell their people: go and fight again against Russia to break the power of the Bolsheviks whom we hatebecause they owe us 17 thousand million and won’t pay up, 66 because they are rude to capitalists, landowners and tsars. 
Civilised nations who come down to admitting such things,patently betray the failure of their policy. 
 No matter how strong they may be militarily we calmly review their strength and say: but you have in your rear an even moreterrible enemy—the common people, whom you have deceivedup to now; so much so that your tongue has dried upfrom the lies and slander you have spread about Soviet Rus-sia. 
 Similar information may be gleaned from The Manches-ter Guardian 67 of October 23. 
 This British bourgeois newspa-per writes: “If the Allied armies still remain in Russia andstill operate in Russia, their purpose can only be to effecta revolution in ... Russia. 
 The Allied governments must,therefore, either ... put an end to their operations in Russiaor announce that they are at war with Bolshevism. 
” I repeat that the significance of this small quotation, which sounds to us like a revolutionary call, like a powerfulrevolutionary appeal, is that it is written by a bourgeoisnewspaper, which is itself an enemy of the socialists, butfeels that the truth can no longer be hidden. 
 If bourgeoispapers write in this vein you can imagine what the British workers must be thinking and saying. 
 You know the sort of language used by the liberals in tsarist times, prior tothe 1905 and 1917 revolutions. 
 You know this language heralded an impending explosion amidst the revolutionary proletariat. 
 From the language of these British bourgeois liberals, therefore, you can draw conclusions about what is going on in the moods, minds and hearts of the British,French and American workers. 
 We must, therefore, face thebitter truth about our international position. 
 The worldrevolution is not far off, but it cannot develop accordingto a special time-table. 
 Having survived two revolutions we well appreciate this. 
 We know, however, that although the imperialists cannot contain the world revolution, certaincountries are likely to be defeated, and even heavier lossesare possible. 
 They know that Russia is in the birth-pangsof a proletarian revolution, but they are mistaken if theythink that by crushing one centre of the revolution they will crush the revolution in other countries. 
 We, for our part, must admit that the situation is more dangerous than ever before, that once again we shall have tosummon up every effort. 
 Over the past year we have laid afirm foundation, created a socialist Red Army with a newdiscipline, and we are absolutely certain that we can and must continue the work we are doing. 
 At all meetings, in every Soviet institution, at trade union meetings and at meetingsof Poor Peasants’ Committees we must say: Comrades, wehave survived a year and have achieved some success, but allthis is still insufficient when we consider the powerfulenemy bearing down on us. 
 This enemy, Anglo-French imperialism, is world-wide, powerful and has defeated the whole world. 
 We are going to fight it not because we thinkourselves economically and technically on a par with theadvanced countries of Europe. 
 No, but we do know this enemyis going to topple into the abyss into which Austro-Germanimperialism once toppled; we know that the enemy, which has now ensnared Turkey, seized Bulgaria and is bent on occupying the whole of Austria-Hungary with the object of establishinga tsarist, gendarme regime, is heading for its doom. 
 We knowthis as a historical fact, and that is why, while in no wayattempting the impossible, we say we can beat off Anglo-French imperialism! Every step in strengthening our Red Army will be echoed by a dozen steps in the disintegration of and revolutionsin this apparently all-powerful enemy. 
 There is therefore no cause whatsoever for despair or pessimism. 
 We know the danger is great. 
 It may be that fate has even heavier sacri-fices in store for us. 
 Even if they can crush one country, they can never crush the world proletarian revolution, they willonly add more fuel to the flames that will consume them all. 
(Prolonged applause passing into ovation . 
) Newspaper reports published in Izvestia No. 
 244, November 9, 1918 , and in Pravda No. 
 243, November 10, 1918 First published in full in Published according to the 1919 in the book Extraordinary book checked with the Sixth All-Russia Congress of verbatim report and the Soviets. 
 Verbatim Report , pamphlet N. 
 Lenin, Moscow World Imperialism and Soviet Russia , Moscow, 1919 SPEECH AT THE UNVEILING OF A MEMORIAL TO AND ENGELS NOVEMBER 7, 1918 We are unveiling a memorial to Marx and Engels, the leaders of the world workers’ revolution. 
 Humanity has for ages suffered and languished under the oppression of a tiny handful of exploiters who maltreatedmillions of labourers. 
 But whereas the exploiters of anearlier period, the landowners, robbed and maltreated thepeasant serfs, who were disunited, scattered and ignorant, the exploiters of the new period, the capitalists, came face to face with the vanguard of the downtrodden people, theurban, factory, industrial workers. 
 They were united by thefactory, they were enlightened by urban life, they weresteeled by the common strike struggle and by revolutionaryaction. 
 It is to the great historic merit of Marx and Engels that they proved by scientific analysis the inevitability ofcapitalism’s collapse and its transition to communism, underwhich there will be no more exploitation of man by man. 
 It is to the great historic merit of Marx and Engels that they indicated to the workers of the world their role, their task, their mission, namely, to be the first to rise in the revolutionary struggle against capital and to rallyaround themselves in this struggle all working and exploit-ed people. 
 We are living at a wonderful time, when this prophecy of the great socialists is beginning to be realised. 
 We all see the dawn of the world socialist revolution of the proletariat breaking in several countries. 
 The unspeakable horrors ofthe imperialist butchery of nations are everywhere evoking a heroic upsurge of the oppressed and multiplying their strength in the struggle for emancipation. 
 Let this memorial to Marx and Engels again and again remind the millions of workers and peasants that we are notalone in our struggle. 
 Side by side with us the workers ofmore advanced countries are rising. 
 Hard battles stilllie ahead of them and us. 
 In common struggle capitalistoppression will be broken, and socialism finally won! Brief reports published November 9, 1918 in Pravda No. 
 242 First published in full Published according to April 3, 1924 in the manuscript Pravda No. 
 76 SPEECH AT THE UNVEILING OF A MEMORIAL PLAQUE TO THOSE WHO FELL IN THE OCTOBER REVOLUTION NOVEMBER 7, 1918 Comrades, we are here to unveil a memorial to those who fell in the October Revolution, 1917. 
 The best sons ofthe working people laid down their lives in starting arevolution to liberate nations from imperialism, to put anend to wars among nations, to overthrow capital and to win socialism. 
 For several decades now the history of Russia has had a long list of revolutionary martyrs. 
 Thousands upon thou-sands died fighting tsarism. 
 Their death roused new fightersand drew more and more people into the struggle. 
 Those comrades who fell last October brought the mag-nificent happiness of victory. 
 The greatest honour of which the revolutionary leaders of mankind dreamed was won bythem: over the bodies of those comrades who gallantly fellin battle passed thousands and millions of new and just asfearless fighters who won victory by their mass heroism. 
 Today, all over the world, the workers are seething with anger. 
 The workers’ socialist revolution is beginning in several countries. 
 The capitalists of the whole world interror and hatred hurriedly rally together for the revolution’ssuppression. 
 And the Socialist Soviet Republic of Russiais a particular thorn in their side. 
 The combined imperial-ists of the world are prepared to attack us, to involve us in more battles, and to impose more sacrifices on us. 
 Comrades, let us honour the memory of the October fighters by swearing before their memorial that we shall follow in their footsteps and emulate their courage and heroism. 
 Let their motto be our motto, the motto of the rebelling workers of the world—“Victory or Death!” And with this motto the fighters for the proletarian world socialist revolution will be invincible. 
 Brief report published November 8, 1918 in Vecherniye Izvestia Moskovskovo Soveta No. 
 93 First published in full Published according to April 3, 1924 in Pravda the manuscript No. 
 76 SPEECH AT A RALLY AND CONCERT FOR THE ALL -RUSSIA EXTRAORDINARY COMMISSION STAFF NOVEMBER 7, 1918 (Storm of applause . 
) Comrades, in celebrating the anni-versary of our revolution, I would like to say a few wordsabout the onerous duties of the Extraordinary Commissions. 
 It is not at all surprising to hear Cheka’s activities frequently attacked by friends as well as enemies. 
 We have taken on a hard job. 
 When we took over the government ofthe country, we naturally made many mistakes, and it isonly natural that the mistakes of the Extraordinary Commis-sions strike the eye most. 
 The narrow-minded intellectualfastens on these mistakes without trying to get to the root of the matter. 
 What does surprise me in all these outcries about Cheka’s mistakes is the manifest inability to putthe question on a broad footing. 
 People harp on individualmistakes Cheka makes, and raise a hue and cry about them. 
 We, however, say that we learn from our mistakes. 
 In this department, as in all others, we say we shall learn by self-criticism. 
 It is not a matter, of course, of Cheka’s personnel but the nature of its functions, which demanddetermined, swift and, above all, faithful action. 
 WhenI consider its activities and see how they are attacked, I saythis is all narrow-minded and futile talk. 
 It reminds me ofKautsky’s homily on the dictatorship, which is tantamount to supporting the bourgeoisie. 
 We surely know from experi-ence that the expropriation of the bourgeoisie entails adrastic struggle—a dictatorship. 
 Marx said that the revolutionary dictatorship of the proletariat lies between capitalism and communism. 
 The more the proletariat presses the bourgeoisie, the more furiously they will resist. 
 We know what vengeance was wreaked on theworkers in France in 1848. 
 And when people charge us withharshness we wonder how they can forget the rudiments ofMarxism. 
 We have not forgotten the mutiny of the officercadets 68 in October, and we must not forget that a number of revolts are now being engineered. 
 We have, on the one hand,to learn to work constructively, and, on the other, to smashthe bourgeoisie’s resistance. 
 The Finnish whiteguards, forall their much-vaunted democracy, had no scruples aboutshooting down workers. 
 The realisation of the need for dic-tatorship has taken deep root in the people’s minds, arduous and difficult though it is. 
 That alien elements should try to worm their way into Cheka is quite natural. 
 With the help ofself-criticism we shall dig them out. 
 The important thingfor us is that Cheka is directly exercising the dictatorshipof the proletariat, and in that respect its services are in-valuable. 
 There is no way of emancipating the people except by forcibly suppressing the exploiters. 
 That is what Cheka is doing, and therein lies its service to the proletariat. 
 Brief reports published Published according to November 9, 1918 in the typewritten copy Izvestia No. 
 244 of the minutes SPEEC H AT A MEETIN G OF DELEGATES FRO M THE POO R PEASANTS ’ COMMITTEES OF CENTRA L GUBERNIAS NOVEMBE R 8, 191869 Comrades, the organisation of the poor peasants is the key problem in our internal construction work, and even in our whole revolution. 
 The aim of the October Revolution was to wrench the factories from the hands of the capitalists so as to make the means of production the property of the whole people, and to reconstruct agriculture on socialist lines by handingover the land to the peasants. 
 The first part of this aim was much easier to accomplish than the second. 
 In the cities, the revolution was dealingwith large-scale industry employing tens and hundreds of thousands of workers. 
 The factories belonged to a small number of capitalists, who gave the workers little trouble. 
The workers had already gained experience in their longstruggle against the capitalists, which had taught them toact concertedly, resolutely, and in an organised way. 
Moreover, they did not have to split up the factories; the thing that mattered was to make all production serve the interests of the working class and the peasants and see thatthe products of labour should not fall into capitalist hands. 
 But agriculture is quite a different proposition. 
 A num-ber of transitional measures are required if socialism isto win here. 
 To transform a vast number of small peasant farms into large farms is something that cannot be done immediately. 
 Agriculture, which has hitherto been conductedon a haphazard basis, cannot immediately or in a short space of time be socialised and transformed into large-scale state enterprise, whose produce would be equally and justly distributed among all working people under a system of universal and equal labour service. 
 While the factory workers in the cities have already succeeded in completely overthrowing the capitalists andgetting rid of exploitation, in the countryside the realfight against exploitation has only just begun. 
 After the October Revolution we finished off the land-owner and took away his land. 
 That, however, did not end therural struggle. 
 Gaining the land, like every other workers’gain, can only be secure when it is based on the independentaction of the working people themselves, on their own organ-isation, on their endurance and revolutionary determination. 
 Did the peasants have this organisation? Unfortunately not. 
 And that is the trouble, the reason why the struggle is so difficult. 
 Peasants who do not employ the labour of others, who do not profit at the expense of others, will, of course, alwaysbe in favour of the land being divided among all equally, of everybody working, of land tenure not serving as a basis of exploitation; they are against the concentration of landin the hands of a few. 
 But it is different with the kulaks andthe parasites who grew rich on the war, who took advantageof the famine to sell grain at fabulous prices, who concealedgrain in anticipation of higher prices, and who are now doing all they can to grow rich on the people’s misfortunes and on the starvation of the village poor and urban workers. 
 They, the kulaks and parasites, are no less formidable enemies than the capitalists and landowners. 
 And if thekulaks are not dealt with properly, if we do not cope withthe parasites, the return of the tsar and the capitalists is inevitable. 
 The experience of every revolution that has occurred in Europe offers striking corroboration of the fact that revolu-tion is inevitably doomed if the peasants do not throw offthe domination of the kulaks. 
 Every European revolution ended in failure because the peasants could not cope with their enemies. 
 In the cities the workers overthrew their kings (in England and Francethey executed their kings several centuries ago; it was only we who were late with our tsar), yet after a certain interval the old order came back. 
 That was because in those days even in the cities there was no large-scale industry which could unite millions of workers in the factories andweld them into an army powerful enough to withstand theonslaught of the capitalists and the kulaks even withoutpeasant support. 
 The poor peasants were unorganised, fought the kulaks badly, and as a result the revolution was defeated in the cities as well. 
 Now the situation is different. 
 During the last two hundred years large-scale production has developed so powerfullyand has covered all countries with such a network of hugefactories employing thousands and tens of thousands of work-ers that today everywhere in the cities there are many organised workers, the proletarians, who constitute a forcestrong enough to achieve final victory over the bourgeoisie,the capitalists. 
 In former revolutions the poor peasants had nowhere to turn for support in their difficult struggle against the kulaks. 
 The organised proletariat—which is stronger and more experienced than the peasants (having gained experience inearlier struggles)—now holds power in Russia and possessesall the means of production, the mills, factories, railways,ships, etc. 
 Now the poor peasants have a reliable and powerful ally in their anti-kulak struggle. 
 They know that the town isbehind them, that the proletariat will help them, and is infact already helping them with every means in its power. 
That has been shown by recent events. 
 You all remember, comrades, in what a dangerous situa-tion the revolution was this July. 
 The Czech revolt was spreading, the food shortage in the cities was worsening andthe kulaks were becoming more insolent and violent than everin their attacks on the towns, the Soviet government and thepoor peasants. 
 We appealed to the poor peasants to organise. 
 We pro-ceeded to form Poor Peasants’ Committees and organise workers’ food detachments. 
 The Left Socialist-Revolutiona-ries started an uprising. 
 They said the Poor Peasants’ Committees consisted of idlers and the workers were rob-bing the working peasants of grain. 
 We replied that they were defending the kulaks, who realised that the Soviet government could be fought bystarvation as well as arms. 
 They talked about “idlers”. 
 Andwe asked, “But why does an individual become an ‘idler’, whydoes he deteriorate, why is he impoverished, and why does hetake to drink? Isn’t it because of the kulaks?” The kulaks, in unison with the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries, raised an outcry against “idlers”, but they themselves were raking in grain,concealing it and profiteering because they wanted togrow rich on the starvation and suffering of the workers. 
 The kulaks were squeezing the poor peasants dry. 
 They were profiting from the labour of others, at the same time crying, “Idlers!” The kulaks waited impatiently for the Czechs. 
 They would most willingly have enthroned a new tsar so as tocontinue their exploitation with impunity, to continue todominate the farm labourer and to continue to grow rich. 
 The only salvation was in the village uniting with the town, the rural proletarians and semi-proletarians (those who do not employ the labour of others) joining the town workersin a campaign against the kulaks and parasites. 
 To achieve this unity a great deal had to be done about the food situation. 
 The workers in the towns were starving,while the kulak said: “If I hold my grain back a bit longer they may pay more. 
” The kulaks, of course, are in no hurry; they have plenty of money; they say themselves they have tons of Kerenskynotes. 
 70 But people who during famine can conceal and hoard grain are vicious criminals. 
 They must be fought as the worst enemies of the people. 
 And we have begun this fight in the countryside. 
The Mensheviks and S. 
R. 
s tried to frighten us by saying that in forming the Poor Peasants’ Committees we weresplitting the peasants. 
 But if we don’t split the peasants?The countryside will be left at the kulak’s mercy. 
 And that is exactly what we do not want, so we decided to split them. 
 We said: true, we are losing the kulaks—we cannot avoidthat misfortune ( laughter )—but we shall win thousands and millions of poor peasants who will side with the workers. 
 (Applause . 
) And that is exactly what is taking place. 
 The split among the peasants only served to bring out more clearly who arethe poor peasants, who are the middle peasants not employingthe labour of others, and who are the parasites and kulaks. 
 The workers have been helping the poor peasants in their struggle against the kulaks. 
 In the civil war that has flared up in the countryside the workers are on the side of the poor peasants, as they were when they passed the S. 
R. 
-sponsored law on the socialisation of the land. 
 We Bolsheviks were opposed to this law. 
 Yet we signed it, because we did not want to oppose the will of the majorityof peasants. 
 The majority will is binding on us always, and to oppose the majority will is to betray the revolution. 
 We did not want to impose on the peasants the idea that the equal division of the land was useless, an idea which wasalien to them. 
 Far better, we thought, if, by their own ex-perience and suffering, the peasants themselves come torealise that equal division is nonsense. 
 Only then could we ask them how they would escape the ruin and kulak domina-tion that follow from the division of the land. 
 Division of the land was all very well as a beginning. 
 Its purpose was to show that the land was being taken fromthe landowners and handed over to the peasants. 
 But that isnot enough. 
 The solution lies only in socialised farming. 
 You did not realise this at the time, but you are coming round to it by force of experience. 
 The way to escape thedisadvantages of small-scale farming lies in communes,artels or peasant associations. 
 That is the way to improveagriculture, economise forces and combat the kulaks, para-sites and exploiters. 
 We were well aware that the peasants live rooted to the soil. 
 The peasants fear innovations and tenaciously clingto old habits. 
 We knew the peasants would only believe inthe benefits of any particular measure when their own com-mon sense led them to understand and appreciate the benefits. 
And that is why we helped to divide the land, although we realised this was no solution. 
 Now the poor peasants themselves are beginning to agree with us. 
 Experience is teaching them that while ten ploughs, /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR say, are required when the land is divided into one hundred separate holdings, a smaller number suffices under communal farming because the land is not divided up so minutely. 
 A commune permits a whole artel or association to make im-provements in agriculture that are beyond the capacity ofindividual small owners, and so on. 
 Of course, it will not be possible to change everywhere to socialised farming immediately. 
 The kulaks will put up every resistance—and frequently the peasants themselves stubbornly resist the introduction of communal farmingprinciples. 
 But the more the peasants are convinced byexample and by their own experience of the advantages ofcommunes, the greater progress will be. 
 The Poor Peasants’ Committees have an immensely impor-tant part to play. 
 They must cover the whole of Russia. 
 For some time their development has been quite rapid. 
 The otherday a Congress of Poor Peasants’ Committees of the NorthernRegion was held in Petrograd. 
 Instead of the 7,000 represent-atives expected, 20,000 actually turned up, and the hallbooked for the purpose could not accommodate them all. 
 The fine weather came to the rescue and the meeting was held in the square outside the Winter Palace. 
 The Congress showed that the rural civil war is being properly understood: the poor peasants are uniting andfighting together against the kulaks, the rich and the parasites. 
 Our Party Central Committee has drawn up a plan for reforming the Poor Peasants’ Committees which will be sub-mitted for the approval of the Sixth Congress of Soviets. 
We have decided that the Poor Peasants’ Committees andthe rural Soviets must not exist separately, otherwise therewill be squabbling and too much useless talk. 
 We shallmerge the Poor Peasants’ Committees with the Soviets and turn the Poor Peasants’ Committees into Soviets. 
 We know kulaks sometimes worm their way even into the Poor Peasants’ Committees. 
 If this continues the poorpeasants will have the same sort of attitude towards theCommittees as they had towards the kulak Soviets of Ke-rensky and Avksentyev. 
 A change of name will fool nobody. 
 It is therefore proposed to hold new elections to the Poor Peasants’ Committees. 
 The right to vote will only go tothose who do not exploit the labour of others, who do not make the starving people a source of plunder, and who do not profiteer on or conceal grain surpluses. 
 There must be no place for kulaks and parasites in the proletarian Poor Peasants’ Committees. 
 The Soviet government has decided to assign one thou-sand million rubles to a special fund for improving farming. 
All existing and newly formed communes will receive mone-tary and technical assistance. 
 We shall send trained experts if they are required. 
 Although most of these experts are counter-revolutionary, the PoorPeasants’ Committees should be able to harness them andthey will work for the people no worse than they used towork for the exploiters. 
 Our specialists are now quite surethey cannot overthrow the workers’ government by sabotage or wilful damage to work. 
 We are not afraid of foreign imperialism either. 
 Germany has already burnt her fingers in the Ukraine. 
 Instead ofthe sixty million poods of grain which Germany hoped tocarry off from the Ukraine, she got only nine million poods,and Russian Bolshevism into the bargain, for which she was not so keen. 
 ( Storm of applause . 
) The British should watch out the same thing does not happen to them. 
 We mightwarn them not to choke themselves! ( Laughter and applause . 
) The danger, however, continues to exist as long as our brothers abroad have not everywhere rebelled. 
 And we must therefore continue to organise and strengthen our Red Army. 
 The poor peasants should be particularly concerned in thismatter for they can only carry on farming under the protectionof our army. 
 Comrades, the transition to the new form of agriculture may perhaps proceed slowly, but the beginnings of communal farming must be carried into practice unswervingly. 
 There must be no let-up in the fight against the kulaks, and no deals must be made with them. 
 We can work together with the middle peasants, and with them fight the kulaks. 
 We have nothing against the middlepeasants. 
 They may not be socialists, and may never become socialists, but experience will teach them the advantages of socialised farming and the majority of them will notresist. 
 We tell the kulaks: We have nothing against you either, but hand over your surplus grain, don’t profiteer and don’t exploit the labour of others. 
 Until you do so we shall hit you with everything we’ve got. 
 We are taking nothing from the working peasants; but we shall completely expropriate all those who employ hiredlabour and who grow rich at the expense of others. 
 ( Stormy applause . 
) Byednota No. 
 185 Published according to November 10, 1918 the Byednota text TELEGRAM TO ALL SOVIETS OF DEPUTIES, TO EVERYONE 10. 
11 . 
18 News came from Germany in the night about the victory of the revolution there. 
 First Kiel radio announced that power was in the hands of a Council of Workers and Sailors. 
Then Berlin made the following announcement: “Greetings of peace and freedom to all. 
 Berlin and the surrounding districts are in the hands of a Council ofWorkers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies. 
 Adolf Hoffmann, Deputy to the Seym. 
 Joffe and the Embassy staff are returning at once. 
” Please take every step to notify German soldiers at all border points. 
 Berlin also reports that German soldiers atthe front have arrested the peace delegation from the for-mer German Government and have begun peace negotiations themselves with the French soldiers. 
 Lenin , Chairman of the Council of People’s Commissars Pravda No. 
 244, Published according to November 12, 1918 the manuscript SPEEC H AT THE FIRS T ALL-RUSSI A CONGRESS OF WORKIN G WOMEN 71 NOVEMBER 19, 1918 (Comrade Lenin is greeted by the delegates with stormy ap-plause . 
) Comrades, in a certain sense this Congress of the women’s section of the workers’ army has a special signifi-cance, because one of the hardest things in every country hasbeen to stir the women into action. 
 There can be no socialistrevolution unless very many working women take a bigpart in it. 
 In all civilised countries, even the most advanced, women are actually no more than domestic slaves. 
 Women do notenjoy full equality in any capitalist state, not even in thefreest of republics. 
 One of the primary tasks of the Soviet Republic is to abol-ish all restrictions on women’s rights. 
 The Soviet govern-ment has completely abolished divorce proceedings, that source of bourgeois degradation, repression and humilia-tion. 
 It will soon be a year now since complete freedom of divorce was legislated. 
 We have passed a decree annullingall distinction between legitimate and illegitimate children and removing political restrictions. 
 Nowhere else in the world have equality and freedom for working women been sofully established. 
 We know that it is the working-class woman who has to bear the full brunt of antiquated codes. 
 For the first time in history, our law has removed every-thing that denied women rights. 
 But the important thingis not the law. 
 In the cities and industrial areas this lawon complete freedom of marriage is doing all right, but in the countryside it all too frequently remains a dead letter. 
 There the religious marriage still predominates. 
 This is due to the influence of the priests, an evil that is harder to combat than the old legislation. 
 We must be extremely careful in fighting religious preju-dices-some people cause a lot of harm in this struggle byoffending religious feelings. 
 We must use propaganda andeducation. 
 By lending too sharp an edge to the struggle we may only arouse popular resentment; such methods of strug-gle tend to perpetuate the division of the people along re-ligious lines, whereas our strength lies in unity. 
 The deepestsource of religious prejudice is poverty and ignorance; andthat is the evil we have to combat. 
 The status of women up to now has been compared to that of a slave; women have been tied to the home, and only socialism can save them from this. 
 They will only be com-pletely emancipated when we change from small-scale indi-vidual farming to collective farming and collective workingof the land. 
 That is a difficult task. 
 But now that PoorPeasants’ Committees are being formed, the time has come when the socialist revolution is being consolidated. 
 The poorest part of the rural population is only now be-ginning to organise, and socialism is acquiring a firm foun-dation in these organisations of poor peasants. 
 Before, often the town became revolutionary and then the countryside. 
 But the present revolution relies on the countryside, and therein lie its significance and strength. 
 The experienceof all liberation movements has shown that the success ofa revolution depends on how much the women take part init. 
 The Soviet government is doing everything in its powerto enable women to carry on independent proletarian so-cialist work. 
 The Soviet government is in a difficult position because the imperialists of all countries hate Soviet Russia and arepreparing to go to war with her for kindling the fire of rev-olution in a number of countries and for taking determinedsteps towards socialism. 
 Now that they are out to destroy revolutionary Russia, the ground is beginning to burn under their own feet. 
 Youknow how the revolutionary movement is spreading in Ger-many. 
 In Denmark the workers are fighting their government. 
 In Switzerland and Holland the revolutionary movement is getting stronger. 
 The revolutionary movement in these small countries has no importance in itself, but it is particularlysignificant because there was no war in these countries andthey had the most “constitutional” democratic system. 
 Ifcountries like these are stirring into action, it makes ussure the revolutionary movement is gaining ground all over the world. 
 No other republic has so far been able to emancipate woman. 
 The Soviet government is helping her. 
 Our cause isinvincible because the invincible working class is risingin all countries. 
 This movement signifies the spread of theinvincible socialist revolution. 
 ( Prolonged applause. 
 All sing the “Internationale ”. 
) Newspaper report published Published according to November 20, 1918 the typewritten copy of in Izvestia No. 
 253 the minutes checked with the newspaper text SPEEC H AT A RALL Y IN LENI N’S HONOUR NOVEMBE R 20, 191872 BRIEF NEWSPAPER REPORT (Comrade Lenin is greeted with stormy applause passing into ovation . 
) Comrades, I should like to say a few words about a letter in today’s Pravda . 
 The letter is written by Pitirim Sorokin, a prominent member of the Constituent Assembly and Right Socialist-Revolutionary Party. 
 Soro-kin informs his constituents that he is relinquishing his seat in the Constituent Assembly and withdrawing com-pletely from politics. 
 Apart from being an extremely inter-esting “human document”, the letter has a great deal ofpolitical significance. 
 As is fairly well known, Pitirim Sorokin was the main force on the staff of the Right-wing S. 
R. 
 Volya Naroda 73 which connived with the Cadets. 
 To admit this in the pressis quite a volte-face , a big change, which is taking place among people who had been violently hostile to the Sovietgovernment up till now. 
 In saying that in many cases thepolicy of certain statesmen is socially harmful, PitirimSorokin shows that he is publicly and hohestly admitting at last that the whole policy of the Right-wing S. 
R. 
s was socially harmful. 
 Through recent events, many members of this party are beginning to realise that the time has come when the Bol-shevik stand is being proved right and all the blunders anderrors of its inveterate enemies are being exposed. 
 Sorokin’s letter goes to show that at the given moment we can count on at least a neutral attitude to the Sovietgovernment from a whole number of groups now antagonistic. 
 The monstrous Brest-Litovsk Peace Treaty turned many away from us, many did not believe in revolution, many piously trusted the pure intentions of the Allies; and now all this has been exposed and everyone can see that the notoriousAllies, having dictated even more monstrous peace terms toGermany than those at Brest-Litovsk, are just as rapaciousas the German imperialists. 
 As we all know, the Allies are supporters of the monarchy in Russia: in Archangel, for instance, they are actively backing the monarchists. 
 The British are attacking Russiato take the place of the vanquished German imperialists. 
All this has opened the eyes of even the most inveterate anduninformed enemies of the revolution. 
 Many people had been blind supporters of the Constituent Assembly up till now, although we had always said it was just a slogan of the landowners, the monarchists and the en-tire bourgeoisie with Milyukov at their head, who is sellingRussia left, right and centre to the highest bidder. 
 The “Republic” of America is oppressing the working class. 
 Now everyone knows what a democratic republic actually is. 
 Now it is apparent to everyone that either victorious imperialism or Soviet power can exist—there’s nomiddle way. 
 ( Lenin ’s speech is repeatedly interrupted by stormy ovations . 
) Pravda No. 
 253, Published according to November 22, 1918 the Pravda text THE VALUABLE ADMISSlONS OF PITIRIM SOROKIN Pravda today carries a remarkably interesting letter by Pitirim Sorokin, to which the special attention of allCommunists should be drawn. 
 In this letter, which was originally published in Izvestia of the North Dvina Executive Committee , 74 Pitirim Sorokin announces that he is leaving the Right Socialist-Revolutionary Party and relinquishinghis seat in the Constituent Assembly. 
 His motives are thathe finds it difficult to provide effective political recipes,not only for others, but even for himself, and that therefore he “is withdrawing completely from politics”. 
 He writes: “The past year of revolution has taught me one truth: poli-ticians may make mistakes, politics may be socially useful,but may also be socially harmful, whereas scientific andeducational work is always useful and is always neededby the people .... 
” The letter is signed: “Pitirim Sorokin, lecturer at St. 
 Petersburg University and the Psycho-Neurological Institute, former member of the ConstituentAssembly and former member of the Socialist-Revolution-ary Party”. 
 This letter is worth mentioning in the first place because it is an extremely interesting “human document”. 
 We do not often meet such sincerity and frankness as are dis-played by Sorokin in admitting the mistakenness of hispolitics. 
 In practically the majority of cases politicianswho become convinced that the line they have been pursuingis erroneous try to conceal their change of front, to hushit up, to “invent” more or less extraneous motives, and so on. 
 A frank and honest admission of one’s political error is in itself an important political act. 
 Pitirim Sorokin iswrong when he says that scientific work “is always useful”. 
 For mistakes are made in this sphere too, and there are examples also in Russian literature of the obstinate advocacy of, for instance, reactionary philosophical views by people who are not conscious reactionaries. 
 On the other hand, afrank declaration by a prominent person—i. 
e. 
, a person whohas occupied a responsible political post known to the peopleat large—that he is withdrawing from politics is also poli-tics. 
 An honest confession of a political error may be of great political benefit to many people if the error was shared by whole parties which at one time enjoyed influence over thepeople. 
 The political significance of Pitirim Sorokin’s letter is very great precisely at the present moment. 
 It is a “lesson”which we should all seriously think over and learn thoroughly. 
 It is a truth long known to every Marxist that in every capitalist society the only decisive forces are the proletar-iat and the bourgeoisie, while all social elements occu-pying a position between these classes and coming withinthe economic category of the petty bourgeoisie inevitably vacillate between these decisive forces. 
 But there is an enormous gulf between academic recognition of this truthand the ability to draw the conclusions that follow from itin the complex conditions of practical reality. 
 Pitirim Sorokin is representative of the Menshevik Socialist-Revolutionary trend, an extremely broad public and political trend. 
 That this is a single trend, that the difference between the Mensheviks and the Socialist-Revo-lutionaries in their attitude towards the struggle betweenthe bourgeoisie and the proletariat is insignificant, is es-pecially convincingly and strikingly borne out by the eventsin the Russian revolution since February 1917. 
 The Men-sheviks and the Socialist-Revolutionaries are varieties of petty-bourgeois democrats—that is the economic essenceand fundamental political characteristic of the trend inquestion. 
 We know from the history of the advanced coun-tries how frequently this trend in its early stages assumes a“socialist” hue. 
 What was it that several months ago so forcibly repelled those of this trend from the Bolsheviks, from the proletar-ian revolution, and what is it that is now inducing them to shift from hostility to neutrality? It is quite obvious that the cause of this shift was, firstly, the collapse of German imperialism in connection with the revolution in Germany and other countries, and the exposure of Anglo-Frenchimperialism, and, secondly, the dispelling of bourgeois-democratic illusions. 
 Let us deal with the first cause. 
 Patriotism is one of the most deeply ingrained sentiments, inculcated by the existence of separate fatherlands for hundreds and thousands of years. 
 One of the most pronounced, one might say excep-tional, difficulties of our proletarian revolution is that itwas obliged to pass through a phase of extreme departurefrom patriotism, the phase of the Brest-Litovsk Peace. 
 Thebitterness, resentment, and violent indignation provoked by this peace were easy to understand and it goes without saying that we Marxists could expect only the class-con-scious vanguard of the proletariat to appreciate the truththat we were making and were obliged to make great nationalsacrifices for the sake of the supreme interests of the worldproletarian revolution. 
 There was no source from which ideologists who are not Marxists, and the broad mass of the working people, who do not belong to the proletariat trainedin the long school of strikes and revolution, could deriveeither a firm conviction that the revolution was maturing, oran unreserved devotion to it. 
 At best, our tactics appearedto them a fantastic, fanatical, and adventurist sacrifice of the real and most obvious interests of hundreds of millions for the sake of an abstract, utopian, and dubious hope ofsomething that might occur abroad. 
 And the petty bourgeoi-sie, owing to their economic position, are more patrioticthan the bourgeoisie or the proletariat. 
 But it turned out as we had said. 
 German imperialism, which had seemed to be the only enemy, collapsed. 
 The German revolution, which hadappeared to be a “dream-farce” (to use Plekhanov’s expression),became a fact. 
 Anglo-French imperialism, which the fantasyof the petty-bourgeois democrats had pictured as a friend ofdemocracy and a protector of the oppressed, turned out to be a savage beast which imposed on the German Republic and the people of Austria terms worse than those of Brest, asavage beast which used armies of “free” republicans—French and American—as gendarmes, butchers and throttlers of the independence and freedom of small and weak nations. 
 Anglo-French imperialism was exposed by world history with ruthless thoroughness and frankness. 
 The facts of worldhistory demonstrated to the Russian patriots, who formerlywould hear of nothing that was not to the direct advantage(as formerly understood) of their country, that the trans-formation of our Russian revolution into a socialist revolution was not a dubious venture but a necessity, for there was no other alternative: Anglo-French and American imperialism will inevitably destroy the independence and freedom of Russia if the world socialist revolution, world Bolshevism, does not triumph. 
 Facts are stubborn things, as the English say. 
 And during recent months we have witnessed facts that signify a most momentous turning-point in world history. 
 These factsare compelling the petty-bourgeois democrats of Russia, inspite of their hatred of Bolshevism, a hatred inculcated bythe history of our inner-Party struggle, to turn from hos-tility to Bolshevism first to neutrality and then to support of Bolshevism. 
 The objective conditions which repelled these democratic patriots from us most strongly have nowvanished. 
 The objective conditions existing in the worldnow compel them to turn to us. 
 Pitirim Sorokin’s change of front is by no means fortuitous, but rather the symptom ofan inevitable change of front on the part of a whole class , of the whole petty-bourgeois democracy. 
 Whoever fails to reckon with this fact and to take advantage of it is a badsocialist, not a Marxist. 
 Furthermore, faith in “democracy” in general , as a uni-versal panacea, and failure to understand that this democ-racy is bourgeois democracy, historically limited in its usefulness and its necessity, have for decades and centuries been particularly characteristic of the petty bourgeoisie ofall countries. 
 The big bourgeois is case-hardened; he knowsthat under capitalism a democratic republic, like everyother form of state, is nothing but a machine for the suppres-sion of the proletariat. 
 The big bourgeois knows this from his most intimate acquaintance with the real leaders and with the most profound (and therefore frequently the most con-cealed) springs of every bourgeois state machine. 
 The petty bourgeois, Owning to his economic position and his conditions of life generally, is less able to appreciate this truth, and even cherishes the illusion that a democratic republic implies “pure democracy”, “a free people’s state”, the non-class orsupra-class rule of the people, a pure manifestation of thewill of the people, and so on and so forth. 
 The tenacity ofthese prejudices of the petty-bourgeois democrat is inevit-ably due to the fact that he is farther removed from the acute class struggle, the stock exchange, and “real” politics; and it would be absolutely un-Marxist to expect theseprejudices to be eradicated very rapidly by propagandaalone. 
 World history, however, is moving with such furious rapidity, is smashing everything customary and established with a hammer of such immense weight, by crises of such unparalleled intensity, that the most tenacious prejudicesare giving way. 
 The naïve belief in a Constituent Assemblyand the naïve habit of contrasting “pure democracy” with“proletarian dictatorship” took shape naturally and inev-itably in the mind of the “democrat in general”. 
 But the experiences of the Constituent Assembly supporters in Archangel, Samara, Siberia and the South could not butdestroy even the most tenacious of prejudices. 
 The idealiseddemocratic republic of Wilson proved in practice to be a form of the most rabid imperialism, of the most shameless oppres-sion and suppression of weak and small nations. 
 The average “democrat ” in general, the Menshevik and the Socialist-Revolutionary, thought: “How can we even dream of someallegedly superior type of state, some Soviet government?God grant us even an ordinary democratic republic!” And,of course, in “ordinary”, comparatively peaceful times hecould have kept on cherishing this “hope” for many a long decade. 
 Now, however, the course of world events and the bitter lessons derived from the alliance of all the Russian mon-archists with Anglo-French and American imperialism areproving in practice that a democratic republic is a bourgeois-democratic republic, which is already out of date from the point of view of the problems which imperialism has placed before history. 
 They show that there is no other alternative: either Soviet government triumphs in every advanced country in the world, or the most reactionary imperialism triumphs, the most savage imperialism, which is throttling the small and weak nations and reinstating reaction all over the world—Anglo-American imperialism, which has perfectlymastered the art of using the form of a democratic republic. 
 One or the other. 
There is no middle course. 
 Until quite recently this view was regarded as the blind fanaticism of the Bolsheviks. 
 But it turned out to be true. 
 If Pitirim Sorokin has relinquished his seat in the Con-stituent Assembly, it is not without reason; it is a symptomof a change of front on the part of a whole class, the petty-bourgeois democrats. 
 A split among them is inevitable: onesection will come over to our side, another section will remain neutral, while a third will deliberately join forces with the monarchist Constitutional-Democrats, who are sell-ing Russia to Anglo-American capital and seeking to crushthe revolution with the aid of foreign bayonets. 
 One of themost urgent tasks of the present day is to take into accountand make use of the turn among the Menshevik and Socialist-Revolutionary democrats from hostility to Bolshevism first to neutrality and then to support of Bolshevism. 
 Every slogan the Party addresses to the people is bound to become petrified, become a dead letter, yet remainvalid for many even when the conditions which rendered itnecessary have changed. 
 That is an unavoidable evil, and it is impossible to ensure the correctness of Party policy unless we learn to combat and overcome it. 
 The period ofour proletarian revolution in which the differences withthe Menshevik and Socialist-Revolutionary democrats wereparticularly acute was a historically necessary period. 
 Itwas impossible to avoid waging a vigorous struggle against these democrats when they swung to the camp of our enemies and set about restoring a bourgeois and imperialist democrat-ic republic. 
 Many of the slogans of this struggle have nowbecome frozen and petrified and prevent us from properly assessing and taking effective advantage of the new period,in which a change of front has begun among these democrats, a change in our direction, not a fortuitous change, but one rooted deep in the conditions of the international situa-tion. 
 It is not enough to encourage this change of front and amicably greet those who are making it. 
 A politician who knows what he is working for must learn to bring about this change of front among the various sections and groups of thebroad mass of petty-bourgeois democrats if he is convincedthat serious and deep-going historical reasons for such aturn exist. 
 A revolutionary proletarian must know whom tosuppress and with whom—and when and how—to conclude an agreement. 
 It would be ridiculous and foolish to refrain from employing terror against and suppressing the landownersand capitalists and their henchmen, who are selling Russiato the foreign imperialist “Allies”. 
 It would be farcicalto attempt to “convince” or generally to “psychologicallyinfluence” them. 
 But it would be equally foolish and ridic-ulous—if not more so—to insist only on tactics of suppres-sion and terror in relation to the petty-bourgeois democratswhen the course of events is compelling them to turn in ourdirection. 
 The proletariat encounters these democrats everywhere. 
 Our task in the rural districts is to destroy the landowner and smash the resistance of the exploiter and the kulak profiteer. 
 For this purpose we can safely rely only on the semi-proletarians, the “poor peasants”. 
 But the middlepeasant is not our enemy. 
 He wavered, is wavering, andwill continue to waver. 
 The task of influencing the waverersis not identical with the task of overthrowing the exploiter and defeating the active enemy. 
 The task at the present moment is to come to an agreement with the middle peasant—while not for a moment renouncing the struggle againstthe kulak and at the same time firmly relying solely on thepoor peasant—for a turn in our direction on the part of themiddle peasants is now inevitable owing to the causes enumerated above. 
 This applies also to the handicraftsman, the artisan, and the worker whose conditions are most petty-bourgeoisor whose views are most petty-bourgeois, and to many officeworkers and army officers, and, in particular, to the intellec-tuals generally. 
 It is an unquestionable fact that there often are instances in our Party of inability to make use of this change of front among them and that this inability canand must be overcome. 
 We already have the firm support of the vast majority of the proletarians organised in the trade unions. 
 We must know how to win over the least proletarian and most petty-bourgeois sections of the working people who are turning towards us, to include them in the general organisation andto subject them to general proletarian discipline. 
 Theslogan of the moment here is not to fight these sections,but to win them over, to be able to influence them, to con-vince the waverers, to make use of those who are neutral, and, by mass proletarian influence, to educate those who arelagging behind or who have only very recently begun tofree themselves from “Constituent Assembly” or “patriotic-democratic” illusions. 
 We already have sufficiently firm support among the working people. 
 This was quite strikingly borne out by the Sixth Congress of Soviets. 
 We are not afraid of the bour-geois intellectuals, but we shall not for a moment relaxthe struggle against the deliberate saboteurs and white-guards among them. 
 But the slogan of the moment is tomake use of the change of attitude towards us which is taking place among them. 
 There still remain plenty of the worst bourgeois specialists who have wormed themselvesinto Soviet positions. 
 To throw them out, to replace them byspecialists who yesterday were our convinced enemies andtoday are only neutral is one of the most important tasks ofthe present moment, the task of every active Soviet function-ary who comes into contact with the “specialists”, of every agitator, propagandist, and organiser. 
 Of course, like every other political action in a complex and rapidly changing situation, agreement with the middlepeasant, with the worker who was a Menshevik yesterdayand with the office worker or specialist who was a saboteur yesterday, takes skill to achieve. 
 The whole point is not to rest content with the skill we have acquired by previousexperience, but under all circumstances to go on , under all circumstances to strive for something bigger , under all circum-stances to proceed from simpler to more difficult tasks. 
Otherwise, no progress whatever is possible and in particular no progress is possible in socialist construction. 
 The other day I was visited by representatives from a congress of delegates of credit co-operative societies. 
 They showed me the congress resolution75 protesting against the merger of the Credit Co-operative Bank with the People’s Bank of the Republic. 
 I told them that I stood for agreement with the middle peasants and highly valued even the be-ginnings of a change in attitude from hostility to neutralitytowards the Bolsheviks on the part of the co-operators, butthe basis for an agreement could be created only by theirconsent to the complete merger of their special bank with the single Bank of the Republic. 
 The congress delegates thereupon replaced their resolution by another, which theyhad the congress adopt, and in which everything hostile tothe merger was deleted; but ... but what they proposed was a plan for a special “credit union” of co-operators, which infact differed in no way from a special bank! That was ridiculous. 
 Only a fool, of course, will be deceived by such verbiage. 
 But the “failure” of one such ... “attempt” will notaffect our policy in the least; we have pursued and will pur-sue a policy of agreement with the co-operators, the middlepeasants, at the same time suppressing every attempt tochange the policy of the Soviet government and of Soviet socialist construction. 
 Vacillation on the part of the petty-bourgeois democrats is inevitable. 
 It was enough for the Czechs to win a few vic-tories for these democrats to fall into a panic, to begin tospread panic, to hasten to the side of the “victors”, and beready to greet them in a servile manner. 
 Of course, it must not be forgotten for a moment that now, too, any partial success of, let us say, the Anglo-American-Krasnov white-guards would be enough for vacillation to begin in the otherdirection, increasing panic and multiplying cases of thedissemination of panic, of treachery, and desertion to theimperialists, and so on and so forth. 
 We are aware of that. 
 We shall not forget it. 
 The purely proletarian basis we have won for the Soviet government,which is supported by the semi-proletarians, will remainfirm and enduring. 
 Our ranks will not falter, our army willnot waver—that we already know from experience. 
 But whenprofound world-historic changes bring about an inevitable turn in our direction among the mass of non-Party, Menshe-vik, and Socialist-Revolutionary democrats, we must learnand shall learn to make use of this change of front, to encourage it, to induce it among the various groups and sections of the population, to do everything possible to reach agreement with them and thus facilitate the work of socialist construction and ease the burden of grievous economic dis-location, ignorance, and incompetence which are delayingthe victory of socialism. 
 Written November 20, 1918 Published November 21, 1918 Published according to in Pravda No. 
 252 the Pravda text Signed: N. 
 Lenin SPEEC H ON RED OFFICE RS’ DAY NOVEMBE R 24, 191876 (Thunderous applause , singing of the “Internationale ”. 
) Greetings on behalf of the People’s Commissars. 
 When-ever I think about the tasks of our army and Red officers, I recall something that happened in a train on FinnishRailways not so long ago. 
 I noticed that the passengers were smiling at something an old Finnish woman was saying, so I asked someone totranslate her words. 
 She was comparing the revolutionary soldiers to the old soldiers and saying that the former protected the poor whereas the latter used to protect theinterests of the bourgeoisie and the landowners. 
 “Formerlythe poor man had to pay heavily for every stick of wood hetook without permission,” the old woman said. 
 “But whenyou meet a soldier in the woods nowadays he’ll even give you a hand with your bundle of sticks. 
 You don’t have to fear the man with the gun any more,” she said. 
 I think it would be hard to imagine any better tribute to the Red Army than that. 
 Most of the old officers were the spoiled and depraved darling sons of capitalists, who had nothing in common with the private soldier. 
 So in building our new army now, we must draw our officers solely from among the people. 
 OnlyRed officers will have any respect among the soldiers andbe able to strengthen socialism in our army. 
 Such anarmy will be invincible. 
 Izvestia No. 
 258, Published according to November 26, 1918 the Izvestia text SPEEC H DELIVERE D TO A MEETIN G OF DELEGATES FRO M THE MOSCO W CENTRA L WORKERS’ CO-OPERATIVE NOVEMBE R 26, 191877 (Comrade Lenin ’s appearance is greeted with stormy, pro-longed applause . 
) Comrades, greetings to you representatives of the workers’ co-operative societies that have a tremendous part to play in setting the whole business of supply on the proper lines. 
 In the Council of People’s Commissars we have frequently, especially just lately, had to discussquestions that concern co-operative societies and the atti-tude of the workers’ and peasants’ government towards them. 
 In this respect we should remember how important the role of the co-operative movement was under capitalism, when it functioned on the principle of fighting the capitalist class economically. 
 It is certainly true that in their approach to the practical work of distribution, the co-operatives often turned theinterests of the people into the interests of a group of indi-viduals, and were often guided by the urge to share trading profits with the capitalists. 
 With purely commercial inter-ests as their guide, the co-operators often forgot about thesocialist system that seemed to them to be too far away, oreven unattainable. 
 The co-operatives were often associations of mainly petty-bourgeois people, middle peasants, whose efforts in the co-operative movement were governed by their own petty-bourgeois interests. 
 Nevertheless these co-operativesundoubtedly helped to encourage popular initiative, thereby rendering a great service. 
 They really did build big economic organisations based on popular initiative, and in this, we must admit, they played an important role. 
 In some cases these economic organisations developed into institutions capable of replacing or complementing thecapitalist apparatus; this is something we should recognise. 
But in the meantime the urban workers had been drawninto the organisation of large-scale capitalist industry to such an extent that they had grown strong enough to overthrow the landowning and capitalist class, and to be capable ofutilising the entire capitalist apparatus. 
 The urban workers well appreciated that owing to the disorder caused by the imperialist war the supply systemhad to be put in order and for that purpose they used, first and foremost, the big economic apparatus of the capital-ists. 
 We must keep that in mind. 
 The co-operative movement is a huge cultural legacy that we must treasure and makeuse of. 
 Hence we approached the problem cautiously in the Council of People’s Commissars when we had to deal with it, knowing full well how important it was to make full useof that efficient economic apparatus. 
 Yet we had to bear in mind that the chief co-operative workers were Mensheviks, Right S. 
R. 
s and members ofother compromise and petty-bourgeois parties. 
 We could not forget that while the political groups between the two war-ring classes used the co-operatives partially as a screen forcounter-revolutionaries, even to support the Czechs out oftheir funds. 
 We had evidence of this all right. 
 This, however,was certainly not the case everywhere and we frequentlyinvited the co-operatives to work with us, if they wished to. 
 Soviet Russia’s international position has recently be-come such that many petty-bourgeois groups have come torealise the importance of the workers’ and peasants’ govern-ment. 
 When Soviet Russia was faced with the Brest-Litovsk negotiations and we were forced to conclude that very harsh peace with the German imperialists, the Mensheviks and Right S. 
R. 
s were particularly vociferous in attackingus. 
 When Soviet Russia was forced to conclude that peace, the Mensheviks and S. 
R. 
s raised a hue and cry that the Bolsheviks were ruining Russia. 
 Some of those people thought the Bolsheviks were uto-pians, dreamers who believed in the possibility of worldrevolution. 
 Others thought the Bolsheviks were agents ofGerman imperialism. 
 Furthermore, many of them in those days assumed that the Bolsheviks had made concessions to German imperialism and gloated over this being an agreement with the ruling German bourgeoisie. 
 I won’t mention other expressions unflattering, to say the least, that these groups then hurled at the Soviet govern-ment. 
 Recent events all over the world, however, have taught the Mensheviks and Right S. 
R. 
s a great deal. 
 The Menshe-vik Central Committee appeal to all working people 78 pub-lished recently in our press states that although they haveideological differences with the Communists they considerit necessary to fight world imperialism today headed by theAnglo-American capitalists. 
 Indeed, events of tremendous importance have occurred. 
 Soviets of Workers’ Deputies have been formed in Rumaniaand Austria-Hungary. 
 In Germany the Soviets have opposedthe Constituent Assembly and soon, perhaps in a few weeks,the Haase-Scheidemann government will fall and be replacedby the Liebknecht government. 
 At the same time the British and French capitalists are doing all they can to crush the Russian revolution and thereby halt the worldrevolution. 
 Everyone now realises that the aspirations ofAllied imperialism go even farther than those of Germanimperialism; the terms imposed on Germany are even worsethan those of the Brest-Litovsk Peace Treaty, and on top of that they want to crush the revolution and be world gendarmes. 
 The Mensheviks have shown by their resolutionthat they realise which way the British winds are blowing. 
We must not now turn them away, on the contrary, we mustmeet them halfway and give them a chance to work with us. 
 Last April the Communists showed they were not averse to working with co-operators. 
 It is the job of the Commu-nists, relying on the support of the urban proletariat, tobe able to use all those who can be enlisted for the work, who formerly adopted socialist slogans but did not have the courage to continue fighting for them until they achieved victory or were defeated. 
 Marx said the proletariat must expropriate the capitalists and make use of petty-bourgeois groups. 
 And we said everything must be taken from the capitalists but only pressure must be brought to bear on the kulaks and they must be kept under the con-trol of the grain monopoly. 
 We must come to an agreement with the middle peasants, bring them under our control, while at the same time actually promoting the ideals of socialism. 
 We must say forthrightly that the workers and poor peasants will do all they can to really promote the ideals of socialism, and if there are people out of step with these ideals, we shall go it alone. 
 We must, however, make use of everyone who can really help us in this most difficult struggle. 
 When discussing these questions last April the Council of People’s Commissars came to an agreement with the co-operators . 
79 This was the only meeting that was attended by members of the non-government co-operative movement as well as the Communist People’s Commissars. 
 We came to an agreement with them. 
 This was the only meeting that adopted a decision by a minority, by co-opera-tors, and not by a majority of Communists. 
 The Council of People’s Commissars did this because it thought it necessary to make use of the experience and knowl-edge of the co-operators and of their apparatus. 
 You also know that a decree80 on the organisation of supply was adopted a few days ago and published in Sunday’s Izvestia , and which allots a considerable role to the co-operatives and the co-operative movement. 
 This is be-cause socialist economic organisation is impossible without a network of co-operative organisations and because there have been a lot of mistakes in this sphere up to now. 
 Someco-operatives have been closed or nationalised even thoughthe Soviets could not cope with distribution and the organi-sation of Soviet shops. 
 By the decree everything taken from the co-operatives must be returned to them. 
 The co-operatives must be denationalised and re-estab-lished. 
 True enough, the decree is cautious towards co-operatives that were closed because counter-revolutionaries had wormed their way into them. 
 We categorically stated that in this respect the work of the co-operatives had to be kept undercontrol, although they must be fully utilised. 
 All of you well appreciate that one of the proletariat’s chief tasks is the immediate and proper organisation of thesupply and distribution of food. 
 Since we do have an apparatus with the necessary exper-ience and which, most important of all, is based on popularinitiative, we must set it to fulfilling these tasks. 
 It is par-ticularly important to utilise the initiative of the people whocreated these organisations. 
 The ordinary people must bedrawn into this work, and this is the main task we must set the co-operatives, the workers’ co-operatives in particular. 
 The supply and distribution of food is something everyone understands. 
 Even a man with no book-learning understands. 
And in Russia most people are still ignorant and illiteratebecause everything had been done to prevent the workingand exploited people from acquiring education. 
 Yet there are very many live wires among the people who can display tremendous ability, far greater than might beimagined. 
 It is, therefore, the duty of the workers’ co-oper-atives to enlist these people, to nose them out and give themdirect work in the supply and distribution of food. 
 Socialistsociety is one single co-operative. 
 I do not doubt that popular initiative in the workers’ co-operatives will indeed lead to the conversion of the work-ers’ co-operatives into a single Moscow city consumers’commune. 
 Published in December 1918 Published according to as a leaflet and in the journal the leaflet checked with Rabochy Mir No. 
 19 the journal MOSCO W PARTY WORKE RS’ MEETING NOVEMBE R 27, 191881 1 REPORT ON THE ATTITUDE OF THE PROLETARIAT TO PETTY -BOURGEOIS DEMOCRATS Comrades, I should like to talk about the tasks facing our Party and the Soviet government in connection with the policy of the proletariat towards the petty -bourgeois democrats. 
 Recent events have undoubtedly brought thisquestion to the fore because the vast changes in the international situation—such as the annulment of the Brest -Litovsk Treaty, the revolution in Germany, the collapse of German imperialism and the disintegration of British andAmerican imperialism—were bound to undermine a numberof bourgeois -democratic tenets underlying the theory of the petty -bourgeois democrats. 
 Russia’s military position and the onslaught of the British, French and American imperial -ists were bound to bring some of the petty -bourgeois demo -crats more or less over to our side. 
 What I should like to talkabout this evening are the changes we must make in ourtactics and the new tasks before us. 
 Let me begin with certain fundamental theoretical propo -sitions. 
 There can be no doubt that the chief social groupwhich gives the petty -bourgeois democrats an economic basis is, in Russia, the middle peasants. 
 Undoubtedly thesocialist revolution and the transition from capitalism tosocialism are bound to assume special forms in a countrywhere the peasant population is numerically large. 
 I should therefore like first to remind you of the main tenets of Marxism with regard to the proletariat’s attitude to themiddle peasants. 
 I shall do so by reading some of Engels’s statements in his article “The Peasant Question in France and Germany”. 
 This article, published in pamphlet form, was written in 1894 or 1895, when the agrarian programme of the socialist party, its attitude towards the peasants,became a practical issue in connection with the discussionof the programme of the German Social -Democratic Party at its Breslau Congress. 
82 This is what Engels had to say about the attitude of the proletariat: “What, then, is our attitude towards the small peasantry? “To begin with, the French programme is absolutely correct in stating: that we foresee the inevitable doom ofthe small peasant but that it is not our mission to hastenit by any interference on our part. 
 “Secondly, it is just as evident that when we are in pos -session of state power we shall not even think of forciblyexpropriating the small peasants (regardless of whetherwith or without compensation), as we shall have to do inthe case of the big landowners. 
 Our task relative to the smallpeasant consists, in the first place, in effecting a transitionof his private enterprise and private possession to co -opera -tive ones, not forcibly but by dint of example and theproffer of social assistance for this purpose. 
” Engels says further:“Neither now nor at any time in the future can we prom -ise the small -holding peasants to preserve their individual property and individual enterprise against the overwhelming power of capitalist production. 
 We can only promise them that we shall not interfere in their property relations byforce, against their will. 
” 83 And the last statement I would like to quote is the argument about the rich peasants, the big peasants, thekulaks as we call them in Russia, peasants who employ hired labour. 
 Unless these peasants realise the inevitability of the doom of their present mode of production and draw thenecessary conclusions, Marxists cannot do anything for them. 
Our duty is only to facilitate their transition, too, to thenew mode of production. 
 84 These are the tenets which I wanted to quote to you and which are no doubt known to every Communist. 
 It follows that when the workers come to power, they cannot have thesame task in countries where large -scale capitalism predom -inates and in countries where backward, small, middle and big peasants predominate. 
 Thus, we were interpreting Marxism quite correctly when we said it was our duty to wage war on the landowners, the exploiters. 
 For the middle peasant we say: no force under any cir -cumstances. 
 For the big peasant we say: our aim is to bringhim under the control of the grain monopoly and fighthim when he violates the monopoly and conceals grain. 
 I expounded these principles the other day at a meeting of several hundred delegates from Poor Peasants’ Committeeswho had come to Moscow at the time the Sixth Congress wasbeing held. 
 * In our Party literature, as in our propaganda and agitation, we have always stressed the distinction betweenour attitude to the big bourgeoisie and the petty bourgeoisie. 
 But although we are all in agreement as to theory, not all of us by a long shot have drawn the correct politicalconclusions, or drawn them rapidly enough. 
 I deliberatelybegan in a roundabout way, so to speak, to show you whateconomic concepts about class relations must guide us ifour policy towards the petty -bourgeois democrats is to be based on a firm foundation. 
 There can be no doubt that this small -peasant class (by middle peasant we mean one who does not sell his labourpower) in Russia, at any rate, constitutes the chief eco -nomic class which is the source of the broad diversity ofpolitical trends among the petty -bourgeois democrats. 
 Here in Russia these trends are associated mostly with the Menshevik and S. 
R. 
 parties. 
 The history of socialism inRussia shows a long struggle between the Bolsheviks andthese parties, while West -European socialists have always regarded this struggle as one within socialism, that is, as a split in the Russian socialist movement. 
 Incidentally, this view is often expressed even by sound Social -Democrats. 
 Only today I was handed a letter from Friedrich Adler, a man who is well known for his revolutionary activity inAustria. 
 His letter, which was written at the end of Octo -ber and received today, contains only one request: torelease the Mensheviks from prison. 
 He could find nothing more sensible to write about at a moment like this. 
 True, *See pp. 
 171 -78 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 he makes the reservation that he is not well informed about our movement, and so on. 
 But still this is typical. 
 This silly mistake by West -European socialists comes from them looking backwards instead of forwards, and not realis -ing that neither the Mensheviks nor the S. 
R. 
s, who preachsocialism, can be classed as socialists. 
 All through the1917 revolution the Mensheviks and S. 
R. 
s did nothing butvacillate between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat; they could never stick to a correct stand, as though to deliber -ately illustrate Marx’s words that the petty bourgeoisie are incapable of taking an independent stand in decisivebattles. 
 As soon as they began to form the Soviets, the workers instinctively took up a firm class stand by the very act of establishing them. 
 The Mensheviks and S. 
R. 
s, on the other hand, vacillated all the time. 
 And when in the spring andsummer of 1917 their own friends labelled them semi -Bolsheviks, this was a true description, not merely a wit -ticism. 
 On every single issue they would say “yes” oneday and “no” the next, whether it was the question of the Soviets, the revolutionary movement in the countryside, the direct seizure of land, fraternisation at the front, orwhether to support imperialism. 
 They would help on the onehand, and hinder on the other, all the time displaying theirspinelessness and helplessness. 
 Yet their propaganda amongthe people for the Soviets, which they always referred to as revolutionary democracy and contrasted with what they called the propertied elements, was only a cunning politicaldevice on their part, and the masses whom they addressedwere carried away by this propaganda. 
 Thus the Menshevikpreaching was partly of service to us too. 
 This is a very complex question with a wealth of history behind it. 
 I need only dwell on it briefly. 
 This policy of the Mensheviks and S. 
R. 
s before our very eyes is conclusive proofof our assertion that it is wrong to regard them as socialists. 
If they had at any time been socialists, it was only in theirphraseology and reminiscences; in fact they are nothingbut Russian petty bourgeois. 
 I began with the attitude Marxists should adopt towards the middle peasant, or, in other words, towards the petty -bourgeois parties. 
 We are now coming to a stage when our slogans of the previous period of the revolution must be changed to take proper account of the present turn of events. 
 You know that in October and November these people wa -vered. 
 The Bolshevik Party stood firm then and rightly so. 
 We said we should have to destroy the enemies of the pro -letariat, and were facing a battle on the fundamental issuesof war or peace, of bourgeois representation, and of Soviet government. 
 In all these questions we only had our own forces to rely on, and we were absolutely right when we refusedto compromise with the petty -bourgeois democrats. 
 The subsequent course of events confronted us with the question of peace and the conclusion of the Brest -Litovsk Peace Treaty. 
 You know that the Brest -Litovsk Peace Trea -ty repelled the petty bourgeoisie from us. 
 The petty -bourgeois democrats sharply recoiled from us as a consequence of these two circumstances: our foreignpolicy, which led to the conclusion of the Brest -Litovsk Peace Treaty, on the one hand, and our ruthless struggleagainst democratic illusions on the part of a section of the petty -bourgeois democrats, our ruthless struggle for the Soviet government, on the other. 
 You know that afterthe Brest -Litovsk Peace, the Left Socialist -Revolutionaries began to waver, some taking to open warfare, and otherssplitting up, and still splitting up to this day. 
 But thefact remains. 
 Of course, we cannot doubt for one minute or one little bit that our policy was absolutely right. 
 To start proving that now would be to reiterate the fundamen -tals, because the German revolution has proved more thananything else that our views were correct. 
 What we were reproached for most after the Brest -Litovsk Peace, and what we heard most often from the less enlightened workers, was that our hopes of a German revolution were in vain and were not being fulfilled. 
 TheGerman revolution has refuted all these reproaches and hasproved we were right in our view that it had to come andthat we had to fight German imperialism by propaganda andby undermining it from within as well as by a national war. 
 Events have justified us so fully that no further proof is needed. 
 The very same applies to the Constituent Assem -bly; vacillations on this score were inevitable, and events have proved the correctness of our views so fully that all the revolutions now starting up in the West are taking place under the slogan of Soviet government and are setting up Soviet government. 
 Soviets are the distinguishing fea -ture of the revolution everywhere. 
 They have spread fromAustria and Germany to Holland and Switzerland, countrieswith the oldest democratic culture, which call themselvesWestern Europe even in relation to Germany. 
 In these coun -tries the demand for Soviet government is being raised. 
 Thatmeans that the historical collapse of bourgeois democra -cy was an absolute historical necessity, not an inventionof the Bolsheviks. 
 In Switzerland and Holland, the polit -ical struggle took place hundreds of years ago, and it isnot for the sake of the Bolsheviks’ beautiful eyes that the demand for Soviet government is being raised there now. 
 That means we gauged the situation rightly. 
 Events haveborne out the correctness of our tactics so well that it is notworth dwelling on the subject any further. 
 Only we must realisethat this is a serious matter, one affecting the most deep -seated prejudices of the petty -bourgeois democrats. 
 Look at the overall history of the bourgeois revolution and parliamentary development in all the West -European countries, and you will find that a similar prejudice prevailed among the oldSocial -Democrats of the forties in all countries. 
 These views persisted longest of all in France. 
 All this is only natural. 
 When it comes to parliamentarism, the petty bourgeoisie are the most patriotic, more patriotic than the proletariat or the big bourgeoisie. 
 The latter are more international. 
The petty bourgeoisie are less mobile, are not connectedto the same extent with other nations and are not drawninto the orbit of world trade. 
 It was therefore impossibleto expect anything else than that the petty bourgeoisie should be most up in arms over the question of parliamentar -ism. 
 And this proved to be the case in Russia too. 
 An im -portant factor was that our revolution had to fight against patriotism. 
 At the time of the Brest -Litovsk Peace we had to go against patriotism. 
 We said that if you are a socialistyou must sacrifice all your patriotic feelings to the inter -national revolution, which is inevitable, and although itis not here yet you must believe in it if you are an interna -tionalist. 
 And, naturally, with this sort of talk, we could only hope to win over the advanced workers. 
 It was only natural that the majority of the petty bourgeoisie should not see eye to eye with us. 
 We could scarcely have expected themto. 
 How could the petty bourgeoisie have been expected toaccept our point of view? We had to exercise the dictatorshipof the proletariat in its harshest form. 
 It took us severalmonths to live through the period of illusions. 
 But if you examine the history of the West -European countries, you will find they did not get over this illusion even in decades. 
Take the history of Holland, France, Britain, etc. 
 We had todisperse the petty -bourgeois illusion that the people are an integral whole and that the popular will can be expressedother than in class struggle. 
 We were absolutely right in rejecting all compromise over this. 
 If we had made any concessions to petty -bour -geois illusions, to illusions about the Constituent Assembly,we would have ruined the whole cause of the proletarianrevolution in Russia. 
 We would have sacrificed to narrownational interests the interests of the world revolution, which turned out to be proceeding along the Bolshevik course, because it was purely proletarian instead of national. 
The result of these conditions was that the Menshevik andS. 
R. 
 petty -bourgeois people recoiled from us. 
 They crossed the barricades and landed in the camp of our enemies. 
When the Dutov revolt broke out, we saw clearly enough that the political forces that had been fighting us were in the camp of Dutov, Krasnov and Skoropadsky. 
 The prole -tariat and poor peasants stood on our side. 
 You know that during the Czech attack, when it was at the height of its success, kulak revolts broke out all overRussia. 
 It was only the close ties formed between the urban workers and the peasants that consolidated our rule. 
 It was only the proletariat, with the help of the poorpeasants, that held off all our enemies. 
 The overwhelmingmajority of both the Mensheviks and the S. 
R. 
s sided withthe Czechs, the Dutov and Krasnov gangs. 
 This state ofaffairs forced us to make a ruthless struggle and use terrorist methods of warfare. 
 No matter how much people may have condemned this terrorism from different points of view—and we were condemned by all the vacillating Social -Democrats—we knew perfectly well it was necessitated by the acute Civil War. 
 It was necessary because all the petty -bourgeois democrats had turned against us. 
 They usedall kinds of methods against us—civil war, bribery andsabotage. 
 It was these conditions that necessitated theterror. 
 Therefore we should not repent or renounce it. 
Only we must clearly appreciate the conditions of ourproletarian revolution that gave rise to these acute forms of struggle. 
 These special conditions were that we had to go against patriotism, that we had to replace theConstituent Assembly with the slogan “All Power to theSoviets!” The change in international politics was inevitably followed by a change in the position of the petty -bourgeois democrats. 
 A change of heart is now occurring in their camp. 
 In the Menshevik appeal we find a call to renounce alliancewith the propertied classes, a call to go and fight Britishand American imperialism addressed by the Mensheviksto their friends, people from among the petty -bourgeois democrats who had concluded an alliance with the Dutov men, the Czechs and the British. 
 It is now clear to everybody that, except for British and American imperialism, thereis no force that can put up any sort of stand against theBolshevik power. 
 Similar vacillations are going on amongthe S. 
R. 
s and the intellectuals, who most of all share theprejudices of the petty -bourgeois democrats and were swayed by patriotic sentiments. 
 The same sort of thing is going on among them too. 
 Our Party’s job now is to be guided by class relations when choosing tactics, and to be perfectly clear whetherthis is just chance, spinelessness, groundless vacillation,or, on the contrary, a process with deep social roots. 
 The answer is quite obvious if we examine this question as a whole from the standpoint of theoretically established re -lations between the proletariat and the middle peasants,and from the standpoint of the history of our revolution. 
This change of front is not due to chance or something personal. 
 It involves millions and millions of people whose status in Russia is either that of middle peasants or something equivalent. 
 The change of front involves all the petty -bour -geois democrats, who opposed us with a bitterness amount -ing almost to fury because we had to break down all their patriotic sentiments. 
 But history has veered round to bring patriotism back towards us now. 
 It is evident that the Bolsheviks cannot be overthrown except by foreignbayonets. 
 Up till now the petty bourgeoisie had cherishedthe illusion that the British, French and Americans stoodfor real democracy. 
 But now that illusion is being completelydispelled by the peace terms that are being imposed on Austria and Germany. 
 The British are behaving as if they had made a special point of proving the correctness ofthe Bolshevik views on international imperialism. 
 Hence voices are being raised in the parties that fought us, as in the Plekhanovite camp, for instance, saying: “Wewere mistaken, we thought that German imperialism was our chief enemy and that the Western countries—France, Britain and America—would bring us a democratic system. 
 ” Yet now it appears that the peace terms these Western coun -tries offer are a hundred times more humiliating, rapacious and predatory than our peace terms at Brest -Litovsk. 
 It appears that the British and Americans are acting as the hang -men of Russian freedom, as gendarmes, playing the part ofthe Russian butcher Nicholas I, and are doing it no lesseffectively than the kings who played the hangmen inthrottling the Hungarian revolution. 
 This part is now beingplayed by Wilson’s agents. 
 They are crushing the revolutionin Austria, they are playing the gendarme, they are issuing an ultimatum to Switzerland: “You’ll get no bread from us if you don’t join the fight against the Bolshevik Government. 
”They tell Holland: “Don’t you dare allow Soviet ambassa -dors into your country, or we’ll blockade you. 
” Theirs isa simple weapon—the noose of famine. 
 That is what theyare using to strangle the peoples. 
 The history of recent times, of the war and post -war period, has developed with extraordinary speed, and it goesto show that British and French imperialism is just asinfamous as German imperialism. 
 Don’t forget that even inAmerica, where we have the freest and most democratic ofall republics, that does not prevent its imperialists from behaving just as brutally. 
 Internationalists are not only lynched, they are dragged into the street by the mob,stripped naked, tarred and burned. 
 Events are exposing the imperialists most effectively, and posing the alternative: either a Soviet government, or the complete suppression of the revolution by British and French bayonets. 
 There is no longer any question of anagreement with Kerensky. 
 As you know, they have thrownhim away like a squeezed lemon. 
 They joined forces withDutov and Krasnov. 
 Now the petty bourgeoisie have gotover that phase. 
 Patriotism is now pushing them to us— that is how things have turned out, that is how history has compelled them to act. 
 And we must all draw a lesson fromthis great experience of all world history. 
 The bourgeoisiecannot be defended, the Constituent Assembly cannot bedefended, because it in fact played into the hands of theDutovs and Krasnovs. 
 It seems funny that they should have been for the Constituent Assembly, but that happened because the bourgeoisie were still on top when it was beingconvened. 
 The Constituent Assembly turned out to be anorgan of the bourgeoisie, and the bourgeoisie turned out tobe on the side of the imperialists, whose policy was directedagainst the Bolsheviks. 
 The bourgeoisie were prepared to go to any lengths, to resort to the vilest means to throttle the Soviet government, to sell Russia to anybody, only to destroythe power of the Soviets. 
 That is the policy that led to civil war and made the petty -bourgeois democrats change round. 
 Of course, there is always bound to be vacillation among them. 
 When the Czechs gained their first victories, the petty -bourgeois intellectuals tried to spread rumours that the Czechs werebound to win. 
 Telegrams from Moscow were issued declaringthat the city was surrounded and about to fall. 
 And weknow perfectly well that if the British and French gain eventhe slightest success, the petty -bourgeois intellectuals will be the first to lose their heads, give way to panic and spread all sorts of rumours about enemy gains. 
 But therevolution showed that revolts against imperialism areinevitable. 
 And now our “Allies” have proved to be thechief enemies of Russian freedom and independence. 
 Russia cannot and will not be independent unless Soviet power is consolidated. 
 That is why this turn about has occurred. 
 So we must now define our tactics. 
 It would bea great mistake to think of mechanically applying slogans of our revolutionary struggle from the time when there could be no reconciliation between us, when the petty bourgeoisie were against us, and when our firm stand demanded resort to terror. 
 Today, this would not be standing firm but sheerstupidity, a failure to understand Marxist tactics. 
 Whenwe were obliged to sign the Brest -Litovsk Peace Treaty, this step seemed, from the narrow patriotic point of viewto be a betrayal of Russia; but from the point of view of world revolution it was a correct strategical step, which was of the greatest help to the world revolution. 
 The worldrevolution has broken out just now, when Soviet powerhas become an institution of the whole people. 
 Although the petty -bourgeois democrats are still waver -ing, their illusions have been dispelled. 
 And we must of course take this state of affairs into account, as we must all the other conditions. 
 Formerly we looked at thingsdifferently, because the petty bourgeois sided with theCzechs, and we had to use force. 
 After all, war is war, andwhen at war you have to fight. 
 But now that these peopleare beginning to swing over to us, we must not turn away from them simply because the slogan in our leaflets and newspapers used to be different. 
 When we find them halfturning towards us, we must rewrite our leaflets, becausethe petty -bourgeois democrats’ attitude towards us has changed. 
 We must say: “Come along, we are not afraidof you; if you think the only way we know how to act is by force, you are mistaken; we might reach agreement. 
” Everyone steeped in the traditions of bourgeois prejudice,all the co -operators, all sections of working people particu -larly connected with the bourgeoisie, might come over to us. 
 Take the intellectuals. 
 They lived a bourgeois life, they were accustomed to certain comforts. 
 When they swung towards the Czechs, our slogan was ruthless struggle — terror . 
 Now that there is this change of heart among the petty -bourgeois masses, our slogan must be one of agreement , of establishing good -neighbourly relations. 
 When we come across a declaration from a group of petty -bourgeois democrats to the effect that they want to be neutral towards the Soviet government, we must say: neutrality and good -neighbourly relations are old -fashioned rubbish and absolutely useless from the point of view of communism. 
 They are just old -fashioned rubbish and nothing else, but we must consider this rubbish from the practical standpoint. 
 That has always been our view, and we never had hopes that these petty -bourgeois people would become Communists. 
 But practical propositions must be considered. 
 We said of the dictatorship of the proletariat that the proletariat must dominate over all other classes. 
 Wecannot obliterate the distinctions between classes until complete communism. 
 Classes will remain until we have got rid of the exploiters—the big bourgeoisie and the land -owners, whom we are ruthlessly expropriating. 
 But we cannotsay the same thing of the middle and small peasants. 
 Whilerelentlessly suppressing the bourgeoisie and the landowners,we must win over the petty -bourgeois democrats. 
 And when they say they want to be neutral and live on good -neighbourly terms with us, we shall reply: “That’s just what we want. 
We never expected you to become Communists. 
” We continue to stand for the ruthless expropriation of the landowners and capitalists. 
 Here we are ruthless,and we cannot agree to any conciliation or compromise. 
 But we realise that no decrees can convert small -scale into large -scale production, that we must gradually, keeping in step with events, win conviction for the inevitability ofsocialism. 
 These people will never become socialists byconviction, honest to goodness socialists. 
 They willbecome socialists when they see there is no other way. 
 Now they can see that Europe has been so thoroughly shattered and imperialism has reached such a state that no bourgeoisdemocracy can save the situation, that only a Soviet systemcan do so. 
 That is why this neutrality, this good -neighbour -ly attitude of the petty -bourgeois democrats is to be wel -comed rather than feared. 
 That is why, if we look at the matter as the representatives of a class which is exercising dictatorship, we must say that we never counted on any -thing more from the petty -bourgeois democrats. 
 That is quite sufficient as far as we are concerned. 
 You maintaingood -neighbourly relations with us, and we shall keep state power. 
 After your declaration in regard to the “Allies” we are quite willing to legalise you, Menshevik gentlemen. 
 Our Party Central Committee will do that. 
 But we shall notforget there are still “activists” in your party, and for them our methods of struggle will remain the same; for they are friends of the Czechs and until the Czechs are driven out of Russia, you are our enemies too. 
 We reserve state power for ourselves, and for ourselves alone . 
 To those who adopt an attitude of neutrality towards us we shall act as a classwhich holds political power and keeps the sharp edge of itsweapon for the landowners and capitalists, and which says tothe petty -bourgeois democrats: if it suits you better to side with the Czechs and Krasnov, well, we have shown you we can fight, and we shall carry on fighting. 
 But if you preferto learn from the Bolshevik example, we shall come someway to meet you, knowing that without a series of agreements,which we shall try out, examine and compare, the countrycannot get to socialism. 
 This is the path we took from the very beginning, for example, by passing the socialisation of the land law andturning it gradually into the means that enabled us to unitethe poor peasants around us and turn them against thekulaks. 
 Only as the proletarian movement succeeds in thecountryside shall we systematically pass to collective common ownership of land and to socialised farming. 
 This could only be done with the backing of a purely proletarianmovement in the countryside, and in this respect a greatdeal still remains to be done. 
 There can be no doubt thatonly practical experience, only realities will show us howto act properly. 
 To reach agreement with the middle peasants is one thing, with the petty -bourgeois elements another, and with the co -operators yet another. 
 There will be some modi -fication of our task in relation to the associations whichhave preserved petty -bourgeois traditions and habits. 
 It will be even further modified in relation to the petty -bour -geois intellectuals. 
 They vacillate, but we need them, too,for our socialist revolution. 
 We know socialism can onlybe built from elements of large -scale capitalist culture, and the intellectuals are one of these elements. 
 We had to beruthless with them, but it was not communism that com -pelled us to do so, it was events, which repelled from us all “democrats” and everyone enamoured of bourgeois democ -racy. 
 Now we have the chance to utilise the intellectuals for socialism, intellectuals who are not socialist, who will never be communist, but whom objective events and relations are now inducing to adopt a neutral and good-neighbourly attitude towards us. 
 We shall never rely on the intellectuals, we shall only rely on the vanguard of the proletariat that leads all workers and poor peasants. 
 The Communist Party can rely on no other support. 
 It is one thing, however, to rely on the class which embodies the dictatorship, and another to dominate over other classes. 
 You may remember what Engels said even of the peasants who employ hired labour: Most likely we shall not have to expropriate all of them . 
85 We are expropriating as a general rule, and we have no kulaks in the Soviets. 
 We are crushing them. 
 We suppress them physically when they worm theirway into the Soviets and from there try to choke the poor peasants. 
 You see how the domination of one class is exercised here. 
 Only the proletariat may dominate. 
 But this is appliedin one way to the small peasant, in another to the middlepeasant, in another to the landowner, and in yet another tothe petty bourgeois. 
 The whole point is for us to understandthis change of attitude brought about by international conditions, to understand that it is inevitable that slogans we were accustomed to during the past six months of therevolution’s history should be modified as far as the petty -bourgeois democrats are concerned. 
 We must say that wereserve the power for the same class. 
 In relation to thepetty -bourgeois democrats our slogan was one of agreement, but we were forced to resort to terror. 
 If you co -operators and intellectuals really agree to live in good -neighbourly relations with us, then work a bit and do the jobs we giveyou. 
 If you don’t, you will be lawbreakers and our enemies,and we shall fight you. 
 But if you maintain good -neighbourly relations and perform these tasks, that will be more than enough for us. 
 Our support is secure. 
 We’ve always known you were weak and flabby. 
 But we don’t deny we need you,for you are the only educated group. 
 Things would not be so bad if we did not have to build socialism with people inherited from capitalism. 
 But thatis the whole trouble with socialist construction—we have to build socialism with people who have been thoroughly spoiled by capitalism. 
 That is the whole trouble with thetransition—it is associated with a dictatorship which can be exercised only by one class—the proletariat. 
 That is why we say the proletariat will set the pace since it has been schooled and moulded into a fighting force capable of smashing the bourgeoisie. 
 Between the bourgeoisie and theproletariat stand innumerable transitional groups, and ourpolicy to them must now be put on the lines which wereenvisaged by our theory, and which we are now in a positionto follow in practice. 
 We shall have to settle a number of problems and make a number of agreements and technical assignments which we, as the ruling proletarian power, mustknow how to set. 
 We must know how to set the middlepeasant one assignment—to assist in commodity exchange andin exposing the kulak—and the co -operators another—they have the apparatus for distributing products on a mass scale, and we must take over that apparatus. 
 And the intellectuals must be set quite a different assignment. 
 They cannot con -tinue their sabotage, and they are now in a very good -neigh -bourly mood towards us. 
 We must make use of these intel -lectuals, set them definite tasks and keep an eye on themand check their work; we must treat them as Marx said when speaking of office workers under the Paris Commune: “Every other employer knows how to choose assistants and account -ants for his business, and, if they for once make a mistake,to redress it promptly. 
 If they prove to be unfit for thejob, he replaces them with other, efficient assistants andaccountants. 
” 86 We are building our state out of the elements left over by capitalism. 
 We cannot build it if we do not utilise sucha heritage of capitalist culture as the intellectuals. 
 Nowwe can afford to treat the petty bourgeoisie as good neigh -bours who are under the strict control of the state. 
 Theclass -conscious proletariat’s job now is to appreciate that its domination does not mean carrying out all the tasksitself. 
 Whoever thinks that has not the slightest inklingof socialist construction and has learnt nothing from a yearof revolution and dictatorship. 
 People like that had bettergo to school and learn something. 
 But whoever has learntsomething in this period will say to himself: “These intel -lectuals are the people I am now going to use in construction. 
For I have a strong enough support among the peasants. 
”And we must remember that we can only work out the form of construction that will lead to socialism in that struggle, and in a number of agreements and trial agreements between the proletariat and the petty -bourgeois democrats. 
 Remember that Engels said we must act by force of exam -ple. 
87 No form will be final until complete communism has been achieved. 
 We never claimed to know the exact road. 
But we are inevitably moving towards communism. 
 In timeslike these every week is worth more than decades of tranquility. 
 The six months that have elapsed since the Brest -Litovsk Peace have shown a swing away from us. 
 The West -European revolution—a revolution which is following our example—should strengthen us. 
 We must take account ofthe changes taking place, we must take account of everyelement, and must have no illusions, for we know that the waverers will remain waverers until the world socialist revolution is completely triumphant. 
 That may not be sosoon, although the course of the German revolution leadsus to hope that it may be sooner than many anticipate. 
 TheGerman revolution is developing in the same way as ours,but at a faster pace. 
 In any case, our job now is to wage a desperate struggle against British and American imperialism. 
 Just because it feels that Bolshevism has become a worldforce, it is trying to throttle us as fast as possible in the hope ofdealing first with the Russian Bolsheviks, and then with its own. 
 We must make use of the waverers whom the atrocities of imperialism are driving towards us. 
 And we shall do so. 
 You know full well that in time of war no aid, even indi -rect, can be scorned. 
 In war even the position of the waver -ing classes is of immense significance. 
 The fiercer the war, the more we need to gain influence over the waverers who arecoming over to us. 
 So the tactics we have been pursuing forsix months must be modified to suit the new tasks with re -gard to the various groups of petty -bourgeois democrats. 
 If I have succeeded in directing the attention of Party workers to this problem and in inducing them to seek acorrect solution by systematic experiment, I may considermy task accomplished. 
 Pravda Nos. 
 264, 265, Published according to December 5 and 6, 1918 the Pravda text checked with the verbatim report 2 REPLY TO THE DISCUSSION OF REPORT OF THE ATTITUDE OF THE PROLETARIAT TO PETTY -BOURGEOIS DEMOCRATS Comrades, I have a few remarks to make in reply to the discussion. 
 First of all, I would like to reply to the question of dogma that was raised. 
 Marx and Engels repeatedly saidthat our teaching is not a dogma, but a guide to action, 88 and I think that is what we should bear in mind most. 
 The teaching of Marx and Engels is not a dogma to be learnt by heart. 
 It must be taken as a guide to action. 
 We have always stood by that, and I think we have acted con -sistently, never succumbing to opportunism, modifying our tactics. 
 That is no departure from Marxism, andcertainly cannot be called opportunism. 
 I have said before,and I repeat once again, that this teaching is not a dogma,but a guide to action. 
 Now on to Comrade Steklov’s remark about whom we are to make an agreement with—the top men or the rank andfile? My reply is, of course, with the rank and file, and thenwith the top men; and when it comes to fighting the topmen, all will depend on the particular circumstances. 
 Ishall come to that, but just now I see no practical possibil -ity of an agreement with the Menshevik and S. 
R. 
 parties. 
It is said that agreement means ceding something. 
 Whatdo we intend to cede and how are we going to depart frombasic policy? That would be apostasy, but if it is to applyonly to practice, there is nothing new in it. 
 Of course, weshall never renounce our principles. 
 That does not come into the argument now. 
 Fifteen years ago there was a con -troversy over the basic policy and principles and, unfortu -nately, I had to carry on this controversy mostly abroad, not in Russia. 
 But now it is the question of state power that is at issue, and there simply cannot be any question of ceding anything here. 
 No wonder Wilson declared: “Our enemy now is world Bolshevism. 
” That is what the bourgeoisieall over the world are saying. 
 The fact that they are pre -paring to attack us means they realise that the Bolshevikgovernment is not only a Russian but a world phenomenon. 
He would be a sorry and miserable Bolshevik who offered any kind of agreement to the bourgeoisie. 
 And, anyway, now that the fires of revolution have spread to so many countries,no capitalist bourgeois government will or can consent to it. 
 When the recent events developed, the Swiss bourgeoisie said outright: “We are not Russians, we shan’t surrenderpower to you. 
” Captain Sadoul, who has now sided with Bolshevism, writes that he is surprised at the astonishing docility of the Russian bourgeoisie, and declares that thatis not the way the French bourgeoisie will act. 
 There thestruggle will be far fiercer, and civil war, if it breaks out,will assume the most ruthless forms. 
 No one would deny it. 
 In practice, the matter has been fully decided by the year of proletarian dictatorship, and no peasant or worker would think of trying to reach agreement with the bour -geoisie. 
 As to agreement being nothing new, I fully agree. 
I only wanted all of us to confer on these questions. 
 The circumstances which most repelled the Mensheviks and S. 
R. 
s and the lesser intellectuals from us, namely, the relentless struggle over the Brest -Litovsk Peace when Ger -man imperialism was on the advance, are now a thing of the past. 
 But we know perfectly well that any success, howevertransient, the British and French may have, will producemore hesitation among these intellectuals and petty demo -crats, and they will begin to spread panic and desert to the other side. 
 We are making an agreement with them to achieve definite results and for definite practical work. 
 Thesetactics should present no cause either for controversy orsurprise. 
 Yet many, even such an influential member of theMoscow Soviet as Comrade Maximov, have shown theydo not understand these tactics. 
 Comrade Maximov said that we do not have to come to terms with Khinchuk, but only come to a sensible understanding with him. 
 When weissued the first decree on the co -operative societies in the /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR spring, and they presented us with an ultimatum, we gave in to them. 
 That is what we call agreement—there is no other name for this policy. 
 And I shall be satisfied if every Soviet official makes it a rule and says to himself and allhis comrades that we must come to a sensible understandingwith the petty-bourgeois democrats. 
 In our work, especially in our work in the localities, we are still a long way from a sensible understanding. 
 We all too frequently do not discuss matters sensibly. 
 This is thrown in our faces by people who do not appreciate thatthis is bound to happen in building a new society. 
 Thereis no genius who could build a new way of life withouthaving learnt how to build. 
 We are no good at coming tosensible terms with practical men when we have to. 
 To run a shop, you must know how to run it. 
 We need people who know their business. 
 We Bolsheviks have had very littlechance to apply our talents to practical affairs of this kind. 
We are not often short of propagandists, but our most cryingshortage is the lack of efficient leaders and organisers. 
 Andthat is still so despite the year’s experience we have behind us. 
 Come to a sensible understanding with every person who has enough experience in this sphere and who favours neu -trality and good -neighbourly relations. 
 If he knows how to run a shop and distribute goods, if he can teach us anythingif he is a practical man, he will be a great attribute. 
 Everybody knows the Bolsheviks have many enemies among their “friends” ever since their triumph. 
 Very often utterly unreliable and dishonest people worm their wayinto our midst, elements that are politically unstable, whosell us out, deceive us and betray us. 
 We are perfectly awareof it, but it does not alter our purpose. 
 It is historicallyinevitable. 
 When the Mensheviks reproach us that among Soviet employees there are many hangers -on, people who are dishonest even in the ordinary sense, we say: Where are weto get better people? What can we do to make the best peoplebelieve in us at once? No revolution can immediatelytriumph and convince everyone, can make people believein it at once. 
 A revolution may begin in one country, and elsewhere people will not believe in it. 
 Our revolution is reckoned an awful nightmare, utter chaos, and in othercountries they do not expect anything to come of our organised “chaotic” assemblies, which we call Soviets. 
 And that is quite natural. 
 There were many things we had to fight for. 
 So when they say we must come to a sensible understanding with Khinchuk, because he knows how to run shops, I say:Come to terms with others too, and make use of the pettybourgeoisie, they are good at many things. 
 If we drive this “come to an understanding” slogan into the heads of the people in the localities, if we realise that a new class is awakening to power, that things are being run by people who have never tackled such a complicatedjob before, and are naturally making mistakes, we shan’t besorry. 
 We know that it is impossible to govern withoutmaking mistakes. 
 But, besides making mistakes, people areusing the power crudely, as nothing but power, as though to say: “I have the power, I have given my orders, and you must obey. 
” We say, this is not the way to treat quite a num -ber of people—the petty -bourgeois democrats in the trade unions, the peasants and those in the co -operatives—it is becoming unnecessary. 
 It is therefore more sensible to cometo an understanding with the petty -bourgeois democrats, especially the intellectuals—that is our task. 
 Of course, we shall come to such an understanding on the basis of ourpolicy, we shall do so as the government. 
 We ask: Is it true you have abandoned hostility for neu -trality and good -neighbourly relations? Is it true you have stopped being hostile? If not, we shall not close our eyes to the fact and we’ll tell you straight: If you want war, you’ll have it . 
 And we’ll act as people do in war. 
 If you real -ly have abandoned your hostility for neutrality, however,if you really do want good -neighbourly relations—I have taken these words from statements by people who do notbelong to the communist camp, who only yesterday were much closer to the whiteguards—I say that since there are so many people abandoning their former hostility for neu -trality and good -neighbourly relations, we must continue our propaganda. 
 Comrade Khmelnitsky need have no fear that the Men -sheviks are carrying on their own propaganda to run the lives of the workers. 
 We won’t mention the Social -Democrats, who have not understood the socialist republic, nor thepetty -bourgeois bureaucrats. 
 What we have to do is wage an ideological struggle, a relentless war, against Menshevism. 
 You cannot make a worse insult to a Menshevik than to call him a petty -bourgeois democrat; and the more calmly you try to prove it to him, the more furious he will get. 
 It isa mistake to think we shall surrender a hundredth or evena thousandth part of the position we have won. 
 We shan’tbudge an inch. 
 The examples quoted by Comrade Schmidt show that even the workers who stood closest to the bourgeoisie (like the printers, for example), the petty -bourgeois clerks, the bour -geois bank officials who used to perform the business opera -tions in the commercial and industrial firms, stand to losea lot from the transition to socialism. 
 We have closed downa great many bourgeois papers, we have nationalised the banks, we have blocked several channels through which bank employees used to make money by dabbling in profiteering. 
Even in this camp we see them wavering, we find them sidingwith us. 
 If Khinchuk is valuable because he knows how torun shops, the bank employee is valuable because he knowsthe ins and outs of the money business, with which many of us may have a theoretical acquaintance, but in which we are very weak practically. 
 We must come to a sensibleunderstanding with a man who knows the ins and outs ofthis business and who tells us he has abandoned his formerhostility for neutrality and good -neighbourliness. 
 I shall be more than satisfied if Comrade Maximov, as a prominent member of the Presidium of the Moscow Soviet, pursues in the Soviets the tactics he spoke of in relation to the intel -lectuals and the vacillating petty bourgeoisie. 
 Next, the question of the co -operative societies. 
 Comrade Steklov said the co -operatives stink. 
 Comrade Maximov said we should not pass decrees like the last one passed by the Council of People’s Commissars. 
 On the practical side opinions differed. 
 It is nothing new to us that we must cometo an agreement with the petty bourgeoisie on such a basisif they are not hostile to us. 
 If the old stand is no good, itshould be revised when new circumstances demand it. 
 Andthings have certainly changed all right. 
 The co -operatives are a striking example. 
 The co -operative apparatus is a supply apparatus based on the mass participation of theworking people themselves, instead of the private initiative of capitalists. 
 Kautsky was right when he said, long before he became a renegade, that socialist society is one big co -operative. 
 If we are out to get control going and organise the economy in a practical way, in the interests of hundreds of thousandsof people, we must not forget that when socialists discussthis question they point out that directors of trusts, asexperienced practical men, may be useful to them. 
 Today experience shows that petty -bourgeois people have renounced hostility for neutrality. 
 And, moreover, we must realisethat they do know how to run shops. 
 We do not deny thatKhinchuk as an ideologist is chock -full of bourgeois preju -dices. 
 They all reek of them, but at the same time, theyhave practical knowledge. 
 As far as ideas are concerned, all the guns are on our side, and not a single one on theirs. 
 But when they say they are no longer hostile and intend tobe neutral, we must remember that now hundreds and thou -sands of people less capable than Khinchuk are coming toa sensible understanding. 
 We must know how to come toterms with them. 
 In practical matters they know more than we do and are more proficient, and we must learn from them. 
 Let them learn from us how to influence the internationalproletariat; but when it comes to running shops we shalllearn from them. 
 That is something we do not know. 
Technicians with special knowledge are needed in everyfield. 
 As far as the co -operatives are concerned, I don’t under -stand why you say they stink. 
 When drafting the first decree on the co -operatives we invited for discussion in the Council of People’s Commissars people who not only were notCommunists, but were actually far closer to the whiteguards. 
We conferred with them and asked: Can you accept this point? They replied: We can accept this, but not that. 
 Of course, looking at it offhand, superficially, this was compro -mising with the bourgeoisie. 
 For, after all, these were rep -resentatives of bourgeois co -operatives, and it was at their request that several clauses were deleted from the decree. 
Thus, we deleted a clause providing that there should be no dues or entrance fees in the proletarian co -operatives. 
 To us that seemed quite acceptable, but they rejected ourproposal. 
 We say we must come to terms with people who know how to run shops much better than we do; that’s something we are weak at. 
 But we shall not budge an inch from our struggle. 
 When we issued another decree of the same type, ComradeMaximov said such decrees must not be written, becausethe decree says that the co -operatives that were closed down are to be reopened. 
 This shows that in the MoscowSoviet, as among ourselves, there are certain misapprehen -sions, and if only for the sake of removing such misappre -hensions, conferences and discussions should be arrangedlike ours here today. 
 We said that in the interests of our work we intended to utilise not only the trade unions in general, but even theUnion of Trade and Industrial Employees, and, you know, the trade and industrial employees have always been a mainstay of the bourgeois system. 
 But since these peoplehave come to us and say they are willing to live on good -neighbourly terms with us, we must welcome them with openarms, and accept the hand they proffer—our own won’tdrop off. 
 We do not forget that if the British and French imperialists were to strike tomorrow, they would be the first to turn tail and run away. 
 But as long as this party,these bourgeois people do not run away, we repeat that wemust have closer relations with them. 
 That is why we adopt -ed the decree published on Sunday, the one that is not toComrade Maximov’s liking—which shows that he clings to the old communist tactics, tactics which are inapplica -ble to the new conditions. 
 We drew up that decree the other day, and received in reply the resolution of the CentralCommittee of the Employees, 89 and it would be foolish to say we are issuing decrees at the wrong time, when thechange of front has begun and the situation is changing. 
 The armed capitalists are continuing the war with grea -ter stubbornness than ever, and it is immensely important for our practical construction to take advantage of thischange of attitude, even if it is only temporary. 
 All poweris in our hands. 
 We need not close down co -operatives, and we can reopen those that have been closed down, for we closed them down when they served the ends of whiteguard propaganda. 
 Every slogan has the faculty of becoming morerigid than is necessary. 
 When the wave of closing down and persecuting the co -operatives swept over Russia, it was the conditions of the time that made it necessary. 
 But now it is no longer necessary. 
 They are a highly important appara -tus connected with the middle peasants; they unite the scattered and disunited sections of the peasants. 
 TheseKhinchuks are doing a useful job, which was started bybourgeois elements. 
 When these peasants and petty -bour -geois democrats say they are abandoning hostility for neu -trality, for good -neighbourly relations, we must say to them: That’s just what we want. 
 And now, good neighbours, letus come to a sensible understanding. 
 We shall assist you allwe can and help you to exercise your rights, and we shallexamine your claims and grant you every privilege, butyou must carry out the jobs we assign you. 
 If you don’t, remember that the whole Extraordinary Commission appa -ratus is in our hands. 
 If you are unable to make proper use of your rights and do not carry out our assignments, we havethe whole apparatus of State Control in our hands, and weshall regard you as violators of the will of the state. 
 Youmust account for the last kopek, and any violation will be punished as a violation of the will of the state and its laws. 
 This entire system of control remains in our hands, but just now the task of winning over these people, if only fora while, although it may not be a gigantic one from thestandpoint of world politics, is for us one of urgent neces -sity. 
 It will strengthen our position in the war. 
 We have no decently organised rear. 
 It will give us a moral victory, for it will show the West -European imperialists that they can expect to meet pretty serious resistance. 
 And that isnot to be scoffed at, for inside every country there is aworkers’ opposition to the attack on Russia. 
 That is why Ithink, as far as one can judge from Comrade Maximov’s statement, that we are groping our way to a definite agree -ment. 
 Even if differences do crop up, they are not so import -ant, for once we recognise the necessity of coming to a sens -ible understanding with all the petty -bourgeois democrats, with the intellectuals, the co -operators and the trade unions which still do not recognise us, while at the same time never allowing power to slip from our hands—if we firmly adhere to this policy all winter, we shall gain a great advantagefor the whole cause of world revolution. 
 TELEGRAM TO COMMANDER -IN-CHIEF In Serpukhov 29/11 As our troops push on west wards and into the Ukraine, provisional regional Soviet governments are being formedto back up the Soviets in the localities. 
 This has the advan -tage of depriving the Ukrainian, Lithuanian, Latvian andEstonian chauvinists of a chance to regard our troop move -ments as occupation and of creating a favourable situation for further advance. 
 Otherwise our troops would have been in an impossible situation on unoccupied territory and thelocal population would not have meet them as liberators. 
In view of the situation, please issue an order to the com -manders of the corresponding units so that they render allpossible support to the provisional Soviet governments in Latvia, Estonia, the Ukraine and Lithuanian, but, of course, only to the Soviet governments. 
 Lenin Written November 29, 1918 Published according to First published in 1942 the text written by Stalin with additions by Lenin THE PROLETARIA N REVOLUTION AND THE RENEGAD E KAUTS KY90 Written October -November 1918 Published in pamphlet form in 1918 Published according to the by Kommunist Publishers, Moscow pamphlet checked with the manuscript THE PROLETARIAN REVOLUTION AND THE RENEGADE KAUTSKY90 Written October -November 1918 Published in pamphlet form in 1918 Published according to the by Kommunist Publishers, Moscow pamphlet checked with the manuscript Cover of the pamphlet The Proletarian Revolution and the Renegade Kautsky . 
 1918 Reduced PREFACE Kautsky’s pamphlet, The Dictatorship of the Proletariat , recently published in Vienna (Wien, 1918, Ignaz Brand, pp. 
 63) is a most lucid example of that utter and ignominious bankruptcy of the Second International about which all honest socialists in all countries have been talking for along time. 
 The proletarian revolution is now becoming apractical issue in a number of countries, and an examinationof Kautsky’s renegade sophistries and his complete renun -ciation of Marxism is therefore essential. 
 First of all, it should be emphasised, however, that the present author has, from the very beginning of the war,repeatedly pointed to Kautsky’s rupture with Marxism. 
A number of articles published between 1914 and 1916 in Sotsial -Demokrat91 and Kommunist ,92 issued abroad, dealt with this subject. 
 These articles were afterwards collected and published by the Petrograd Soviet under the title Against the Stream, by G. 
 Zinoviev and N. 
 Lenin (Petrograd,1918, pp. 
 550). 
 In a pamphlet published in Geneva in 1915and translated at the same time into German and French 93 I wrote about “Kautskyism” as follows: “Kautsky, the leading authority in the Second Inter -national, is a most typical and striking example of how averbal recognition of Marxism has led in practice to itsconversion into ‘Struvism’, or into ‘Brentanoism’ [i. 
e. 
,into a bourgeois -liberal theory recognising the non -revolu -tionary “class” struggle of the proletariat, which was expressedmost clearly by Struve, the Russian writer, and Brentano, the German economist]. 
 Another example is Plekhanov. 
 By means of patent sophistry, Marxism is stripped of itsrevolutionary living spirit; everything is recognised in Marxism except the revolutionary methods of struggle, the propaganda and preparation of those methods, and the education of the masses in this direction. 
 Kautsky recon -ciles in an unprincipled way the fundamental idea of social -chauvinism, recognition of defence of the fatherland in the present war, with a diplomatic sham concession to the Lefts—his abstention from voting for war credits, his ver-bal claim to be in the opposition, etc. 
 Kautsky, who in 1909 wrote a book on the approaching epoch of revolutions and on the connection between war and revolution, Kautsky, who in 1912 signed the Basle Manifesto94 on taking revo-lutionary advantage of the impending war, is outdoing himself in justifying and embellishing social -chauvinism and, like Plekhanov, joins the bourgeoisie in ridiculing any thought of revolution and all steps towards the imme -diate revolutionary struggle. 
 “The working class cannot play its world -revolutionary role unless it wages a ruthless struggle against this back -sliding, spinelessness, subservience to opportunism, and unparalleled vulgarisation of the theories of Marxism. 
 Kaut -skyism is not fortuitous; it is the social product of thecontradictions within the Second International, a blend ofloyalty to Marxism in word and subordination to opportun -ism in deed” (G. 
 Zinoviev and N. 
 Lenin, Socialism and War , Geneva, 1915, pp. 
 13 -14). 
 Again, in my book Imperialism , the Latest Stage of Capi -talism ,95 written in 1916 and published in Petrograd in 1917, I examined in detail the theoretical fallacy of allKautsky’s arguments about imperialism. 
 I quoted Kautsky’sdefinition of imperialism: “Imperialism is a product ofhighly developed industrial capitalism. 
 It consists in thestriving of every industrial capitalist nation to bring under its control or to annex all large areas of agrarian [Kautsky’s italics] territory, irrespective of what nations inhabit it. 
” I showed how utterly incorrect this definition was, and howit was “adapted” to the glossing over of the most profoundcontradictions of imperialism, and then to reconciliationwith opportunism. 
 I gave my own definition of imperial -ism: “Imperialism is capitalism at that stage of developmentat which the dominance of monopolies and finance capitalis established; at which the export of capital has acquired pronounced importance; at which the division of the world among the international trusts has begun; at which the division of all territories of the globe among the biggest capi -talist powers has been completed. 
” I showed that Kautsky’s critique of imperialism is on an even lower plane thanthe bourgeois, philistine critique. 
 Finally, in August and September 1917—that is, before the proletarian revolution in Russia (October 25 [Novem -ber 7], 1917), I wrote a pamphlet (published in Petrogradat the beginning of 1918) entitled The State and Revolution. 
 The Marxist Theory of the State and the Tasks of the Pro -letariat in the Revolution . 
 In Chapter VI of this book, entitled “The Vulgarisation of Marxism by the Opportunists”,I devoted special attention to Kautsky, showing that he had completely distorted Marx’s ideas, tailoring them to suit opportunism, and that he had “repudiated the revolutionin deeds, while accepting it in words. 
” In substance, the chief theoretical mistake Kautsky makes in his pamphlet on the dictatorship of the proletariat liesin those opportunist distortions of Marx’s ideas on the state—the distortions which I exposed in detail in my pam -phlet, The State and Revolution . 
 These preliminary remarks were necessary for they show that I openly accused Kautsky of being a renegadelong before the Bolsheviks assumed state power and were condemned by him on that account. 
 HOW KAUTSKY TURNED INTO A COMMON LIBERAL The fundamental question that Kautsky discusses in his pamphlet is that of the very essence of proletarian revolu -tion, namely, the dictatorship of the proletariat. 
 This isa question that is of the greatest importance for all coun -tries, especially for the advanced ones, especially for thoseat war, and especially at the present time. 
 One may saywithout fear of exaggeration that this is the key problemof the entire proletarian class struggle. 
 It is, therefore, necessary to pay particular attention to it. 
 Kautsky formulates the question as follows: “The con -trast between the two socialist trends” (i. 
e. 
, the Bolsheviks and non -Bolsheviks) “is the contrast between two radically different methods: the dictatorial and the democratic ” (p. 
 3). 
 Let us point out, in passing, that when calling the non -Bolsheviks in Russia, i. 
e. 
, the Mensheviks and Socialist -Revolutionaries, socialists, Kautsky was guided by their name , that is, by a word, and not by the actual place t hey occupy in the struggle between the proletariat and thebourgeoisie. 
 What a wonderful understanding and applica -tion of Marxism! But more of this later. 
 For the moment we must deal with the main point, namely, with Kautsky’s great discovery of the “fundamentalcontrast” between “democratic and dictatorial methods”. 
That is the crux of the matter; that is the essence of Kaut -sky’s pamphlet. 
 And that is such an awful theoretical mud -dle, such a complete renunciation of Marxism, that Kautsky,it must be confessed, has far excelled Bernstein. 
 The question of the dictatorship of the proletariat is a question of the relation of the proletarian state to thebourgeois state, of proletarian democracy to bourgeoisdemocracy. 
 One would think that this is as plain as a pike -stall. 
 But Kautsky, like a schoolmaster who has become asdry as dust from quoting the same old textbooks on history,persistently turns his back on the twentieth century andhis face to the eighteenth century, and for the hundredthtime, in a number of paragraphs, in an incredibly tediousfashion chews the old cud over the relation of bourgeois democracy to absolutism and medievalism! It sounds just like he were chewing rags in his sleep!But this means he utterly fails to understand what is what! One cannot help smiling at Kautsky’s effort to makeit appear that there are people who preach “contempt fordemocracy” (p. 
 11) and so forth. 
 That is the sort of twaddle Kautsky uses to befog and confuse the issue, for he talks like the liberals, speaking of democracy in general, andnot of bourgeois democracy; he even avoids using this pre -cise, class term, and, instead, tries to speak about “pre -socialist” democracy. 
 This windbag devotes almost one-third of his pamphlet, twenty pages out of sixty -three, to this twaddle, which is so agreeable to the bourgeoisie, for it is tantamount to embellishing bourgeois democracy,and obscures the question of the proletarian revolution. 
 But, after all, the title of Kautsky’s pamphlet is The Dic-tatorship of the Proletaria t. 
 Everybody knows that this is the very essence of Marx’s doctrine; and after a lot of irrelevant twaddle Kautsky was obliged to quote Marx’s words on the dictatorship of the proletariat. 
 But the way in which he the “Marxist” did it was simply farcical! Listen to this: “This view” (which Kautsky dubs “contempt for demo c-racy”) “rests upon a single word of Karl Marx’s”. 
 This is what Kautsky literally says on page 20. 
 And on page 60 the same thing is repeated even in the form that they (the Bolsheviks) “opportunely recalled the little word” (that is literally what he says —des Wörtchen s!!) “about the dictatorship of the proletariat which Marx once used in 1875 in a letter”. 
 Here is Marx’s “little word”: “Between capitalist and communist society lies the period of the revolutionary transformation of the one into the other. 
 Corresponding to this is also a political transition period in which the state can be nothing but the revolutio n-ary dictatorship of the proletariat . 
”96 First of all, to call this classical reasoning of Marx’s, which sums up the whole of his revolutionary teaching, “asingle word” and even “a little word,” is an insult to andcomplete renunciation of Marxism. 
 It must not be forgot -ten that Kautsky knows Marx almost by heart, and, judg -ing by all he has written, he has in his desk, or in his head, a number of pigeon -holes in which all that was ever written by Marx is most carefully filed so as to be ready at hand for quotation. 
 Kautsky must know that both Marx and Engels, in their letters as well as in their published works,repeatedly spoke about the dictatorship of the proletariat, before and especially after the Paris Commune. 
 Kautsky must know that the formula “dictatorship of the proletar -iat” is merely a more historically concrete and scientifi -cally exact formulation of the proletariat’s task of “smash -ing” the bourgeois state machine, about which both Marx and Engels, in summing up the experience of the Revolu -tion of 1848, and, still more so, of 1871, spoke for forty years , between 1852 and 1891. 
 How is this monstrous distortion of Marxism by that Marx -ist pedant Kautsky to be explained? As far as the philo -sophical roots of this phenomenon are concerned, it amounts to the substitution of eclecticism and sophistry for dialec -tics. 
 Kautsky is a past master at this sort of substitution. 
Regarded from the point of view of practical poli -tics, it amounts to subservience to the opportunists, thatis, in the last analysis to the bourgeoisie. 
 Since the outbreakof the war, Kautsky has made increasingly rapidprogress in this art of being a Marxist in words and a lackey of the bourgeoisie in deeds, until he has become a virtuoso at it. 
 One feels even more convinced of this when examining the remarkable way in which Kautsky “interprets” Marx’s“little word” about the dictatorship of the proletariat. 
 Lis -ten to this: “Marx, unfortunately, neglected to show us in greater detail how he conceived this dictatorship .... 
” (This is an utterly mendacious phrase of a renegade, for Marx and Engels gave us, indeed, quite a numberof most detailed indications, which Kautsky, the Marxist pedant, hasdeliberately ignored. 
) “Literally, the word dictatorship means the abo -lition of democracy. 
 But, of course, taken literally, this word alsomeans the undivided rule of a single person unrestricted by any laws— an autocracy, which differs from despotism only insofar as it is not meant as a permanent state institution, but as a transient emergencymeasure. 
 “The term, dictatorship of the proletariat’, hence not the dictator -ship of a single individual, but of a class, ipso facto precludes the possi -bility that Marx in this connection had in mind a dictatorship in the literal sense of the term. 
 “He speaks here not of a form of government , but of a condition , which must necessarily arise wherever the proletariat has gained polit -ical power. 
 That Marx in this case did not have in mind a form ofgovernment is proved by the fact that he was of the opinion that inBritain and America the transition might take place peacefully, i. 
e. 
, in a democratic way” (p. 
 20). 
 We have deliberately quoted this argument in full so that the reader may clearly see the methods Kautsky the“theoretician” employs. 
 Kautsky chose to approach the question in such a way as to begin with a definition of the “ word ” dictatorship. 
 Very well. 
 Everyone has a sacred right to approach a question in whatever way he pleases. 
 One must only dis -tinguish a serious and honest approach from a dishonest one. 
 Anyone who wants to be serious in approaching the question in this way ought to give his own definition of the “word”. 
 Then the question would be put fairly and squarely. 
 But Kautsky does not do that. 
 “Literally,” he writes, “the word dictatorship means the abolition ofdemocracy. 
” In the first place, this is not a definition. 
 If Kautsky want -ed to avoid giving a definition of the concept dictatorship,why did he choose this particular approach to the question? Secondly, it is obviously wrong. 
 It is natural for a liberal to speak of “democracy” in general; but a Marxist willnever forget to ask: “for what class?” Everyone knows, forinstance (and Kautsky the “historian” knows it too), thatrebellions, or even strong ferment, among the slaves inancient times at once revealed the fact that the ancient state was essentially a dictatorship of the slaveowners . 
 Did this dictatorship abolish democracy among , and for, the slaveowners? Everybody knows that it did not. 
 Kautsky the “Marxist” made this monstrously absurd and untrue statement because he “ forgot ” the class struggle.... 
 To transform Kautsky’s liberal and false assertion into a Marxist and true one, one must say: dictatorship does not necessarily mean the abolition of democracy for theclass that exercises the dictatorship over other classes; butit does mean the abolition (or very material restriction,which is also a form of abolition) of democracy for the classover which, or against which, the dictatorship is exercised. 
 But, however true this assertion may be, it does not give a definition of dictatorship. 
 Let us examine Kautsky’s next sentence: “...But, of course, taken literally, this word also means the undivid -ed rule of a single person unrestricted by any laws.... 
” Like a blind puppy sniffing at random first in one direc -tion and then in another, Kautsky accidentally stumbledupon one true idea (namely, that dictatorship is rule unre -stricted by any laws), nevertheless , he failed to give a defini -tion of dictatorship, and, moreover, he made an obvious historical blunder, namely, that dictatorship means the rule of a single person. 
 This is even grammatically incor -rect, since dictatorship may also be exercised by a handful of persons, or by an oligarchy, or by a class, etc. 
 Kautsky then goes on to point out the difference between dictatorship and despotism, but, although what he says is obviously incorrect, we shall not dwell upon it, as it is wholly irrelevant to the question that interests us. 
 Everyoneknows Kautsky’s inclination to turn from the twentiethcentury to the eighteenth, and from the eighteenth centuryto classical antiquity, and we hope that the German prole -tariat, after it has attained its dictatorship, will bear this inclination of his in mind and appoint him, say, teacher of ancient history at some Gymnasium. 
 To try to evade adefinition of the dictatorship of the proletariat by philoso -phising about despotism is either crass stupidity or veryclumsy trickery. 
 As a result, we find that, having undertaken to discuss the dictatorship, Kautsky rattled off a great deal of mani -fest lies, but has given no definition! Yet, instead of rely -ing on his mental faculties he could have used his memory to extract from “pigeon -holes” all those instances in which Marx speaks of dictatorship. 
 Had he done so, he wouldcertainly have arrived either at the following definition or at one in substance coinciding with it: Dictatorship is rule based directly upon force and unre -stricted by any laws. 
 The revolutionary dictatorship of the proletariat is rule won and maintained by the use of violence by the proletar -iat against the bourgeoisie, rule that is unrestricted by any laws. 
 This simple truth, a truth that is as plain as a pikestaff to every class -conscious worker (who represents the people, and not an upper section of petty -bourgeois scoundrels who have been bribed by the capitalists, such as are the social -imperialists of all countries), this truth, which is obvious to every representative of the exploited classes fighting for their emancipation, this truth, which is beyond dispute forevery Marxist, has to be “extracted by force” from the mostlearned Mr. 
 Kautsky! How is it to be explained? Simply bythat spirit of servility with which the leaders of the SecondInternational, who have become contemptible sycophants in the service of the bourgeoisie, are imbued. 
 Kautsky first committed a sleight of hand by proclaiming the obvious nonsense that the word dictatorship, in its literal sense, means the dictatorship of a single person, and then—on the strength of this sleight of hand—he declared that “hence” Marx’s words about the dictatorship of a class were not meant in the literal sense (but in one in which dictatorship does not imply revolutionary violence, butthe “peaceful” winning of a majority under bourgeois—mark you—“democracy”). 
 One must, if you please, distinguish between a “condition” and a “form of government”. 
 A wonderfully profound distinction; it is like drawing a distinction between the“condition” of stupidity of a man who reasons foolishly andthe “form” of his stupidity. 
 Kautsky finds it necessary to interpret dictatorship as a “condition of domination” (this is the literal expression he uses on the very next page, p. 
 21), because then revolu -tionary violence , and violent revolution , disappear . 
 The “con -dition of domination” is a condition in which any majority finds itself under ... “democracy”! Thanks to such a fraud,revolution happily disappears ! The fraud, however, is too crude and will not save Kaut -sky. 
 One cannot hide the fact that dictatorship presupposesand implies a “condition,” one so disagreeable to renegades,of revolutionary violence of one class against another. 
 It is patently absurd to draw a distinction between a “condition”and a “form of government”. 
 To speak of forms of govern -ment in this connection is trebly stupid, for every schoolboy knows that monarchy and republic are two different forms of government. 
 It must be explained to Mr. 
 Kautsky thatboth these forms of government, like all transitional “forms of government” under capitalism, are only variations of thebourgeois state , that is, of the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie . 
 Lastly, to speak of forms of government is not only a stupid, but also a very crude falsification of Marx, who was very clearly speaking here of this or that form or typeof state , and not of forms of government. 
 The proletarian revolution is impossible without the forcible destruction of the bourgeois state machine and thesubstitution for it of a new one which, in the words of Engels, is “no longer a state in the proper sense of the word”. 
 97 Because of his renegade position, Kautsky, however, has to befog and belie all this. 
 Look what wretched subterfuges he uses. 
 First subterfuge. 
 “That Marx in this case did not have in mind a form of government is proved by the fact that he was of the opinion that in Britain and America the transi -tion might take place peacefully, i. 
e. 
, in a democratic way. 
” The form of government has absolutely nothing to do with it, for there are monarchies which are not typical ofthe bourgeois state , such, for instance, as have no military clique, and there are republics which are quite typical in this respect, such, for instance, as have a military clique anda bureaucracy. 
 This is a universally known historical andpolitical fact, and Kautsky cannot falsify it. 
 If Kautsky had wanted to argue in a serious and honest manner he would have asked himself: Are there historical laws relating to revolution which know of no exception? And the reply would have been: No, there are no such laws. 
Such laws only apply to the typical, to what Marx oncetermed the “ideal,” meaning average, normal, typicalcapitalism. 
 Further, was there in the seventies anything which made England and America exceptional in regard to what we are now discussing ? It will be obvious to anyone at all famil -iar with the requirements of science in regard to the prob -lems of history that this question must be put. 
 To fail to put it is tantamount to falsifying science, to engaging insophistry. 
 And, the question having been put, there can be no doubt as to the reply: the revolutionary dictatorship of the proletariat is violence against the bourgeoisie; and the necessity of such violence is particularly called for, as Marx and Engels have repeatedly explained in detail (es -pecially in The Civil War in France and in the preface to it), by the existence of militarism and a bureaucracy . 
 But it is precisely these institutions that were non-existent in Britain and America in the seventies, when Marx madehis observations (they do exist in Britain and in America now )! Kautsky has to resort to trickery literally at every step to cover up his apostasy! And note how he inadvertently betrayed his cloven hoof when he wrote: “peacefully, i. 
e. 
, in a democratic way ”! In defining dictatorship, Kautsky tried his utmost to conceal from the reader the fundamental feature of this con -cept, namely, revolutionary violence . 
 But now the truth is out: it is a question of the contrast between peaceful and violent revolutions . 
 That is the crux of the matter. 
 Kautsky has to resort to all these subterfuges, sophistries and falsifications only toexcuse himself from violent revolution, and to conceal his renunciation of it, his desertion to the side of the liberal labour policy, i. 
e. 
, to the side of the bourgeoisie. 
 That is the crux of the matter. 
 Kautsky the “historian” so shamelessly falsifies history that he “forgets” the fundamental fact that pre -monopoly capitalism -which actually reached its zenith in the seven -ties-was by virtue of its fundamental economic traits, which found most typical expression in Britain and in America, distinguished by a, relatively speaking, maximumfondness for peace and freedom. 
 Imperialism, on the otherhand, i. 
e. 
, monopoly capitalism, which finally maturedonly in the twentieth century, is, by virtue of its fundamen -tal economic traits, distinguished by a minimum fondness for peace and freedom, and by a maximum and universal development of militarism. 
 To “fail to notice” this in dis -cussing the extent to which a peaceful or violent revolutionis typical or probable is to stoop to the level of a mostordinary lackey of the bourgeoisie. 
 Second subterfuge. 
 The Paris Commune was a dictator -ship of the proletariat, but it was elected by universal suffrage, i. 
e. 
, without depriving the bourgeoisie of the franchise,i. 
e. 
, “ democratically ”. 
 And Kautsky says triumphantly: “...The dictatorship of the proletariat was for Marx” (or:according to Marx) “a condition which ;necessarily followsfrom pure democracy, if the proletariat forms the majority” (bei überwiegendem Proletariat , S. 
 21). 
 This argument of Kautsky’s is so amusing that one truly suffers from a veritable embarras de richesses (an embarrass -ment due to the wealth ... of objections that can be made to it). 
 Firstly, it is well known that the flower, the GeneralStaff, the upper sections of the bourgeoisie, had fled from Paris to Versailles. 
 In Versailles there was the “socialist” Louis Blanc—which, by the way, proves the falsity ofKautsky’s assertion that “all trends” of socialism took part in the Paris Commune. 
 Is it not ridiculous to represent the division of the inhabitants of Paris into two belligerent camps, one of which embraced the entire militant and polit -ically active section of the bourgeoisie, as “pure democracy” with “universal suffrage”? Secondly, the Paris Commune waged war against Ver -sailles as the workers’ government of France against the bourgeois government. 
 What have “pure democracy” and “universal suffrage” to do with it, when Paris was decid -ing the fate of France? When Marx expressed the opinion that the Paris, Commune had committed a mistake infailing to seize the bank, which belonged to the whole ofFrance, 98 did he not proceed from the principles and practice of “pure democracy”? In actual fact, it is obvious that Kautsky is writing in a country where the police forbid people to laugh “in crowds,”otherwise Kautsky would have been killed by ridicule. 
 Thirdly, I would respectfully remind Mr. 
 Kautsky, who has Marx and Engels off pat, of the following appraisal ofthe Paris Commune given by Engels from the point of view of ... “pure democracy”: “Have these gentlemen” (the anti -authoritarians) “ever seen a revolution? A revolution is certainly the most au -thoritarian thing there is; it is an act whereby one part of thepopulation imposes its will upon the other by meansof rifles, bayonets and cannon—all of which are highly authoritarian means. 
 And the victorious party must main -tain its rule by means of the terror which its arms inspire in the reactionaries. 
 Would the Paris Commune have lastedmore than a day if it had not used the authority of thearmed people against the bourgeoisie? Cannot we, on thecontrary, blame it for having made too little use of that authority?” 99 Here is your “pure democracy”! How Engels would have ridiculed the vulgar petty bourgeois, the “Social -Democrat” (in the French sense of the forties and the general Europeansense of 1915 -18), who took it into his head to talk about “pure democracy” in a class -divided society! But that’s enough. 
 It is impossible to enumerate all Kautsky’s various absurdities, since every phrase he uttersis a bottomless pit of apostasy. 
 Marx and Engels analysed the Paris Commune in a most detailed manner and showed that its merit lay in its attempt to smash , to break up the “ready -made state machinery”. 
 Marx and Engels considered this conclusion to be so impor -tant that this was the only amendment they introduced in 1872 into the “obsolete” (in parts) programme of theCommunist Manifesto . 
 100 Marx and Engels showed that the Paris Commune had abolished the army and the bureaucracy, had abolished parliamentarism , had destroyed “that parasitic excrescence, the state,” etc. 
 But the sageKautsky, donning his nightcap, repeats the fairy -tale about “pure democracy,” which has been told a thousand times byliberal professors. 
 No wonder Rosa Luxemburg declared, on August 4, 1914, that German Social -Democracy was a stinking corpse . 
 Third subterfuge. 
 “When we speak of the dictatorship as a form of government we cannot speak of the dictatorshipof a class, since a class, as we have already pointed out,can only rule but not govern .... 
” It is “organisations” or “parties” that govern. 
 That is a muddle, a disgusting muddle, Mr. 
 “Muddle -headed Counsellor”! Dictatorship is not a “form of govern -ment”; that is ridiculous nonsense. 
 And Marx does not speak of the “form of government” but of the form or typeof state . 
 That is something altogether different, entirely different. 
 It is altogether wrong, too, to say that a class cannot govern: such an absurdity could only have been uttered by a “parliamentary cretin,” who sees nothing butbourgeois parliaments and notices nothing but “rulingparties”. 
 Any European country will provide Kautsky withexamples of government by a ruling class , for instance, by the landowners in the Middle Ages, in spite of their insuf -ficient organisation. 
 To sum up: Kautsky has in a most unparalleled manner distorted the concept dictatorship of the proletariat, andhas turned Marx into a common liberal; that is, he himselfhas sunk to the level of a liberal who utters banal phrasesabout “pure democracy,” embellishing and glossing over the class content of bourgeois democracy, and shrinking, above all, from the use of revolutionary violence by the oppressed class. 
 By so “interpreting” the concept “revolutionary dic -tatorship of the proletariat” as to expunge the revolutionary violence of the oppressed class against its oppressors, Kaut -sky has beaten the world record in the liberal distortionof Marx. 
 The renegade Bernstein has proved to be a merepuppy compared with the renegade Kautsky. 
 BOURGEOIS AND PROLETARIAN DEMOCRACY The question which Kautsky has so shamelessly muddled really stands as follows. 
 If we are not to mock at common sense and history, it is obvious that we cannot speak of pure democracy” as longas different classes exist; we can only speak of class democ -racy. 
 (Let us say in parenthesis that “pure democracy” is not only an ignorant phrase, revealing a lack of understand -ing both of the class struggle and of the nature of the state, but also a thrice -empty phrase, since in communist society democracy will wither away in the process of changing and becoming a habit, but will never be “pure” democracy. 
) “Pure democracy” is the mendacious phrase of a liberal who wants to fool the workers. 
 History knows of bourgeois democracy which takes the place of feudalism, and of pro -letarian democracy which takes the place of bourgeoisdemocracy. 
 When Kautsky devotes dozens of pages to “proving” the truth that bourgeois democracy is progressive compared with medievalism, and that the proletariat must unfailingly utilise it in its struggle against the bourgeoisie, that infact is just liberal twaddle intended to fool the workers. 
This is a truism, not only for educated Germany, but alsofor uneducated Russia. 
 Kautsky is simply throwing “learned”dust in the eyes of the workers when, with a pompous mien, he talks about Weitling and the Jesuits of Paraguay and many other things, in order to avoid telling about the bourgeois essence of modern, i. 
e. 
, capitalist , democracy. 
 Kautsky takes from Marxism what is acceptable to the liberals, to the bourgeoisie (the criticism of the MiddleAges, and the progressive historical role of capitalism in general and of capitalist democracy in particular), and discards, passes over in silence, glosses over all that inMarxism which is unacceptable to the bourgeoisie (the revo -lutionary violence of the proletariat against the bourgeoisie for the latter’s destruction). 
 That is why Kautsky, by vir -tue of his objective position and irrespective of what hissubjective convictions may be, inevitably proves to be alackey of the bourgeoisie. 
 Bourgeois democracy, although a great historical advance in comparison with medievalism, always remains, andunder capitalism is bound to remain, restricted, truncated, false and hypocritical, a paradise for the rich and a snare and deception for the exploited, for the poor. 
 It is thistruth, which forms a most essential part of Marx’s teaching,that Kautsky the “Marxist” has failed to understand. 
 Onthis—the fundamental issue—Kautsky offers “delights” forthe bourgeoisie instead of a scientific criticism of those conditions which make every bourgeois democracy a democ -racy for the rich. 
 Let us first remind the most learned Mr. 
 Kautsky of the theoretical propositions of Marx and Engels which thatpedant has so disgracefully “forgotten” (to please the bour -geoisie), and then explain the matter as popularly as pos -sible. 
 Not only the ancient and feudal, but also “the modern representative state is an instrument of exploitation ofwage -labour by capital” (Engels, in his work on the state). 
101 “As, therefore, the state is only a transitional institutionwhich is used in the struggle, in the revolution, to hold down one’s adversaries by force, it is sheer nonsense to talk of a ‘free people’s state’; so long as the proletariatstill needs the state, it does not need it in the interests offreedom but in order to hold down its adversaries, and assoon as it becomes possible to speak of freedom the state assuch ceases to exist” (Engels, in his letter to Bebel, March 28, 1875). 
 “In reality, however, the state is nothing but a machine for the oppression of one class by another, and in -deed in the democratic republic no less than in the monarchy”(Engels, Introduction to The Civil War in France by Marx). 
 102 Universal suffrage is “the gauge of the maturity of the work -ing class. 
 It cannot and never will be anything more in the present -day state ”. 
 (Engels, in his work on the state. 
103 Mr. 
 Kautsky very tediously chews over the cud in the first part of this proposition, which is acceptable to the bour -geoisie. 
 But the second part, which we have italicised and which is not acceptable to the bourgeoisie, the renegade Kautsky passes over in silence!) “The Commune was to be a working, not a parliamentary, body, executive and legis -lative at the same time .... 
 Instead of deciding once in three or six years which member of the ruling class was to repre -sent and suppress ( ver-und zertreten ) the people in Parlia -ment, universal suffrage was to serve the people, constituted in Communes, as individual suffrage serves every other employer in the search for workers, foremen and accountantsfor his business” (Marx, in his work on the Paris Commune,The Civil War in France ). 
 104 Every one of these propositions, which are excellently known to the most learned Mr. 
 Kautsky, is a slap in his face and lays bare his apostasy. 
 Nowhere in his pamphlet does Kautsky reveal, the slightest understanding of thesetruths. 
 His whole pamphlet is a sheer mockery of Marxism! Take the fundamental laws of modern states, take their administration, take freedom of assembly, freedom of thepress, or “equality of all citizens before the law,” and you will see at every turn evidence of the hypocrisy of bourgeois democracy with which every honest and class -conscious worker is familiar. 
 There is not a single state, howeverdemocratic, which has no loopholes or reservations in itsconstitution guaranteeing the bourgeoisie the possibility ofdispatching troops against the workers, of proclaiming martial law, and so forth, in case of a “violation of public order,” and actually in case the exploited class “violates”its position of slavery and tries to behave in a non -slavish manner. 
 Kautsky shamelessly embellishes bourgeois democ -racy and omits to mention, for instance, how the mostdemocratic and republican bourgeoisie in America or Switzer -land deal with workers on strike. 
 The wise and learned Kautsky keeps silent about these things! That learned politician does not realise that toremain silent on this matter is despicable. 
 He prefers totell the workers nursery tales of the kind that democracymeans “protecting the minority”. 
 It is incredible, but it is a fact! In the year of our Lord 1918, in the fifth year of the world imperialist slaughter and the strangulation of inter -nationalist minorities (i. 
e. 
, those who have not despicably betrayed socialism, like the Renaudels and Longuets, the Scheidemanns and Kautskys, the Hendersons and Webbs et al. 
) in all “democracies” of the world, the learned Mr. 
 Kaut -sky sweetly, very sweetly, sings the praises of “protection of the minority”. 
 Those who are interested may read thison page 15 of Kautsky’s pamphlet. 
 And on page 16 thislearned ... individual tells you about the Whigs and Toriesin England in the eighteenth century! What wonderful erudition! What refined servility to the bourgeoisie! What civilised belly -crawling before the capi -talists and boot -licking! If I were Krupp or Scheidemann, or Clemenceau or Renaudel, I would pay Mr. 
 Kautskymillions, reward him with Judas kisses, praise him beforethe workers and urge “socialist unity” with “honourable” men like him. 
 To write pamphlets against the dictatorship of the proletariat, to talk about the Whigs and Tories inEngland in the eighteenth century, to assert that democracymeans “protecting the minority,” and remain silent aboutpogroms against internationalists in the “democratic” re -public of America—isn’t this rendering lackey service to the bourgeoisie? The learned Mr. 
 Kautsky has “forgotten”—accidentally forgotten, probably—a “trifle,” namely, that the rulingparty in a bourgeois democracy extends the protection of theminority only to another bourgeois party, while the prole -tariat, on all serious , profound and fundamental issues, gets martial law or pogroms, instead of the “protection of the minority”. 
 The more highly developed a democracy is , the more imminent are pogroms or civil war in connection withany profound political divergence which is dangerous to thebourgeoisie . 
 The learned Mr. 
 Kautsky could have studied this “law” of bourgeois democracy in connection with the Dreyfus case 105 in republican France, with the lynching of Negroes and internationalists in the democratic republicof America, with the case of Ireland and Ulster in democraticBritain, 106 with the baiting of the Bolsheviks and the staging of pogroms against them in April 1917 in the demo -cratic republic of Russia. 
 I have purposely chosen examples not only from wartime but also from pre -war time, peace -time. 
 But mealy -mouthed Mr. 
 Kautsky prefers to shut his eyes to these facts of the twentieth century, and instead to tell the workers wonderfully new, remarkably interest -ing, unusually edifying and incredibly important things about the Whigs and Tories of the eighteenth century! Take the bourgeois parliament. 
 Can it be that the learned Kautsky has never heard that the more highly democracy is developed, the more the bourgeois parliaments are subject -ed by the stock exchange and the bankers? This does not mean that we must not make use of bourgeois parliament (the Bolsheviks made better use of it than probably any other party in the world, for in 1912 -15 we won the entire workers’ curia in the Fourth Duma). 
 But it does mean thatonly a liberal can forget the historical limitations and con -ventional nature of the bourgeois parliamentary system as Kautsky does. 
 Even in the most democratic bourgeois state the oppressed people at every step encounter the crying contradiction between the formal equality proclaimed by the “democracy” of the capitalists and the thousands of real limitations and subterfuges which turn the proletariansinto wage -slaves . 
 It is precisely this contradiction that is opening the eyes of the people to the rottenness, mendacity and hypocrisy of capitalism. 
 It is this contradiction that the agitators and propagandists of socialism are constantlyexposing to the people, in order to prepare them for revolu -tion! And now that the era of revolution has begun , Kautsky turns his back upon it and begins to extol the charms ofmoribund bourgeois democracy. 
 Proletarian democracy, of which Soviet government is one of the forms, has brought a development and expansion ofdemocracy unprecedented in the world, for the vast majorityof the population, for the exploited and working people. 
To write a whole pamphlet about democracy, as Kautskydid, in which two pages are devoted to dictatorship and dozens to “pure democracy,” and fail to notice this fact, means completely distorting the subject in liberal fashion. 
 Take foreign policy. 
 In no bourgeois state, not even in the most democratic, is it conducted openly. 
 The peopleare deceived everywhere, and in democratic France, Switzer -land, America and Britain this is done on an incomparably wider scale and in an incomparably subtler manner than in other countries. 
 The Soviet government has torn theveil of mystery from foreign policy in a revolutionary manner. 
 Kautsky has not noticed this, he keeps silent about it, although in the era of predatory wars and secret treaties for the “division of spheres of influence” (i. 
e. 
, for the par -tition of the world among the capitalist bandits) this is of cardinal importance, for on it depends the question of peace, the life and death of tens of millions of people. 
 Take the structure of the state. 
 Kautsky picks at all manner of “trifles,” down to the argument that under the Soviet Constitution elections are “indirect,” but he misses the point. 
 He fails to see the class nature of the state apparatus, of the machinery of state. 
 Under bourgeois democracy thecapitalists, by thousands of tricks—which are the moreartful and effective the more “pure” democracy is developed—drive the people away from administrative work, from freedom of the press, freedom of assembly, etc. 
 The Soviet government is the first in the world (or strictly speak -ing, the second, because the Paris Commune began to do the same thing) to enlist the people, specifically the exploited people, in the work of administration. 
 The workingpeople are barred from participation in bourgeois parlia -ments (they never decide important questions under bour -geois democracy, which are decided by the stock exchange and the banks) by thousands of obstacles, and the workersknow and feel, see and realise perfectly well that the bour -geois parliaments are institutions alien to them, instruments for the oppression of the workers by the bourgeoisie, insti -tutions of a hostile class, of the exploiting minority. 
 The Soviets are the direct organisation of the working and exploited people themselves, which helps them to organ -ise and administer their own state in every possible way. 
 And in this it is the vanguard of the working and exploitedpeople, the urban proletariat, that enjoys the advantage of being best united by the large enterprises; it is easier for it than for all others to elect and exercise control overthose elected. 
 The Soviet form of organisation automaticallyhelps to unite all the working and exploited people around their vanguard, the proletariat. 
 The old bourgeois appara -tus—the bureaucracy, the privileges of wealth, of bourgeois education, of social connections, etc. 
 (these real priv -ileges are the more varied the more highly bourgeois democ -racy is developed)—all this disappears under the Soviet form of organisation. 
 Freedom of the press ceases to be hypoc -risy, because the printing -plants and stocks of paper are taken away from the bourgeoisie. 
 The same thing applies to the best buildings, the palaces, the mansions and manor -houses. 
 Soviet power took thousands upon thousands of thesebest buildings from the exploiters at one stroke, and in thisway made the right of assembly—without which democracyis a fraud— a million times more democratic for the people. 
 Indirect elections to non -local Soviets make it easier to hold congresses of Soviets, they make the entire apparatus less costly, more flexible, more accessible to the workersand peasants at a time when life is seething and it is neces -sary to be able very quickly to recall one’s local deputy or todelegate him to a general congress of Soviets. 
 Proletarian democracy is a million times more democratic than any bourgeois democracy; Soviet power is a milliontimes more democratic than the most democratic bourgeoisrepublic. 
 To fail to see this one must either deliberately serve the bourgeoisie, or be politically as dead as a doornail, unable to see real life from behind the dusty pages of bourgeois books, be thoroughly imbued with bourgeois -democratic prejudices, and thereby objectively convert oneself into alackey of the bourgeoisie. 
 To fail to see this one must be incapable of presenting the question from the point of view of the oppressed classes: Is there a single country in the world, even among the most democratic bourgeois countries, in which the average rank-and-file worker, the average rank -and-file farm labourer , or village semi -proletarian generally (i. 
e. 
, the repre -sentative of the oppressed, of the overwhelming majorityof the population), enjoys anything approaching such liberty of holding meetings in the best buildings, such liberty of using the largest printing -plants and biggest stocks of paper to express his ideas and to defend his interests, suchliberty of promoting men and women of his own class to administer and to “knock into shape” the state, as in SovietRussia? It is ridiculous to think that Mr. 
 Kautsky could find in any country even one out of a thousand of well -informed workers or farm labourers who would have any doubts as to the reply. 
 Instinctively, from hearing fragments of admis -sions of the truth in the bourgeois press, the workers of the whole world sympathise with the Soviet Republic pre -cisely because they regard it as a proletarian democracy, a democracy for the poor , and not a democracy for the rich that every bourgeois democracy, even the best, actual -ly is. 
 We are governed (and our state is “knocked into shape”) by bourgeois bureaucrats, by bourgeois members of parlia -ment, by bourgeois judges—such is the simple, obvious and indisputable truth which tens and hundreds of millionsof people belonging to the oppressed classes in all bourgeoiscountries, including the most democratic, know from theirown experience, feel and realise every day. 
 In Russia, however, the bureaucratic machine has been completely smashed, razed to the ground; the old judgeshave all been sent packing, the bourgeois parliament hasbeen dispersed—and far more accessible representation has been given to the workers and peasants; their Soviets have replaced the bureaucrats, or their Soviets have been put in control of the bureaucrats, and their Soviets have been authorised to elect the judges. 
 This fact alone is enoughfor all the oppressed classes to recognise that Soviet power,i. 
e. 
, the present form of the dictatorship of the proletariat,is a million times more democratic than the most democraticbourgeois republic. 
 Kautsky does not understand this truth, which is so clear and obvious to every worker, because he has “forgot -ten,” “unlearned” to put the question: democracy for which class? He argues from the point of view of “pure” (i. 
e. 
,non -class? or above -class?) democracy. 
 He argues like Shy -lock: my “pound of flesh” and nothing else. 
 Equality for all citizens—otherwise there is no democracy. 
 We must ask the learned Kautsky, the “Marxist” and “socialist” Kautsky: Can there be equality between the exploited and the exploiters? It is dreadful, it is incredible that such a question should have to be put in discussing a book written by the ideologi -cal leader of the Second International. 
 But “having put your hand to the plough, don’t look back,” and having undertaken to write about Kautsky, I must explain to the learned man why there can be no equality between the ex -ploiter and the exploited. 
 CAN THERE BE EQUALITY BETWEEN THE EXPLOITED AND THE EXPLOITER? Kautsky argues as follows: (1) “The exploiters have always formed only a small minority of the population ” (p. 
 14 of Kautsky’s pamphlet). 
 This is indisputably true. 
 Taking this as the starting -point, what should be the argument? One may argue in a Marxist, a socialist way. 
 In which case one would proceed from the relation between the exploited and the exploiters. 
 Or one may argue in a liberal, a bourgeois -democratic way. 
 And in that case one would proceed from the relationbetween the majority and the minority. 
 If we argue in a Marxist way, we must say: the exploiters inevitably transform the state (and we are speaking of democ -racy, i. 
e. 
, one of the forms of the state) into an instrumentof the rule of their class, the exploiters, over the exploited. 
Hence, as long as there are exploiters who rule the majority,the exploited, the democratic state must inevitably be ademocracy for the exploiters. 
 A state of the exploited mustfundamentally differ from such a state; it must be a democ -racy for the exploited, ‘and a means of suppressing the ex -ploiters ; and the suppression of a class means inequality for that class, its exclusion from “democracy”. 
 If we argue in a liberal way, we must say: the majority decides, the minority submits. 
 Those who do not submit arepunished. 
 That is all. 
 Nothing need be said about the class character of the state in general, or of “pure democracy” in particular, because it is irrelevant; for a majority isa majority and a minority is a minority. 
 A pound of fleshis a pound of flesh, and that is all there is to it. 
 And this is exactly how Kautsky argues. 
 (2) “Why should the rule of the proletariat assume, and necessarily assume, a form which is incompatible with democracy?” (P. 
 21). 
 Then follows a very detailed and avery verbose explanation, backed by a quotation from Marx and the election figures of the Paris Commune, to the effect that the proletariat is in the majority. 
 The conclusion is: “A regime which is so strongly rooted in the people has not the slightest reason for encroaching upon democracy. 
 Itcannot always dispense with violence in cases when vio -lence is employed to suppress democracy. 
 Violence can onlybe met with violence. 
 But a regime which knows that ithas popular backing will employ violence only to protect democracy and not to destroy it. 
 It would be simply suicidal if it attempted to do away with its most reliablebasis—universal suffrage, that deep source of mighty moralauthority” (p. 
 22). 
 As you see, the relation between the exploited and the exploiters has vanished in Kautsky’s argument. 
 All that remains is majority in general, minority in general, democ -racy in general, the “pure democracy” with which we are already familiar. 
 And all this, mark you, is said apropos of the Paris Commune ! To make things clearer I shall quote Marx and Engels to show what they said on the subject of dictatorship apropos of the Paris Commune : Marx : “...When the workers replace the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie by their revolutionary dictatorship ... tobreak down the resistance of the bourgeoisie ... the workersinvest the state with a revolutionary and transitionalform .... 
 107 Engels : “...And the victorious party” (in a revolution) “must maintain its rule by means of the terror which its armsinspire in the reactionaries. 
 Would the Paris Commune havelasted more than a day if it had not used the authority ofthe armed people against the bourgeoisie? Cannot we, on thecontrary, blame it for having made too little use of that authority?... 108 Engels : “As, therefore, the state is only a transitional institution which is used in the struggle, in the revolution,to hold down one’s adversaries by force, it is sheer nonsenseto talk of a ‘free people’s state’; so long as the proletariatstill needs the state, it does not need it in the interests of freedom but in order to hold down its adversaries, and as soon as it becomes possible to speak of freedom the stateas such ceases to exist.... 
 109 Kautsky is as far removed from Marx and Engels as heav -en is from earth, as a liberal from a proletarian revolution -ary. 
 The pure democracy and simple “democracy” that Kautsky talks about is merely a paraphrase of the “freepeople’s state”, i. 
e. 
, sheer nonsense . 
 Kautsky, with the learned air of a most learned armchair fool, or with theinnocent air of a ten -year -old schoolgirl, asks: Why do we need a dictatorship when we have a majority? And Marx and Engels explain: —to break down the resistance of the bourgeoisie;—to inspire the reactionaries with fear;—to maintain the authority of the armed people against the bourgeoisie; —that the proletariat may forcibly hold down its adver -saries. 
 Kautsky does not understand these explanations. 
 Infatu -ated with the “purity” of democracy, blind to its bourgeoischaracter, he “consistently” urges that the majority, sinceit is the majority, need not “break down the resistance” ofthe minority, nor “forcibly hold it down”—it is sufficient to suppress cases of infringement of democracy. 
 Infatuated with the “purity” of democracy, Kautsky inadvertently commits the same little error that all bourgeois democratsalways commit, namely, he takes formal equality (which isnothing but a fraud and hypocrisy under capitalism) foractual equality! Quite a trifle! The exploiter and the exploited cannot be equal. 
 This truth, however unpleasant it may be to Kautsky, nevertheless forms the essence of socialism. 
 Another truth: there can be no real, actual equality until all possibility of the exploitation of one class by anotherhas been totally destroyed. 
 The exploiters can be defeated at one stroke in the event of a successful uprising at the centre, or of a revolt in thearmy. 
 But except in very rare and special cases, the exploit -ers cannot be destroyed at one stroke. 
 It is impossible toexpropriate all the landowners and capitalists of any bigcountry at one stroke. 
 Furthermore, expropriation alone, as a legal or political act, does not settle the matter by a long chalk, because it is necessary to depose the landowners and capitalists in actual fact, to replace their management of the factories and estates by a different management, workers’ management, in actual fact. 
 There can be no equal -ity between the exploiters—who for many generationshave been better off because of their education, conditionsof wealthy life, and habits—and the exploited, the majorityof whom even in the most advanced and most democraticbourgeois republics are downtrodden, backward, ignorant,intimidated and disunited. 
 For a long time after the revo -lution the exploiters inevitably continue to retain a numberof great practical advantages: they still have money (sinceit is impossible to abolish money all at once); some movableproperty—often fairly considerable; they still have variousconnections, habits of organisation and management; knowl -edge of all the “secrets” (customs, methods, means and pos -sibilities) of management; superior education; close connec -tions with the higher technical personnel (who live arid thinklike the bourgeoisie); incomparably greater experience in theart of war (this is very important), and so on and so forth. 
 If the exploiters are defeated in one country only—and this, of course, is typical, since a simultaneous revolution in a number of countries is a rare exception—they still remain stronger than the exploited, for the international connections of the exploiters are enormous. 
 That a sectionof the exploited from the least advanced middle -peasant, artisan and similar groups of the population may, andindeed does, follow the exploiters has been proved by all revo -lutions, including the Commune (for there were also prole -tarians among the Versailles troops, which the most learned Kautsky has “forgotten”). 
 In these circumstances, to assume that in a revolution which is at all profound and serious the issue is decidedsimply by the relation between the majority and the minority is the acme of stupidity, the silliest prejudice of a common liberal, an attempt to deceive the people by concealing from them a well -established historical truth. 
 This historical truth is that in every profound revolution, the prolonged , stubborn and desperate resistance of the exploiters, who for a number of years retain important practical advantages over the exploited, is the rule . 
 Never—except in the senti -mental fantasies of the sentimental fool Kautsky—will the exploiters submit to the decision of the exploited majority without trying to make use of their advantages in a last desperate battle, or series of battles. 
 The transition from capitalism to communism takes an entire historical epoch. 
 Until this epoch is over, the exploit -ers inevitably cherish the hope of restoration, and thishope turns into attempts at restoration. 
 After their first serious defeat, the overthrown exploiters—who had notexpected their overthrow, never believed it possible, never conceded the thought of it—throw themselves with energy grown tenfold, with furious passion and hatred grown ahundredfold, into the battle for the recovery of the “para -dise”, of which they were deprived, on behalf of their fami -lies, who had been leading such a sweet and easy life andwhom now the “common herd” is condemning to ruin and destitution (or to “common” labour...). 
 In the train of the capitalist exploiters follow the wide sections of the pettybourgeoisie, with regard to whom decades of historicalexperience of all countries testify that they vacillate andhesitate, one day marching behind the proletariat and thenext day taking fright at the difficulties of the revolution; that they become panic -stricken at the first defeat or semi -defeat of the workers, grow nervous, run about aimlessly, snivel, and rush from one camp into the other—just likeour Mensheviks and Socialist -Revolutionaries. 
 In these circumstances, in an epoch of desperately acute war, when history presents the question of whether age-old and thousand -year -old privileges are to be or not to be—at such a time to talk about majority and minority,about pure democracy, about dictatorship being unneces -sary and about equality between the exploiter and theexploited! What infinite stupidity and abysmal philistinismare needed for this! However, during the decades of comparatively “peaceful” capitalism between 1871 and 1914, the Augean stables ofphilistinism, imbecility, and apostasy accumulated in thesocialist parties which were adapting themselves to oppor -tunism.... 
 * * * The reader will probably have noticed that Kautsky, in the passage from his pamphlet quoted above, speaks of an attempt to encroach upon universal suffrage (calling it, by the way, a deep source of mighty moral authority, whereas Engels, apropos of the same Paris Commune and the same question of dictatorship, spoke of the authority of the armedpeople against the bourgeoisie—a very characteristic differ -ence between the philistine’s and the revolutionary’sviews on “authority”...). 
 It should be observed that the question of depriving the exploiters of the franchise is a purely Russian question, and not a question of the dictatorship of the proletariat ingeneral. 
 Had Kautsky, casting aside hypocrisy, entitled hispamphlet Against the Bolsheviks , the title would have cor -responded to the contents of the pamphlet, and Kautsky would have been justified in speaking bluntly about the franchise. 
 But Kautsky wanted to come out primarily as a “theoretician”. 
 He called his pamphlet The Dictatorship of the Proletariat —in general . 
 He speaks about the Soviets and about Russia specifically only in the second part of thepamphlet, beginning with the sixth paragraph. 
 The sub -ject dealt with in the first part (from which I took the quo -tation) is democracy and dictatorship in general . 
 In speaking about the franchise, Kautsky betrayed himself as an oppo -nent of the Bolsheviks, who does not care a brass farthing for theory . 
 For theory, i. 
e. 
, the reasoning about the general (and not the nationally specific) class foundations of democ -racy and dictatorship, ought to deal not with a special question, such as the franchise, but with the general ques -tion of whether democracy can be preserved for the rich , for the exploiters in the historical period of the overthrow of the exploiters and the replacement of their state by thestate of the exploited. 
 That is the way, the only way, a theoretician can present the question. 
 We know the example of the Paris Commune, we know all that was said by the founders of Marxism in connectionwith it and in reference to it. 
 On the basis of this materialI examined, for instance, the question of democracy anddictatorship in my pamphlet, The State and Revolution , written before the October Revolution. 
 I did not say any -thing at all about restricting the franchise. 
 And it must be said now that the question of restricting the franchise is a nationally specific and not a general question of the dicta -torship. 
 One must approach the question of restricting the franchise by studying the specific conditions of the Russian revolution and the specific path of its development. 
 This will be done later on in this pamphlet. 
 It would be amistake, however, to guarantee in advance that the impend -ing proletarian revolutions in Europe will all, or the major -ity of them, be necessarily accompanied by restriction of the franchise for the bourgeoisie. 
 It may be so. 
 After the war and the experience of the Russian revolution it probablywill be so; but it is not absolutely necessary for the exercise of the dictatorship, it is not an indispensable characteristic of the logical concept “dictatorship”, it does not enter asan indispensable condition in the historical and class con -cept “dictatorship”. 
 The indispensable characteristic, the necessary condition of dictatorship is the forcible suppression of the exploiters as a class , and, consequently, the infringement of “pure democracy”, i. 
e. 
, of equality and freedom, in regard to that class . 
 This is the way, the only way, the question can be put theoretically. 
 And by failing to put the question thus,Kautsky has shown that he opposes the Bolsheviks not as atheoretician, but as a sycophant of the opportunists and thebourgeoisie. 
 In which countries, and given what national features of capitalism, democracy for the exploiters will be in one or another form restricted (wholly or in part), infringed upon,is a question of the specific national features of this or thatcapitalism, of this or that revolution. 
 The theoreticalquestion is different: Is the dictatorship of the proletariatpossible without infringing democracy in relation to the exploiting class? It is precisely this question, the only theoretically impor -tant and essential one, that Kautsky has evaded. 
 He has quoted all sorts of passages from Marx and Engels, except those which bear on this question, and which I quoted above. 
 Kautsky talks about anything you like, about everything that is acceptable to liberals and bourgeois democrats and does not go beyond their circle of ideas, but he does nottalk about the main thing, namely, the fact that the prole -tariat cannot achieve victory without breaking the resistance of the bourgeoisie, without forcibly suppressing its adver -saries , and that, where there is “forcible suppression”, where there is no “freedom”, there is , of course , no democracy . 
 This Kautsky has not understood. 
 * * * We shall now examine the experience of the Russian revolution and that divergence between the Soviets of Deputies and the Constituent Assembly which led to the dis -solution of the latter and to the withdrawal of the franchisefrom the bourgeoisie. 
 THE SOVIETS DARE NOT BECOME STATE ORGANISATIONS The Soviets are the Russian form of the proletarian dicta -torship. 
 If a Marxist theoretician, writing a work on the dictatorship of the proletariat, had really studied the sub -ject (and not merely repeated the petty -bourgeois lamentations against dictatorship, as Kautsky did, singing to Menshevik tunes), he would first have given a general definition ofdictatorship, and would then have examined its peculiar,national, form, the Soviets; he would have given his critiqueof them as one of the forms of the dictatorship of the prole -tariat. 
 It goes without saying that nothing serious could be expected from Kautsky after his liberalistic “interpretation”of Marx’s teaching on dictatorship; but the manner in whichhe approached the question of what the Soviets are andthe way he dealt with this question is highly characteristic. 
 The Soviets, he says, recalling their rise in 1905, created “the most all -embracing ( umfassendste ) form of proletarian organisation, for it embraced all the wage -workers” (p. 
 31). 
 In 1905 they were only local bodies; in 1917 they became anational organisation. 
 “The Soviet form of organisation,” Kautsky continues, “already has a great and glorious history behind it, and it has a still mightier futurebefore it, and not in Russia alone. 
 It appears that everywhere the oldmethods of the economic and political struggle of the proletariat are inadequate” ( versagen ; this German expression is somewhat stronger than “inadequate” and somewhat weaker than “impotent”) “against the gigantic economic and political forces which finance capital has at its disposal. 
 These old methods cannot he discarded; they are still indis -pensable for normal times; but from time to time tasks arise whichthey cannot cope with, tasks that can be accomplished successfully only as a result of a combination of all the political and economic instruments of force of the working class” (p. 
 32). 
 Then follows a reasoning on the mass strike and on “trade union bureaucracy”—which is no less necessary than the trade unions—being “useless for the purpose of directingthe mighty mass battles that are more and more becominga sign of the times.... 
” “Thus,” Kautsky concludes, “the Soviet form of organisation is one of the most important phenomena of our time. 
 It promises to acquire decisive importance in the great decisive battles between capital andlabour towards which we are marching. 
 “But are we entitled to demand more of the Soviets? The Bolshe -viks, after the November Revolution” (new style, or October, according to our style) “1917, secured in conjunction with the Left Socialist -Revolutionaries a majority in the Russian Soviets of Workers’ Deputies,and after the dispersion of the Constituent Assembly, they set out totransform the Soviets from a combat organisation of one class , as they had been up to then, into a state organisation . 
 They destroyed the democ -racy which the Russian people had won in the March” (new style, or February, our style) “Revolution. 
 In line with this, the Bolsheviks have ceased to call themselves Social -Democrats . 
 They call themselves Communists ” (p. 
 33, Kautsky’s italics). 
 Those who are familiar with Russian Menshevik litera -ture will at once see how slavishly Kautsky copies Martov, Axelrod, Stein and Co. 
 Yes, “slavishly”, because Kautskyridiculously distorts the facts in order to pander to Menshe -vik prejudices. 
 Kautsky did not take the trouble, for in -stance, to ask his informants (Stein of Berlin, or Axelrodof Stockholm) when the questions of changing the name of the Bolsheviks to Communists and of the significance of the Soviets as state organisations were first raised. 
 Had Kautskymade this simple inquiry he would not have penned theseludicrous lines, for both these questions were raised by theBolsheviks in April 1917 , for example, in my “Theses” of April 4, 1917, i. 
e. 
, long before the Revolution of October 1917 (and, of course, long before the dissolution of the Con -stituent Assembly on January 5, 1918). 
 But Kautsky’s argument which I have just quoted in full represents the crux of the whole question of the Soviets. 
 The crux is: should the Soviets aspire to become state organ -isations (in April 1917 the Bolsheviks put forward the slogan: “All Power to the Soviets!” and at the Bolshevik Party Conference held in the same month they declared theywere not satisfied with a bourgeois parliamentary republicbut demanded a workers’ and peasants’ republic of the ParisCommune or Soviet type); or should the Soviets not strive for this, refrain from taking power into their hands, refrain from becoming state organisations and remain the “combat organisations” of one “class” (as Martov expressed it,embellishing by this innocent wish the fact that underMenshevik leadership the Soviets were an instrument for the subjection of the workers to the bourgeoisie )? Kautsky slavishly repeats Martov’s words, picks out fragments of the theoretical controversy between the Bol -sheviks and the Mensheviks, and uncritically and senselessly transplants them to the general theoretical and generalEuropean field. 
 The result is such a hodge -podge as to provoke Homeric laughter in every class -conscious Rus -sian worker had he read these arguments of Kautsky’s. 
 When we explain what the question at issue is, every worker in Europe (barring a handful of inveterate social -imperialists) will greet Kautsky with similar laughter. 
 Kautsky has rendered Martov a backhanded service by developing his mistake into a glaring absurdity. 
 Indeed,look what Kautsky’s argument amounts to. 
 The Soviets embrace all wage -workers. 
 The old methods of economic and political struggle of the proletariat areinadequate against finance capital. 
 The Soviets have a greatrole to play in the future, and not only in Russia. 
 Theywill play a decisive role in great decisive battles betweencapital and labour in Europe. 
 That is what Kautsky says. 
 Excellent. 
 But won’t the “decisive battles between capi -tal and labour” decide which of the two classes will assume state power? Nothing of the kind! Heaven forbid!The Soviets, which embrace all the wage -workers, must not become state organisations in the “decisive” battles! But what is the state? The state is nothing but a machine for the suppression of one class by another. 
 Thus, the oppressed class, the vanguard of all the work -ing and exploited people in modern society, must strive towards the “decisive battles between capital and labour”, but must not touch the machine by means of which capital suppresses labour!— It must not break up that machine!— It must not make use of its all -embracing organisation for suppressing the exploiters ! Excellent, Mr. 
 Kautsky, magnificent! ‘We” recognise the class struggle—in the same way as all liberals recognise it, i. 
e. 
, without the overthrow of the bourgeoisie.... 
 This is where Kautsky’s complete rupture both with Marxism and with socialism becomes obvious. 
 Actually, itis desertion to the camp of the bourgeoisie, who are pre -pared to concede everything except the transformation of the organisations of the class which they oppress into state organisations. 
 Kautsky can no longer save his position oftrying to reconcile everything and of getting away from allprofound contradictions with mere phrases. 
 Kautsky either rejects the assumption of state power by the working class altogether, or he concedes that the working class may take over the old, bourgeois state machine. 
 But he will by no means concede that it must break itup, smash it, and replace it by a new, proletarian machine. 
Whichever way Kautsky’s arguments are “interpreted”,or “explained”, his rupture with Marxism and his desertionto the bourgeoisie are obvious. 
 Back in the Communist Manifesto , describing what sort of state the victorious working class needs, Marx wrote:“the state, i. 
e. 
, the proletariat organised as the rulingclass. 
” 110 Now we have a man who claims still to be a Marxist coming forward and declaring that the proletariat,fully organised and waging the “decisive battle” against capital, must not transform its class organisation into a state organisation. 
 Here Kautsky has betrayed that “super -stitious belief in the state” which in Germany, as Engelswrote in 1891, “has been carried over into the generalthinking of the bourgeoisie and even of many workers”. 
 111 Workers, fight!—our philistine “agrees” to this (as every bour -geois “agrees”, since the workers are fighting all the same,and the only thing to do is to devise means of blunting theedge of their sword)—fight, but don’t dare win ! Don’t destroy the state machine of the bourgeoisie, don’t replace the bourgeois “state organisation” by the proletarian “state organisation”! Whoever sincerely shared the Marxist view that the state is nothing but a machine for the suppression of one class by another, and who has at all reflected upon this truth, could never have reached the absurd conclusion that the proletarian organisations capable of defeating finance capital must not transform themselves into state organisa -tions. 
 It was this point that betrayed the petty bourgeois who believes that “after all is said and done” the state is something outside classes or above classes. 
 Indeed, why should the proletariat, “one class”, be permitted to wage unremitting war on capital , which rules not only over the proletariat, but over the whole people, over the whole petty bourgeoisie, over all the peasants, yet this proletariat, this “one class”, is not to be permitted to transform its organis a-tion into a state organisation? Because the petty bourgeois is afraid of the class struggle, and does not carry it to its logical conclusion, to its main objec t. 
 Kautsky has got himself completely mixed up and has given himself away entirely. 
 Mark you, he himself admits that Europe is heading for decisive battles between capital and labour, and that the old methods of economic and polit-ical struggle of the proletariat are inadequate. 
 But these old methods were precisely the utilisation of bourgeois democracy. 
 It therefore follows...? But Kautsky is afraid to think of what follows. 
 ...It therefore follows that only a reactionary, an enemy of the working class, a henchman of the bourgeoisie, cannow turn his face to the obsolete past, paint the charms ofbourgeois democracy and babble about pure democracy. 
 Bourgeois democracy was progressive compared with medie -valism, and it had to be utilised. 
 But now it is not sufficient for the working class. 
 Now we must look forward instead of backward—to replacing the bourgeois democracy byproletarian democracy. 
 And while the preparatory work for the proletarian revolution, the formation and training of the proletarian army were possible (and necessary) within the framework of the bourgeois -democratic state, now that we have reached the stage of “decisive battles”, to confine the proletariat to this framework means betraying the cause of the proletariat, means being a renegade. 
 Kautsky has made himself particularly ridiculous by repeating Martov’s argument without noticing that in Mar -tov’s case this argument was based on another argument which he, Kautsky, does not use! Martov said (and Kautskyrepeats after him) that Russia is not yet ripe for socialism;from which it logically follows that it is too early to trans -form the Soviets from organs of struggle into state organisa -tions (read: it is timely to transform the Soviets, with theassistance of the Menshevik leaders, into instruments forsubjecting the workers to the imperialist bourgeoisie). 
 Kautsky, however, cannot say outright that Europe is not ripe for socialism. 
 In 1909, when he was not yet a renegade, he wrote that there was then no reason to fear a premature revolution, that whoever had renounced revolution for fearof defeat would have been a traitor. 
 Kautsky does not darerenounce this outright . 
 And so we get an absurdity, which completely reveals the stupidity and cowardice of the pettybourgeois: on the one hand, Europe is ripe for socialism and is heading towards decisive battles between capital and labour; but, on the other hand, the combat organisation (i. 
e. 
, the organisation which arises, grows and gains strengthin combat), the organisation of the proletariat, the vanguardand organiser, the leader of the oppressed, must not be transformed into a state organisation! * * * From the point of view of practical politics the idea that the Soviets are necessary as combat organisations but mustnot be transformed into state organisations is infinitely more absurd than from the point of view of theory. 
 Even in peacetime, when there is no revolutionary situation, themass struggle of the workers against the capitalists—forinstance, the mass strike—gives rise to great bitterness onboth sides, to fierce passions in the struggle, the bourgeoisieconstantly insisting that they remain and mean to remain “masters in their own house”, etc. 
 And in time of revolution, when political life reaches boiling point, an organisationlike the Soviets, which embraces all the workers in all branches of industry, all the soldiers, and all the working and poorest sections of the rural population—such an organ -isation, of its own accord, with the development of thestruggle, by the simple “logic” of attack and defence, comesinevitably to pose the question point -blank . 
 The attempt to take up a middle position and to “reconcile” the prole -tariat with the bourgeoisie is sheer stupidity and doomedto miserable failure. 
 That is what happened in Russia to the preachings of Martov and other Mensheviks, and that will inevitably happen in Germany and other countries if theSoviets succeed in developing on any wide scale, manageto unite and strengthen. 
 To say to the Soviets: fight, butdon’t take all state power into your hands, don’t becomestate organisations—is tantamount to preaching class collab -oration and “social peace” between the proletariat and thebourgeoisie. 
 It is ridiculous even to think that such a posi -tion in the midst of fierce struggle could lead to anythingbut ignominious failure. 
 But it is Kautsky’s everlastingfate to sit between two stools. 
 He pretends to disagree withthe opportunists on everything in theory, but in practice he agrees with them on everything essential (i. 
e. 
, on every -thing pertaining to revolution) THE CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY AND THE SOVIET REPUBLIC The question of the Constituent Assembly and its disper -sal by the Bolsheviks is the crux of Kautsky’s entire pam -phlet. 
 He constantly reverts to it, and the whole of this lit -erary production of the ideological leader of the Second International is replete with innuendoes to the effect thatthe Bolsheviks have “destroyed democracy” (see one of the quotations from Kautsky above). 
 The question is really an interesting and important one, because the relationbetween bourgeois democracy and proletarian democracyhere confronted the revolution in a practical form. 
 Let us see how our “Marxist theoretician” has dealt with thequestion. 
 He quotes the “Theses on the Constituent Assembly”, written by me and published in Pravda on December 26, 1917. 
 One would think that no better evidence of Kaut -sky’s serious approach to the subject, quoting as he does the documents, could be desired. 
 But look how he quotes. 
 He does not say that there were nineteen of these theses; he does not say that they dealt with the relation betweenthe ordinary bourgeois republic with a ConstituentAssembly and a Soviet republic, as well as withthe history of the divergence in our revolution be -tween the Constituent Assembly and the dictatorship of the proletariat. 
 Kautsky ignores all that, and simply tells the reader that “two of them” (of the theses) “are par -ticularly important”: one stating that a split occurred amongthe Socialist -Revolutionaries after the elections to the Constituent Assembly, but before it was convened (Kautskydoes not mention that this was the fifth thesis), and the other, that the republic of Soviets is in general a higher democratic form than the Constituent Assembly (Kautskydoes not mention that this was the third thesis). 
 Only from this third thesis does Kautsky quote a part in full, namely, the following passage: “The republic of Soviets is not only a higher type of democratic institution (as compared with the usual bourgeois republic crowned by a Constituent Assembly), but is theonly form capable of securing the most painless * transi -tion to socialism” (Kautsky omits the word “usual” and theintroductory words of the thesis: “For the transition fromthe bourgeois to the socialist system, for the dictatorship of the proletariat”). 
 After quoting these words, Kautsky, with magnificent irony, exclaims: “It is a pity that this conclusion was arrived at only after the Bolsheviks found themselves in the minority in the Constituent Assem -bly. 
 Before that no one had demanded it more vociferously than Lenin. 
” *Incidentally, Kautsky, obviously trying to be ironical, repeated -ly quotes the expression “most painless” transition; but as the shaftmisses its mark, a few pages farther on he commits a slight forgery and falsely quotes it as a “painless” transition! Of course, by such means it is easy to put any absurdity into the mouth of an opponent. 
 The for -gery also helps him to evade the substance of the argument, namely,that the most painless transition to socialism is possible only when allthe poor are organised to a man (Soviets) and when the core of statepower (the proletariat) helps them to organise. 
 This is literally what Kautsky says on page 31 of his book! It is positively a gem! Only a sycophant of the bourgeoi -sie could present the question in such a false way as togive the reader the impression that all the Bolsheviks’talk about a higher type of state was an invention whichsaw light of day after they found themselves in the minor -ity in the Constituent Assembly! Such an infamous lie could only have been uttered by a scoundrel who has sold himself to the bourgeoisie, or, what is absolutely the same thing, who has placed his trust in Axelrod and is concealingthe source of his information. 
 For everyone knows that on the very day of my arrival in Russia, on April 4, 1917, I publicly read my theses inwhich I proclaimed the superiority of the Paris Commune type of state over the bourgeois parliamentary republic. 
 Afterwards I repeatedly stated this in print, as, for instance, in a pamphlet on political parties, which was translatedinto English and was published in January 1918 in theNew York Evening Post . 
 112 More than that, the Conference of the Bolshevik Party held at the end of April 1917 adopt -ed a resolution to the effect that a proletarian and peasantrepublic was superior to a bourgeois parliamentary repub -lic, that our Party would not be satisfied with the latter, andthat the Party Programme should be modified accordingly. 
 In face of these facts, what name can be given to Kautsky’s trick of assuring his German readers that I had been vigorously demanding the convocation of the Constituent Assembly, and that I began to “belittle” the honour and dignity of the Constituent Assembly only after the Bolsheviks found themselves in the minority in it? How can one excuse such a trick? * By pleading that Kautsky did not know the facts? If that is the case, why did he undertake to write about them? Or why did he not honestly announce that he was writing on the strength of information supplied by the Mensheviks Stein and Axelrod and Co. 
? By pretending to be objective, Kautsky wants to conceal his role as the servant of the Mensheviks, who are disgruntled because they have been defeated. 
 *Incidentally, there are many Menshevik lies of this kind in Kaut -sky’s pamphlet! It is a lampoon written by an embittered Menshevik. 
 This, however, is a mere trifle compared with what is to come. 
 Let us assume that Kautsky would not or could not (?) obtain from his informants a translation of the Bolshevikresolutions and declarations on the question of whether theBolsheviks would be satisfied with a bourgeois parliamentarydemocratic republic or not. 
 Let us assume this, althoughit is incredible. 
 But Kautsky directly mentions my theses of December 26, 1917, on page 30 of his book. 
 Does he not know these theses in full, or does he know only what was translated for him by the Stems, the Axelrodsand Co. 
? Kautsky quotes the third thesis on the fundamental question of whether the Bolsheviks, before the elections to the Constituent Assembly, realised that a Soviet republic is superior to a bourgeois republic, and whether they told the people that. 
 But he keeps silent about the second thesis . 
 The second thesis reads as follows:“While demanding the convocation of a Constituent As -sembly, revolutionary Social -Democracy has ever since the beginning of the revolution of 1917 repeatedly emphasised that a republic of Soviets is a higher form of democracy than the usual bourgeois republic with a Constituent Assembly . 
 (my italics). 
 In order to represent the Bolsheviks as unprincipled people, as “revolutionary opportunists” (this is a term whichKautsky employs somewhere in his book, I forget in which connection), Mr. 
 Kautsky has concealed from his German readers the fact that the theses contain a direct reference to “ repeated ” declarations! These are the petty, miserable and contemptible methods Mr. 
 Kautsky employs! That is the way he has evaded thetheoretical question. 
 Is it true or not that the bourgeois -democratic parliamen -tary republic is inferior to the republic of the Paris Commune or Soviet type? This is the whole point, and Kautsky hasevaded it. 
 Kautsky has “forgotten” all that Marx said inhis analysis of the Paris Commune. 
 He has also “forgotten”Engels’s letter to Bebel of March 28, 1875, in which this same idea of Marx is formulated in a particularly lucid and comprehensible fashion: “The Commune was no longera state in the proper sense of the word. 
” Here is the most prominent theoretician of the Second International, in a special pamphlet on The Dictatorship of the Proletariat , specially dealing with Russia, where the question of a form of state that is higher than a demo -cratic bourgeois republic has been raised directly and re -peatedly, ignoring this very question. 
 In what way does thisdiffer in fact from desertion to the bourgeois camp? (Let us observe in parenthesis that in this respect, too, Kautsky is merely trailing after the Russian Mensheviks. 
 Among the latter there are any number of people who know“all the quotations” from Marx and Engels. 
 Yet not a singleMenshevik, from April to October 1917 and from October1917 to October 1918, has ever made a single attempt to examine the question of the Paris Commune type of state. 
 Plekhanov, too, has evaded the question. 
 Evidently he had to . 
) It goes without saying that to discuss the dispersal of the Constituent Assembly 113 with people who call themselves socialists and Marxists, but who in fact desert to thebourgeoisie on the main question, the question of the Paris Commune type of state, would be casting pearls before swine. 
 It will be sufficient to give the complete text of my theseson the Constituent Assembly as an appendix to the presentbook. 
 The reader will then see that the question was pre -sented on December 26, 1917, in the light of theory, historyand practical politics. 
 If Kautsky has completely renounced Marxism as a theoret -ician he might at least have examined the question of the struggle of the Soviets with the Constituent Assemblyas a historian. 
 We know from many of Kautsky’s works thathe knew how to he a Marxist historian, and that such works of his will remain a permanent possession of the proletariat in spite of his subsequent apostasy. 
 But on this question Kausky, even as a historian, turns his back on the truth, ignores well -known facts and behaves like a sycophant. 
 He wants to represent the Bolsheviks as being unprincipled and he tells his readers that they tried to mitigate the conflict with the Constituent Assembly before dispersing it. 
 There is absolutely nothing wrong about it, we have nothing to recant; I give the theses in full and there it is said as clearas clear can be: Gentlemen of the vacillating petty bour - /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR geoisie entrenched in the Constituent Assembly, either reconcile yourselves to the proletarian dictatorship, or else we shall defeat you by “revolutionary means” (theses 18 and 19). 
 That is how a really revolutionary proletariat has always behaved and always will behave towards the vacillatingpetty bourgeoisie. 
 Kautsky adopts a formal standpoint on the question of the Constituent Assembly. 
 My theses say clearly and repeat -edly that the interests of the revolution are higher than the formal rights of the Constituent Assembly (see theses16 and 17). 
 The formal democratic point of view is preciselythe point of view of the bourgeois democrat who refuses to admit that the interests of the proletariat and of the prole -tarian class struggle are supreme. 
 As a historian, Kautskywould not have been able to deny that bourgeois parliamentsare the organs of this or that class. 
 But now (for the sordidpurpose of renouncing revolution) Kautsky finds it neces -sary to forget his Marxism, and he refrains from putting the question : the organ of what class was the Constituent Assembly of Russia? Kautsky does not examine the concrete conditions; he does not want to face facts; he does not saya single word to his German readers about the fact that thetheses contained not only a theoretical elucidation of thequestion of the limited character of bourgeois democracy(theses 1 -3), not only a description of the concrete conditions which determined the discrepancy between the party lists of candidates in the middle of October 1917 and the realstate of affairs in December 1917 (theses 4 -6), but also a his -tory of the class struggle and the Civil War in October -December 1917 (theses 7 -15). 
 From this concrete history we drew the conclusion (thesis 14) that the slogan “All Power to the Constituent Assembly!” had, in reality , be-come the slogan of the Cadets and the Kaledin men and their abettors. 
 Kautsky the historian fails to see this. 
 Kautsky the his -torian has never heard that universal suffrage sometimesproduces petty -bourgeois, sometimes reactionary and coun -ter-revolutionary parliaments. 
 Kautsky the Marxist his -torian has never heard that the form of elections, the formof democracy, is one thing, and the class content of the given institution is another. 
 This question of the class content of the Constituent Assembly is directly put and answered in my theses. 
 Perhaps my answer is wrong. 
 Nothing would have been more welcome to us than a Marxist criticism of ouranalysis by an outsider. 
 Instead of writing utterly sillyphrases (of which there are plenty in Kautsky’s book) aboutsomebody preventing criticism of Bolshevism, he oughtto have set out to make such a criticism. 
 But the point is that he offers no criticism. 
 He does not even raise the ques -tion of a class analysis of the Soviets on the one hand, and of the Constituent Assembly on the other. 
 It is thereforeimpossible to argue, to debate with Kautsky. 
 All we can do is demonstrate to the reader why Kautsky cannot be called anything else but a renegade. 
 The divergence between the Soviets and the Constituent Assembly has its history, which even a historian who doesnot share the point of view of the class struggle could nothave ignored. 
 Kautsky would not touch upon this actual history. 
 Kautsky has concealed from his German readersthe universally known fact (which only malignant Menshe -viks now conceal) that the divergence between the Sovietsand the “general state” (that is, bourgeois) institutions exist -ed even under the rule of the Mensheviks, i. 
e. 
, from theend of February to October 1917. 
 Actually, Kautsky adoptsthe position of conciliation, compromise and collaborationbetween the proletariat and the bourgeoisie. 
 However much Kautsky may repudiate this, it is a fact which is borne out by his whole pamphlet. 
 To say that the Constituent Assem -bly should not have been dispersed is tantamount to sayingthat the fight against the bourgeoisie should not have beenfought to a finish, that the bourgeoisie should not have beenoverthrown and that the proletariat should have made peace with them. 
 Why has Kautsky kept quiet about the fact that the Men -sheviks were engaged in this inglorious work between Feb -ruary and October 1917 and did not achieve anything?If it was possible to reconcile the bourgeoisie with the prole -tariat, why didn’t the Mensheviks succeed in doing so? Why did the bourgeoisie stand aloof from the Soviets? Why did the Mensheviks call the Soviets “revolutionary democ -racy”, and the bourgeoisie the “propertied elements”? Kautsky has concealed from his German readers that it was the Mensheviks who, in the “epoch” of their rule (Feb -ruary to October 1917), called the Soviets “revolutionarydemocracy”, thereby admitting their superiority over all other institutions. 
 It is only by concealing this fact thatKautsky the historian made it appear that the divergencebetween the Soviets and the bourgeoisie had no history,that it arose instantaneously, without cause, suddenly, because of the bad behaviour of the Bolsheviks. 
 Yet, in actual fact, it was the more than six months ’ (an enormous period in time of revolution) experience of Menshevik com -promise, of their attempts to reconcile the proletariat with the bourgeoisie, that convinced the people of the fruitless -ness of these attempts and drove the proletariat away from the Mensheviks. 
 Kautsky admits that the Soviets are an excellent combat organisation of the proletariat, and that they have a greatfuture before them. 
 But, that being the case, Kautsky’sposition collapses like a house of cards, or like the dreamsof a petty bourgeois that the acute struggle between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie can be avoided. 
 For revo -lution is one continuous and moreover desperate struggle, and the proletariat is the vanguard class of all the oppressed, the focus and centre of all the aspirations of all theoppressed for their emancipation! Naturally, therefore, theSoviets, as the organ of the struggle of the oppressed people, reflected and expressed the moods and changes of opinions of these people ever so much more quickly, fully, and faith -fully than any other institution (that, incidentally, is oneof the reasons why Soviet democracy is the highest type ofdemocracy). 
 In the period between February 28 (old style) and October 25, 1917, the Soviets managed to convene two all -Russia congresses of representatives of the overwhelming majorityof the population of Russia, of all the workers and soldiers,and of 70 or 80 per cent of the peasants, not to mentionthe vast number of local, uyezd, town, gubernia, andregional congresses. 
 During this period the bourgeoisie did not succeed in convening a single institution representing the majority (except that obvious sham and mockerycalled the “Democratic Conference”, 114 which enraged the proletariat). 
 The Constituent Assembly reflected the same popular mood and the same political grouping as the First (June) All -Russia Congress of Soviets. 
 By the time the Con -stituent Assembly was convened (January 1918), the Second (October 1917) and Third (January 1918) Congresses ofSoviets had met, both of which had demonstrated as clear as clear could be that the people had swung to the left, had become revolutionised, had turned away from the Menshe -viks and the Socialist -Revolutionaries, and had passed over to the side of the Bolsheviks; that is , had turned away from petty -bourgeois leadership, from the illusion that it was possible to reach a compromise with the bourgeoisie, andhad joined the proletarian revolutionary struggle for theoverthrow of the bourgeoisie. 
 So, even the external history of the Soviets shows that the Constituent Assembly was a reactionary body and that its dispersal was inevitable. 
 But Kautsky sticks firmly to his“slogan”: let “pure democracy” prevail though the revolutionperish and the bourgeoisie triumph over the proletariat!Fiat justitia , pereat mundus ! * Here are the brief figures relating to the all -Russia cong -resses of Soviets in the course of the history of the Russian re -revolution: All-Russia Congress Number of Number of Percentage of of Soviets Delegates Bolsheviks Bolsheviks First (June 3, 1917) .... 
 790 103 13 Second (October 25, 1917) . 
. 
 675 343 51 Third (January 10, 1918) . 
. 
 710 434 61 Fourth (March 14, 1918) ... 1,232 795 64 Fifth (July 4, 1918) .... 
 1,164 773 66 One glance at these figures is enough to understand why the defence of the Constituent Assembly and talk (like Kautsky’s) about the Bolsheviks not having a majority of the population behind them are just ridiculed in Russia. 
 THE SOVIET CONSTITUTION As I have already pointed out, the disfranchisement of the bourgeoisie is not a necessary and indispensable feature of the dictatorship of the proletariat. 
 And in Russia, the *Let justice be done, even though the world may perish. 
— Ed. 
 Bolsheviks, who long before October put forward the slogan of proletarian dictatorship, did not say anything in advance about disfranchising the exploiters. 
 This aspect of the dic -tatorship did not make its appearance “according to the plan” of any particular party; it emerged of itself in the course of the struggle. 
 Of course, Kautsky the historianfailed to notice this. 
 He failed to understand that even whenthe Mensheviks (who compromised with the bourgeoisie) still ruled the Soviets, the bourgeoisie cut themselves off from the Soviets of their own accord, boycotted them, putthemselves up in opposition to them and intrigued againstthem. 
 The Soviets arose without any constitution and existedwithout one for more than a year (from the spring of 1917 to the summer of 1918). 
 The fury of the bourgeoisie against this independent and omnipotent (because it was all -embracing) organisation of the oppressed; the fight, the unscrupulous, self -seeking and sordid fight, the bourgeoisie waged against the Soviets; and, lastly, the overt participa -tion of the bourgeoisie (from the Cadets to the Right Social -ist-Revolutionaries, from Milyukov to Kerensky) in the Kornilov mutiny115—all this paved the way for the formal exclusion of the bourgeoisie from the Soviets. 
 Kautsky has heard about the Kornilov mutiny, but he majestically scorns historical facts and the course andforms of the struggle which determine the forms of the dictatorship. 
 Indeed, who should care about facts where “pure” democracy is involved? That is why Kautsky’s “criticism” of the disfranchisement of the bourgeoisie isdistinguished by such ... sweet naïveté, which would betouching in a child but is repulsive in a person who has notyet been officially certified as feeble -minded. 
 “... If the capitalists found themselves in an insignificant minority under universal suffrage they would more readily become reconciled to their fate” (p. 
 33) .... 
 Charming, isn’t it? Clever Kautsky has seen many cases in history, and,generally, knows perfectly well from his own observationsof life of landowners and capitalists reckoning with the willof the majority of the oppressed. 
 Clever Kautsky firmly advocates an “opposition ”, i. 
e. 
, parliamentary struggle. 
 That is literally what he says: “opposition” (p. 
 34 and else -where). 
 My dear learned historian and politician! It would not harm you to know that “opposition” is a concept that belongs to the peaceful and only to the parliamentary struggle, i. 
e. 
, a concept that corresponds to a non -revolutionary situation, a concept that corresponds to an absence of revo -lution . 
 During revolution we have to deal with a ruthless enemy in civil war; and no reactionary jeremiads of a pettybourgeois who fears such a war, as Kautsky does, will alter the fact. 
 To examine the problems of ruthless civil war from the point of view of “opposition” at a time when the bour -geoisie are prepared to commit any crime—the example ofthe Versailles men and their deals with Bismarck must meansomething to every person who does not treat history likeGogol’s Petrushka 116—when the bourgeoisie are summoning foreign states to their aid and intriguing with them against the revolution, is simply comical. 
 The revolutionary pro -letariat is to put on a nightcap, like “Muddle -headed Coun -sellor” Kautsky, and regard the bourgeoisie, who are organ -ising Dutov, Krasnov and Czech counter -revolutionary insurrections and are paying millions to saboteurs, as a legal “opposition”. 
 Oh, what profundity! Kautsky is exclusively interested in the formal, legal aspect of the question, and, reading his disquisitions onthe Soviet Constitution, one involuntarily recalls Bebel’swords: Lawyers are thoroughbred reactionaries. 
 “In reality,”Kautsky writes, “the capitalists alone cannot be disfran -chised. 
 What is a capitalist in the legal sense of the term?A property -owner? Even in a country which has advanced so far along the path of economic progress as Germany,where the proletariat is so numerous, the establishment of aSoviet republic would disfranchise a large mass of people. 
In 1907, the number of persons in the German Empire engaged in the three great occupational groups—agricul -ture, industry and commerce—together with their families amounted roughly to thirty -five million in the wage -earn -ers’ and salaried employees’ group, and seventeen millionin the independent group. 
 Hence, a party might well forma majority among the wage -workers but a minority among the population as a whole” (p. 
 33). 
 That is an example of Kautsky’s mode of argument. 
 Isn’t it the counter -revolutionary whining of a bourgeois? Why, Mr. 
 Kautsky, have you relegated all the “independents” to the category of the disfranchised, when you know very well that the overwhelming majority of the Russian peas -ants do not employ hired labour, and do not, therefore, lose their franchise? Isn’t this falsification? Why, learned economist, did you not quote the facts with which you are perfectly familiar and which are to befound in those same German statistical returns for 1907 relating to hired labour in agriculture according to size of farms? Why did you not quote these facts to enable theGerman workers, the readers of your pamphlet, to see how many exploiters there are , and how few they are compared with the total number of “farmers” who figure in Germanstatistics? You did not because your apostasy has made you a mere sycophant of the bourgeoisie. 
 The term capitalist, Kautsky argues, is legally a vague concept, and on several pages he thunders against the“arbitrariness” of the Soviet Constitution. 
 This “seriousscholar” has no objection to the British bourgeoisie taking several centuries to work out and develop a new (new for the Middle Ages) bourgeois constitution, but, representativeof lackey’s science that lie is, he will allow no time to us,the workers and peasants of Russia. 
 He expects us to havea constitution all worked out to the very last letter in afew months.... 
 “Arbitrariness!” Just imagine what a depth of vile sub -servience to the bourgeoisie and most inept pedantry is contained in such a reproach. 
 When thoroughly bourgeois and for the most part reactionary lawyers in the capitalistcountries have for centuries or decades been drawing up mostdetailed rules and regulations and writing scores and hundreds of volumes of laws and interpretations of laws to oppress the workers, to bind time poor man hand and foot and to place thousands of hindrances and obstacles in the wayof any of the common labouring people—there the bourgeoisliberals and Mr. 
 Kautsky see no “arbitrariness”! That is“law” and “order”! The ways in which the poor are to be “kept down” have all been thought out and written down. 
 There are thousands of bourgeois lawyers arid bureaucrats(about them Kautsky says nothing at all, probably just because Marx attached enormous significance to smashing the bureaucratic machine...)—lawyers and bureaucrats who know how to interpret the laws in such a way that the worker and the average peasant can never break throughthe barbed -wire entanglements of these laws. 
 This is not “arbitrariness” on the part of the bourgeoisie, it is not thedictatorship of the sordid and self -seeking exploiters who are sucking the blood of the people. 
 Nothing of the kind! It is “pure democracy”, which is becoming purer and purer every day. 
 But now that the toiling and exploited classes, while cut off by the imperialist war from their brothers acrossthe border, have for the first time in history set up theirown Soviets, have called to the work of political construc -tion those people whom the bourgeoisie used to oppress, grind down and stupefy, and have begun themselves to build a new , proletarian state, have begun in the heat of furious struggle, in the fire of civil war, to sketch the funda -mental principles of a state without exploiters —all the bourgeois scoundrels, the whole gang of bloodsuckers, with Kautsky echoing them, howl about “arbitrariness”! Indeed, how will these ignorant people, these workers andpeasants, this “mob”, be able to interpret their laws? Howcan these common labourers acquire a sense of justicewithout the counsel of educated lawyers, of bourgeoiswriters, of the Kautskys and the wise old bureaucrats? Mr. 
 Kautsky quotes from my speech of April 28, 1918, the words: “The people themselves determine the procedureand the time of elections. 
” And Kautsky, the “pure demo -crat”, infers from this: “...Hence, it would mean that every assembly of electors may deter -mine the procedure of elections at their own discretion. 
 Arbitrariness and the opportunity of getting rid of undesirable opposition in the ranks of the proletariat itself would thus be carried to the extreme” (p. 
 37). 
 Well, how does this differ from the talk of a hack lured by capitalists, who howls about the people oppressing indus -trious workers who are “willing to work” during a strike?Why is the bourgeois bureaucratic method of determining electoral procedure under “pure” bourgeois democracy not arbitrariness? Why should the sense of justice among the masses who have risen to fight their age -old exploiters and who are being educated and steeled in this desperate struggle be less than that of a handful of bureaucrats, intellectuals and lawyers brought up in bourgeois prejudices? Kautsky is a true socialist. 
 Don’t dare suspect the sin -cerity of this very respectable father of a family, of thisvery honest citizen. 
 He is an ardent and convinced supporterof the victory of the workers, of the proletarian revolution. 
All he wants is that the honey -mouthed, petty -bourgeois intellectuals and philistines in nightcaps should first — before the masses begin to move, before they start a furious battle with the exploiters, and certainly without civil war—draw up a moderate and precise set of rules for the development of the revolution.... 
 Burning with profound moral indignation, our most learned Judas Golovlyov117 tells the German workers that on June 14, 1918, the All -Russia Central Executive Commit -tee of Soviets resolved to expel the representatives of theRight Socialist -Revolutionary Party and the Mensheviks from the Soviets. 
 “This measure,” writes Judas Kautsky,all afire with noble indignation, “is not directed against definite persons guilty of definite punishable offences .... 
 The Constitution of the Soviet Republic does not contain asingle word about the immunity of Soviet deputies. 
 It isnot definite persons , but definite parties that are expelled from the Soviets” (p. 
 37). 
 Yes, that is really awful, an intolerable departure from pure democracy, according to the rules of which our revolu -tionary Judas Kautsky will make the revolution. 
 We Russian Bolsheviks should first have guaranteed immunityto the Savinkovs and Co. 
, to the Lieberdans, 118 Potresovs (“activists”119) and Co. 
, then drawn up a criminal code proclaiming participation in the Czech counter -revolution -ary war, or in the alliance with the German imperialistsin the Ukraine or in Georgia against the workers of one’s own country, to be “punishable offences”, and only then , on the basis of this criminal code, would we be entitled, inaccordance with the principles of “pure democracy”, toexpel “definite persons” from the Soviets. 
 It goes without saying that the Czechs, who are subsidised by the British and French capitalists through the medium (or thanks to theagitation) of the Savinkovs, Potresovs and Lieberdans, and the Krasnovs who receive ammunition from the Germans through the medium of the Ukrainian and Tiflis Menshe -viks, would have sat quietly waiting until we were ready with our proper criminal code, and, like the purest dem o-crats they are, would have confined themselves to the role of an “opposition”.... 
 No less profound moral indignation is aroused in Kau t-sky’s breast by the fact that the Soviet Constitution disfra n-chises all those who “employ hired labour with a view to profit”. 
 “A hom e-worker, or a small master employing only one journeyman,” Kautsky writes, “may live and feel quite like a proletarian, but he has no vote” (p. 
 36). 
 What a departure from “pure democracy”! What an injustice! True, up to now all Marxists have thought—and thousands of facts have proved it—that the small masters were the most unscrupulous and grasping exploiters of hired labour, but our Judas Kautsky takes the small masters not as a class (who invented that pernicious theory of the class struggle?) but as single individuals, exploiters who “live and feel quite like proletarians”. 
 The famous “thrifty Agnes”, who was considered dead and buried long ago, has come to life again under Kautsky’s pen. 
 This “thrifty Agnes” was invented and launched into German literature some decades ago by that “pure” democrat, the bourgeois Eugen Richter. 
 He predicted untold calamities that would follow the dictatorship of the proletariat, the confiscation of the capital of the exploiters, and asked with an innocent air: What is a capitalist in the legal sense of the term? He took as an example a poor, thrifty seamstress (“thrifty Agnes”), whom the wicked “proletarian dictators” rob of her last farthing. 
 There was a time when all German Socia l-Democrats used to poke fun at this “thrifty Agnes” of the pure democrat, Eugen Richter. 
 But that was a long, long time ago, when Bebel, who was quite frank and open about there being many nationa l-liberal s120 in his party, was still alive; that was very long ago, when Kautsky was not yet a renegade. 
 Now “thrifty Agnes” has come to life again in the person of the “small master who employs only one journeymanand who lives and feels quite like a proletarian”. 
 The wickedBolsheviks are wronging him, depriving him of his vote. 
 It is true that “every assembly of electors” in the Soviet Republic, as Kautsky tells us, may admit into its midst a poor little master who, for instance, may be connected with this or that factory, if, by way of an exception, he isnot an exploiter, and if he really “lives and feels quite like a proletarian”. 
 But can one rely on the knowledge of life,on the sense of justice if an irregular factory meeting ofcommon workers acting (how awful!) without a written code? Would it not clearly be better to grant the vote to all exploit -ers, to all who employ hired labour, rather than risk the possibility of “thrifty Agnes” and the “small master wholives and feels quite like a proletarian” being wronged bythe workers? * * * Let the contemptible renegade scoundrels, amidst the applause of the bourgeoisie and the social -chauvinists, * abuse our Soviet Constitution for disfranchising the exploit -ers! That’s fine because it will accelerate and widen thesplit between the revolutionary workers of Europe and the Scheidemanns and Kautskys, the Renaudels and Longuets, the Hendersons and Ramsay MacDonalds, the old leadersand old betrayers of socialism. 
 The mass of the oppressed classes, the class -conscious and honest revolutionary proletarian leaders will be on our side . 
 It will be enough to acquaint such proletarians and such people with our Soviet Constitution for them to say at once: “These are really our people , this is a real workers’ party, this is a real workers’ government, for it does notdeceive the workers by talking about reforms in the way all the above -mentioned leaders have done , but is fighting the exploiters in real earnest, making a revolution in real earnest and actually fighting for the complete emancipation of the workers. 
” The fact that after a year’s “experience” the Soviets *I have just read a leading article in Frankfurter Zeitung121 (No. 
 293, October 22, 1918), giving an enthusiastic summary of Kaut -sky’s pamphlet. 
 This organ of the stock exchange is satisfied. 
 And no wonder! And a comrade writes to me from Berlin that Vorwärts ,122 the organ of the Scheidemanns, has declared in a special article that it subscribes to almost every line Kautsky has written. 
 Hearty congratu -lations! have deprived the exploiters of the franchise shows that the Soviets are really organisations of the oppressed and not of social -imperialists and social -pacifists who have sold themselves to the bourgeoisie. 
 The fact that the Soviets have disfranchised the exploiters shows they are not organs of petty -bourgeois compromise with the capitalists, not organs of parliamentary chatter (on the part of theKautskys, the Longuets and the MacDonalds), but organs of the genuinely revolutionary proletariat which is waging a life -and-death struggle against the exploiters. 
 “Kautsky’s book is almost unknown here,” a well -informed comrade wrote to me from Berlin a few days ago (today isOctober 30). 
 I would advise our ambassadors in Germanyand Switzerland not to stint thousands in buying up this book and distributing it gratis among the class -conscious workers so as to trample in the mud this “European”—read:imperialist and reformist—Social -Democracy, which has long been a “stinking corpse”. 
 * * * At the end of his book, on pages 61 and 63, Mr. 
 Kautsky bitterly laments the fact that the “new theory” (as he callsBolshevism, fearing to touch Marx’s and Engels’s analysisof the Paris Commune) “finds supporters even in old democ -racies like Switzerland, for instance”. 
 “It is incomprehen -sible” to Kautsky “how this theory can be adopted by German Social -Democrats”. 
 No, it is quite comprehensible; for after the serious lessons of the war the revolutionary masses are becomingsick and tired of the Scheidemanns and the Kautskys. 
 “We” have always been in favour of democracy, Kautsky writes, yet we are supposed suddenly to renounce it! “We”, the opportunists of Social -Democracy, have always been opposed to the dictatorship of the proletariat, andKolb and Co. 
 proclaimed this long ago . 
 Kautsky knows this and vainly expects that he will be able to conceal from his readers the obvious fact that he has “returned to the fold” of the Bernsteins and Kolbs. 
 “We”, the revolutionary Marxists, have never made a fetish of “pure” (bourgeois) democracy. 
 As is known, in1903 Plekhanov was a revolutionary Marxist (later his unfortunate turn brought him to the position of a Russian Scheidemann). 
 And in that year Plekhanov declared at our Party Congress, which was then adopting its programme, that in the revolution the proletariat would, if necessary,disfranchise the capitalists and disperse any parliament that, was found to be counter -revolutionary. 
 That this is the only view that corresponds to Marxism will be clearto anybody even from the statements of Marx and Engels which I have quoted above; it patently follows from all the fundamental principles of Marxism. 
 “We”, the revolutionary Marxists, never made speeches to the people that the Kautskyites of all nations love tomake, cringing before the bourgeoisie, adapting themselvesto the bourgeois parliamentary system, keeping silent about the bourgeois character of modern democracy and demanding only its extension, only that it be carried to its logical conclusion. 
 “We” said to the bourgeoisie: You, exploiters and hypo -crites, talk about democracy, while at every step you erectthousands of barriers to prevent the oppressed people from taking part in politics. 
 We take you at your word and, in the interests of these people, demand the extension of yourbourgeois democracy in order to prepare the people for revolution for the purpose of overthrowing you, the exploit -ers. 
 And if you exploiters attempt to offer resistance to our proletarian revolution we shall ruthlessly suppress you; we shall deprive you of all rights; more than that, we shall not give you any bread, for in our proletarian republic theexploiters will have no rights, they will be deprived offire and water, for we are socialists in real earnest, and notin the Scheidemann or Kautsky fashion. 
 That is what “we”, the revolutionary Marxists, said, and will say—and that is why the oppressed people will support us and be with us, while the Scheidemanns andthe Kautskys will be swept into the renegades’ cesspool. 
 WHAT IS INTERNATIONALISM? Kautsky is absolutely convinced that he is an internation -alist and calls himself one. 
 The Scheidemanns he calls“government socialists”. 
 In defending the Mensheviks (he does not openly express his solidarity with them, but he faithfully expresses their views), Kautsky has shown with perfect clarity what kind of “internationalism” he subscribes to. 
 And since Kautsky is not alone, but is spokesman fora trend which inevitably grew up in the atmosphere of theSecond International (Longuet in France, Turati in Italy,Nobs and Grimm, Graber and Naine in Switzerland, Ram -say MacDonald in Britain, etc. 
), it will be instructive to dwell on Kautsky’s “internationalism”. 
 After emphasising that the Mensheviks also attended the Zimmerwald Conference (a diploma, certainly, but ... atainted one), Kautsky sets forth the views of the Menshe -viks, with whom he agrees, in the following manner: “...The Mensheviks wanted a general peace. 
 They wanted all the belligerents to adopt the formula: no annexations and no indemnities. 
 Until this had been achieved, theRussian army, according to this view, was to stand readyfor battle. 
 The Bolsheviks, on the other hand, demandedan immediate peace at any price; they were prepared, ifneed be, to make a separate peace; they tried to force it by increasing the state of disorganisation of the army, which was already bad enough” (p. 
 27). 
 In Kautsky’s opin -ion the Bolsheviks should not have taken power, and shouldhave contented themselves with a Constituent Assembly. 
 So, the internationalism of Kautsky and the Mensheviks amounts to this: to demand reforms from the imperialist bourgeois government, but to continue to support it, and to continue to support the war that this government iswaging until everyone in the war has accepted the formula:no annexations and no indemnities. 
 This view was repeat -edly expressed by Turati, and by the Kautsky supporters(Haase and others), and by Longuet and Co. 
, who declared that they stood for defence of the fatherland. 
 Theoretically, this shows a complete inability to disso -ciate oneself from the social -chauvinists and complete confusion on the question of defence of the fatherland. 
Politically, it means substituting petty -bourgeois national -ism for internationalism, deserting to the reformists’ camp and renouncing revolution. 
 From the point of view of the proletariat, recognising “defence of the fatherland” means justifying the present war, admitting that it is legitimate. 
 And since the war remains an imperialist war (both under a monarchy and under a republic), irrespective of the country—mine or some other country—in which the enemy troops are stationed atthe given moment, recognising defence of the fatherlandmeans, in fact , supporting the imperialist, predatory bour -geoisie, and completely betraying socialism. 
 In Russia, even under Kerensky, under the bourgeois -democratic repub -lic, the war continued to be imperialist war, for it wasbeing waged by the bourgeoisie as a ruling class (and waris a “continuation of politics”); and a particularly strikingexpression of the imperialist character of the war werethe secret treaties for the partitioning of the world and theplunder of other countries which had been concluded by the tsar at the time with the capitalists of Britain and France. 
 The Mensheviks deceived the people in a most despicable manner by calling this war a defensive or revolutionarywar. 
 And by approving the policy of the Mensheviks,Kautsky is approving the popular deception, is approvingthe part played by the petty bourgeoisie in helping capital to trick the workers and harness them to the chariot of the imperialists. 
 Kautsky is pursuing a characteristically petty -bourgeois, philistine policy by pretending (and trying tomake the people believe the absurd idea) that putting forward a slogan alters the position. 
 The entire history of bourgeois democracy refutes this illusion; the bourgeois democrats have always advanced all sorts of “slogans” to deceive the people. 
 The point is to test their sincerity, to compare their words with their deeds , not to be satisfied with idealistic or charlatan phrases , but to get down to class reality . 
 An imperialist war does not cease to be imperial -ist when charlatans or phrase -mongers or petty -bourgeois philistines put forward sentimental “slogans”, but only when the class which is conducting the imperialist war, and is bound to it by millions of economic threads (andeven ropes), is really overthrown and is replaced at the helm of state by the really revolutionary class, the proletariat. 
There is no other way of getting out of an imperialist war , as also out of an imperialist predatory peace. 
 By approving the foreign policy of the Mensheviks, and by declaring it to be internationalist and Zimmerwaldist, Kautsky, first, reveals the utter rottenness of the opportun -ist Zimmerwald majority (no wonder we, the Left Zimmer -waldists,123 at once dissociated ourselves from such a majority!), and, secondly—and this is the chief thing—passes from the position of the proletariat to the positionof the petty bourgeoisie, from the revolutionary to thereformist. 
 The proletariat fights for the revolutionary overthrow of the imperialist bourgeoisie; the petty bourgeoisie fights for the reformist “improvement” of imperialism, for adapta -tion to it, while submitting to it. 
 When Kautsky was still a Marxist, for example, in 1909, when he wrote his Road to Power , it was the idea that war would inevitably lead to revolution that he advocated, and he spoke of the approach of an era of revolutions . 
 The Basle Manifesto of 1912 plainly and definitely speaks of a proletarian revolution in connec -tion with that very imperialist war between the German and the British groups which actually broke out in 1914. 
But in 1918, when revolutions did begin in connection withthe war, Kautsky, instead of explaining that they were inevitable, instead of pondering over and thinking out the revolutionary tactics and the ways and means of prepar -ing for revolution, began to describe the reformist tactics of the Mensheviks as internationalism. 
 Isn’t this apos -tasy? Kautsky praises the Mensheviks for having insisted on maintaining the fighting strength of the army, and he blames the Bolsheviks for having added to “disorganisation of thearmy”, which was already disorganised enough as it was. 
This means praising reformism and submission to theimperialist bourgeoisie, and blaming and renouncingrevolution. 
 For under Kerensky maintaining the fighting strength of the army meant its preservation under bourgeois (albeit republican) command. 
 Everybody knows, and theprogress of events has strikingly confirmed it, that thisrepublican army preserved the Kornilov spirit because its officers were Kornilov men. 
 The bourgeois officers couldnot help being Kornilov men; they could not help gravitat -ing towards imperialism and towards the forcible suppres -sion of the proletariat. 
 All that the Menshevik tacticsamounted to in practice was to leave all the foundations of the imperialist war and all the foundations of the bourgeois dictatorship intact, to patch up details and to daub over a few trifles (“reforms”). 
 On the other hand, not a single great revolution has ever taken place, or ever can take place, without the “disor -ganisation” of the army. 
 For the army is the most ossifiedinstrument for supporting the old regime, the most hardenedbulwark of bourgeois discipline, buttressing up the rule of capital, and preserving and fostering among the working people the servile spirit of submission and subjection tocapital. 
 Counter -revolution has never tolerated, and never could tolerate, armed workers side by side with the army. 
In France, Engels wrote, the workers emerged armed fromevery revolution: “therefore, the disarming of the workers was the first commandment for the bourgeoisie, who were at the helm of the state. 
” 124 The armed workers were the embryo of a new army, the organised nucleus of a new social order. 
 The first commandment of the bourgeoisie was tocrush this nucleus and prevent it from growing. 
 The firstcommandment of every victorious revolution, as Marx and Engels repeatedly emphasised, was to smash the old army, dissolve it and replace it by a new one. 
 125 A n ew social class, when rising to power, never could, and cannotnow, attain power and consolidate it except by completelydisintegrating the old army (“Disorganisation!” the reaction -ary or just cowardly philistines howl on this score), except by passing through a most difficult and painful period without any army (the great French Revolution also passedthrough such a painful period), and by gradually buildingup, in the midst of hard civil war, a new army, a new disci -pline, a new military organisation of the new class. 
 Formerly,Kautsky the historian understood this. 
 Now, Kautsky the renegade has forgotten it. 
 What right has Kautsky to call the Scheidemanns “govern -ment socialists” if he approves of the tactics of the Menshe -viks in the Russian revolution? In supporting Kerensky and joining his Ministry, the Mensheviks were also govern -ment socialists. 
 Kautsky could not escape this conclusion if he were to put the question as to which is the ruling class that is waging the imperialist war. 
 But Kautsky avoidsraising the question about the ruling class, a question that is imperative for a Marxist, for the mere raising of it would expose the renegade. 
 The Kautsky supporters in Germany, the Longuet support -ers in France, and Turati and Co. 
 in Italy argue in this way: socialism presupposes the equality and freedom ofnations, their self -determination, hence , when our country is attacked, or when enemy troops invade our territory, itis the right and duty of socialists to defend their country. 
 But theoretically such an argument is either a sheer mockery of socialism or a fraudulent subterfuge, while from the pointof view of practical politics it coincides with the argumentof the quite ignorant country yokel who has even noconception of the social, class character of the war, and ofthe tasks of a revolutionary party during a reactionary war. 
 Socialism is opposed to violence against nations. 
 That is indisputable. 
 But socialism is opposed to violence againstmen in general. 
 Apart from Christian anarchists and Tolstoy -ans, however, no one has yet drawn the conclusion fromthis that socialism is opposed to revolutionary violence. 
 So, to talk about “violence” in general, without examining the conditions which distinguish reactionary from revolu -tionary violence, means being a philistine who renounces revolution, or else it means simply deceiving oneself andothers by sophistry. 
 The same holds true of violence against nations. 
 Every war is violence against nations, but that does not prevent socialists from being in favour of a revolutionary war. 
 The class character of war—that is the fundamental questionwhich confronts a socialist (if lie is not a renegade). 
 Theimperialist war of 1914 -18 is a war between two groups of the imperialist bourgeoisie for the division of the world,for the division of the booty, and for the plunder and stran -gulation of small and weak nations. 
 This was the appraisalof the impending war given in the Basle Manifesto in 1912,and it has been confirmed by the facts. 
 Whoever departsfrom this view of war is not a socialist. 
 If a German under Wilhelm or a Frenchman under Cle -menceau says, “It is my right and duty as a socialist to defend my country if it is invaded by an enemy”, lie argues not like a socialist, not like an internationalist, not likea revolutionary proletarian, but like a petty -bourgeois nationalist . 
 Because this argument ignores the revolutionary class struggle of the workers against capital, it ignores the appraisal of the war as a whole from the point of view of the world bourgeoisie and the world proletariat, that is, itignores internationalism, and all that remains is miserableand narrow -minded nationalism. 
 My country is being wronged, that is all I care about—that is what this argumentamounts to, and that is where its petty -bourgeois, national -ist narrow -mindedness lies. 
 It is the same as if in regard to individual violence, violence against an individual, onewere to argue that socialism is opposed to violence andtherefore I would rather be a traitor than go to prison. 
 The Frenchman, German or Italian who says: “Socialism is opposed to violence against nations, therefore I defend myself when my country is invaded”, betrays socialism and internationalism, because such a man sees only his own “country”, he puts “his own” ... bourgeoisie above everything else and does not give a thought to the international connec -tions which make the war an imperialist war and his bour -geoisie a link in the chain of imperialist plunder. 
 All philistines and all stupid and ignorant yokels argue in the same way as the renegade Kautsky supporters,Longuet supporters, Turati and Co. 
: “The enemy has invaded my country, I don’t care about anything else. 
” * The socialist, the revolutionary proletarian, the interna -tionalist, argues differently. 
 He says: “The character of the war (whether it is reactionary or revolutionary) does not depend on who the attacker was, or in whose country the ‘enemy’ is stationed; it depends on what class is waging the war, and on what politics this war is a continuation of. 
 If the war is a reactionary, imperialist war, that is, if it *The social -chauvinists (the Scheidemanns, Renaudels, Hender -sons, Gomperses and Co. 
) absolutely refuse to talk about the “Interna -tional” during the war. 
 They regard the enemies of “ their ” respective bourgeoisies as “traitors” to ... socialism. 
 They support the policy of conquest pursued by their respective bourgeoisies. 
 The social -pacifists (i. 
e. 
, socialists in words and petty -bourgeois pacifists in practice) ex -press all sorts of “internationalist” sentiments, protest against annexa -tions, etc. 
, but in practice they continue to support their respective im -perialist bourgeoisies. 
 The difference between the two types is unimpor -tant; it is like the difference between two capitalists—one with bitter, and the other with sweet, words on his lips. 
 is being waged by two world groups of the imperialist, rapacious, predatory, reactionary bourgeoisie, then every bourgeoisie (even of the smallest country) becomes a partic -ipant in the plunder, and my duty as a representative of the revolutionary proletariat is to prepare for the world proletar -ian revolution as the only escape from the horrors of a world slaughter. 
 I must argue, not from the point of view of ‘my’country (for that is the argument of a wretched, stupid, petty -bourgeois nationalist who does not realise that he is only a plaything in the hands of the imperialist bourgeoi -sie), but from the point of view of my share in the prepara -tion, in the propaganda, and in the acceleration of the world proletarian revolution. 
” That is what internationalism means, and that is the duty of the internationalist, the revolutionary worker, the genuine socialist. 
 That is the ABC that Kautsky the rene -gade has “forgotten”. 
 And his apostasy becomes still more obvious when he passes from approving the tactics of thepetty -bourgeois nationalists (the Mensheviks in Russia, the Longuet supporters in France, the Turatis in Italy, and Haase and Co. 
 in Germany) to criticising the Bolshevik tactics. 
 Here is his criticism: “The Bolshevik revolution was based on the assumption that it would become the starting -point of a general European revolution, that the bold initiative of Russia would prompt the proletarians of all Europe to rise. 
 “On this assumption it was, of course, immaterial what forms the Russian separate peace would take, what hardships and territorial losses(literally: mutilation or maiming, Verstümmelungen ) it would cause the Russian people, and what interpretation of the self -determination of nations it would give. 
 At that time it was also immaterial whether Russia was able to defend herself or not. 
 According to this view, theEuropean revolution would be the best protection of the Russian revolu -tion, and would bring complete and genuine self -determination to all peoples inhabiting the former Russian territory. 
 “A revolution in Europe, which would establish and consolidate socialism there, would also become the means of removing the obsta -cles that would arise in Russia in the way of the introduction of the socialist system of production owing to the economic backwardness ofthe country. 
 “All this was very logical and very sound—only if the main assump -tion were granted, namely, that the Russian revolution would infallibly let loose a European revolution. 
 But what if that did not happen? “So far the assumption has not been justified. 
 And the proletarians of Europe are now being accused of having abandoned and betrayed the Russian revolution. 
 This is an accusation levelled against unknown persons, for who is to be held responsible for the behaviour of the Euro -pean proletariat?” (P. 
 28. 
) And Kautsky then goes on to explain at great length that Marx, Engels and Bebel were more than once mistakenabout the advent of revolution they had anticipated, butthat they never based their tactics on the expectation ofa revolution “ at a definite date ” (p. 
 29), whereas, he says, the Bolsheviks “staked everything on one card, on a general European revolution”. 
 We have deliberately quoted this long passage to demon -strate to our readers Kautsky’s “skill” in counterfeitingMarxism by palming off his banal and reactionary philis -tine view in its stead. 
 First, to ascribe to an opponent an obviously stupid idea and then to refute it is a trick practised by none tooclever people. 
 If the Bolsheviks had based their tactics onthe expectation of a revolution in other countries by a definite date that would have been an undeniable stupidity. 
 But the Bolshevik Party has never been guilty of such stupidity. 
 In my letter to American workers (August 20, 1918), I expressly disown this foolish idea by saying thatwe count on an American revolution, but not by any definitedate. 
 I dwelt at length upon the very same idea more thanonce in my controversy with the Left Socialist -Revolution -aries and the “Left Communists” (January -March 1918). 
 Kautsky has committed a slight ... just a very slight forgery, on which he in fact based his criticism of Bolshevism. 
Kautsky has confused tactics based on the expectation ofa European revolution in the more or less near future, butnot at a definite date, with tactics based on the expectationof a European revolution at a definite date. 
 A slight, just a very slight forgery! The last -named tactics are foolish. 
 The first -named are obligatory for a Marxist, for every revolutionary proletarian and internationalist— obligatory , because they alone take into account in a proper Marxist way the objective situationbrought about by the war in all European countries, and they alone conform to the international tasks of the proletariat. 
 By substituting the petty question about an error which the Bolshevik revolutionaries might have made, but did not, for the important question of the foundations of revo -lutionary tactics in general, Kautsky adroitly abjures allrevolutionary tactics! A renegade in politics, he is unable even to present the question of the objective prerequisites of revolutionary tactics theoretically. 
 And this brings us to the second point. 
 Secondly, it is obligatory for a Marxist to count on a European revolution if a revolutionary situation exists. 
 It is the ABC of Marxism That the tactics of the socialist proletariat cannot be the same both when there is a revolution -ary situation and when there is no revolutionary situation. 
 If Kautsky had put this question, which is obligatory for a Marxist, he would have seen that the answer was abso -lutely against him. 
 Long before the war, all Marxists, all socialists were agreed that a European war would createa revolutionary situation. 
 Kautsky himself, before hebecame a renegade, clearly and definitely recognised this—in 1902 (in his Social Revolution ) and in 1909 (in his Road to Power ). 
 It was also admitted in the name of the entire Second International in the Basle Manifesto. 
 No wonder thesocial -chauvinists and Kautsky supporters (the “Centrists”, i. 
e. 
, those who waver between the revolutionaries and theopportunists) of all countries shun like the plague thedeclarations of the Basle Manifesto on this score! So, the expectation of a revolutionary situation in Europe was not an infatuation of the Bolsheviks, but the general opinion of all Marxists. 
 When Kautsky tries to escape from this indisputable truth using such phrases as the Bolshe -viks “always believed in the omnipotence of violence andwill”, he simply utters a sonorous and empty phrase to cover up his evasion, a shameful evasion, to put the question of a revolutionary situation. 
 To proceed. 
 Has a revolutionary situation actually come or not? Kautsky proved unable to put this question either. 
The economic facts provide an answer: the famine andruin created everywhere by the war imply a revolutionary situation. 
 The political facts also provide an answer: ever since 1915 a splitting process has been evident in all coun -tries within the old and decayed socialist parties, a process of departure of the mass of the proletariat from the social -chauvinist leaders to the left, to revolutionary ideas and sentiments, to revolutionary leaders. 
 Only a person who dreads revolution and betrays it could have failed to see these facts on August 5, 1918,when Kautsky was writing his pamphlet. 
 And now, at theend of October 1918, the revolution is growing in a number of European countries, and growing under everybody’s eyes and very rapidly at that. 
 Kautsky the “revolutionary”, who still wants to be regarded as a Marxist, has proved tobe a short -sighted philistine, who, like those philistines of 1847 whom Marx ridiculed, failed to see the approachingrevolution! Now to the third point. 
 Thirdly, what should be the specific features of revolu -tionary tactics when there is a revolutionary situation in Europe? Having become a renegade, Kautsky feared toput this question, which is obligatory for a Marxist. 
 Kautskyargues like a typical petty bourgeois, a philistine, or likean ignorant peasant: has a “general European revolution” begun or not? If it has, then he too is prepared to become a revolutionary! But then, mark you, every scoundrel(like the scoundrels who now sometimes attach themselvesto the victorious Bolsheviks) would proclaim himself arevolutionary! If it has not, then Kautsky will turn his back on revolu -tion! Kautsky does not display a shade of understanding ofthe truth that a revolutionary Marxist differs from the philis -tine and petty bourgeois by his ability to preach to the uneducated masses that the maturing revolution is necessary,to prove that it is inevitable, to explain its benefits to the people, and to prepare the proletariat and all the working and exploited people for it. 
 Kautsky ascribed to the Bolsheviks an absurdity, namely, that they had staked everything on one card, on a Europeanrevolution breaking out at a definite date. 
 This absurdityhas turned against Kautsky himself, because the logicalconclusion of his argument is that the tactics of the Bolshe -viks would have been correct if a European revolution hadbroken out by August 5, 1918! That is the date Kautskymentions as the time he was writing his pamphlet. 
 And when, a few weeks after this August 5, it became clear that revolution was coming in a number of European countries, the whole apostasy of Kautsky, his whole falsification of Marxism, and his utter inability to reason or even to presentquestions in a revolutionary manner, became revealed inall their charm! When the proletarians of Europe are accused of treachery, Kautsky writes, it is an accusation levelled at unknown persons. 
 You are mistaken, Mr. 
 Kautsky! Look in the mirror and you will see those “unknown persons” against whom thisaccusation is levelled. 
 Kautsky assumes an air of naïvetéand pretends not to understand who levelled the accusation, and its meaning . 
 In reality, however, Kautsky knows per -fectly well that the accusation has been and is being levelled by the German “Lefts”, by the Spartacists,126 by Liebknecht and his friends. 
 This accusation expresses a clear apprecia -tion of the fact that the German proletariat betrayed the Russian (and world) revolution when it strangled Finland,the Ukraine, Latvia and Estonia. 
 This accusation is levelled primarily and above all, not against the masses , who are always downtrodden, but against those leaders who, like the Scheidemanns and the Kautskys, failed in their duty to carry on revolutionary agitation, revolutionary propaganda,revolutionary work among the masses to overcome theirinertness, who in fact worked against the revolutionary instincts and aspirations which are always aglow deep down among the mass of the oppressed class. 
 The Scheidemannsbluntly, crudely, cynically, and in most cases for selfishmotives betrayed the proletariat and deserted to the sideof the bourgeoisie. 
 The Kautsky and the Longuet supportersdid the same thing, only hesitatingly and haltingly, and casting cowardly side -glances at those who were stronger at the moment. 
 In all his writings during the war Kautskytried to extinguish the revolutionary spirit instead of foster -ing and fanning it. 
 The fact that Kautsky does not even understand the enormous theoretical importance, and the even greater agitational and propaganda importance, of the “accusation” that the proletarians of Europe have betrayed the Russianrevolution will remain a veritable historical monument to the philistine stupefaction of the “average” leader of German official Social -Democracy! Kautsky does not understand that, owing to the censorship prevailing in the German “Reich”, this “accusation” is perhaps the only form in whichthe German socialists who have not betrayed socialism—Liebknecht and his friends—can express their appeal to the German workers to throw off the Scheidemanns and the Kautskys, to push aside such “leaders”, to free themselves from their stultifying and debasing propaganda, to rise in revolt in spite of them, without them, and march over their heads towards revolution ! Kautsky does not understand this. 
 And how could he understand the tactics of the Bolsheviks? Can a man whorenounces revolution in general be expected to weigh and appraise the conditions of the development of revolution in one of the most “difficult” cases? The Bolsheviks’ tactics were correct; they were the only internationalist tactics, because they were based, not on thecowardly fear of a world revolution, not on a philistine “lackof faith” in it, not on the narrow nationalist desire to pro -tect one’s “own” fatherland (the fatherland of one’s ownbourgeoisie), while not “giving a damn” about all the rest,but on a correct (and, before the war and before the apostasyof the social -chauvinists and social -pacifists, a universally accepted) estimation of the revolutionary situation in Eu -rope. 
 These tactics were the only internationalist tactics, because they did the utmost possible in one country for the development, support and awakening of the revolutionin all countries . 
 These tactics have been justified by their enormous success, for Bolshevism (not by any means becauseof the merits of the Russian Bolsheviks, but because of themost profound sympathy of the people everywhere for tactics that are revolutionary in practice) has become world Bolshevism, has produced an idea, a theory, a programmeand tactics which differ concretely and in practice from thoseof social -chauvinism and social -pacifism. 
 Bolshevism has given a coup de grâce to the old, decayed International of the Scheidemanns and Kautskys, Renaudels and Longuets, Hendersons and MacDonalds, who from now on will be tread -ing on each other’s feet, dreaming about “unity” and trying to revive a corpse. 
 Bolshevism has created the ideological and tactical foundations of a Third International, of a really proletarian and Communist International, which will take into consideration both the gains of the tranquil epoch and the experience of the epoch of revolutions , which has begun. 
 Bolshevism has popularised throughout the world the idea of the “dictatorship of the proletariat”, has translatedthese words from the Latin, first into Russian, and then into all the languages of the world, and has shown by the example of Soviet government that the workers and poor peasants, even of a backward country, even with the least experience, education and habits of organisation, have been able for a whole year, amidst gigantic difficulties and amidst astruggle against the exploiters (who were supported by the bourgeoisie of the whole world), to maintain the power of the working people, to create a democracy that is immeasur -ably higher and broader than all previous democracies inthe world, and to start the creative work of tens of millions of workers and peasants for the practical construction ofsocialism. 
 Bolshevism has actually helped to develop the proletar -ian revolution in Europe and America more powerfully than any party in any other country has so far succeededin doing. 
 While the workers of the whole world are realisingmore and more clearly every day that the tactics of theScheidemanns and Kautskys have not delivered them from the imperialist war and from wage -slavery to the imperialist bourgeoisie, and that these tactics cannot serve as a modelfor all countries, the mass of workers in all countries arerealising more and more clearly every day that Bolshevismhas indicated the right road of escape from the horrors ofwar and imperialism, that Bolshevism can serve as a model of tactics for all. 
 Not only the general European, but the world proletarian revolution is maturing before the eyes of all, and it hasbeen assisted, accelerated and supported by the victory ofthe proletariat in Russia. 
 All this is not enough for the com -plete victory of socialism, you say? Of course it is not enough. 
 One country alone cannot do more. 
 But this one country, thanks to Soviet government, has done so much that evenif Soviet government in Russia were to be crushed by world imperialism tomorrow, as a result, let us say, of an agree -ment between German and Anglo -French imperialism— even granted that very worst possibility—it would still be found that Bolshevik tactics have brought enormousbenefit to socialism and have assisted the growth of theinvincible world revolution. 
 SUBSERVIENCE TO THE BOURGEOISIE IN THE GUISE OF “ECONOMIC ANALYSIS” As has already been said, if the title of Kautsky’s book were properly to reflect its contents, it should have beencalled, not The Dictatorship of the Proletariat , but A Re -hash of Bourgeois Attacks on the Bolsheviks. 
 The old Menshevik “theories” about the bourgeois charac -ter of the Russian revolution, i. 
e. 
, the old distortion of Marxism by the Mensheviks ( rejected by Kautsky in 1905!), are now once again being rehashed by our theoretician. 
 Wemust deal with this question, however boring it may be forRussian Marxists. 
 The Russian revolution is a bourgeois revolution, said all the Marxists of Russia before 1905. 
 The Mensheviks,substituting liberalism for Marxism, drew the followingconclusion from this: the proletariat therefore must not gobeyond what is acceptable to the bourgeoisie and mustpursue a policy of compromise with them. 
 The Bolsheviks said this was a bourgeois -liberal theory. 
 The bourgeoisie were trying to bring about the reform of the state on bour -geois, reformist , not revolutionary lines, while preserving the monarchy, the landlord system, etc. 
, as far as possible. 
The proletariat must carry through the bourgeois -democratic revolution to the end, not allowing itself to be “bound” by the reformism of the bourgeoisie. 
 The Bolsheviks formu -lated the alignment of class forces in the bourgeois revolu -tion as follows: the proletariat, winning over the peasants, will neutralise the liberal bourgeoisie and utterly destroythe monarchy, medievalism and the landlord system. 
 It is the alliance between the proletariat and the peasants in general that reveals the bourgeois character of the revolu -tion, for the peasants in genera] are small producers who exist on the basis of commodity production. 
 Further, the Bolsheviks then added, the proletariat will win over the entire semi -proletariat (all the working and exploited people), will neutralise the middle peasants and overthrow the bourgeoisie; this will be a socialist revolution, as dis -tinct from a bourgeois -democratic revolution. 
 (See my pamphlet Two Tactics , published in 1905 and reprinted in Twelve Years , St. 
 Petersburg, 1907. 
) Kautsky took an indirect part in this controversy in 1905, when, in reply to an inquiry by the then Menshevik Plekhanov, he expressed an opinion that was essentiallyagainst Plekhanov, which provoked particular ridicule inthe Bolshevik press at the time. 
 But now Kautsky does not say a single word about the controversies of that time (for fear of being exposed by his own statements!), and thereby makes it utterly impossible for the German reader to under -stand the essence of the matter. 
 Mr. 
 Kautsky could not tell the German workers in 1918 that in 1905 he had been infavour of an alliance of the workers with the peasants andnot with the liberal bourgeoisie, and on what conditions hehad advocated this alliance, and what programme he had outlined for it. 
 Backing out from his old position, Kautsky, under the guise of an “economic analysis”, and talking proudly about“historical materialism”, now advocates the subordinationof the workers to the bourgeoisie, and, with the aid ofquotations from the Menshevik Maslov, chews over the old liberal views of the Mensheviks. 
 Quotations are used to prove the new idea of the backwardness of Russia. 
 Butthe deduction drawn from this new idea is the old one, thatin a bourgeois revolution one must not go farther than thebourgeoisie! And this in spite of all that Marx and Engelssaid when comparing the bourgeois revolution of 1789 -93 in France with the bourgeois revolution of 1848 in Germa -ny!127 Before passing to the chief “argument” and the main content of Kautsky’s “economic analysis”, let us note thatKautsky’s very first sentences reveal a curious confusion,or superficiality, of thought. 
 “Agriculture, and specifically small peasant farming,” our “theoretician” announces, “to this day represents the economic foundation of Russia. 
 About four -fifths, perhaps even five -sixths, of the population live by it” (p. 
 45). 
 First of all, my dear theoretician, have you considered how many exploiters there may be among this mass of small producers? Certainly not more than one -tenth of the total, and in the towns still less, for there large -scale production is more highly developed. 
 Take even an incredibly high figure; assumethat one -fifth of the small producers are exploiters who are deprived of the franchise. 
 Even then you will find that the 66 per cent of the votes held by the Bolsheviks at the Fifth Congress of Soviets represented the majority of the popu -lation . 
 To this it must be added that there was always a considerable section of the Left Socialist -Revolutionaries who were in favour of Soviet power—in principle all the Left Socialist -Revolutionaries were in favour of Soviet power, and when a section of them, in July 1918, started an adventurous revolt, two new parties split away from theold party, namely, the “Narodnik Communists” and the“Revolutionary Communists” 128 (of the prominent Left Socialist -Revolutionaries who had been nominated for important posts in the government by the old party, to the first-mentioned belongs Zax, for instance, and to the second Kolegayev). 
 So, Kautsky has himself—inadvertently—refuted the ridiculous fable that the Bolsheviks only havethe backing of a minority of the population. 
 Secondly, my dear theoretician, have you considered the fact that the small peasant producer inevitably vacil -lates between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie? This Marxist truth, which has been confirmed by the whole modernhistory of Europe, Kautsky very conveniently “forgot”,for it simply demolishes the Menshevik “theory” that hekeeps repeating! Had Kautsky not “forgotten” this he couldnot have denied the need for a proletarian dictatorship in a country in which the small peasant producers predominate. 
 Let us examine the main content of our theoretician’s “economic analysis”. 
 That Soviet power is a dictatorship cannot be disputed, says Kautsky. 
 “But is it a dictatorship of the proletariat ?” P. 
 34. 
) “According to the Soviet Constitution, the peasants form the major -ity of the population entitled to participate in legislation and admin -istration. 
 What is presented to us as a dictatorship of the proletariat would prove to be—if carried out consistently, and if, generally speak -ing, a class could directly exercise a dictatorship, which in reality can only be exercised by a party—a dictatorship of the peasants ” (p. 
 35). 
 And, highly elated over so profound and clever an argu -ment, our good Kautsky tries to be witty and says: “It would appear, therefore, that the most painless achievementof socialism is best assured when it is put in the hands ofthe peasants” (p. 
 35). 
 In the greatest detail, and citing a number of extremely learned quotations from the semi -liberal Maslov, our theore -tician labours to prove the new idea that the peasants areinterested in high grain prices, in low wages for the urbanworkers, etc. 
, etc. 
 Incidentally, the enunciation of these newideas is the more tedious the less attention our author pays to the really new features of the post -war period—for exam -ple, that the peasants demand for their grain, not money, but goods, and that they have not enough agriculturalimplements, which cannot be obtained in sufficient quanti -ties for any amount of money. 
 But more of this later. 
 Thus, Kautsky charges the Bolsheviks, the party of the proletariat, with having surrendered the dictatorship, the work of achieving socialism, to the petty -bourgeois peasants. 
 Excellent, Mr. 
 Kautsky! But what, in your enlightenedopinion, should have been the attitude of the proletarianparty towards the petty -bourgeois peasants? Our theoretician preferred to say nothing on this score— evidently bearing in mind the proverb: “Speech is silver, silence is gold. 
” But he gives himself away by the followingargument: “At the beginning of the Soviet Republic, the peasants’ Soviets were organisations of the peasants in general. 
 Now this Republic pro -claims that the Soviets are organisations of the proletarians and the poor peasants. 
 The well -to-do peasants are deprived of the suffrage in the elections to the Soviets. 
 The poor peasant is here recognised to be a permanent and mass product of the socialist agrarian reform under the‘dictatorship of the proletariat’” (p. 
 48). 
 What deadly irony! It is the kind that may be heard in Russia from any bourgeois: they all jeer and gloat over the fact that the Soviet Republic openly admits the existence of poor peasants. 
 They ridicule socialism. 
 That is their right. 
 But a “socialist” who jeers at the fact that after four years of a most ruinous war there remain (and will remain for a long time) poor peasants in Russia—such a “socialist” could only have been born at a time of whole -sale apostasy. 
 And further: “...The Soviet Republic interferes in the relations between the rich and poor peasants, but not by redistributing the land. 
 In order to re-lieve the bread shortage in the towns, detachments of armed workers are sent into the countryside to take away the rich peasants’ surplus stocks of grain. 
 Part of that stock is given to the urban population, the other— to the poorer peasants” (p. 
 48). 
 Of course, Kautsky the socialist and Marxist is profoundly indignant at the idea that such a measure should be exten d-ed beyond the environs of the large towns (and we have extended it to the whole of the country). 
 With the matchless, incomparable and admirable coolness (or pigheadedness) of a philistine, Kautsky the socialist and Marxist sermo n-ises: ... “It [the expropriation of the well-to-do peasants] introduces a new element of unrest and civil war into the process of production” ... (civil war introduced into the “process of production”—that is something supernatural!) ... “which stands in urgent need of peace and security for its recovery” (p. 
 49). 
 Oh, yes, of course, Kautsky the Marxist and socialist must sigh and shed tears over the subject of peace and se-curity for the exploiters and grain profiteers who hoard their surplus stocks, sabotage the grain monopoly law, and reduce the urban population to famine. 
 “We are all socialists and Marxists and internationalists,” the Kautskys, Heinrich Weber s129 (Vienna), Longuets (Paris), MacDonalds (London), etc. 
, sing in chorus. 
 “We are all in favour of a working -class revolution. 
 Only ... only we would like a revolution that does not infringe upon the peace and security of the grain profiteers! And we camouflage this sordid subservience tothe capitalists by a ‘Marxist’ reference to the ‘process ofproduction’.... 
” If this is Marxism, what is servility to thebourgeoisie? Just see what our theoretician arrives at. 
 He accuses the Bolsheviks of presenting the dictatorship of the peasantsas the dictatorship of the proletariat. 
 But at the same timehe accuses us of introducing civil war into the rural districts (which we think is to our credit ), of dispatching into the countryside armed detachments of workers, who publicly proclaim that they are exercising the “dictatorship of the proletariat and the poor peasants”, assist the latter andconfiscate from the profiteers and the rich peasants thesurplus stocks of grain which they are hoarding in contraven -tion of the grain monopoly law. 
 On the one hand, our Marxist theoretician stands for pure democracy, for the subordination of the revolutionary class, the leader of the working and exploited people, to the majorityof the population (including, therefore, the exploiters). 
On the other hand, as an argument against us, he explains that the revolution must inevitably bear a bourgeois character—bourgeois, because the life of the peasants as a whole is based on bourgeois social relations—and at the same time he pretends to uphold the proletarian, class, Marxist pointof view! Instead of an “economic analysis” we have a first -class hodge -podge. 
 Instead of Marxism we have fragments of liberal doctrines and the preaching of servility to the bourgeoisie and the kulaks. 
 The question which Kautsky has so tangled up was fully explained by the Bolsheviks as far back as 1905. 
 Yes, ourrevolution is a bourgeois revolution as long as we march with the peasants as a whole . 
 This has been as clear as clear can be to us; we have said it hundreds and thousands of times since 1905, and we have never attempted to skip this necessary stage of the historical process or abolish it bydecrees. 
 Kautsky’s efforts to “expose” us on this point merelyexpose his own confusion of mind and his fear to recall whathe wrote in 1905, when he was not yet a renegade. 
 Beginning with April 1917, however, long before the October Revolution, that is, long before we assumed power, we publicly declared and explained to the people: therevolution cannot now stop at this stage, for the country hasmarched forward, capitalism has advanced, ruin has reachedfantastic dimensions, which (whether one likes it or not)will demand steps forward, to socialism . 
 For there is no other way of advancing, of saving the war -weary country and of alleviating the sufferings of the working and exploited people. 
 Things have turned out just as we said they would. 
 The course taken by the revolution has confirmed the correctness of our reasoning. 
 First , with the “whole” of the peasants against the monarchy, against the landowners, againstmedievalism (and to that extent the revolution remainsbourgeois, bourgeois -democratic). 
 Then , with the poor peasants, with the semi -proletarians, with all the exploited, against capitalism , including the rural rich, the kulaks, the profiteers, and to that extent the revolution becomes a socialist one. 
 To attempt to raise an artificial Chinese Wall between the first and second, to separate them by anything else than the degree of preparedness of the proletariat and the degree of its unity with the poor peasants, means todistort Marxism dreadfully, to vulgarise it, to substitute liberalism in its place. 
 It means smuggling in a reactionary defence of the bourgeoisie against the socialist proletariat bymeans of quasi -scientific references to the progressive character of the bourgeoisie in comparison with medievalism. 
 Incidentally, the Soviets represent an immensely higher form and type of democracy just because, by uniting and drawing the mass of workers and peasants into political life, they serve as a most sensitive barometer, the one closest tothe “people” (in the sense in which Marx, in 1871, spoke ofa real people’s revolution 130), of the growth and development of the political, class maturity of the people. 
 The SovietConstitution was not drawn up according to some “plan”; it was not drawn up in a study, and was not foisted on the working people by bourgeois lawyers. 
 No, this Constitutiongrew up in the course of the development of the class struggle in proportion as class antagonisms matured. 
 The very facts which Kautsky himself has to admit prove this. 
 At first, the Soviets embraced the peasants as a whole. 
 It was owing to the immaturity, the backwardness, the ignorance of the poor peasants that the leadership passedinto the hands of the kulaks, the rich, the capitalists andthe petty -bourgeois intellectuals. 
 That was the period of the domination of the petty bourgeoisie, of the Mensheviksand Socialist -Revolutionaries (only fools or renegades like Kautsky can regard either of these as socialists). 
 The petty bourgeoisie inevitably and unavoidably vacillated betweenthe dictatorship of the bourgeoisie (Kerensky, Kornilov, Savinkov) and the dictatorship of the proletariat; for owing to the basic features of its economic position, the petty bourgeoisie is incapable of doing anything independently. 
 Kautsky, by the way, completely renounces Marxism byconfining himself in his analysis of the Russian revolution tothe legal and formal concept of “democracy”, which servesthe bourgeoisie as a screen to conceal their domination andas a means of deceiving the people, and by forgetting that in practice “democracy” sometimes stands for the dictator -ship of the bourgeoisie , sometimes for the impotent reform -ism of the petty bourgeoisie who submit to that dicta -torship, and so on. 
 According to Kautsky, in a capitalist country there were bourgeois parties and there was a prole -tarian party (the Bolsheviks), which led the majority, the mass of the proletariat, but there were no petty -bourgeois parties! The Mensheviks and Socialist -Revolutionaries had no class roots , no petty -bourgeois roots! The vacillations of the petty bourgeoisie, of the Men -sheviks and the Socialist -Revolutionaries, helped to enlighten the people and to repel the overwhelming majority of them, all the “lower sections”, all the proletarians and semi -proletarians, from such “leaders”. 
 The Bolsheviks won predominance in the Soviets (in Petrograd and Moscowby October 1917); the split among the Socialist -Revolution -aries and the Mensheviks became more pronounced. 
 The victorious Bolshevik revolution meant the end of vacillation, meant the complete destruction of the monarchy and of the landlord system (which had not been destroyed before the October Revolution). 
 We carried the bourgeois revolution to its conclusion . 
 The peasants supported us as a whole . 
 Their antagonism to the socialist proletariat could not reveal itself all at once. 
 The Soviets united the peasants in general . 
 The class divisions among the peasants had not yet matured, had not yet come into the open. 
 That process took place in the summer and autumn of 1918. 
 The Czech counter -revolutionary mutiny roused the kulaks. 
 A wave of kulak revolts swept over Russia. 
 Thepoor peasants learned, not from books or newspapers, but from life itself , that their interests were irreconcilably antagonistic to those of the kulaks, the rich, the ruralbourgeoisie. 
 Like every other petty -bourgeois party, the “Left Socialist -Revolutionaries” reflected the vacillation of the people, and in the summer of 1918 they split: one section joined forces with the Czechs (the rebellion in Moscow, when Proshyan, having seized the Telegraph Office—for one hour!—announced to Russia that the Bolsheviks hadbeen overthrown; then the treachery of Muravyov, 131 Com -mander -in-Chief of the army that was fighting the Czechs, etc. 
), while the other section, that mentioned above, remained with the Bolsheviks. 
 The growing food shortage in the towns lent increasing urgency to the question of the grain monopoly (this Kautskythe theoretician completely “forgot” in his economic analysis,which is a mere repetition of platitudes gleaned tenyears ago from Maslov’s writings!). 
 The old landowner and bourgeois, and even democratic -republican, state had sent to the rural districts armed detachments which were practically at the beck and call ofthe bourgeoisie. 
 Mr. 
 Kautsky does not know this! He doesnot regard that as the “dictatorship of the bourgeoisie”—Heaven forbid! That is “pure democracy”, especially if endorsed by a bourgeois parliament! Nor has Kautsky “heard” that, in the summer and autumn of 1917, Avksentyevand S. 
 Maslov, in company with the Kerenskys, the Tsere -telis and other Socialist -Revolutionaries and Mensheviks, arrested members of the Land Committees; he does not saya word about that! The whole point is that a bourgeois state which is exer -cising the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie through a democratic republic cannot confess to the people that it is serving thebourgeoisie; it cannot tell the truth, and has to play thehypocrite. 
 But the state of the Paris Commune type, the Soviet state, openly and frankly tells the people the truth and declares that it is the dictatorship of the proletariat and the poorpeasants; and by this truth it wins over scores and scores ofmillions of new citizens who are kept down in any democraticrepublic, but who are drawn by the Soviets into politicallife, into democracy , into the administration of the state. 
 The Soviet Republic sends into the rural districts detach -ments of armed workers, primarily the more advanced, from the capitals. 
 These workers carry socialism into the countryside, win over the poor, organise and enlighten them, and help them to suppress the resistance of the bourgeoisie. 
 All who are familiar with the situation and have been in the rural districts declare that it is only now, in the sum -mer and autumn of 1918, that the rural districts themselves are passing through the “October” (i. 
e. 
, proletarian)Revolution. 
 Things are beginning to change. 
 The wave ofkulak revolts is giving way to a rise of the poor, to a growth of the “Poor Peasants’ Committees”. 
 In the army, the number of workers who become commissars, officers and command -ers of divisions and armies is increasing. 
 And at the verytime that the simple -minded Kautsky, frightened by the July (1918) crisis132 and the lamentations of the bourgeoisie, was running after the latter like a cockerel, and writing a whole pamphlet breathing the conviction that the Bolshe -viks are on the eve of being overthrown by the peasants; at the very time that this simpleton regarded the secessionof the Left Socialist -Revolutionaries as a “narrowing” (p. 
 37) of the circle of those who support the Bolsheviks—at that very time the real circle of supporters of Bolshevism was expanding enormously , because scores and scores of millions of the village poor were freeing themselves from thetutelage and influence of the kulaks and village bourgeoisieand were awakening to independent political life. 
 We have lost hundreds of Left Socialist -Revolutionaries, spineless intellectuals and kulaks from among the peasants; but we have gained millions of poor people. 
 * A year after the proletarian revolution in the capitals, and under its influence and with its assistance, the prole -tarian revolution began in the remote rural districts, andit has finally consolidated the power of the Soviets and Bol -shevism, and has finally proved there is no force in the country that can withstand it. 
 Having completed the bourgeois -democratic revolution in alliance with the peasants as a whole, the Russian pro -letariat finally passed on to the socialist revolution when itsucceeded in splitting the rural population, in winning over *At the Sixth Congress of Soviets (November 6 -9, 1918), there were 967 voting delegates, 950 of whom were Bolsheviks, and 351 delegateswith voice but no vote, of whom 335 were Bolsheviks, i. 
e. 
, 97 per cent of the total number of delegates were Bolsheviks. 
 the rural proletarians and semi -proletarians, and in uniting them against the kulaks and the bourgeoisie, including the peasant bourgeoisie. 
 Now, if the Bolshevik proletariat in the capitals and large industrial centres had not been able to rally the villagepoor around itself against the rich peasants, this wouldindeed have proved that Russia was “unripe” for socialistrevolution. 
 The peasants would then have remained an “integral whole”, i. 
e. 
, they would have remained under the economic, political, and moral leadership of the kulaks,the rich, the bourgeoisie, and the revolution would not havepassed beyond the limits of a bourgeois -democratic revolu -tion. 
 (But, let it be said in parenthesis, even if this had beenthe case, it would not have proved that the proletariat should not have taken power, for it is the proletariat alone that has really carried the bourgeois -democratic revolution to its conclusion, it is the proletariat alone that has done somethingreally important to bring nearer the world proletarian revo -lution, and the proletariat alone that has created the Sovietstate, which, after the Paris Commune, is the second step towards the socialist state. 
) On the other hand, if the Bolshevik proletariat had tried at once, in October -November 1917, without waiting for the class differentiation in the rural districts, without beingable to prepare it and bring it about, to “decree” a civil war or the “introduction of socialism” in the rural districts, had tried to do without a temporary bloc with the peasants in general, without making a number of concessions to themiddle peasants, etc. 
, that would have been a Blanquist 133 dis-tortion of Marxism, an attempt by the minority to impose its will upon the majority; it would have been a theoretical absurd -ity, revealing a failure to understand that a general peasant revolution is still a bourgeois revolution, and that without a series of transitions , of transitional stages, it cannot be trans -formed into a socialist revolution in a backward country. 
 Kautsky has confused everything in this very important theoretical and political problem, and has, in practice,proved to be nothing but a servant of the bourgeoisie, howl -ing against the dictatorship of the proletariat. 
 * * * Kautsky has introduced a similar, if not greater, confu -sion into another extremely interesting and important question, namely: was the legislative activity of the Soviet Republic in the sphere of agrarian reform—that most difficultand yet most important of socialist reforms—based onsound principles and then properly carried out? We shouldbe boundlessly grateful to any West -European Marxist who, after studying at least the most important documents, gave a criticism of our policy, because he would thereby help us immensely, and would also help the revolution thatis maturing throughout the world. 
 But instead of criticismKautsky produces an incredible theoretical muddle, whichconverts Marxism into liberalism and which, in practice,is a series of idle, venomous, vulgar sallies against the Bolsheviks. 
 Let the reader judge for himself: “Large landed estates could not be preserved. 
 This was a result of the revolution. 
 That was at once clear. 
 The trans -fer of the large estates to the peasant population becameinevitable.... 
 ” (That is not true, Mr. 
 Kautsky. 
 You substi -tute what is “clear” to you for the attitude of the different classes towards the question. 
 The history of the revolution has shown that the coalition government of the bourgeoisand the petty bourgeois, the Mensheviks and the Socialist -Revolutionaries, pursued a policy of preserving big land -ownership. 
 This was proved particularly by S. 
 Maslov’s billand by the arrest of the members of the Land Committees. 
 134 Without the dictatorship of the proletariat, the “peasantpopulation” would not have vanquished the landowners, whohad joined forces with the capitalists. 
) “...But as to the forms in which it was to take place, there was no unity. 
 Various solutions were conceivable.... 
”(Kautsky is most of all concerned about the “unity” of the “socialists”, no matter who called themselves by that name. 
 He forgets that the principal classes in capitalist societyare bound to arrive at different solutions. 
) “...From thesocialist point of view, the most rational solution wouldhave been to convert the large estates into state propertyand to allow the peasants who hitherto had been employed on them as wage -labourers to cultivate them in the form of co-operative societies. 
 But such a solution presupposes the existence of a type of farm labourer that did not exist in Russia. 
 Another solution would have been to convert the large estates into state property and to divide them up into small plots to be rented out to peasants who owned little land. 
 Had that been done, at least something socialisticwould have been achieved.... 
” As usual Kautsky confines himself to the celebrated: on the one hand it cannot but be admitted, and on the otherhand it must be confessed. 
 He places different solutions side by side without a thought—the only, realistic and Marxist thought—as to what must be the transitional stages from capitalism to communism in such -and-such specific conditions. 
 There are farm labourers in Russia, but not many; and Kautsky did not touch on the question—which the Soviet government did raise —of the method of transition to a communal and co -operative form of land cultivation. 
 The most curious thing, however, is that Kaut -sky claims to see “something socialistic” in the renting outof small plots of land. 
 In reality, this is a petty -bourgeois slogan, and there is nothing “socialistic” in it. 
 If the “state” that rents out the land is not a state of the Paris Commune type, but a parliamentary bourgeois republic (and that is exactly Kautsky’s constant assumption), the renting ofland in small plots is a typical liberal reform . 
 Kautsky says nothing about the Soviet government having abolished all private ownership of land. 
 Worse than that: he resorts to an incredible forgery and quotes the de-crees of the Soviet government in such a way as to omit the most essential. 
 After stating that “small production strives for complete private ownership of the means of production”, and that theConstituent Assembly would have been the “only authority”capable of preventing the dividing up of the land (an asser-tion which will evoke laughter in Russia, where everybody knows that the Soviets alone are recognised as authoritative by the workers and peasants, while the Constituent Assem-bly has become the slogan of the Czechs and the landowners),Kautsky continues: “One of the first decrees of the Soviet Government declared that: (1) Landed proprietorship is abolished forthwith without any compen -sation. 
 (2) The landed estates, as also all crown, monastery and churchlands, with all their livestock, implements, buildings and everything pertaining thereto, shall be placed at the disposal of the volost Land Committees of the uyezd Soviets of Peasants’ Deputies pending thesettlement of the land question by the Constituent Assembly. 
” Having quoted only these two clauses , Kautsky concludes: “The reference to the Constituent Assembly has remained a dead letter. 
 In point of fact, the peasants in the separate volosts could do asthey pleased with the land” (p. 
 47). 
 Here you have an example of Kautsky’s “criticism”! Here you have a “scientific” work which is more like a fraud. 
 The German reader is induced to believe that the Bolshevikscapitulated before the peasants on the question of privateownership of land, that the Bolsheviks permitted the peas -ants to act locally (“in the separate volosts”) in whateverway they pleased! But in reality, the decree Kautsky quotes—the first to be promulgated, on October 26, 1917 (old style)—consistsnot of two, but of five clauses, plus eight clauses of the Man -date, which, it was expressly stated, “shall serve as a guide”. 
 Clause 3 of the decree states that the estates are transferred “to the people ”, and the “exact inventories of all property confiscated” shall be drawn up and the property “protected in the strictest revolutionary way”. 
 And the Mandate declaresthat “private ownership of land shall be abolished forever”, that “lands on which high -level scientific farming is practised ... shall not be divided up ”, that “all livestock and farm implements of the confiscated estates shall pass into the exclusive use of the state or a commune, depending on size and importance, and no compensation shall be paid forthis”, and that “all land shall become part of the nationalland fund”. 
 Further, simultaneously with the dissolution of the Con -stituent Assembly (January 5, 1918), the Third Congress of Soviets adopted the Declaration of Rights of the Working and Exploited People, which now forms part of the Fun -damental Law of the Soviet Republic. 
 Article 2, paragraph 1of this Declaration states that “private ownership of land ishereby abolished”, and that “model estates and agriculturalenterprises are proclaimed national property”. 
 So, the reference to the Constituent Assembly did not remain a dead letter, because another national representativebody, immeasurably more authoritative in the eyes of the peasants, took upon itself the solution of the agrarian problem. 
 Again, on February 6 (19), 1918, the land socialisation law was promulgated, which once more confirmed the abo -lition of all private ownership of land, and placed the landand all private stock and implements at the disposal of the Soviet authorities under the control of the federal Soviet government . 
 Among the duties connected with the disposal of the land, the law prescribed: “the development of collective farming as more advantageous from the point of view of economy of labour and produce, at the expense ofindividual farming, with a view to transition to socialist farming”(Article 11, paragraph e). 
 The same law, in establishing the principle of equal land tenure, replied to the fundamental question: “Who has a right to the use of the land?” in the following manner: (Article 20. 
) “Plots of land surface within the borders of the Russian Soviet Federative Republic may be used for public and private needs. 
A. 
 For cultural and educational purposes: (1) by the state as represented by the organs of Soviet power (federal, as well as in regions, gubernias, uyezds, volosts, and villages), and (2) by public bodies (under the con -trol, and with the permission, of the local Soviet authorities); B. 
 For agricultural purposes: (3) by agricultural communes, (4) by agricultural co-operative societies, (5) by village communities, (6) by individual families and persons.... 
” The reader will see that Kautsky has completely distorted the facts, and has given the German reader an absolutely false view of the agrarian policy and agrarian legislation ofthe proletarian state in Russia. 
 Kautsky proved even unable to formulate the theoreti -cally important fundamental questions! These questions are: (1) Equal land tenure and (2) Nationalisation of the land—the relation of these two measures to socialism in general, and to the transitionfrom capitalism to communism in particular. 
 (3) Farming in common as a transition from small scat -tered farming to large -scale collective farming; does the man -ner in which this question is dealt with in Soviet legislationmeet the requirements of socialism? On the first question it is necessary, first of all, to establish the following two fundamental facts: (a) in reviewing the experience of 1905 (I may refer, for instance, to my work on the agrarian problem in the First Russian Revolution), the Bolsheviks pointed to the democratically progressive, the democratically revolutionary meaning of the slogan“equal land tenure”, and in 1917, before the October Revo -lution, they spoke of this quite definitely; (b) when enforcing the land socialisation law—the “spirit” of which is equalland tenure—the Bolsheviks most explicitly and definitely declared: this is not our idea, we do not agree with this slogan, but we think it our duty to enforce it because thisis the demand of the overwhelming majority of thepeasants. 
 And the idea and demands of the majority of theworking people are things that the working people mustdiscard of their own accord : such demands cannot be either “abolished” or “skipped over”. 
 We Bolsheviks shall help the peasants to discard petty -bourgeois slogans, to pass from them as quickly and as easily as possible to socialistslogans. 
 A Marxist theoretician who wanted to help the working -class revolution by his scientific analysis should have answered the following questions: first, is it true that the idea of equal land tenure has a democratically revolutionary meaningof carrying the bourgeois -democratic revolution to its con -clusion? Secondly, did the Bolsheviks act rightly in helping to pass by their votes (and in most loyally observing) thepetty -bourgeois equal land tenure law? Kautsky failed even to perceive what, theoretically, was the crux of the problem! Kautsky will never be able to refute the view that the idea of equal land tenure has a progressive and revolutionaryvalue in the bourgeois -democratic revolution. 
 Such a revo -lution cannot go beyond this. 
 By reaching its limit, it all the more clearly , rapidly and easily reveals to the people the inadequacy of bourgeois -democratic solutions and the neces -sity of proceeding beyond their limits, of passing on to socialism . 
 The peasants, who have overthrown tsarism and the land -owners, dream of equal land tenure, and no power on earth could have stopped the peasants, once they had been freed both from the landowners and from the bourgeois parlia -mentary republican state. 
 The workers say to the peasants: We shall help you reach “ideal” capitalism, for equal land tenure is the idealisation of capitalism by the small pro -ducer. 
 At the same time we shall prove to you its inadequacyand the necessity of passing to farming in common. 
 It would be interesting to see Kautsky’s attempt to dis -prove that this kind of leadership of the peasant struggle by the proletariat was right. 
 Kautsky, however, preferred to evade the question al -together.... 
 Next, Kautsky deliberately deceived his German readers by withholding from them the fact that in its land law the Soviet government gave direct preference to communes and co-operative societies. 
 With all the peasants right through to the end of the bourgeois -democratic revolution; and with the poor, the proletarian and semi -proletarian section of the peasants, for -ward to the socialist revolution! That has been the policy ofthe Bolsheviks, and it is the only Marxist policy. 
 But Kautsky is all muddled and incapable of formulat -ing a single question! On the one hand, he dare not say that the workers should have parted company with the peasants over the question of equal land tenure, for he realisesthat it would have been absurd (and, moreover, in 1905,when he was not yet a renegade, he himself clearly andexplicitly advocated an alliance between the workers andpeasants as a condition for the victory of the revolution). 
 On the other hand, he sympathetically quotes the liberal platitudes of the Menshevik Maslov, who “proves” that petty -bourgeois equal land tenure is utopian and reactionaryfrom the point of view of socialism , but hushes up the pro -gressive and revolutionary character of the petty -bourgeois struggle for equality and equal tenure from the point of view of the bourgeois -democratic revolution. 
 Kautsky is in a hopeless muddle: note that he (in 1918) insists on the bourgeois character of the Russian revolution. 
 He (in 1918) peremptorily says: Don’t go beyond theselimits! Yet this very same Kautsky sees “somethingsocialistic ” (for a bourgeois revolution) in the petty -bourgeois reform of renting out small plots of land to the poor peas -ants (which is an approximation to equal land tenure)! Understand this if you can! In addition to all this, Kautsky displays a philistine inability to take into account the real policy of a definite party. 
 He quotes the empty phrases of the Menshevik Maslov and refuses to see the real policy the Menshevik Party pursued in 1917, when, in “coalition” with the landownersand Cadets, they advocated what was virtually a liberal agrarian reform and compromise with the landowners (proof: the arrest of the members of the Land Committees and S. 
 Maslov’s land bill). 
 Kautsky failed to notice that P. 
 Maslov’s phrases about the reactionary and utopian character of petty -bourgeois equal -ity are really a screen to conceal the Menshevik policy ofcompromise between the peasants and the landowners (i. 
e. 
, of supporting the landowners in duping the peasants), in -stead of the revolutionary overthrow of the landowners by the peasants. 
 What a “Marxist” Kautsky is!It was the Bolsheviks who strictly differentiated bet -ween the bourgeois -democratic revolution and the socialist revolution: by carrying the former through, they opened the door for the transition to the latter. 
 This was the only policy that was revolutionary and Marxist. 
 It would have been wiser for Kautsky not to repeat the feeble liberal witticism: “Never yet have the small peasantsanywhere adopted collective farming under the influenceof theoretical convictions” (p. 
 50). 
 How very smart! But never as yet and nowhere have the small peasants of any large country been under the influence of a prole -tarian state. 
 Never as yet and nowhere have the small peasants engaged in an open class struggle reaching the extent of a civil war between the poor peasants and the rich peasants, with propagandist, political, economic and military supportgiven to the poor by a proletarian state. 
 Never as yet and nowhere have the profiteers and the rich amassed such wealth out of war, while the mass of peasanthave been so utterly ruined. 
 Kautsky just reiterates the old stuff, he just chews the old cud, afraid even to give thought to the new tasks of theproletarian dictatorship. 
 But what, dear Kautsky, if the peasants lack implements for small -scale farming and the proletarian state helps them to obtain machines for collective farming—is that a “theoreti -cal conviction”? We shall now pass to the question of nationalisation of the land. 
 Our Narodniks, including all the Left Socialist -Revolutionaries, deny that the measure we have adopted is nationalisation of the land. 
 They are wrong in theory. 
 Insofar as we remain within the framework of commodityproduction and capitalism, the abolition of private ownership of land is nationalisation of the land. 
 The term “socialisation” merely expresses a tendency, a desire, the preparation forthe transition to socialism. 
 What should be the attitude of Marxists towards nation -alisation of the land? Here, too, Kautsky fails even to formulate the theoretical question, or, which is still worse, he deliberately evades it, although one knows from Russian literature that Kautskyis aware of the old controversies among the Russian Marxists on the question of nationalisation, municipalisation (i. 
e. 
, the transfer of the large estates to the local self -government authorities), or division of the land. 
 Kautsky’s assertion that to transfer the large estates to the state and rent them out in small plots to peasants whoown little land would be achieving “something socialistic” is a downright mockery of Marxism. 
 We have already shown that there is nothing socialistic about it. 
 But that is not all;it would not even be carrying the bourgeois -democratic revolution to its conclusion. 
 Kautsky’s great misfortune is that he placed his trust in the Mensheviks. 
 Hence the curiousposition that while insisting on our revolution having a bourgeois character and reproaching the Bolsheviks for tak -ing it into their heads to proceed to socialism, he himself proposes a liberal reform under the guise of socialism, without carrying this reform to the point of completely clearing away all the survivals of medievalism in agrarianrelations! The arguments of Kautsky, as of his Menshevik advisers, amount to a defence of the liberal bourgeoisie, who fear revolution, instead of defence of consistent bour -geois -democratic revolution. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR Indeed, why should only the large estates, and not all the land, be converted into state property? The liberal bourgeoisie thereby achieve the maximum preservation of the old conditions (i. 
e. 
, the least consistency in revolution)and the maximum facility for a reversion to the old condi -tions. 
 The radical bourgeoisie, i. 
e. 
, the bourgeoisie thatwant to carry the bourgeois revolution to its conclusion, putforward the slogan of nationalisation of the land . 
 Kautsky, who in the dim and distant past, some twenty years ago, wrote an excellent Marxist work on the agrarianquestion, cannot but know that Marx declared that landnationalisation is in fact a consistent slogan of the bour -geoisie . 
135 Kautsky cannot but be aware of Marx’s contro -versy with Rodbertus, and Marx’s remarkable passages in his Theories of Surplus Value where the revolutionary signi -ficance—in the bourgeois -democratic sense—of land nationa -lisation is explained with particular clarity. 
 The Menshevik P. 
 Maslov, whom Kautsky, unfortunately for himself, chose as an adviser, denied that the Russianpeasants would agree to the nationalisation of all the land (including the peasants’ lands). 
 To a certain extent, this view of Maslov’s could be connected with his “original”theory (which merely parrots the bourgeois critics of Marx),namely, his repudiation of absolute rent and his recognitionof the “law” (or “fact”, as Maslov expressed it) “of diminish -ing returns”. 
 In point of fact, however, already the 1905 Revolution revealed that the vast majority of the peasants in Russia,members of village communes as well as homestead peasants,were in favour of nationalisation of all the land. 
 The 1917Revolution confirmed this, and after the assumption ofpower by the proletariat this was done. 
 The Bolsheviks remained loyal to Marxism and never tried (in spite of Kautsky, who, without a scrap of evidence, accuses us ofdoing so) to “skip” the bourgeois -democratic revolution. 
 The Bolsheviks, first of all, helped the most radical, mostrevolutionary of the bourgeois -democratic ideologists of the peasants, those who stood closest to the proletariat, namely, the Left Socialist -Revolutionaries, to carry out what was in effect nationalisation of the land. 
 On October20, 1917, i. 
e. 
, on the very first day of the proletarian, socialist revolution, private ownership of land was abolished in Russia. 
 This laid the foundation, the most perfect from the point of view of the development of capitalism (Kautsky cannotdeny this without breaking with Marx), and at the same timecreated an agrarian system which is the most flexible from the point of view of the transition to socialism. 
 From thebourgeois -democratic point of view, the revolutionary peas -ants in Russia could go no farther : there can be nothing “more ideal” from this point of view, nothing “more radical”(from this same point of view) than nationalisation of theland and equal land tenure. 
 It was the Bolsheviks, and onlythe Bolsheviks, who, thanks only to the victory of theproletarian revolution, helped the peasants to carry the bourgeois -democratic revolution really to its conclusion. 
 And only in this way did they do the utmost to facilitate andaccelerate the transition to the socialist revolution. 
 One can judge from this what an incredible muddle Kaut -sky offers to his readers when he accuses the Bolsheviksof failing to understand the bourgeois character of the revolution, and yet himself betrays such a departure from Marxism that he says nothing about nationalisation of the land and presents the least revolutionary (from the bourgeois pointof view) liberal agrarian reform as “something socialistic”! We have now come to the third question formulated above, namely, to what extent the proletarian dictatorship in Russia has taken into account the necessity of passing to farming in common. 
 Here again, Kautsky commits some -thing very much in the nature of a forgery: he quotes onlythe “theses” of one Bolshevik which speak of the task ofpassing to farming in common! After quoting one of thesetheses, our “theoretician” triumphantly exclaims: “Unfortunately, a task is not accomplished by the fact that it is called a task. 
 For the time being, collective farming in Russia is doomed to remain on paper only. 
 Never yet have the small peasants anywhere adopted collective farming under the influence of theoretical convic -tions” (p. 
 50). 
 Never as yet and nowhere has a literary swindle been perpetrated equal to that to which Kautsky has stooped. 
 Hequotes “theses”, but says nothing about the law of the Soviet government. 
 He talks about “theoretical convictions”, but says nothing about the proletarian state power which holds in its hands the factories and goods! All that Kautsky the Marxist wrote in 1899 in his Agrarian Question about the means at the disposal of the proletarian state for bringingabout the gradual transition of the small peasants tosocialism has been forgotten by Kautsky the renegade in 1918. 
 Of course, a few hundred state -supported agricultural communes and state farms (i. 
e. 
, large farms cultivated by associations of workers at the expense of the state) arevery little, but can Kautsky’s ignoring of this fact be called“criticism”? The nationalisation of the land that has been effected in Russia by the proletarian dictatorship has best ensured the carrying of the bourgeois -democratic revolution to its con -clusion—even in the event of a victory of the counter -revo-lution causing a reversion from land nationalisation to land division (I made a special examination of this possibilityin my pamphlet on the agrarian programme of the Marxistsin the 1905 Revolution). 
 In addition, the nationalisation of the land has given the proletarian state the maximum opportunity of passing to socialism in agriculture. 
 To sum up, Kautsky has presented us, as far as theory is concerned, with an incredible hodge -podge which is a complete renunciation of Marxism, and, as far as practiceis concerned, with a policy of servility to the bourgeoisie and their reformism. 
 A fine criticism indeed! * * * Kautsky begins his “economic analysis” of industry with the following magnificent argument: Russia has a large -scale capitalist industry. 
 Cannot a socialist system of production be built up on this foundation?“One might think so if socialism meant that the workers ofthe separate factories and mines made these their property”(literally appropriated these for themselves) “in order tocarry on production separately at each factory” (p. 
 52). 
 “This very day, August 5, as I am writing these lines,” Kautsky adds, “a speech is reported from Moscow deliveredby Lenin on August 2, in which he is stated to have declared: ‘The workers are holding the factories firmly in their hands, and the peasants will not return the land to the landowners. 
’ Up till now, the slogan: the factories to the workers, and the land to the peasants, has been an anarcho -syndicalist slogan, not a Social -Democratic one” (pp. 
 52 -53). 
 I have quoted this passage in full so that the Russian workers, who formerly respected Kautsky, and quite rightly,might see for themselves the methods employed by this deserter to the bourgeois camp. 
 Just think: on August 5, when numerous decrees on the nationalisation of factories in Russia had been issued—andnot a single factory had been “appropriated” by the workers,but had all been converted into the property of the Repub -lic—on August 5, Kautsky, on the strength of an obviously crooked interpretation of one sentence in my speech, tries to make the German readers believe that in Russia thefactories are being turned over to individual groups ofworkers! And after that Kautsky, at great length, chewsthe cud about it being wrong to turn over factories to indi -vidual groups of workers! This is not criticism, it is the trick of a lackey of the bourgeoisie, whom the capitalists have hired to slander theworkers’ revolution. 
 The factories must be turned over to the state, or to the municipalities, or the consumers’ co -operative societies, says Kautsky over and over again, and finally adds: “This is what they are now trying to do in Russia.... 
” Now! What does that mean? In August? Why, could not Kautsky have commissioned his friends Stein or Axelrod,or any of the other friends of the Russian bourgeoisie, to translate at least one of the decrees on the factories? “How far they have gone in this direction, we cannot yet tell. 
 At all events, this aspect of the activity of the Soviet Republic is of thegreatest interest to us, but it still remains entirely shrouded in dark -ness. 
 There is no lack of decrees.... 
” (That is why Kautsky ignorestheir content , or conceals it from his readers!) “But there is no reliable information as to the effect of these decrees. 
 Socialist production is impossible without all -round, detailed, reliable and rapidly informa -tive statistics. 
 The Soviet Republic cannot possibly have created such statistics yet. 
 What we learn about its economic activities is highly contradictory and can in no way be verified. 
 This, too, is a result of the dictatorship and the suppression of democracy. 
 There is no freedom ofthe press, or of speech” (p. 
 53). 
 This is how history is written! From a “free” press of the capitalists and Dutov men Kautsky would have received information about factories being taken over by the work -ers.... 
 This “serious savant” who stands above classes is magnificent, indeed! About the countless facts which showthat the factories are being turned over to the Republiconly , that they are managed by an organ of Soviet power, the Supreme Economic Council, which is constituted mainly of workers elected by the trade unions, Kautsky refuses to say a single word. 
 With the obstinacy of the “man in themuffler”, he stubbornly keeps repeating one thing: give mepeaceful democracy, without civil war, without a dicta -torship and with good statistics (the Soviet Republic hascreated a statistical service in which the best statistical experts in Russia are employed, but, of course, ideal statis -tics cannot be obtained so quickly). 
 In a word, what Kautsky demands is a revolution without revolution, without fiercestruggle, without violence. 
 It is equivalent to asking forstrikes in which workers and employers do not get excited. 
Try to find the difference between this kind of “socialist” and common liberal bureaucrat! So, relying upon such “factual material”, i. 
e. 
, deliberately and contemptuously ignoring the innumerable facts, Kautsky“concludes”: “It is doubtful whether the Russian proletariat has obtained more in the sense of real practical gains, and not of mere decrees, under theSoviet Republic than it would have obtained from a Constituent As -sembly, in which, as in the Soviets, socialists, although of a differenthue, predominated” (p. 
 58). 
 A gem, is it not? We would advise Kautsky’s admirers to circulate this utterance as widely as possible among the Russian workers, for Kautsky could not have provided better material for gauging the depth of his political degra -dation. 
 Comrade workers, Kerensky, too, was a “socialist”,only of a “different hue”! Kautsky the historian is satisfied with the name, the title which the Right Socialist -Revolu -tionaries and the Mensheviks “appropriated” to themselves. 
Kautsky the historian refuses even to listen to the facts which show that under Kerensky the Mensheviks and the Right Socialist -Revolutionaries supported the imperialist policy and marauding practices of the bourgeoisie: he is discreetly silent about the fact that the majority in the Constituent Assembly consisted of these very champions of imperialist war and bourgeois dictatorship. 
 And this is called “economic analysis”! In conclusion let me quote another sample of this “economic analysis”: “... After nine months’ existence, the Soviet Republic, instead of spreading general well -being, felt itself obliged to explain why there is general want” (p. 
 41). 
 We are accustomed to hear such arguments from the lips of the Cadets. 
 All the flunkeys of the bourgeoisie in Russiaargue in this way: show us, after nine months, your generalwell -being—and this after four years of devastating war, with foreign capital giving all -round support to the sabotage and rebellions of the bourgeoisie in Russia. 
 Actually , there has remained absolutely no difference whatever, nota shadow of difference, between Kautsky and a counter -revolutionary bourgeois. 
 His honeyed talk, cloaked in theguise of “socialism”, only repeats what the Kornilov men, the Dutov men and Krasnov men in Russia say bluntly, straightforwardly and without embellishment. 
 * * * The above lines were written on November 9, 1918. 
 That same night news was received from Germany announcing the beginning of a victorious revolution, first in Kiel andother northern towns and ports, where power has passed intothe hands of Councils of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies,then in Berlin, where, too, power has passed into the handsof a Council. 
 The conclusion which still remained to be written to my pamphlet on Kautsky and on the proletarian revolution isnow superfluous. 
 November 10, 1918 Appendix I THESE S ON THE CONSTITUEN T ASSEMBL Y136 Appendix II VANDERVELDE’S NEW BOOK ON THE STATE It was only after I had read Kautsky’s book that I had the opportunity to acquaint myself with Vandervelde’s Socialism versus the State (Paris, 1918). 
 A comparison of the two books involuntarily suggests itself. 
 Kautsky is the ideological leader of the Second International (1889 -1914), while Vandervelde, in his capacity of Chairman of the In -ternational Socialist Bureau,137 is its official representative. 
 Both represent the complete bankruptcy of the Second International, and both with the dexterity of experienced journalists “skilfully” mask this bankruptcy and their ownbankruptcy and desertion to the bourgeoisie with Marxistcatchwords. 
 One gives us a striking example of what istypical of German opportunism, ponderous, theorising andgrossly falsifying Marxism by trimming it of all that is unacceptable to the bourgeoisie. 
 The other is typical of the Latin—to a certain extent, one may say, of the West -Eu-ropean (that is, west of Germany)—variety of prevailingopportunism, which is more flexible, less ponderous, andwhich falsifies Marxism by the same fundamental method,but in a more subtle manner. 
 Both radically distort Marx’s teaching on the state as well as his teaching on the dictatorship of the proletariat;Vandervelde deals more with the former subject, Kautskywith the latter. 
 Both obscure the very close and inseparableconnection that exists between the two subjects. 
 Both arerevolutionaries and Marxists in word, but renegades in prac -tice, who strain every effort to dissociate themselves from revolution. 
 Neither of them has anything that permeatesthe works of Marx and Engels, and that actually distinguishes socialism from a bourgeois caricature of it, namely, the elucidation of the tasks of revolution as distinct from the tasks of reform, the elucidation of revolutionary tactics as distinct from reformist tactics, the elucidation of the roleof the proletariat in the abolition of the system, order or regime of wage -slavery as distinct from the role of the pro -letariat of the “Great” Powers which shares with the bour -geoisie a particle of the latter’s imperialist superprofits and superbooty. 
 We shall quote a few of Vandervelde’s most important arguments in support of this opinion. 
 Like Kautsky, Vandervelde quotes Marx and Engels with great zeal, and like Kautsky, he quotes from Marx and Engelsanything you like except what is absolutely unaccepta -ble to the bourgeoisie and what distinguishes a revolutionary from a reformist. 
 He speaks volubly about the conquest ofpolitical power by the proletariat, since practice hasalready confined this within strictly parliamentary limits. 
But as regards the fact that after the experience of the ParisCommune, Marx and Engels found it necessary to supple -ment the partially obsolete Communist Manifesto with an elucidation of the truth that the working class cannotsimply lay hold of the ready -made state machinery, but must smash it—not a single word has he to say about that! Van -dervelde and Kautsky, as if by agreement, pass over in complete silence what is most essential in the experience of the proletarian revolution, precisely that which distinguishes proletarian revolution from bourgeois reforms. 
 Like Kautsky, Vandervelde talks about the dictatorship of the proletariat only to dissociate himself from it. 
 Kautskydid it by gross falsifications. 
 Vandervelde does it in a moresubtle way. 
 In the part of his book, Section 4, on the sub -ject of the “conquest of political power by the proletariat”,he devotes sub -section b to the question of the “collective dictatorship of the proletariat”, “quotes” Marx and Engels(I repeat: omitting precisely what pertains to the mainpoint, namely, the smashing of the old, bourgeois -demo -cratic state machine), and concludes: “... In socialist circles, the social revolution is commonly conceived in the following manner: a new Commune, this time victorious, and not in one place but in the main centres of the capitalist world. 
 “A hypothesis, but a hypothesis which has nothing improbable about it at a time when it is becoming evident that the post -war period will see in many countries unprecedented class antagonisms and socialconvulsions. 
 “But if the failure of the Paris Commune, not to speak of the dif -ficulties of the Russian revolution, proves anything at all, it proves that it is impossible to put an end to the capitalist system until theproletariat has sufficiently prepared itself to make proper use of thepower the force of circumstances may place into its hands” (p. 
 73). 
 And absolutely nothing more on the point at issue! Here they are, the leaders and representatives of the Second International! In 1912 they signed the Basle Mani -festo, which explicitly speaks of the connection betweenthat very war which broke out in 1914 and a proletarianrevolution, and actually holds it up as a threat . 
 And when the war broke out and a revolutionary situation arose, the Kautskys and Vanderveldes began to dissociate themselvesfrom revolution. 
 A revolution of the Paris Commune typeis only a not improbable hypothesis! This is quite analo -gous to Kautsky’s argument about the possible role of theSoviets in Europe. 
 But that is just the way every educated liberal argues; he will, no doubt, agree now that a new Commune is “notimprobable”, that the Soviets have a great role to play, etc. 
The proletarian revolutionary differs from the liberalprecisely in that he, as a theoretician, analyses the newsignificance of the Commune and the Soviets as a state . 
 Vandervelde, however, passes over in silence everything Marx and Engels said at such length on the subject when analysingthe experience of the Paris Commune. 
 As a practical worker, as a politician, a Marxist should have made it clear that only traitors to socialism can nowevade the task of elucidating the need for a proletarian revo -lution (of the Commune type, the Soviet type, or perhapsof some third type), of explaining the necessity of preparingfor it, of conducting propaganda for revolution among thepeople, of refuting the petty -bourgeois prejudices against it, etc. 
 But neither Kautsky nor Vandervelde does anything of the sort, precisely because they themselves are traitors to socialism, who want to maintain their reputation as social -ists and Marxists among the workers. 
 Take the theoretical formulation of the question. 
 The state, even in a democratic republic, is nothing but a machine for the suppression of one class by another. 
 Kautsky is familiar with this truth, admits it, agrees withit, but ... he evades the fundamental question as to whatparticular class the proletariat must suppress when it estab -lishes the proletarian state, for what reasons, and by whatmeans. 
 Vandervelde is familiar with, admits, agrees with and quotes this fundamental proposition of Marxism (p. 
 72 ofhis book), but ... he does not say a single word on the“unpleasant” (for the capitalist gentlemen) subject of thesuppression of the resistance of the exploiters ! Both Vandervelde and Kautsky have completely evaded this “unpleasant” subject. 
 Therein lies their apostasy. 
 Like Kautsky, Vandervelde is a past master in the art of substituting eclecticism for dialectics. 
 On the one handit cannot but be admitted, and on the other hand it must beconfessed. 
 On the one hand, the term state may mean “thenation as a whole” (see Littré’s dictionary—a learned work, it cannot be denied—and Vandervelde, p. 
 87); on the other hand, the term state may mean the “government” (ibid. 
). 
Vandervelde quotes this learned platitude, with approval,side by side with quotations from Marx. 
 The Marxist meaning of the word “state” differs from the ordinary meaning, writes Vandervelde. 
 Hence, “misunder -standings” may arise. 
 “Marx and Engels regard the state notas the state in the broad sense, not as an organ of guidance,as the representative of the general interests of society(intérêts généraux de la société ). 
 It is the state as the power, the state as the organ of authority, the state as the instru -ment of the rule of one class over another” (pp. 
 75 -76 of Vandervelde’s book). 
 Marx and Engels speak about the abolition of the state only in its second meaning.... 
 “Too absolute affirmationsrun the risk of being inexact. 
 There are many transitionalstages between the capitalist state, which is based on theexclusive rule of one class, and the proletarian state, the aim of which is to abolish all classes” (p. 
 156). 
 There you have an example of Vandervelde’s “manner”, which is only slightly different from that of Kautsky’s, and, in essence, identical with it. 
 Dialectics repudiate abso -lute truths and explain the successive changes of opposites and the significance of crises in history. 
 The eclectic does not want propositions that are “too absolute”, because he wantsto push forward his philistine desire to substitute “ transi-tional stages ” for revolution. 
 The Kautskys and Vanderveldes say nothing about the fact that the transitional stage between the state as an organ of the rule of the capitalist class and the state as an organ of the rule of the proletariat is revolution , which means overthrowing the bourgeoisie and breaking up , smashing, their state machine. 
 The Kautskys and Vanderveldes obscure the fact that the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie must be replaced by the dictatorship of one class, the proletariat, and that the “transitional stages” of the revolution will be followed by the“transitional stages” of the gradual withering away of theproletarian state. 
 Therein lies their political apostasy. 
Therein, theoretically, philosophically, lies their substitution of eclecticism and sophistry for dialectics. 
 Dialectics are concrete and revolutionary and distinguishbetween the “transition” from the dictatorship of one class tothe dictatorship of another and “transition” from the demo -cratic proletarian state to the non -state (“the withering away of the state”). 
 To please the bourgeoisie, the eclecticism and sophistry of the Kautskys and Vanderveldes blur all that is concrete and precise in the class struggle and advanceinstead the general concept “transition”, under which theymay hide (as nine -tenths of the official Social -Democrats of our time do hide ) their renunciation of revolution! As an eclectic and sophist, Vandervelde is more skilful and subtle than Kautsky; for the phrase , “transition from the state in the narrow sense to the state in the broad sense”,can serve as a means of evading all and sundry problems ofrevolution, all the difference between revolution and re -form, and even the difference between the Marxist and theliberal. 
 For what bourgeois with European education would think of denying, “in general”, “transitional stages” in this “general” sense? Vandervelde writes: “I agree with Guesde that it is impossible to socialise the means of production and exchange without the following two conditions havingbeen fulfilled: “1. 
 The transformation of the present state as the organ of the rule of one class over another into what Monger calls a people’s labour state, by the conquest of political power by the proletariat. 
 “2. 
 Separation of the state as an organ of authority from the state as an organ of guidance, or, to use Saint -Simon’s expression, of the government of men from the administration of things” (p. 
 89). 
 Vandervelde puts this in italics, laying special emphasis on the importance of these propositions. 
 But this is a sheereclectical hodge -podge, a complete rupture with Marxism! The “people’s labour state” is just a paraphrase of theold “free people’s state”, which the German Social -Democrats paraded in the seventies and which Engels brand -ed as an absurdity. 
138 The term “people’s labour state” is a phrase worthy of petty -bourgeois democrats (like our Left Socialist -Revolutionaries), a phrase which substitutes non-class concepts for class concepts. 
 Vandervelde places the conquest of state power by the proletariat (by one class) alongside of the “people’s” state, and fails to see that the result is a hodge -podge. 
 With Kautsky and his “pure democ -racy”, the result is a similar hodge -podge, and a similar anti-revolutionary, philistine disregard of the tasks of the class revolution, of the class, proletarian, dictatorship, ofthe class (proletarian) state. 
 Further, the government of men will disappear and give way to the administration of things only when the state in all forms withers away. 
 But talking about this rela -tively distant future, Vandervelde overlays, obscures the task of tomorrow , namely, the overthrow of the bourgeoi -sie. 
 This trick is also equivalent to subserviency to the liberal bourgeoisie. 
 The liberal is willing to talk about what will happen when it is not necessary to govern men. 
 Why notindulge in such innocuous dreams? But about the proletar -iat having to crush the bourgeoisie’s resistance to theirexpropriation—not a word. 
 The class interests of the bour -geoisie demand it. 
 Socialism versus the State. 
 This is Vandervelde’s bow to the proletariat. 
 It is not difficult to make a bow; every“democratic” politician knows how to make a how to his electors. 
 And under cover of a “bow”, an anti -revolutionary, anti-proletarian meaning is insinuated. 
 Vandervelde extensively paraphrases Ostrogorsky139 t o show what amount of deceit, violence, corruption, mendac -ity, hypocrisy and oppression of the poor is hidden beneaththe civilised, polished and perfumed exterior of modernbourgeois democracy. 
 But he draws no conclusion from this. 
He fails to notice that bourgeois democracy suppresses the working and exploited people and that proletarian democ -racy will have to suppress the bourgeoisie . 
 Kautsky and Vandervelde are blind to this. 
 The class interests of thebourgeoisie, in whose wake these petty -bourgeois traitors to Marxism are floundering, demand that this question be evaded, that it be hushed up, or that the necessity of such suppression be directly denied. 
 Petty -bourgeois eclecticism versus Marxism, sophistry versus dialectics, philistine reformism versus proletarianrevolution -that should have been the title of Vandervelde’s book. 
 DRAF T DECISIO N ON THE USE OF STAT E CONTRO L140 On the question of using State Control for keeping a check on work and improving defence capacity, the majority on the commission have voted for lightning control, that is, dispatch of groups or commissions with wide powers to checkon various institutions. 
 We must have concrete, factual, numerical data on the forces at our disposal (Party members first, then non -Party, but absolutely honest men) for exercising genuine control. 
 We must know the number of specialists in the various branches; the number of those experienced in administra -tion and management. 
 Tasks of control are of two kinds:the very simple task of checking on warehouses, goods, etc. 
; the more difficult one of checking on the efficiency of the work; combating sabotage, completely exposing it; check -ing on the way the work is being organised; ensuring thegreatest efficiency of work, and so on. 
 No. 
 1 task is to improve work in the Food and Communi -cations Commissariats. 
 Written December 3, 1918 Published according to First published in 1931 the manuscript SPEECH TO THE MOSCOW GUBERNIA CONGRESS OF SOVIETS, POOR PEASANTS ’ COMMITTEES AND DISTRICT COMMITTEES OF THE RUSSIAN COMMUNIST PARTY (BOLSHEVIKS ) DECEMBER 8, 1918 BRIEF NEWSPAPER REPORT (Storm of applause. 
 ) Lenin began his speech by saying that events of the past few weeks in Austria and Germanyhad gone to show that in our estimation of the international situation we had been right to base our policy on a precise, lucid and proper account of all the consequences of the four -year war, which, from being a battle of capitalists for di -viding up their spoils, had turned into a battle between themand the workers of the world. 
 The revolution had had ahard time starting in Western Europe, but once it had done so it had been developing more rapidly, surely and orderly than ours. 
 Speaking of the labour movement in other countries which is coming to our aid Comrade Lenin called for an all -out effort and said that every month of our existence, whichwe were defending at so high a cost, was bringing us nearer to a lasting victory. 
 On the current task of re -elections to the volost and village Soviets, Comrade Lenin stressed that all the difficulties ofindependent organisation of the working people from belowwould be overcome when everyone realised that the govern -ment must rely on the workers and the poor and middle peasants, who are not our enemies, they are just wavering, and with the consolidation of the Soviet government theywill side with us. 
 The cause we have begun, Lenin concluded, will be carried through by the workers of the whole world. 
 ( Prolonged applause. 
 ) Izvestia No. 
 271, Published according to December 11, 1918 the Izvestia text SPEEC H TO THE THIR D WORKE RS’ CO-OPERATIV E CONGRES S141 DECEMBER 9, 1918 (Stormy ovation. 
 ) Comrades, the workers’ co -operatives are today faced with extremely important economic and political tasks. 
 Both the one and the other are now part andparcel of the economic and political struggle. 
 In respect of theimmediate tasks I want to underline the meaning of “concili -ation with the co -operatives”. 
 This conciliation, mentioned so frequently of late in the papers, radically differs from theconciliation with the bourgeoisie, which is nothing shortof treachery. 
 This conciliation we are talking about now isconciliation of a very special kind. 
 There is a world ofdifference between the Soviet Government’s conciliation withGermany which produced some results, and the concilia -tion—which would be harmful and even fatal to the country—of the working class with the bourgeoisie. 
 What that pretextof conciliation amounts to is the complete betrayal both ofthe class struggle and the fundamentals of socialism. 
 So -cialists who are well aware that their chief task is to fightthe bourgeoisie and capital appreciate this distinction. 
 All of us very well realise that there can only be one al -ternative in our class struggle: recognition either of the rule ofcapital or of the working class. 
 We know that all the attemptsby the petty -bourgeois parties to form and pursue their policy in the country are doomed to failure before they evenstart. 
 We have clearly seen and experienced several attempts by various petty -bourgeois parties and groups to push through their policy, and we see that all attempts by intermedi -ate forces are bound to end in failure. 
 By virtue of the very definite conditions there are only two central forces, standing -at opposite ends of the pole, that can have a hold on Russia, can decide her fate one way or the other. 
 I will go even further and say that the whole world is being formed anddirected by one or the other of these central forces. 
 As faras Russia is concerned I can say quite definitely that,because of the specific economic conditions, only one of theseforces can take control. 
 The rest, the intermediate forces, may be numerous but they can never count for much. 
 Right now, the Soviet authorities must face the question of conciliation with the co -operatives. 
 In April we departed from our vowed intention and made concessions. 
Naturally enough, there should be no class co -operatives in a country where all classes are being eliminated, but, I repeat, the conditions of the time demanded a certain delay and we put it off for a few months. 
 Nevertheless, we allrealise that the Soviet government will never abandon theposition it now occupies. 
 We had to make those concessionssince at that time we were alone in the whole world. 
 Our con -cessions were due to the difficulties we had in our work. 
 Because of the economic tasks which the proletariat had taken on, we had to reconcile ourselves to and preserve certainpetty -bourgeois habits. 
 The point here is that in one way or another we must ensure the guidance and coordination ofthe activity of the whole mass of working and exploitedpeople. 
 We must all the while bear in mind what the proletar -iat requires of us. 
 A popular government must remember thatthe various sections of the petty bourgeoisie will more andmore come over to the governing working class when theyeventually see there is no choice, that all their hopes of amiddle way of running the country are finally ruined. 
 Allthe wonderful slogans about popular will, the Constituent Assembly and the like, which were a screen for all the half -measures, were immediately swept away the moment genuine popular will asserted itself. 
 You can see foryourselves what happened and how all these slogans, thehalf -measure slogans, were scattered to the winds. 
 At the given moment, we can see this happening throughout the whole world in revolution as well as in Russia. 
 I want to show you the difference between the concilia -tion which produced such an appalling disgust throughout the working class, and the conciliation which we are now calling for, agreement with all the small peasants, all the petty bourgeoisie. 
 At the time of the Brest -Litovsk Peace Treaty, when we accepted the harsh terms of the treaty, itwas said there was no hope of a world revolution, nor couldthere be. 
 We were quite alone in the world. 
 We know that atthat time many parties were repelled from us because of thetreaty and joined the bourgeoisie. 
 At that time we had to endure all sorts of terrible experiences. 
 A few months later we saw there was and could be no choice, no middle way. 
 When the German revolution came, everyone realised that revolution was sweeping the whole world, that Britain,France and America were also going the same way—alongour path! When our petty -bourgeois democrats followed their patrons, they did not realise where they were being led, they did not realise they were being led along the capitalistroad. 
 Now we see by the example of the German revolutionthat these representatives and patrons of democracy, theseWilsons and Co. 
, are imposing worse treaties on a defeatednation than the Brest -Litovsk Treaty which was forced on us. 
 It is quite clear to us that international demagogy is now bankrupt because of the events in the West and the newsituation. 
 Now the physiognomy of every nation is as clearas can be. 
 Now, the masks have been torn off and all the illu -sions have been dispelled by the battering -ram of history. 
 It is natural that the Soviet government should have to use all its influence and weight with such waverers who are always around during a transition, so as to carry out taskswhich we are now setting, tasks which back our policy begunin April. 
 We then had to put off our vowed intentions fora while; then we consciously and openly made several con -cessions. 
 Someone asked about exactly where we stand on this road. 
 Now the whole of Europe clearly sees that our revolu -tion is no longer in the experimental stage, the attitude ofthe civilised nations to us has now changed. 
 They now ap -preciate that in this respect we are doing something new andtremendous, that we have had so much trouble because for almost all the time we stood utterly alone and completely forsaken by the entire international proletariat. 
 In this re -spect we have been guilty of many serious mistakes which we do not in any way hide. 
 We should, of course, have endeav -oured to unite the whole population and not to divide them. 
 We may not have done it up to now and we must get down to the job sometime. 
 We have already joined up with manyorganisations. 
 Now, the workers’ co -operatives and Soviet bodies should be merged. 
 Since this April we have beenorganising on the basis of experience and we have been em -ploying the store of social and political forces that we have at our disposal. 
 We have been organising the supply and distribution of goods among the whole population. 
 We havechecked every step we took because this organisation hasbeen particularly difficult to carry out in our economicallybackward country. 
 Agreements with the co -operatives were first made in April and the decree issued on the complete merger and organisation of supply and distribution pursues the same aim. 
 The previous speaker mentioned friction in a reference to Petrograd; we know there is friction almost everywhere. 
We also know that this friction is quite inevitable becausethe time has come when two utterly different types of appa -ratus are meeting and merging. 
 We know too, however,that we have to pass through it because it is inevitable. 
In just the same way you must realise that the long resistanceput up by the workers’ co -operatives has finally resulted in distrust from the Soviet government, a distrust that isperfectly natural. 
 You say you want independence. 
 It is quite natural that anyone who puts forward this demand should inducedistrust. 
 If you complain of friction and want to avoid it,then you must first give up the idea of independence sinceanyone who insists on that is an enemy of the Soviet govern -ment at a time when we are all striving for a closer union. 
 Once the workers’ co -operatives unite in a perfectly clear -cut, honest and open way with the Soviet government, this friction will begin to disappear. 
 I know only too well thatwhen two groups merge the work does not proceed smoothlyat first. 
 Nevertheless, with a little time, when the one groupearns the trust of the other, all the friction gradually fades away. 
 However, constant inter -departmental friction is likely if the two groups stay apart. 
 I don’t understand whatindependence has got to do with it. 
 After all we all agree that the whole of society should be one big co -operative as far as supply and distribution are concerned. 
 All of us agree that the co -operatives are a socialist gain. 
 There lies the immense difficulty of socialist gains. 
 There lie the difficultyand aim of victory. 
 Capitalism deliberately splits the popu -lation. 
 This split must disappear once and for all, and thewhole of society must become a single workers’ co -operative. 
 There can and must be no question of any kind of independ -ence for individual groups. 
 To establish this type of co -operative I was speaking about just now is the condition for the victory of socialism. 
 Thatis why we say that no matter what difference of opinion wemay have over private matters, we shall never come toterms with capitalism or take any step away from the prin -ciples of our struggle. 
 The agreement we are now going tomake with sections of social classes is an agreement not withthe bourgeoisie or capital, but with individual groups ofworkers and democrats. 
 There is nothing to be afraid of inthis agreement because the whole difference between thesesections will disappear without a trace in the fire of revolu -tion. 
 Now all we need is a single will to enter with an openheart that single world co -operative. 
 What the Soviet government and the co -operatives have done up to now must be merged. 
 That is the substance of the latest decree passedby the Soviet government. 
 That has been the approach bySoviet representatives in many places in the absence of our decree. 
 The tremendous good accomplished by the co -opera -tives must be merged with the tremendous good accomplished by the Soviet government. 
 All sections of the populationfighting for their freedom must be merged in a single strongorganisation. 
 We know we have made a lot of mistakes,especially in the first months after the October Revolution. 
 But from now onwards, after a passage of time, we shall endeavour to attain a complete union and complete agree -ment among the population. 
 To do so, everything must comeunder the Soviet government and all illusions about somesort of “independence”, whether for individual groups orthe workers’ co -operatives, must be dispelled as quickly as possible. 
 Hopes for “independence” can only be held out where there can still be hopes for some sort of return to thepast. 
 The Western nations once regarded us and all our revo -lutionary movement as a curiosity. 
 They used to say: “Let the people have their fling; we shall wait and see how it all works out .... 
 Queer pe ople, those Russians !” Now the “queer Russians” have shown the world what their “fling”means. 
 ( Applause. 
 ) Now that the German revolution has broken out, a foreign consul said to Zinoviev: “It’s hard to say at this point who has made better use of the Brest -Litovsk Peace, you or we. 
” He said this because everyone was saying it. 
 Everyone saw that this was just the beginning of the great worldrevolution. 
 And this great revolution was started by thebackward and “queer” Russian people .... 
 History certainly has strange ways: that a backward country should have the honour of leading a great world movement, which is seen and understood by the bourgeoisie of the whole world. 
 Thisconflagration has swept Germany, Belgium, Switzerlandand Holland. 
 This movement is spreading from day to day, the revolu -tionary Soviet Government is daily gaining in strength. 
 That is why the bourgeoisie have now taken an entirely different attitude to matters. 
 Now that the axe is about tofall on world capitalism, there can be no question at all ofany independence for individual parties. 
 America providesthe most glaring example. 
 America is one of the most demo -cratic countries, it is a great democratic social republic. 
 Where else, if not in that country—which has all the elec -toral rights and all the rights of a free state—could we expect a correct solution to all legal questions? Yet we knowwhat has happened to a clergyman there, in that democraticrepublic: he was tarred and whipped until his blood flowedin the dust. 
 This took place in a free country, in a democratic republic. 
 This was allowed to happen by the “humane”, “philanthropic” Tiger Wilsons and Co. 
 What are these Wil -sons now doing with Germany, a defeated country? Thepictures of world relations are displayed before us in fullview! We see the substance of what the Wilsons offer theirfriends from these pictures, which carry such overwhelming conviction. 
 The Wilsons would have instantly proved our point. 
 These gentlemen—the free multimillionaires, the“most humane” people in the world—would have instantly broken their friends’ habit of talking, even of dreaming, of “independence” in any form. 
 They would have squarely put before you the alternative: either you stand for the capital -ist system or you stand for the Soviets. 
 They would have said: do this, because we say so, we, your friends, theBritish, the Americans—the Wilsons, and the French—Clemenceau’s friends. 
 That is why it is quite hopeless to expect any vestige of independence to remain. 
 This cannot be, and it is no use dreaming of it. 
 There can be no middle course once it is aquestion of protecting property on the one hand, and oncethe proletariat has found its way on the other. 
 The branchesof the tree of life must either be closely intertwined withcapital, or even more closely with the Soviet Republic. 
 It is absolutely clear to everyone that socialism has entered the period of its realisation. 
 It is quite clear to everyone that itis absolutely impossible to maintain or retain petty -bour -geois positions through universal suffrage. 
 The Wilsons maynurture such illusions, rather, they do not nurture such illu -sions but try to embellish their own aims by fostering such illusions, but you won’t find many people nowadays who believe these fairy -tales. 
 If such people do exist, they are a historical rarity or a museum piece. 
 ( Applause . 
) The differences you have had from the outset about pre -serving the “independence” of the co -operative movement are nothing but vain efforts which must peter out without any hope of a positive solution. 
 This struggle is not serious and it clashes with the principles of democracy. 
 Althoughthis is not surprising because the Wilsons are also “democrats”. 
They say that it remains for them to establish one finalunion because they have so many dollars they can buy upthe whole of Russia, and the whole of India, and the whole world. 
 Wilson presides over their company, their pockets are bulging with dollars and that is why they talk about buyingup Russia and India and everything else. 
 But they forgetthat basic international issues are settled in an entirelydifferent manner, that only some people, in a definite envi -ronment, may be impressed by their statements. 
 They forget that the resolutions daily adopted by the strongest class in the world—the kind our own Congress is sure to adoptunanimously—greet only the dictatorship of the proletariat all over the world. 
 By adopting such a resolution our Con -gress takes the road which does not and cannot lead to the kind of “independence” being discussed here today. 
 You are aware that Karl Liebknecht has shown some oppositionnot only to the petty -bourgeois peasants, but also to the co -operative movement. 
 You know that just for this Scheide -mann and company consider him a dreamer and fanatic,yet you addressed a message of greetings to him, just as you sent greetings to Maclean. 
 By voicing solidarity on these matters with the great world leaders you have burnt yourboats. 
 You must keep a firm stand because at the momentyou are standing up not only for yourselves, not only foryour own rights, but also for the rights of Liebknecht andMaclean. 
 I have often heard the Russian Mensheviks con -demn conciliation, and inveigh against those who came toterms with the Kaiser’s lackeys. 
 Nor were the Mensheviksalone in erring that way. 
 The whole world pointed at us,hurling this stern charge: “Conciliators. 
” Now that the worldrevolution has started, and they have to deal with Haase andKautsky, we have the right to describe our position in the words of the good Russian proverb: “Let’s stand back, and see how well we are placed. 
” We know our shortcomings, and they are easily pointed out. 
 But to the onlooker everything appears to be quitedifferent from what it actually is. 
 At one time, you know,everyone in the other parties condemned our behaviour and our policy, and now whole parties are siding with us, and want to work with us. 
 142 The wheel of the world revolu -tionary movement has now turned to such an extent that weneed not fear any kind of conciliation whatsoever. 
 And I amsure that our Congress will find the right way out of thesituation. 
 There is only one way out: a merger of the co -operative movement with the Soviet government. 
 You knowthat Britain, France, America and Spain regarded our actionsas experiments; they have now changed their tune: they nowhave to look to their own affairs at home. 
 Of course, phys -ically, materially and financially they are considerablystronger than we are, in spite of their outward polish we know they are rotten inside; they are stronger than we are at present with the strength that was Germany’s when theBrest -Litovsk Peace Treaty was concluded. 
 But what do we see now? Everyone recoiled from us then. 
 Now, every month we spend in strengthening the Soviet Republic we spend in defending not only ourselves, but also the cause started by Liebknecht and Maclean, and we already see that Britain,France, America and Spain have been infected with thesame disease and are fired with the same flame as Germany,the flame of the universal and world -wide struggle of the working class against imperialism. 
 ( Prolonged applause . 
) Brief report published in Izvestia No. 
 270, December 10, 1918 Published in full in 1919 Published according to in the pamphlet Speeches by the pamphlet checked Lenin , Milyutin and Nogin with the verbatim report at the Third Workers ’ Co-operative Congress . 
 SPEEC H TO THE FIRS T ALL-RUSSI A CONGRESS OF LAN D DEPARTMENTS, POO R PEASANT S’ COMMITTEE S AND COMMUNE S143 DECEMBER 11, 1918 (Loud applause passing into ovation . 
) Comrades, the com -position of this Congress, in my opinion, is in itself an indication of the profound change that has taken placeand the great progress we, the Soviet Republic, have madein building socialism, in particular in agricultural re -lations, which are of the utmost importance to our coun -try. 
 This Congress consists of representatives of the land departments, the Poor Peasants’ Committees and the agricultural communes, a combination which shows thatwithin a short space of time, within a single year, our revo -lution has made great strides in recasting those relationsthat are the most difficult to recast and which in all previousrevolutions constituted the greatest hindrance to the cause of socialism, but which must be most fully recast to ensure the triumph of socialism. 
 The first stage in the development of our revolution since October was mainly devoted to defeating the common enemyof all the peasants, the landowners. 
 Comrades, you are all very well aware that even the February Revolution—the revolution of the bourgeoisie, therevolution of the compromisers—promised the peasantsvictory over the landowners, and that this promise was notfulfilled. 
 Only the October Revolution, only the victory ofthe urban working class, only the Soviet government couldrelieve the whole of Russia, from end to end, of the ulcer of the old feudal heritage, the old feudal exploitation, landed estates and the landowners’ oppression of the peasants asa whole, of all peasants without distinction. 
 This fight against the landowners was one in which all the peasants were bound to participate, and participate they did. 
 The fight united the poor peasants, who do not live by exploiting the labour of others. 
 But it also unitedthe most prosperous and even wealthy peasants, who cannotget along without hired labour. 
 As long as our revolution was occupied with this task, as long as we had to exert every effort for the independent movement of the peasants, aided by the urban workers’ movement, to sweep away and completely destroy the powerof the landowners, the revolution remained a general peas -ant revolution and could therefore not go beyond bourgeoislimits. 
 It had still not touched the more powerful and more modern enemy of all working people—capital. 
 It therefore ran the risk of ending halfway, like the majority of therevolutions in Western Europe, in which a temporary alli -ance of the urban workers and all the peasants succeededin sweeping away the monarchy and the survivals of medi -evalism, in more or less thoroughly sweeping away the landed estates or the power of the landowners, but never succeeded in undermining the actual foundations of the power of cap -ital. 
 Our revolution began to tackle this much more important and much more difficult task this summer and autumn. 
 Thewave of counter -revolutionary uprisings which arose this summer—when the attack of the West -European imperial -ists and their Czech hirelings on Russia was joined by all the exploiting and oppressing elements in Russian life—injected a new spirit and fresh life in the countryside. 
 In practice, all these revolts united the European impe -rialists, their Czech hirelings, and all those in Russia who remained on the side of the landowners and capitalists, united them in a desperate struggle against the Soviet govern -ment. 
 These revolts were followed by the revolt of all thevillage kulaks. 
 The village was no longer united. 
 The peasants, who had fought as one man against the landowners, now split into two camps—the camp of the more prosperous peasants and the camp of the poor peasants who, side by side with theworkers, continued their steadfast advance towards socialism and changed from fighting the landowners to fighting capi -tal, the power of money, and the use of the great land reform for the benefit of the kulaks. 
 This struggle cut the property -owning and exploiting classes off from the revolution completely; it definitely put our revolution on the socialistroad which the urban working class had tried so hard andvigorously to put it on in October, but along which itwill not be able to direct the revolution successfully unless it finds firm, deliberate and solid support in the countryside. 
 There lies the significance of the revolution which took place this summer and autumn even in the most remotevillages of Russia, a revolution which was not spectacular,not as striking and obvious as the October Revolution of last year, but whose significance is incomparably deeper and greater. 
 The formation of the Poor Peasants’ Committees in the rural districts was the turning -point; it showed that the urban working class, which in October had united with all thepeasants to crush the landowners, the principal enemy of the free, socialist Russia of the working people, had progressed from this to the much more difficult and historically morenoble and truly socialist task—that of carrying the enlight -ening socialist struggle into the rural districts, and reachingthe minds of the peasants as well. 
 The great agrarianrevolution—proclamation in October of the abolition of private ownership of land, proclamation of the socialisa -tion of the land—would have inevitably remained a paper revolution if the urban workers had not stirred into actionthe rural proletariat, the poor peasants, the working peasants,who constitute the vast majority. 
 Like the middle peas -ants, they do not exploit the labour of others and are not interested in exploitation. 
 They are therefore capable of advancing, and have already advanced, beyond the jointstruggle against the landowners to the general proletarianstruggle against capital, against the rule of the exploiters,who rely on the power of money and property. 
 They haveprogressed from sweeping Russia clean of landowners to establishing a socialist system. 
 This, comrades, was an extremely difficult step to take. 
 Those who doubted the socialist character of our revolution prophesied that this is where we were bound to slip up. 
 Today, however, socialist construction in the countryside depends entirely on this step. 
 The formation of the Poor Peasants’ Committees, their wide network throughout Russia,their coming conversion, which in part has already begun,into fully competent rural Soviets that will have to put thefundamental principles of Soviet organisation, the powerof the working people, into effect in the rural districts, con -stitute a real guarantee that we have gone further than thetasks to which ordinary bourgeois -democratic revolutions in West -European countries confined themselves. 
 We have destroyed the monarchy and the medieval power of the land -owners, and we are now getting down to the real work ofbuilding socialism. 
 This is the most difficult but at the same time the most important and very rewarding work in the countryside. 
 We have got through to the working peasantsright in the villages; the wave of capitalist revolts hascompletely turned them against the capitalist class; thepeasants in the Poor Peasants’ Committees and in the Sovietswhich are now undergoing changes are more and more join -ing forces with the urban workers. 
 In all this we see thesole, yet true and undoubtedly permanent guarantee thatsocialist development in Russia has now become more stable,and has now acquired a basis among the vast mass of theagricultural population. 
 There is no doubt that building socialism is a very dif -ficult job in a peasant country like Russia. 
 There is nodoubt that it was comparatively easy to sweep away anenemy like tsarism, the power of the landowners, the landedestates. 
 At the centre the job could be done in a few days;throughout the country it could be done in a few weeks. 
But, by its very nature, the task we are now tackling can be accomplished only by extremely persistent and sustained effort. 
 Here we shall have to fight our way step by step, inchby inch. 
 We shall have to fight for every achievement towin a new, socialist Russia; we shall have to fight for collec -tive farming. 
 It goes without saying that a revolution of this kind, the transition from small individual peasant farms to collective farming, will take some time and can certainly not be accom -plished at one stroke. 
 We know very well that in countries where small peasant farming prevails the transition to socialism cannot be effected except by a series of gradual, preliminary stages. 
 In the light of this, the first aim set by the October Revo -lution was merely to overthrow and destroy the landowners’power. 
 The February fundamental law on the socialisationof the land, which, as you know, was passed unanimouslyboth by Communists and the non -Communist partners of the Soviet government, was at the same time an expression of the conscious will of the vast majority of the peasants andproof that the working class, the workers’ CommunistParty, aware of their task, are persistently and patientlyadvancing towards the new socialist construction—advanc -ing by a series of gradual measures, by awakening the working peasants, and forging ahead only in step with that awakening, only insofar as the peasants are indepen -dently organised. 
 We fully realise that such tremendous changes in the lives of tens of millions of people as the transition from smallindividual peasant farming to collective farming, affecting as they do the most deep -going roots of the peasants’ way of life and their mores, can only be accomplished by longeffort, and only when necessity compels people to reshapetheir lives. 
 After the long and desperate world war, we call clearly discern the beginnings of a socialist revolution all over the world. 
 This has become a necessity for even the more backward countries and—irrespective of any theoreticalviews or socialist doctrines—is emphatically bringing ithome to everybody that it is impossible to live in the oldway. 
 The country has suffered tremendous ruin and disruption, and we see this disruption spreading all over the world, we see many centuries of man’s cultural, scientific and techno -logical achievements swept away in these four years ofcriminal, destructive and predatory war, and the whole ofEurope, not merely Russia alone, returning to a state ofbarbarism. 
 Now, all common people, particularly the peas -ants, who have probably suffered most from the war, arecoming to realise clearly enough that tremendous effortsare required, that every ounce of energy must be exerted to get rid of the legacy of this accursed war which has left us nothing but ruin and want. 
 It is impossible to live in the old way, in the way we lived before the war, and the waste of human toil and effort associated with individual small -scale peasant farming cannot continue. 
 The productivityof labour would be doubled or trebled, there would be adouble or triple saving of human labour in agriculture andhuman activity in general if a transition were made from this scattered small -scale farming to collective farming. 
 The ruination left by the war simply does not allow us to restore the old small -scale peasant farms. 
 Not only have the mass of the peasants been awakened by the war, not onlyhas the war shown them what technical marvels now existand how these marvels have been adapted for people’s extermination, but it has also given rise to the idea that these technical marvels must be used primarily to reshapeagriculture, the most common form of production in thecountry, in which the greatest number of people are engaged,but which at the same time is the most backward. 
 Not onlyhas this idea been provoked, but the monstrous horrors of modern warfare have made people realise what forces modern technology has created, how these forces are wasted inawful and senseless war, and that it is the forces of technol -ogy themselves that are the only means of salvation fromsuch horrors. 
 It is our obligation and duty to use these forcesto give new life to the most backward form of production, agriculture, to reshape it, and to transform it from production conducted in the old, unenlightened way, into productionbased on science and technical achievements. 
 The war hasmade people realise this much more than any of us can imag -ine. 
 But besides this the war has also made it impossibleto restore production in the old way. 
 Those who cherish the hope that after this war the pre -war situation can be restored, that the old system and farming methods can be resumed, are mistaken and are comingto realise their mistake more and more every day. 
 The warhas resulted in such terrible ruin that some small farms nowpossess no draught animals or implements. 
 We cannot allow the waste of people’s labour to continue. 
 The poor peasants, who have borne the greatest sacrifices for the revolution andsuffered most from the war, did not take the land from the landowners for it to fall into the hands of new kulaks. 
 The latest developments are now confronting these peasants with the question of turning to collective farming as the only means of restoring the agriculture that has been ruinedand destroyed by the war. 
 This is the only means of escapingfrom ignorance and oppression to which capitalism doomedthe entire rural population, due to which the capitalistswere able for four years to burden mankind with war and from which the working people of all countries are now striv -ing with revolutionary energy and fervour to rid themselves at all costs. 
 These, comrades, are the conditions that were required on a world scale for this most difficult and at the same timemost important socialist reform, this crucial and fundamen -tal socialist measure, to come to the forefront, and it hascome to the forefront in Russia. 
 The formation of the PoorPeasants’ Committees and this joint Congress of land depart -ments, Poor Peasants’ Committees and agriculturalcommunes, taken in conjunction with the struggle which tookplace in the countryside this summer and autumn, go to show that very many peasants have been awakened, and that the peasants themselves, the majority of the working peasants,are striving toward collective farming. 
 Of course, I repeat,we must tackle this great reform gradually. 
 Here, nothingcan be done at one stroke. 
 But I must remind you that thefundamental law on the socialisation of the land, whose adoption was a foregone conclusion on the first day after the Revolution of October 25, at the very first session of thefirst organ of Soviet power, the Second All -Russia Congress of Soviets, did more than abolish private ownership of landforever and do away with landed estates. 
 It also stipulated,among other things, that farm property, draught animals and farm implements which passed into the possession of the nation and the working peasants should become publicproperty and cease to be the private property of individualfarms. 
 And on the fundamental question of our present aims,of what tasks of land disposal we want carried out, and whatwe want from the supporters of the Soviet government, the working peasants, in this respect, Article 11 of the law on the socialisation of the land, which was adopted in Feb -ruary 1918, states that the aim is to develop collective farming, the most advantageous form of farming from the point of view of economy of labour and products. 
 This will be at the expense of individual farming and with the aim of passing over to socialist farming. 
 Comrades, when we passed this law, complete agreement did not exist between the Communists and the otherparties. 
 On the contrary, we passed this law when theSoviet Government united the Communists and the Left S. 
R. 
 Party members, who did not hold communist views. 
 Nevertheless, we arrived at a unanimous decision, to whichwe adhere to this day, remembering, I repeat, that the tran -sition from individual farming to collective farming cannotbe effected at one stroke, and that the struggle which devel -oped in the towns was resolved more easily. 
 In the towns thousands of workers had one capitalist to deal with, and it did not take much trouble to remove him. 
 The strugglewhich developed in the rural districts, however, was muchmore complex. 
 At first there was the general drive of thepeasants against the landowners; at first the power of thelandowners was utterly destroyed so that it could never be restored again. 
 This was followed by a struggle among the peasants themselves, among whom new capitalists arose inthe shape of the kulaks, the exploiters and profiteers whoused their surplus grain to enrich themselves at the expenseof the starving non -agricultural parts of Russia. 
 Here a new struggle began, and you know that this summer it led to a number of revolts. 
 We do not say of the kulak as we do of the capitalist landowner that he must be deprived of all hisproperty. 
 What we do say is that we must break the kulak’sresistance to indispensable measures, such as the grainmonopoly, which he is violating to enrich himself by sellinghis grain surplus at exorbitant prices, while the workers and peasants in the non -agricultural areas are suffering pangs of hunger. 
 Our policy here has been to wage astruggle as merciless as that waged against the landownersand capitalists. 
 But there also remained the question of theattitude of the poor peasants to the middle peasants. 
 Ourpolicy has always been to form an alliance with the middle peasant. 
 He is no enemy of Soviet institutions. 
 He is no enemy of the proletariat or socialism. 
 He will, of course,hesitate and only consent to socialism when he sees by definite and convincing example that it is necessary. 
 The middle peasant, of course, cannot be convinced by theoreti -cal arguments or by agitation. 
 And we do not count on that. 
But he can be convinced by the example and the solid frontof the poor peasants. 
 He can be convinced by an allianceof the poor peasants with the proletariat. 
 And here we arecounting on a prolonged and gradual process of persuasionand on a number of transitional measures which will bring about agreement between the proletarian, socialist section of the population, agreement between the Com -munists who are conducting a resolute fight against capitalin all its forms, and the middle peasants. 
 Appreciating this state of affairs and that our task in the rural areas is incomparably more difficult, we present the question in the way it was presented in the law on the social -isation of the land. 
 You know that the law proclaimed abo -lition of private ownership of land and equal land tenure, and you know that the enforcement of this law was begun inthat spirit, and that it has been put into effect in the major -ity of rural areas. 
 The law, moreover, contains, with the unanimous consent both of Communists and of people who at that time did not yet share communist views, the thesisI have just read to you, which declares that our common taskand our common aim is the transition to socialist farming,to collective land tenure and collective farming. 
 As weproceed with our construction, both the peasants who have already settled on the land and the prisoners of war who are now returning from captivity in thousands and millions,ragged and exhausted, are coming to realise more and moreclearly the vast scope of the work that must be done torestore agriculture and free the peasant for ever from his old,neglected, downtrodden and ignorant state. 
 It is becoming clearer to them that the only sure way of escape, one that will bring the mass of peasants nearer to a civilised lifeand put them on a par with other citizens, is collectivefarming, which the Soviet government is now systematicallystriving to put into effect by gradual measures. 
 It is for thispurpose, for collective farming, that the communes and state farms are being formed. 
 The importance of this type of farming is indicated in the law on the socialisation of theland. 
 In the clause stating who is entitled to the use of the land, you will find that among the persons and institutions so entitled first place is given to the state, second to public organisations, third to agricultural communes, and fourth to agricultural co -operative societies. 
 I again draw your attention to the fact that these fundamental principles ofthe law on the socialisation of the land were laid down whenthe Communist Party was carrying out not only its own will,but when it made deliberate concessions to those who in one way or another expressed the ideas and will of the middle peasants. 
 We made such concessions, and are still makingthem. 
 We concluded and are concluding agreements of thiskind because the transition to the collective form of landown -ership, to collective farming, to state farms, to communes,cannot be effected at one stroke. 
 It requires the determined and persistent action of the Soviet government, which has assigned one thousand million rubles for the improve -ment of agriculture on condition that collective farming isadopted. 
 This law shows that we want to influence the massof middle peasants mainly by force of example, by invitingthem to improve farming, and that we count only on the grad -ual effect of such measures to bring about this profound andcrucial revolution in agricultural production in Russia. 
 The alliance of the Poor Peasants’ Committees, agricul -tural communes and land departments at the present Con -gress shows us, and gives us full assurance, that by thistransition to collective farming we have got things going correctly, on a truly socialist scale. 
 This steady and sys -tematic work must ensure an increase in the productivity of labour. 
 For this purpose we must adopt the best farmingmethods and enlist the farm specialists of Russia so that wemay be able to put the best organised farms at our service,which hitherto served as a source of enrichment for indi -viduals, as the source of capitalist revival, as the source ofa new bondage and a new enslavement of wage -labourers, but which now, under the socialisation of land law and thecomplete abolition of private ownership of land, must serveas a source of agricultural knowledge and culture and ofhigher productivity for the millions of working people. 
 This alliance between the urban workers and the working peasants, the formation of the Poor Peasants’ Committeesand their merger with the Soviets are a guarantee that agricultural Russia has taken a path which is being taken by one West -European state after another, later than us, but with greater certainty. 
 It has much harder for them to start the revolution because their enemy is not a rottenautocracy, but a highly cultured and united capitalistclass. 
 But, as you know, this revolution has begun. 
 Youknow that the revolution has not been confined to Russia,and that our chief hope, our chief support, is the proletariat of the more advanced countries of Western Europe, and that this chief support of the world revolution has begun to move. 
And we are firmly convinced, and the course of the Germanrevolution has shown it in practice, that the transition tosocialist farming there, the use of more advanced agricul -tural techniques and the union of the agricultural popula -tion will proceed more rapidly and easily than in our country. 
 In alliance with the urban workers and the socialist proletariat of the whole world, the working peasants ofRussia can now be certain they will overcome all theiradversities, beat off all the attacks of the imperialists, andaccomplish that without which the emancipation of the work -ing people is impossible—collective farming, the gradualbut steady transition from small individual farms tocollective farming. 
 ( Loud , prolonged applause . 
) Pravda No. 
 272, Published according to December 14, 1918 the Pravda text ROUG H DRAF T OF RULES FOR THE ADMINISTRATIO N OF SOVIET INSTITUTION S144 1 Collective discussion and decision of all questions of administration in Soviet institutions must be accompanied by the precisely defined responsibility of every person holding any Soviet post for the performance of definite , and clearly and explicitly specified, functions and practical jobs. 
 Henceforth, this rule, without which it will be impossible to select the most suitable people for each office andjob or to exercise effective control, must be unreservedly obeyed . 
 Accordingly, every Soviet body and every Soviet insti -tution without exception shall immediately: First, adopt a decision precisely distributing the work and responsibilities among all their members or officials; Second, define the exact responsibility of all persons entrusted with the performance of any duties whatever,especially such as concern the speedy and proper collectionand distribution of materials and products. 
 This rule is binding on all Soviet institutions, and in particular on local, uyezd, urban and other EconomicCouncils and Economic Departments of Executive Committees. 
 Such Departments and Economic Councils shall im -mediately assign responsibility to definite persons for thespeedy and proper collection of each of the raw materials and products needed by the population. 
 All leading Soviet bodies—Executive Committees, gu -bernia and city Soviets, etc. 
—shall immediately reorganise their work with a view to giving prime place to effective control for actual fulfilment of the decisions of the central authorities and of local institutions. 
 Other kinds of work are to be turned over, as far as possible, to sub -committees consisting of a small number of members of the given body. 
 2 With a view to eliminating red tape and to the more effective disclosure of abuses, and also to the exposure andremoval of dishonest officials ensconced in Soviet institutions,the following rules are hereby established: Every Soviet institution shall post notices of its reception days and hours outside as well as inside its premises, forall to see without having to obtain passes. 
 The premisesassigned for the reception of the public shall be freely acces -sible without any passes whatever. 
 Every Soviet institution shall keep a register for recording in brief the name of every visitor, the nature of his business, and to whom it has been entrusted. 
 Sundays and holidays shall be reception days. 
State Control officials shall have the right to be present at all receptions, and it shall be their duty to attend fromtime to time during reception hours, to examine the visi -tors’ register, and to draw up a report of their visit and theresult of their examination of the register and interrogationof the public. 
 The Commissariats of Labour, State Control and Justice shall everywhere organise information bureaus, which shallbe open to all without passes and free of charge, reception on Sundays being compulsory; the said Commissariats shall widely announce to the public the days and hours thebureaus are open. 
 It shall be the duty of these information bureaus, not only to give all information requested, orally or in writing, butalso to draw up written declarations free of charge for persons who are illiterate or unable to draw up such declarations properly themselves. 
 It shall be obligatory to enlist theservices for work on these bureaus of members of all parties represented on the Soviets, as well as of parties which are not represented in the government, and also members of the non -party trade unions and non -party unions of intel -lectuals. 
 3 The task of defending the Soviet Republic imperatively calls for the greatest economy of forces and the most produc -tive utilisation of manpower. 
 With these ends in view it is ordered—in the first place in regard to all Soviet institutions, later to be extended toevery enterprise and body—that: 1. 
 Every more or less independent department of every Soviet institution without exception shall within three days submit to the local Executive Committee (and in Moscow to the People’s Commissariat of Justice as well) brief infor -mation on the following: (a) name of institution; (b) nameof department; (c) nature of its work, in brief; (d) number ofsub -departments, sections, or other divisions, with a list of such; (e) number of employees, male and female; (f) volume of work, calculated as far as possible, for example, in number of cases handled, volume of correspondence, orother indices. 
 Local Executive Committees (in Moscow, the Executive Committee of the Soviet of Workers’, Soldiers’ and Peasants’Deputies in agreement with the People’s Commissariat of Justice and the Presidium of the Central Executive Com -mittee) shall immediately: (1) take measures to verify whether the above rule is being promptly and properlyobserved; (2) draw up within one week after the aforesaidinformation has been received a plan for coordinating,uniting and merging departments which are engaged in similar or kindred affairs. 
 The commissions which the above -mentioned institutions charge with this task shall include representatives of theDepartments for the Interior, Justice, State Control andLabour, as well as of other departments, if need be. 
 Thecommissions shall submit to the Council of People’s Com -missars and the Presidium of the Central Executive Commit -tee brief weekly reports on what has been done to merge kindred departments and to economise labour. 
 2. 
 In every town in which there are kindred departments or institutions—central, regional, town, gubernia or uyezd— the highest institution shall immediately set up a commis -sion for the purpose of coordinating and amalgamating all these institutions, with a view to the maximum economy offorces; this commission to be guided by the rules andschedule indicated in Clause 1. 
 3. 
 These same commissions (clauses 1 and 2) are instruct -ed, and on the same grounds, to take urgent measures tosubstitute female labour for male labour to the utmost andto draw up a list of males who can be transferred to work inthe army or for the army, or to other work of an operativeand practical and not of an office nature. 
 4. 
 These same commissions (clauses 1 and 2) are instruct -ed, in agreement with the local organisations of the Rus -sian Communist Party, to make such alteration in staffsas to leave members of the R. 
C. 
P. 
 (of not less than two years’standing) only in leading and responsible posts; all otherposts to be filled by non -Party people, or by members of other parties so as to release as large a number of members of the R. 
C. 
P. 
 as possible for other work. 
 Written December 12, 1918 Published according to First published in 1928the manuscript DRAFT DECISION OF THE CENTRAL COMMITTEE OF THE RUSSIAN COMMUNIST PARTY (BOLSHEVIKS ) All organisations of the R. 
C. 
P. 
 shall within one week of publication of the present decision of the Central Commit -tee of the R. 
C. 
P. 
 enter on all membership and registrationcards the date on which the respective members joined the Bolshevik Party. 
 In the absence of this information, and if it is impossible to obtain (and to have it verified and signed by not less thanthree members of the R. 
C. 
P. 
 of two years’ standing and over), such membership or registration cards shall be marked: “Date of joining the Party unknown. 
” Every member of the R. 
C. 
P. 
 holding any Soviet post must immediately make a brief entry into his membershipcard stating what parties he belonged to, or was associatedwith, over the past five years, the entry to be certified by the chairman or secretary of his Party organisation. 
 Written December 12, 1918 Published according to First published in 1928the manuscript SPEECH AT PRESNYA DISTRICT WORKERS ’ CONFERENCE DECEMBER 14, 1918 Comrades, I am going to examine a couple of questions fixed for discussion today. 
 The first concerns the interna -tional situation and the second our attitude to the petty -bourgeois democratic parties. 
 First a few words about the international situation. 
 As you know, the British, French and American imperialistshave declared a grand campaign against the Russian So -viet Republic. 
 These imperialists are carrying on agitationagainst Russia among their workers, accusing the Bolshe -viks of flouting the majority and being propped up by aminority. 
 Since the vast majority of papers in France andBritain belong to the bourgeoisie, these lies against the SovietGovernment spread quickly and freely. 
 That is why it is not worth even bothering about such a ridiculous and crude story that the Bolsheviks are backed by the minority of thepeople in Russia. 
 It is a story that is not even worth refutingbecause everyone who knows anything about what is goingon here realises how ridiculous it is. 
 Yet when you look atthe British, French and American papers—and, by the way, we only get the bourgeois papers here—you see the bour -geoisie are still spreading these tales. 
 The only people who have no voting rights and no right to take part in or influence the country’s political life areexploiters, those who exploit the labour of others and do notwork themselves. 
 There are only a handful of such people among the population. 
 You can just imagine how many people are exploiting hired labour in the towns. 
 Private owner -ship of the land is no more. 
 The landowners have been deprived of their estates and the homesteaders,145 who were still rob -bing the peasants under Stolypin, have had their land taken away. 
 The number of those exploiting other people’s labour in the countryside is negligible too. 
 But the Soviet govern -ment has not told them it will take their vote away. 
 Ithas said that we recognise anyone’s right to participate inadministration if he wants to stop exploiting other people’slabour. 
 If you want to be a worker, God bless you. 
 If you want to be an exploiter, we shall not only disfranchise you, but we shan’t let you feed off someone else’s labour. 
 From these fundamentals of our Constitution it is apparent that the Soviet government relies on those who work andoffers them the right to run the country. 
 The government isrelying on the vast, overwhelming majority of the people. 
 Every Soviet congress, and there have been six so far, shows us that the workers’, peasants’ and -Red Army representa -tives, representatives of the majority of people who live bytheir own and not someone else’s labour, constitute anincreasingly solid foundation for the Soviet government. 
 TheFirst Congress of Soviets was held in June 1917, when Russia was a bourgeois republic engaged in an imperialist war. 
 It took place in the June of 1917 when Kerensky was drivingthe troops on to the offensive and millions were killed inbattle. 
 At that Congress the number of Communists or Bol -sheviks was only 13 per cent, that is one -seventh. 
 At the Second Congress of Soviets which paved the way for the workers’ and peasants’ government, the Bolsheviks had jumped to 51 per cent, a half. 
 And at the Fifth Congress thisJuly the Bolsheviks had 66 per cent. 
 It was then that theLeft S. 
R. 
s, seeing how quickly Bolshevism was growing,tried their rash action and in so doing split apart completely. 
Three different parties arose from this split, of which the last one, the Narodnik Communists, came over to the Bol -sheviks along with a whole number of prominent individ -uals like Kolegayev. 
 At the Sixth Congress, the Bolsheviks had 97 per cent, that is, practically all representatives of the workers andpeasants of the whole of Russia. 
 This is an indication of the present unity of the vast majority of working people around the Soviet government, and how stupid and ridic -ulous is the bourgeoisie’s fairy -tale about the Bolsheviks only having minority support. 
 The bourgeoisie lie like they do because of the 17 thousand million debt of the tsarist government to the capitalists, the 17 thousand million debt which we repudiated and refused to pay. 
 We don’t intendto pay for the old rulers. 
 We recognise that the debts havebeen incurred but we say: “Fair enough, you made the debt,you settle up among yourselves. 
” The allies want to gettheir own back on us for the debt and restore the power of the landowners and the tsar. 
 We know what they did in Archangel, Samara and Siberia. 
 There, even the Mensheviksand Right S. 
R. 
s. 
, who were antagonistic after the Brest -Litovsk Peace Treaty and thought we were wrong to counton a German revolution, are now convinced of being drivenout and of private property and the landowners being restored with the aid of British and Czech troops. 
 Even though the British and French papers hide the truth, it seems to be making some headway. 
 The workers sense andrealise that the revolution in Russia is theirs, a working -man’s, socialist revolution. 
 Even in France and Britain thelabour movement is now carrying such slogans as “With -draw the forces from Russia!” and “He who makes war against Russia is a criminal!” A socialist rally was recently held inLondon’s Albert Hall and according to information received,which the British Government tried hard to repress, therally demanded “Withdraw the forces from Russia!” and allthe workers’ leaders condemned the government policy as robbery and violence. 
 We also have news that Maclean, who was a Scottish schoolmaster at one time, called the workersout on strike in the principal industrial districts, condemn -ing the war as a war of plunder. 
 He had been in prisonearlier. 
 Then he was put in again. 
 But when the revolutionarymovement flared up in Europe, Maclean was let out and he put up as parliamentary candidate in Glasgow, one of the biggest cities in the North of England and Scotland. 
 Thisshows that the British labour movement and its revolu -tionary demands are having a bigger impact. 
 The BritishGovernment was forced to set Maclean free, its rabid enemy,a man who is proud to call himself a British Bolshevik. 
 In France, where the workers are still affected by chau -vinism, and where they still think the war is being waged only for the defence of the country, a revolutionary mood is growing. 
 Now, when Britain and France have beaten the Germans, they, as you know, have presented them with terms a hundred times harsher than those of the Brest -Litovsk Peace Treaty. 
 Today, revolution in Europe has become a reality. 
 The Allies, who boasted they were bringingGermany freedom from the Kaiser and militarism, havefallen to the role once played by the Russian troops inNicholas I’s time, when Russia was in the dark, when Nicholas I drove the Russian troops to stifle the Hungarian revolution. 
 That was under serfdom over 60 years ago. 
 Yet today, freeBritain and other countries have turned into hangmen andthink they are strong enough to stifle the revolution andrepress the truth. 
 But this truth will overcome all theobstacles both in France and Britain, and the workers will realise they have been deceived and inveigled into a war for robbing another country, and not for freeing France orBritain. 
 From France we now hear there are people inthe Socialist Party, which had previously supported defenceof the fatherland, who warmly welcome the Soviet Repub -lic and protest against military intervention in Russia. 
 On the other hand, the British and French imperialists are menacing Russia and giving support to the Krasnovs andDutovs, helping to restore the monarchy and thinkingthey can deceive a free nation. 
 We know that militarily theimperialists are stronger than us. 
 We knew about it andsaid so ages ago. 
 We appealed to everyone to aid the Red Army so as to bar the way to and repel the robbers and plun -derers. 
 When people say: “If British and French imperialism is stronger, what’s the sense in fighting?” we reply: “Do youremember the Brest -Litovsk Treaty? Didn’t the whole Russian bourgeoisie shout that the Bolsheviks were sellingRussia to the Germans? Didn’t they shout then that the Bolsheviks were hoping for a miracle in banking on a German revolution?” The German imperialists were thenmuch stronger than us and had every chance of plunderingRussia because we had no army. 
 The old army could notand would not fight because people were so exhausted by thewar that they just could not summon up the strength to fight. 
 Everyone who knows what happened then realises that we could not defend ourselves and it looked like Russiawas going to fall into the hands of the Kaiser’s henchmen. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR Yet, a few months later, the Germans had got themselves into such a mess in this same Russia and met such resistance, had so much trouble with the agitation among the German soldiers that now, as I was told by Zinoviev, Chairman ofthe Northern Commune in Petrograd, the German consulsaid as the German representatives were making off: “Nowit’s hard to tell who gained more, you or we. 
” He realisedthat the German soldiers, who had been so much stronger than us, had been infected by the Bolshevik disease. 
 And Germany today is in the grip of a revolution, there is a battlegoing on for Soviet power. 
 The Brest -Litovsk Treaty, which had been declared the complete downfall of the Bolsheviks,turned out to be only a stepping stone to our present posi -tion. 
 Having fortified ourselves we have now begun to form a Red Army. 
 Yet the German soldiers have been infected by Bolshevism and the apparent victories turned out to be onlya step to the complete downfall of German imperialism, anintermediate rung towards extending and developing theworld revolution. 
 We were alone at the time of the Brest -Litovsk Treaty. 
 All Europe looked on the Russian revolution as an exception -al affair, they regarded our revolution as an “Asiatic revo -lution”, which began so hastily and toppled the tsar just because Russia was a backward country, and quickly movedon to take away property and to a socialist revolution becauseof this backwardness. 
 But they forgot the other reason behind the Russian revolution: Russia had no alternative. 
 The war had caused such destruction and starvation every -where, made the people and soldiers so weary, they realisedthey had been tricked for so long, and that the only way outfor Russia was revolution. 
 The Germans were told they had to defend themselves against the Russian invasion. 
 And now this lie is being nailed with every passing day. 
 The German capitalists and generalscontinued to lead their troops against Russia even when thecountry had become socialist. 
 This made it quite clear toeven the dimmest German soldier that he had been trickedfor the whole four years and sent to war so that the German capitalists could plunder Russia. 
 The same thing that brought the downfall of German imperialism, and the revolu -tion in Germany, is with every passing day and hour bringing the revolution closer in France, Britain and other coun -tries. 
 We were alone. 
 Now we are not. 
 Today, there is a revolution in Berlin, Austria, Hungary; even in Switzerland, Holland and Denmark, free countries that were not touchedby the war, the revolutionary movement is growing and theworkers are demanding that Soviets be formed. 
 Now itseems there is no alternative. 
 Revolution is maturing allover the world. 
 We were the first and we must defend the revolution until our allies, the workers of all Europe, catch us up. 
 The further their governments get into the mire, thecloser these allies will be to us. 
 When at the time of the Brest -Litovsk Treaty the Germans thought they were the masters, they were only a step awayfrom their doom. 
 And today, Britain and France, by impos -ing peace terms on the Germans which are far harsher andmore despicable than those Germany foisted on us, are stand -ing on the edge of a precipice. 
 No matter how much theylie, they are now only a few steps away from their doom. 
They are scared stiff of this doom, their lies are being increas -ingly exposed as the days go by. 
 We say this: however much these imperialists lie in their newspapers, our cause is sound, much sounder than theirs because it is backed bythe class -consciousness of the mass of workers everywhere; this class -consciousness was born of the war, which bled the whole world white for four years. 
 The old governmentswill not enter God’s world from this war. 
 The old governments now say they are against world Bolshevism. 
 The workers know what is going on in Russia: the landownersand capitalists are being hounded out, and are calling hire -lings, alien soldiers to the rescue. 
 The situation is now clearto everyone. 
 Workers everywhere realise what is going on. 
And despite the whole savagery and bitterness of the impe -rialists, we courageously go into battle with them in theawareness that every step they take inside Russia will bea step towards their doom, and that they will fare no betterthan the German soldiers who brought Bolshevism backfrom the Ukraine instead of bread. 
 Power in Russia is now in the hands of the working people; if they lose it, nobody will ever be able to heal the wounds caused by this bloody, terrible war! To leave power in thehands of the old capitalists would mean that the whole burden of war would have to be shouldered by the work -ing people, who would have to pay the entire cost. 
 Britain? America and Japan are now fighting for a share of the spoils. 
 Everything has been divided. 
 Wilson isPresident of the world’s most democratic republic. 
 But whatis he saying? People there are shot in the streets by jingoistcrowds for one word in favour of peace. 
 A clergyman whohad never been a revolutionary was dragged out into the street and severely beaten for preaching peace. 
 Where the wildest terror reigns troops are now being used to crushthe revolution, to threaten suppression of the German revo -lution. 
 The revolution in Germany broke out just recently,only a month ago; the burning issue there is a ConstituentAssembly or Soviet government. 
 All the bourgeoisie there are for the Constituent Assembly, and all the socialists— those who served the Kaiser as lackeys, who did not darestart a revolutionary war—they, too, want a ConstituentAssembly. 
 Germany is split into two camps. 
 The socialistsnow favour the Constituent Assembly, while Liebknecht,who spent three years in prison, stands, like Rosa Luxem -burg, at the head of Die Rote Fahne . 
146 An issue of the news -paper was received in Moscow yesterday. 
 It had a very difficult and eventful journey. 
 In it you will find a numberof articles—all the authors, who are revolutionary leaders,describe how the bourgeoisie are cheating the people. 
 Free -dom in Germany was in the hands of the capitalists. 
 They published only their own newspapers, and now Die Rote Fahne says that only the workers have the right to use national wealth. 
 Although the revolution in Germany isonly a month old, the country is split into two camps. 
 All thetraitor socialists are clamouring for a Constituent Assembly,while the genuine, honest socialists are saying: “We all stand for the power of the workers and the soldiers. 
” They are not saying “and the peasants”, because in Germany manypeasants also hire labourers, and so they are saying “for theworkers and the soldiers”. 
 They say instead “for the smallpeasants”. 
 Soviet power there has already become a form ofgovernment. 
 Soviet government is a world -wide government. 
 It is replacing the old bourgeois state. 
 A republic as well as amonarchy is a form of the bourgeoisie’s robbery of the people if the capitalists are left with their property—the factories, banks and print -shops. 
 The Bolsheviks were right when they said the world revolution was growing. 
 It develops differ -ently in different countries. 
 It takes a long time and is not very easy. 
 Any socialist who thinks the capitalists are goingto renounce their rights at once is a bad socialist. 
 No, theworld has not seen such kindly capitalists yet. 
 Socialismcan only develop through struggle with capitalism. 
 There has not yet been any ruling class which has given way with -out a fight. 
 The capitalists know what Bolshevism is. 
 They used to say: “Russian stupidity and Russian backwardnessare making some sort of hocus -pocus there, nothing will come of it. 
 They’re chasing ghosts over there in Russia. 
”But today these very same capitalist gentlemen realise this revolution is a world conflagration and only the workers’ government can triumph. 
 We are now setting up Poor Peas -ants’ Committees. 
 And in Germany most peasants are eitherfarm labourers or small farmers. 
 The big farmers are inmost cases the German brand of landowners. 
 Yesterday the Swiss Government expelled our represent -ative from the country, and we know the reason why. 
 Weknow the French and British imperialists are scared becauseour representative has every day sent us telegrams andaccounts of rallies in London at which the British workershave declared: “Down with British forces in Russia!” Hesent us news about France too. 
 The imperialists have report -edly presented the Russian representatives with an ulti -matum. 
 The Soviet government’s representatives have beenkicked out of Sweden as well and they must return toRussia. 
 But it is still too early for them to rejoice. 
 It isa barren victory. 
 This step won’t get them anywhere. 
No matter how hard the “Allies” try to hide the truth, deceive their people and get rid of representatives of Soviet Russia, the people will learn the whole truth inthe end. 
 We are calling on you to give everything you have to repulse the “Allies” and support the Red Army. 
 When wedid not have the Red Army, what happened was understand -able. 
 But now we see that the Red Army is growing strongand winning battles. 
 Our army is up against the Britishforces. 
 And our army has officers who only yesterday came up from the working class, who only yesterday had completed their military training. 
 From prisoners, we have a lot of evidence that when they read the Constitution of our Republic in English they say to themselves they have beendeceived, that Soviet Russia is not what they thought, thatthe Soviet government is a workers’ government. 
 And wesay: “Yes, comrades, we are not only fighting for SovietRussia, we are fighting for the government of workers and working people generally, the world over. 
” As long as we can contain imperialism, the German revolution will strengthen. 
Revolution will strengthen elsewhere too. 
 That is why, nomatter what names they call it in Europe, this world revo -lution has stood up to its full stature and world imperialismwill go under. 
 Our position may be difficult but we have the assurance that we are not alone in fighting for a just cause, we have allies in the workers of every country. 
 Comrades, after these remarks on our international posi -tion, I want to say a few words about other questions. 
 Iwant to talk about the petty -bourgeois parties. 
 They consid -ered themselves socialists. 
 But they are not. 
 We know full well that the institutions in capitalist society like banks, savings banks, mutual aid societies are called “mutual help”institutions, but in actual fact they are nothing of the sort,this name is a screen for robbery. 
 These parties, which madeout they were for the people, at the time when the Russianworking class was fighting off Krasnov (he was arrested by our troops and set free, unfortunately, through the magna -nimity of the Petrograders), those Menshevik and Right S. 
R. 
 gentlemen were siding with the bourgeoisie. 
 Theseparties of the petty bourgeoisie never know where to go—tothe capitalists or to the workers. 
 They are made up of peoplewho live in the hope that one day they will grow rich. 
 They constantly see that around them most small holders live badly—these are all working people. 
 So these petty -bour -geois parties, who are scattered throughout the world, havebegun to waver. 
 This isn’t new. 
 It has always been thesame, and that is how it is with us too. 
 They all forsook uswhen the Brest -Litovsk Treaty came along, the hardest time of our revolution, when we had no army and we were forced to conclude a peace treaty, saying to ourselves: we shallnot drop our socialist work for one minute. 
 It slipped their mind that Russia was making her supreme sacrifice for the socialist revolution, and they deserted to the Constituent Assembly advocates. 
 These turned up in Samara and Si -beria as well. 
 Now they are being driven away from there and shown the only choice is between the landowners’ govern -ment and the Bolsheviks’ government. 
 There is no middlecourse. 
 Either the government of the oppressed or of theoppressors. 
 All the poor peasants can only follow us. 
 And they will only come when they see we do not stand on ceremony with the old regime and are doing everything forthe good of the people. 
 That is the only government of So -viets that could have had the people’s support throughoutthe year despite the terrible conditions and famine. 
 Theworkers and peasants realise that no matter how badly the war goes, the workers’ and peasants’ government will do everything it can against the capitalist exploiters, so thatthe whole burden of the war falls on these gentlemen’sshoulders and not on the workers. 
 And there you are, theworkers’ and peasants’ government has had the people’ssupport for more than a year. 
 Today, with the beginning of the German revolution, the Mensheviks and S. 
R. 
s are starting to change round. 
 Thebest of them strove for socialism. 
 But they thought the Bol -sheviks were chasing ghosts, hoping for a miracle. 
 Nowthey are convinced that whatever the Bolsheviks expectedwas not daydreams but real life. 
 They see that the world revolution has begun and is growing throughout the world. 
 And the best people among the Mensheviks and S. 
R. 
s arebeginning to repent for their mistakes and realise that theSoviet government is not only Russian but a world -wide government of workers, and that no Constituent Assemblywill help matters. 
 Britain, France and America know that today, now that the world revolution has flared up, they have no externalenemies. 
 The enemy comes from inside every country. 
 A newbreakthrough has arrived, when the Mensheviks and RightS. 
R. 
s are starting to waver and the best of them follow theBolsheviks and see that though they swear by the Constituent Assembly they cannot help being on the side of the Whites. 
 All over the world the question now is: either Soviet poweror the power of the plunderers who have had ten million people murdered in the war, twenty million maimed, and are now continuing to plunder other countries. 
 There you have, comrades, the question which causes the petty -bourgeois democrats to waver. 
 We know these par -ties always have wavered and always will. 
 Most of thepeople get their convictions straight from their own exper -ience and have no trust in books and words. 
 We tell themiddle peasant he is not our enemy and we have no cause to oppress him. 
 And if a local Soviet somewhere or other hits the middle peasant hard and it hurts, that Soviet mustbe taken away because it does not know how to act properly. 
The middle, petty -bourgeois democrats will always waver. 
 And if they swing our way, like a pendulum, we must givethem support. 
 We tell them that if they are going to spoil our work, we don’t want them. 
 But if they are prepared to help us, we shall accept them. 
 There are different groupsamong the Mensheviks, there is the group of “activists”which includes all those who have said: “It’s about time westopped criticising only and helped by action. 
” We have saidwe shall fight the Czechs and whoever helps them will be dealt with ruthlessly. 
 But when there are people who have seen their mistake, we must accept them and treatthem with leniency. 
 The person who stands in the middlebetween the worker and the capitalist will always waver. 
He thought the Soviet government would not last long. 
 Buthe thought wrong. 
 European imperialism cannot bring down our government. 
 Revolution is now spreading all over the world. 
 And we invite those who wavered and now seeand understand their error, to come over to us. 
 We won’tturn them away. 
 We must above all see to it that all thesepeople, no matter what they were before, whether theywavered or not, as long as they are sincere, come over to us. 
 We are now strong enough not to be afraid of anyone. 
 We can stomach them all. 
 But they cannot stomach us. 
 Justremember that these parties are bound to waver. 
 Today thependulum swings one way, tomorrow the other. 
 We mustremain the proletarian party of workers and oppressed. 
 Butwe are now in charge of the whole of Russia and our only enemy is the person who lives by another’s labour. 
 The others are not our enemies. 
 They are only waverers. 
 But waverersare not yet enemies. 
 Now, one more question. 
 Food. 
 As you all know, the food situation, which had improved somewhat in the autumn, is again on the decline. 
 People are starving once more and things will be worse by the spring. 
 Our rail transport isnow very much in a mess. 
 On top of everything, it is over -burdened with prisoners of war coming home. 
 Two millionmen are on their way home from Germany. 
 These two millionare utterly worn out. 
 They have starved terribly. 
 They are not people, but shadows, skeletons of people. 
 Our transport suffered more from the fighting at home. 
 There are no steamengines, and no carriages. 
 And the food situation is gettingreally bad. 
 In view of the seriousness of the situation, theCouncil of People’s Commissars said to itself: We now havean army and discipline established by Party cells which exist in each regiment. 
 The majority of officers are now from the workers and not sons of the rich. 
 If these officers now appre -ciate that the working class must find people to run thecountry, and Red officers too, then the socialist army willreally be socialist with officer personnel renovated by thepresence of Red officers. 
 We know the breakthrough has now arrived. 
 We have an army. 
 It has a new discipline. 
 The dis -cipline is maintained by the Party cells, workers and commis -sars who went to the front in their hundreds of thousands explaining to the workers and peasants what the war was allabout. 
 That is why the breakthrough started in our army. 
That is why it has had such a great effect. 
 The British papers are saying they are now running up against a serious foe in Russia. 
 We are very well aware of the poor apparatus we have for procuring and distributing food supplies. 
 Certain groupsof people have wormed their way in who are swindling androbbing. 
 We know, too, that among the railway workers all those who are shouldering the whole burden of the work are on the side of the Soviet government. 
 But up top they backthe old regime, are either causing sabotage or not workingwith a will. 
 Comrades, you know this war is revolutionary. 
Every force in the country must be summoned for this war. 
The whole country must be turned into a revolutionary camp. 
 Everyone must help. 
 By help we do not only mean that everyone should go to the front, but that the class of ourstate which is leading everyone to freedom, and which is the Soviet government’s support, should run the country because it alone has the right to do so. 
 We appreciate the difficulties resulting from the working class having been kept away both from administration and education for so long. 
 We appre -ciate the difficulties of the workers in learning everythingat once. 
 Nevertheless, in military matters, the most difficultand dangerous of all, it was the working class which effectedthe breakthrough. 
 The politically -conscious working class must help us to make the same sort of breakthrough with food supplies and the railways. 
 Every railwayman and everyfood worker should regard himself as a soldier performing hisduty. 
 He should remember that he is fighting a war onhunger. 
 He must throw off his former bureaucratic habits. 
The other day we passed a decree on forming a workers’ food inspection. 
 We told ourselves that we need the workers’ participation to bring about a breakthrough in the railwayapparatus, to make a type of Red Army out of it. 
 Call onyour people. 
 Rig up courses, teach them, make them commis -sars. 
 Only they, if they give us their staff, can turn the armyof old civil servants into some sort of Red Socialist Army responsible for provisions, an army led by workers and work -ing not under the lash but of their own free will, just like the Red officers are fighting and dying at the front, in theknowledge that they die for a socialist republic. 
 Brief report published in Pravda No. 
 275, December 18, 1918 First published in full in Published according to the fourth Russian edition the verbatim report of Lenin’s Collected Works TELEGRAM TO THE SAMARA UKRAINIANS Samara, Gubernia Military Commissar for Samara Ukrainians Consider it necessary to inform you in reply to telegram sent by Samara Ukrainians that in view of influx of Ukrai -nian volunteers and abundance of conscripts in Ukraineitself still without arms, Workers’ and Peasants’ Govern -ment of Ukraine considers it unnecessary to call up Ukrai -nians in Russia and despatch them to Ukraine. 
 In name ofCouncil of People’s Commissars propose you stop sendingUkrainian units to Ukraine. 
 Lenin , Stalin Written December 16 or 17, 1918 First published in 1942 Published according to the telegram The few numbers of the Berlin Red Banner and the Vienna Call (Weckru f),147 organ of the Communist Party of German Austria, that have reached Moscow, show that the traitors to socialism—those who supported the war of the predatory imperialists—the Scheidemanns and Eberts, Austerlitzes and Renners—are getting the rebuff they deserve from the genuine representatives of the revolu -tionary workers of Germany and Austria. 
 We extend warm greetings to both papers, which epitomise the vitality and growth of the Third International. 
 Apparently the chief question of the revolution both in Germany and Austria now is: Constituent Assembly or Soviet government? The spokesmen of the bankrupt Second International, all the way from Scheidemann to Kautsky, stand for the first and describe their stand as defense of “democracy” (Kautsky has even gone so far as to call it “pure democracy”) as distinct from dictatorship. 
 In the pamphlet The Proletarian Revolution and the Rene-gade Kautsky , which has just come off the press in Moscow and Petrograd, I examine Kautsky’s views in detail. 
 I shall try briefly to give the substance of the point at issue, which has become the question of the day for all the advanced capitalist countries. 
 The Scheidemanns and Kautskys speak about “pure democracy” and “democracy” in general for the purpose of deceiving the people and concealing from them the bourgeois character of presen t-day democracy. 
 Let the bourgeoisie continue to keep the entire apparatus of state power in their hands, let a handful of exploiters continue to use the former, bourgeois, state machine! Elections held in such circum -stances are lauded by the bourgeoisie, for very good reasons, as being “free”, “equal”, “democratic” and “universal”. 
“DEMOCRACY” AND DICTATORSHIP These words are designed to conceal the truth, to conceal the fact that the means of production and political power remain in the hands of the exploiters, and that therefore real freedom and real equality for the exploit -ed, that is, for the vast majority of the population, are outof the question. 
 It is profitable and indispensable for thebourgeoisie to conceal from the people the bourgeois charac -ter of modern democracy, to picture it as democracy in general or “pure democracy”, and the Scheidemanns and the Kautskys, repeating this, in practice abandon the stand -point of the proletariat and side with the bourgeoisie. 
 Marx and Engels in their last joint preface to the Commu -nist Manifesto (in 1872) considered it necessary specially to warn the workers that the proletariat cannot simply lay hold of the ready -made (that is, the bourgeois) state machine and wield it for its own purpose, that it must smash it,break it up. 
 The renegade Kautsky, who has written aspecial pamphlet entitled The Dictatorship of the Proletar -iat, concealed from the workers this most important Marx -ist truth, utterly distorted Marxism, and, quite obviously, the praise which Scheidemann and Co. 
 showered on the pamphlet was fully merited as praise by agents of thebourgeoisie for one switching to the side of the bourgeoisie. 
 It is sheer mockery of the working and exploited people to speak of pure democracy, of democracy in general, ofequality, freedom and universal rights when the workers and all working people are ill -fed, ill -clad, ruined and worn out not only as a result of capitalist wage -slavery, but as a consequence of four years of predatory war, while thecapitalists and profiteers remain in possession of the “prop -erty” usurped by them and the “ready -made” apparatus of state power. 
 This is tantamount to trampling on the basic truths of Marxism which has taught the workers: you must take advantage of bourgeois democracy which, comparedwith feudalism, represents a great historical advance,but not for one minute must you forget the bourgeois charac -ter of this “democracy”, its historically conditional andlimited character. 
 Never share the “superstitious belief” in the “state” and never forget that the state even in the most democratic republic, and not only in a monarchy, issimply a machine for the suppression of one class by another. 
 The bourgeoisie are compelled to be hypocritical and to describe as “popular government” or democracy in general, or pure democracy, the ( bourgeois ) democratic republic which is, in practice, the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie,the dictatorship of the exploiters over the working people. 
The Scheidemanns and Kautskys, the Austerlitzes andRenners (and now, to our regret, with the help of FriedrichAdler) fall in line with this falsehood and hypocrisy. 
 But Marxists, Communists, expose this hypocrisy, and tell the workers and the working people in general this frank andstraightforward truth: the democratic republic, the Consti -tuent Assembly, general elections, etc. 
, are, in practice,the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie, and for the emancipa -tion of labour from the yoke of capital there is no other way but to replace this dictatorship with the dictatorship of the proletariat. 
 The dictatorship of the proletariat alone can emancipate humanity from the oppression of capital, from the lies,falsehood and hypocrisy of bourgeois democracy—democ -racy for the rich —and establish democracy for the poor , that is, make the blessings of democracy really accessible to the workers and poor peasants, whereas now (even in themost democratic— bourgeois —republic) the blessings of democracy are, in fact , inaccessible to the vast majority of working people. 
 Take, for example, freedom of assembly and freedom of the press. 
 The Scheidemanns and Kautskys, the Austerlitzes and Renners assure the workers that the present electionsto the Constituent Assembly in Germany and Austria are“democratic”. 
 That is a lie. 
 In practice the capitalists, the exploiters, the landowners and the profiteers own 9/10 ofthe best meeting halls, and 9/10 of the stocks of newsprint, printing -presses, etc. 
 The urban workers and the farm hands and day labourers are, in practice , debarred from democracy by the “sacred right of property” (guarded by the Kautskysand Renners, and now, to our regret, by Friedrich Adler aswell) and by the bourgeois state apparatus, that is, bour -geois officials, bourgeois judges, and so on. 
 The present “freedom of assembly and the press” in the “democratic” (bourgeois -democratic) German republic is false and hypo -critical, because in fact it is freedom for the rich to buy and bribe the press, freedom for the rich to befuddle the people with the venomous lies of the bourgeois press, freedom for the rich to keep as their “property” the landowners’ mansions, the best buildings, etc. 
 The dictatorship of the proletariatwill take from the capitalists and hand over to the working people the landowners’ mansions, the best buildings,printing -presses and the stocks of newsprint. 
 But this means replacing “universal”, “pure” democracy by the “dictatorship of one class”, scream the Scheidemanns and Kautskys, the Austerlitzes and Renners (together withtheir followers in other countries—the Gomperses, Hender -sons, Renaudels, Vandervelde and Co. 
). 
 Wrong, we reply. 
 This means replacing what in fact is the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie (a dictatorship hypocrit -ically cloaked in the forms of the democratic bourgeoisrepublic) by the dictatorship of the proletariat. 
 This meansreplacing democracy for the rich by democracy for the poor. 
This means replacing freedom of assembly and the pressfor the minority, for the exploiters, by freedom of assemblyand the press for the majority of the population, for the working people. 
 This means a gigantic, world -historic extension of democracy, its transformation from falsehood into truth, the liberation of humanity from the shackles ofcapital, which distorts and truncates any, even the most “democratic” and republican, bourgeois democracy. 
 This means replacing the bourgeois state by the proletarian state, a replacement that is the sole way the state can eventually wither away altogether. 
 But why not reach this goal without the dictatorship of one class? Why not switch directly to “pure” democracy?So ask the hypocritical friends of the bourgeoisie or thenaïve petty bourgeois and philistines gulled by them. 
 And we reply: Because in any capitalist society the decisive say lies with either the bourgeoisie or the proletar -iat, while the small proprietors, inevitably, remain waver -ing, helpless, stupid dreamers of “pure”, i. 
e. 
, non -class or above -class, democracy. 
 Because from a society in which one class oppresses another there is no way out other than through the dictatorship of the oppressed class. 
 Because the proletariat alone is capable of defeating the bourgeoisie,of overthrowing them, being the sole class which capitalism has united and “schooled”, and which is capable of drawing to its side the wavering mass of the working population with a petty -bourgeois way of life, of drawing them to its side or at least “neutralising” them. 
 Because only mealy -mouthed petty bourgeois and philistines can dream—deceiving thereby both themselves and the workers—ofoverthrowing capitalist oppression without a long anddifficult process of suppressing the resistance of the exploit -ers. 
 In Germany and Austria this resistance is not yet very pronounced because expropriation of the expropriatorshas not yet begun. 
 But once expropriation begins the resist -ance will be fierce and desperate. 
 In concealing this fromthemselves and from the workers the Scheidemanns andKautskys, the Austerlitzes and Renners betray the interests of the proletariat, switching at the most decisive moment from the class struggle and overthrow of the yoke of thebourgeoisie to getting the proletariat to come to termswith the bourgeoisie, achieving “social peace” or reconcilia -tion of exploited and exploiters. 
 Revolutions are the locomotives of history, said Marx. 
148 Revolutions teach quickly. 
 The urban workers and farmhands in Germany and Austria will quickly discern thebetrayal of the cause of socialism by the Scheidemanns andKautskys, the Austerlitzes and Renners. 
 The proletariatwill cast aside these “social traitors”—socialists in wordsand betrayers of socialism in practice—as it did in Russia with the same kind of petty bourgeoisie and philistines—the Mensheviks and “Socialist -Revolutionaries”. 
 The more complete the domination of the above -mentioned “leaders”, the quicker the proletariat will see that only the replacementof the bourgeois state, be it the most democratic bourgeoisrepublic, by a state of the type of the Paris Commune (about which so much was said by Marx, who has been distort -ed and betrayed by the Scheidemanns and Kautskys) or by a state of the Soviet type, can open the way to socialism. 
The dictatorship of the proletariat will deliver humanityfrom capitalist oppression and war. 
 Moscow, December 23, 1918 Pravda No. 
 2, Published according to January 3, 1919 the manuscript Signed: N. 
 Lenin HEROISM OF THE PRESNYA WORKERS Thirteen years ago the workers of Moscow raised the standard of revolt against tsarism. 
 This was the culminat -ing point in the development of the first workers’ revolu -tion against tsarism. 
 The workers were defeated, and Pre -snya ran with workers’ blood. 
 The unforgettable heroism of the Moscow workers set an example of militancy to the working people throughoutRussia. 
 But these people were then too ignorant, too disunit -ed, and failed to back the heroes of Presnya and Moscow as awhole who rose in arms against the tsarist, landlordmonarchy. 
 The defeat of the Moscow workers was followed by the defeat of the first revolution as a whole. 
 For twelve longand painful years the savage landlord reaction tortured all the workers and peasants of all nationalities of Russia. 
 The heroism of the Presnya workers was not in vain. 
 Their sacrifices bore fruit. 
 The first breach was made inthe tsarist monarchy; the breach was slowly but surelywidened, weakening the obsolete, medieval regime. 
 Theheroism of the Moscow workers started a deep ferment among the urban and rural working people, the effects of which never died down, in spite of all persecution. 
 Before the armed insurrection of December 1905, the people of Russia were incapable of waging a mass armedstruggle against their exploiters. 
 After December they wereno longer the same people. 
 They had been reborn. 
 They had received their baptism of fire. 
 They had been steeled in revolt. 
 They trained the fighters who were victorious in1917 and who now, despite the incredible difficulties, and overcoming the tormets of hunger and devastation caused by the imperialist war, are fighting for the world victory of socialism. 
 Long live the workers of Red Presnya, the vanguard of the world workers’ revolution! Byednota No. 
 222, Published according to December 24, 1918 the Byednota text Signed: N. 
 Lenin SPEEC H TO THE SECON D ALL-RUSSIA CONGRES S OF ECONOMI C COUNCIL S149 DECEMBER 25, 1918 (Ovation . 
) Comrades, first I want to say a few words about the Soviet Republic’s international situation. 
 Of course, you all know that the main issue at stake is thevictory of the British, French and American imperialistsand their attempts to seize complete possession of thewhole world, and, particularly, to destroy Soviet Russia. 
 At the beginning of the October Revolution, as you know, not only the majority of the West -European bourgeoi -sie, but also a certain section of the Russian bourgeoisiebelieved that what was going on in our country was a sortof socialist experiment which could have no essential andserious significance from a world point of view. 
 Particularly arrogant and short -sighted bourgeois people frequently maintained that the communist experiments in Russia could serve no other purpose than to give satisfaction toGerman imperialism. 
 And, unfortunately, there were peoplewho allowed themselves to be blinded by such words andwho, incidentally, regarded the fantastically harsh and coercive terms of the Brest -Litovsk Peace Treaty from this angle. 
 In actual fact, these people were wittingly or unwit -tingly fostering petty -bourgeois class patriotism and regarding the growing unfavourable situation not from the point of view of its world significance, nor from the develop -ment of events on a world scale, but from the point of view that German imperialism is the chief enemy, and that these harsh and immensely extortionate peace terms were a tri -umph for the German imperialists. 
 Indeed, if we regard the events of that period from the point of view of the situation in Russia, more ruinous terms can scarcely be imagined. 
 But the folly of the calcula -tions of the German imperialists became apparent within a few months, when the Germans were conquering theUkraine and bragging to the German bourgeoisie, and evenmore so to the German proletariat, that the moment hadarrived to reap the fruits of imperialist policy, and that in the Ukraine they would get everything Germany needed. 
 That was a ver y s hor t -sighted and shallow judgement of events. 
 For it soon became apparent that the only people who were right were those who regarded events from the pointof view of their influence on the development of the worldrevolution. 
 The example of the Ukraine, -which had suffered tremendously, in fact showed that the only correct judgement of events was one based on a study and careful observationof the international proletarian revolution. 
 Imperialismfound itself hard pressed by the working people, whosecondition had become intolerable. 
 And we can now seethat the Ukrainian episode was one of the links in the pro -cess of growth of the world revolution. 
 The German imperialists were able to procure from the Ukraine far less material benefits than they had anticipated. 
On the other hand, this transformation of the war into apatently predatory one demoralised the entire German army,while contact with Soviet Russia started in this army of German working people the process of disintegration which was to make itself felt a few months later. 
 And now thatthe British and American imperialists have become evenmore arrogant, and regard themselves as overlords whomnobody can resist, we have no illusions about the extremelydifficult situation in which we find ourselves. 
 The Entente powers have now overstepped the bounds of the possible for bourgeois policy; they have overdone it, just as the Germanimperialists overdid it in February and March 1918 inconcluding the Brest -Litovsk Peace Treaty. 
 The cause that led to the collapse of German imperialism is againclearly perceptible in the case of Anglo -French imperialism. 
 The latter has imposed peace terms on Germany that are far worse, far harsher than those which Germany imposedon us when concluding the Brest -Litovsk Peace Treaty. 
 In doing so, Anglo -French imperialism has overstepped the bounds and this will later prove fatal. 
 Beyond these bounds imperialism forfeits the hope of holding down the working people. 
 In spite of the hullabaloo raised by the chauvinists around Germany’s defeat and destruction, in spite of the fact thatthe war is not yet officially over, we can already discernsigns in France and Britain of an extremely rapid growth of the labour movement and a change of attitude by politi -cians who were formerly chauvinists but who are now oppos -ing their governments’ attempt to meddle in Russian affairs. 
 If we add to this the recent newspaper reports aboutthe beginnings of fraternisation on the part of the Britishand American soldiers, and if we remember that imperialist armies consist of citizens who are being held in check by deceit and threats, we can see that Soviet Russia is standingon fairly firm ground. 
 With this general picture of worldwar and revolution before us, we are absolutely calm, andregard the future with complete confidence. 
 And we assertthat Anglo -French imperialism has gone so far as to overstep all the bounds of peace practically obtainable by imperial -ists and to fall in danger of complete collapse. 
 The tasks that the Entente powers, who are continuing the imperialist war, have set themselves are to stifle revolu -tion and to seize and divide up all countries of the world. 
But although Britain and America have been more exempt from the horrors of war than Germany, and although their democratically organised bourgeoisie are much more far -sight -ed than the German, the British and American imperialistshave lost their heads and are now compelled by objectiveconditions to undertake a task that is beyond their power. 
They are being forced to maintain troops for purposes of pacification and suppression. 
 Nevertheless, our present situation demands a maximum exertion of effort. 
 And we must still set greater value ona month than we formerly did on a whole decade, becausewe are now doing a hundred times more. 
 Besides safeguardingthe Russian Republic, we are doing a great job for the world proletariat. 
 Intense effort is demanded of us, immense work in compiling a plan of organisation and in defininggeneral relations. 
 Passing to the question of our immediate tasks, I must say that the main thing has already been accomplished, and that in the interval between the First and Second Congresses of the Economic Councils the principal type of work hasbeen outlined. 
 A general plan of running industry, nation -alised undertakings and whole branches of industry hasbeen drawn up and put on a firm basis with the help ofthe trade unions. 
 Incidentally, we shall continue to combat all syndicalist, separatist, parochial and regional tendencies, which can only harm our cause. 
 The military situation imposes a special responsibility and grave duties on us. 
 Collegiate management with theparticipation of the trade unions is essential. 
 Collegiatebodies are necessary, but collegiate management must not be allowed to become a hindrance to practical work. 
 And when I personally now see the way economic tasks are beingcarried out by our undertakings, what strikes me most isthat the executive part of our work, associated as it is withcollective discussion, at times impedes the execution. 
 Thistransition from collective execution to personal responsi -bility is the urgent problem of the day. 
 We shall unreservedly demand that all the Economic Councils, Central Boards and Central Administrations seethat the collegiate system of management is not reduced toempty discussion, to writing resolutions, to compiling plansand to regional favouritism. 
 That would be intolerable. 
 We shall firmly insist that every member of an Economic Council and every member of a Central Board shall knowfor which branch of economy, in the narrow sense, he isresponsible. 
 When we receive reports that raw material isavailable, but people do not know how much, cannot workit out, when we hear complaints that warehouses filled with goods are under lock and key while the peasants are demand -ing, and justly demanding, commodity exchange, and are refusing to surrender grain in exchange for devaluated papernotes, we must know what member of what particular colle -giate board is guilty of red tape. 
 We must say that thismember is responsible for the red tape and will be made to answer for it from the defence point of view, i. 
e. 
, he will be liable to immediate arrest and court martial, even ifhe is a member of the most important union in the most important Central Board. 
 He must be made to answer for the practical performance of the most simple and elementary things, such as keeping account of goods in the warehouses and putting them to proper use. 
 It is in the performance ofsuch elementary duties that obstructions most frequentlyarise. 
 From the historical standpoint, this should not evoke any misgivings, because in breaking new ground a certain amount of time has to be spent in outlining the general plan, which is then developed in the actual process ofwork. 
 On the contrary, h is astonishing how much has beendone in this respect in so short a time. 
 From the militaryand the socialist standpoint, however, when the proletariatdemands all -out efforts from us so that there may by bread and warm coats, so that they are not so short of footwear, foodstuffs, and so on, commodity exchange must be increasedto three times and ten times as much as at present. 
This side of the matter must be made the immediate taskof the Economic Councils. 
 What we require is practical work by people who will be responsible for exchanging grain for goods, for seeing that grain is not lying about, for proper account of the rawmaterials in every warehouse, as well as for seeing thatthey do not lie about unutilised, and for real assistancebeing given in production. 
 The co -operatives, too, must be approached in a business -like way. 
 When I hear members of the Economic Councilsasserting that the co -operative societies are a matter for shopkeepers, that they are full of Mensheviks and white -guards, and that we must therefore keep them at arm’slength, I maintain that these people display completeignorance of the matter. 
 They absolutely fail to understand the tasks of the moment when, instead of referring to the good co -operators -as experts, they refer to them as people who are stretching out a hand to the whiteguards. 
 Theyshould mind their own business: we have the ExtraordinaryCommissions for ferreting out whiteguards, and that busi -ness should be left to them. 
 The co -operatives, after all, are the only apparatus created by capitalist society which we must utilise. 
 And we shall therefore ruthlessly punish bymilitary law any attempt to replace action by arguments that are the epitome of short -sightedness, gross stupidity and intellectual conceit. 
 ( Stormy applause . 
) When to this day, after the lapse of a year, matters are not organised as they should be, when, confronted by prac -tical problems, we still continue to discuss plans whilethe country is demanding bread, felt boots and the distri -bution of raw materials on time, such red tape and meddlingin other people’s affairs are not to be tolerated. 
 There are sometimes people in our apparatus who incline towards the whiteguards, but given communist control in allour institutions these people cannot acquire political signifi -cance or leading positions. 
 There cannot be the slightestdoubt on this score. 
 But we need them as practical workers,and there is no need to fear them. 
 I have no doubt that Communists are splendid people, that there are splendid organisers among them, but it will take years and years toobtain such organisers in large numbers, and we cannotwait. 
 Now we can obtain these workers from among the bourgeoi -sie, from among the experts and intellectuals. 
 And we shall ask all comrades working in the Economic Councils: what, sirs, have you done to enlist experienced people inthe work? What have you done to secure experts, salesmen,efficient bourgeois co -operators, who must work for you in no worse a manner than they did for the Kolupayevs andRazuvayevs? 150 Time to abandon the old prejudices and enlist all the experts we need in our work. 
 Every collegiate body, every Communist executive must know this. 
 Thepledge of success lies in this attitude. 
 Let’s cut out the idle talk and get down to practical work to extricate our country from the ring in which the imperial -ists have surrounded it. 
 That must be the position of every Soviet and co -operative organisation. 
 We need action and more action! The proletariat will forfeit much if, once inpower, it cannot utilise that power, put the problem practi -cally and solve it practically. 
 It is about time you droppedthe idea that only Communists, among whom there areunquestionably excellent people, can perform a particular job. 
 It is about time you lost this prejudice; we need many workers who know their job, and we must enlist them allin the work. 
 Capitalism has left us a valuable legacy in the shape of its biggest experts. 
 And we must be sure to utilise them, and utilise them on a broad and mass scale; we must put every one of them to work. 
 We have no time to spend on training experts from among our Communists, because everything now depends on practical work and practical results. 
 We must demand that every member of a collegiate body, every member of a responsible institution take charge of a job and be fully responsible for it. 
 It is absolutely essential that everyone who takes charge of a definite branch of work should be responsible for everything, both for production and distribution. 
 I must tell you that our Soviet Republic’s situation is such that given proper distribution of bread and other goods we can hold on for a very, very long time. 
 But we must have a proper policy of definitely abandoning all red tape. 
 We must act swiftly and decisively, we must appoint definite people for definite responsible work, every one of them must know his job exactly, must answer for it exactly, answer for it even with his head. 
 That is the poli-cy we are pursuing in the Council of People’s Commissars and in the Council of Defenc e151; and to this policy all the activities of the Economic Councils and the co -operatives must be subordinated. 
 That is the path the proletariat’s policy must take. 
 We must see to it that the wheels of commodity exchange revolve properly. 
 That is the whole problem right now. 
An enormous amount of work has to be done in this sphere,and, in conclusion, my emphatic appeal to all of you is todo your share of this work. 
 ( Prolonged applause . 
) Brief reports published in Izvestia No. 
 284 and Ekonomicheskaya Zhizn No. 
 42, December 26, 1918 First published in full in 1919 Published according in the book Transactions of the to the book Second All-Russia Congress of Economic Councils. 
 Verbatim Report , Moscow TASKS OF THE TRADE UNIONS I The theses by Tomsky, Radus -Zenkovich and Nogin each express the viewpoint of the particular job they represent: trade unions, commissariat and co -operatives with mutual benefit societies. 
 Each group of theses therefore suffers from a lopsided emphasis of only one side of the picture and an overshadow -ing and suppression of the fundamental points at issue. 
 A correct picture of these fundamental issues concerning the trade union movement today and its attitude towardsthe Soviet government requires above all proper considera -tion for the specific features of the present , given situation in the transition from capitalism to socialism. 
 All three gave insufficient attention or virtually no attention at all to this vital aspect of the matter. 
 II The chief feature of the present situation in this respect is as follows. 
 The Soviet government as the dictatorship of the proletar -iat is victorious both among the urban proletariat and among the poor peasants but has far from won over bycommunist propaganda and strong organisation all tradesand the whole mass of semi -proletarians. 
 Hence the special importance, particularly at the moment, of stepping up our propaganda and organisational work so that, on the one hand, we extend our influence over thoseworkers and employees who are the least Soviet (that is, the furthest from fully accepting Soviet policy), and subor -dinate them to the general proletarian movement. 
 And so that, on the other hand, we shake up and rouse ideologi -cally, and rally organisationally, the most backward sections and individuals among the proletariat and semi -proletariat, such as the unskilled workers, the town ser -vants, rural semi -proletariat, and so on. 
 Then, the second principal feature of the present situation is that the construction of socialist society is based on a solid foundation, that is, we have not only done more thanmap it out and set it as our immediate practical goal; we haveformed several highly important bodies of this construction(the Economic Councils, for example), had certain experienceof their relationship with mass organisations (trade unions, co -operatives), and obtained certain practical results. 
 All the same, however, our construction is not yet finished byany means, we still have very many flaws to iron out, thevery essentials are not yet guaranteed (for instance, propercollection and distribution of grain, production and distri -bution of fuel), and the main body of working people are still not playing a big enough part in the construction. 
 III With this in view, the trade unions have the following tasks at present. 
 There can be no talk of any sort of trade union “neutrality”. 
 Any campaign for neutrality is either a hypocritical screenfor counter -revolution or a complete lack of class -conscious -ness. 
 We are now strong enough in the basic core of the trade union movement to be able to bring under our influence and proletarian discipline both the backward and the passive non-Communists inside the unions, and those workers who are still in some respects petty -bourgeois. 
 So the chief aim now is, not to break the resistance of a strong enemy, for Soviet Russia no longer has such anenemy among the proletarians and semi -proletarians, but to overcome by stubborn, persistent, more extensive education -al and organisational work the prejudices of certain petty -bourgeois sections of the proletariat and semi -proletariat. 
 The unions must steadily extend the insufficiently wide base of the Soviet government (that is, increase the number of workers and poor peasants directly taking part in state administration), educate the backward working people (bypractical experience in management as well as by books,lectures and newspapers), and discover new organisational forms both for these new tasks of the trade union movement in general, and for attracting a far more numerous mass of semi -proletarians, like the poor peasants, for example. 
 Thus, they must attract all trade union members into state administration—through the system of commissars,through participation in lightning control groups, and soon and so forth. 
 They must attract the housemaid, firstinto co -operative work, in supplying the population with provisions, supervising their production, etc. 
, and then into more responsible and less “narrow” work—but ofcourse with the necessary gradualness. 
 They must get the specialists into state work together with the workers and keep an eye on them. 
 Transitional forms demand new bounds of organisation. 
 Thus, for instance, the Poor Peasants’ Committees are play -ing a tremendous role. 
 There may be a danger that their merging with the Soviets would somewhere end up byleaving the mass of semi -proletarians outside of the bounds of permanent organisation. 
 But we cannot forgo the taskof organising the poor peasants under the pretext that they are not hired hands. 
 It is possible and even necessary to search, search and search again for new forms, if only, forexample, by forming unions of poor peasants (perhapsthe very same Poor Peasants’ Committees) as unions ofthe very poor (a) uninterested in grain profiteering and high grain prices, (b) interested in improving their lot by common measures for everyone, (c) interested in strengthening socialised farming, (d) interested in a permanent alliancewith the urban workers, etc. 
 Such a poor peasant union could make up a special section of the All -Russia Trade Union Council to prevent it over -whelming the completely proletarian elements. 
 The form can be modified and must be sought through applying it to practice, to the new task of embracing the new, transitionalsocial types (the village poor are not the proletariat, and now not even semi -proletariat, but those who stand closest to the semi -proletariat since capitalism is not yet dead, and at the same time those who are most sympathetic to the transition to socialism).... 
 * Written in December 1918 and January 1919 First published in 1933 Published according to the manuscript *Here the manuscript ends. 
— Ed. 
 A LITTLE PICTURE IN ILLUSTRATION OF BIG PROBLEMS Comrade Sosnovsky, editor of Byednota ,152 has brought me a remarkable book. 
 As many workers and peasants as possible should be made familiar with it. 
 Most valuable lessons, splendidly illustrated by vivid examples, are tobe drawn from it on some of the major problems of socialistconstruction. 
 The book, by Comrade Alexander Todorsky,is called A Year with Rifle and Plough and was published in the little town of Vesyegonsk by the local uyezd Execu -tive Committee to mark the anniversary of the OctoberRevolution. 
 The author describes the year’s experience of the men in charge of organising Soviet power in the Vesyegonsk Uyezd—first the Civil War, the revolt of the local kulaks and itssuppression, and then “peaceful creative life”. 
 The author has succeeded in giving such a simple, and at the same time such a lively, account of the course of the revolution inthis rural backwater, that to attempt to retell it could onlyweaken its effect. 
 This book should be distributed as widelyas possible, and it would be very good if many more ofthose who have been working among the people and with the people, in the very thick of life, sat down to describe their experiences. 
 The publication of several hundred, oreven several dozen, such descriptions, the best, most truth -fully and plainly told and containing numerous valuablefacts, would be infinitely more useful to the cause of social -ism than many of the newspaper and magazine articles and books by professional journalists and writers who only too often cannot see real life for the paper they writeon. 
 Let me give a brief example from Comrade Todorsky’s narrative. 
 It was suggested that “merchant hands” should not be allowed to go “unemployed”, but should be encouraged to “set to work”. 
 “...With this end in view, three young, energetic and very business -like manufacturers, E. 
 Yefremov, A. 
 Loginov and N. 
 Kozlov, were summoned to the Executive Committee and ordered on pain ofimprisonment and confiscation of all property to set up a sawmill andtannery. 
 The work was started immediately. 
 “The Soviet authorities were not mistaken in their choice of men, and the manufacturers, to their credit, were among the first to realise that they were not dealing with ‘casual and temporary guests’, but with real masters who had taken power firmly into their hands. 
 “Having quite rightly realised this, they set to work energetically to carry out the orders of the Executive Committee, with the resultthat Vesyegonsk now has a sawmill going at full swing, covering theneeds of the local population and filling orders for a new railway under construction. 
 “As to the tannery, the premises are now ready, and the engine, drums and other machinery, obtained from Moscow, are being installed,so that in a month and a half, or two at the most, Vesyegonsk will begetting fine leather of its own make. 
 “The building of two Soviet plants by ‘non -Soviet’ hands is a good example of how to fight a class which is hostile to us. 
 “To rap the exploiters over the knuckles, to render them harmless or ‘finish them off’, is only half the job. 
 The whole job will be done onlywhen we compel them to work, and with the fruits of their labour helpto improve the new life and strengthen Soviet power. 
” These fine and absolutely true words should be carved in stone and prominently displayed in every Economic Council, food organisation, factory, land department andso on. 
 For what has been understood by our comrades inremote Vesyegonsk is all too often stubbornly ignored bySoviet officials in the capitals. 
 It is quite common to meet aSoviet intellectual or worker, a Communist, who turns his nose up at the mere mention of co -operative societies and declares with an air of profound importance—and withequally profound stupidity—that these are not Soviet hands,they are bourgeois people, shopkeepers, Mensheviks, thatat such and such a time and place the co -operators used their financial manipulations to conceal aid given to white -guards, and that in our Socialist Republic the supply anddistribution apparatus must be built up by clean Soviethands. 
 Such arguments are typical insofar as the truth is so mixed with falsehood that we consequently get a most dangerous distortion of the aims of communism that can do incalculable harm to our cause. 
 The co -operatives certainly are an apparatus of bourgeois society, an apparatus which grew up in an atmosphere of“shopkeeping” and which has trained its leaders in thespirit of bourgeois politics and in a bourgeois outlook, and has therefore been producing a large proportion of whiteguards or their accomplices. 
 That is undeniable. 
 Butit is a bad thing when absurd conclusions are drawn fromundeniable truths, by their oversimplification and slapdashapplication. 
 We can only build communism out of thematerial created by capitalism, out of that refined apparatus which has been moulded under bourgeois conditions and which—as far as concerns the human material in the appa -ratus—is therefore inevitably imbued with the bourgeoismentality. 
 That is what makes the building of communistsociety difficult, but it is also a guarantee that it can andwill be built. 
 In fact, what distinguishes Marxism from the old, utopian socialism is that the latter wanted to build the new society not from the mass human material produced bybloodstained, sordid, rapacious, shopkeeping capitalism,but from very virtuous men and women reared in specialhothouses and cucumber frames. 
 Everyone now sees that thisabsurd idea really is absurd and everyone has discarded it, but not everyone is willing or able to give thought to the opposite doctrine of Marxism and to think out how commu -nism can (and should) be built from the mass human mater -ial which has been corrupted by hundreds and thousandsof years of slavery, serfdom, capitalism, by small individualenterprise, and by the war of every man against his neigh -bour to obtain a place in the market, or a higher price forhis product or his labour. 
 The co -operatives are a bourgeois apparatus. 
 Hence they do not deserve to be trusted politically ; but this does not mean we may turn our backs on the task of using them foradministration and construction. 
 Political distrust means we must not put non -Soviet people in politically responsible posts. 
 It means the Cheka must keep a sharp eye on membersof classes, sections or groups that have leanings towards the whiteguards. 
 (Though, incidentally, one need not go to the same absurd lengths as Comrade Latsis, one of our finest, tried and tested Communists, did in his Kazan magazine, Krasny Terror . 
 He wanted to say that Red terror meant the forcible suppression of exploiters who attempted to resforetheir rule, but instead, he put it this way [on page 2 ofthe first issue of his magazine]: “Don’t search [!!?] therecords for evidence of whether his revolt against the Soviet was an armed or only a verbal one. 
”) Political distrust of the members of a bourgeois apparatus is legitimate and essential. 
 But to refuse to use them inadministration and construction would be the height offolly, fraught with untold harm to communism. 
 If anybodytried to recommend a Menshevik as a socialist, or as a political leader, or even as a political adviser, he would be committing a great mistake, for the history of the revo -lution in Russia has definitely shown that the Mensheviks(and the Socialist -Revolutionaries) are not socialists, but petty -bourgeois democrats who are capable of siding with the bourgeoisie every time the class struggle between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie becomes particularly acute. 
 But petty -bourgeois democracy is not a chance political formation, not an exception, but a necessary product of capitalism. 
 And it is not only the old, pre -capitalist, econom -ically reactionary middle peasants who are the “purveyors”of this democracy. 
 So, too, are the co -operative societies with their capitalist training that have sprung from the soil of large -scale capitalism, the intellectuals, etc. 
 After all, even backward Russia produced, side by side with theKolupayevs and Razuvayevs, capitalists who knew howto make use of the services of educated intellectuals, bethey Menshevik, Socialist -Revolutionary or non -party. 
 Are we to be more stupid than those capitalists and fail to use such “building material” in erecting a communistRussia? Written at the end of 1918 or beginning of 1919 First published in Pravda No. 
 258, Published according to November 7, 1926 the manuscript TELEGRA M TO STALI N AND DZERZHINSK Y153 14. 
1. 
19 Glazov, for Stalin and Dzerzhinsky Received and read first code message. 
 Request both of you personally to see to execution of intended measures on spot, otherwise no guarantee of success. 
 Lenin First published in 1934 Published according to the manuscript SPEEC H AT A JOIN T SESSIO N OF THE AL L-RUSSIA CENTRA L EXECUTIV E COMMITTEE, THE MOSCO W SOVIET AND ALL-RUSSI A TRAD E UNIO N CONGRESS JANUAR Y 17, 1919154 (Stormy ovation . 
) Comrades, allow me to begin by briefly mentioning the chief facts relating to our food policy. 
 I think these brief remarks will be useful in enabling us to form a correct judgement of the significance of the resolu -tion we are recommending today for adoption by the All-Russia Central Executive Committee. 
 They should also enable us to form an opinion of our whole food policy ingeneral, and of the role which now, when a difficult changeis coming, falls to the organised proletariat—that vanguard and chief buttress of Soviet Russia and the socialist revolu -tion. 
 Our food policy has been marked by three major acts, which, taken chronologically, are as follows: first—the decision to form Poor Peasants’ Committees, a step whichlies at the very basis of our food policy and which, moreover, was a tremendously important turning -point in the whole course of development and structure of our revolution. 
 By taking this step we crossed the boundary dividing thebourgeois from the socialist revolution. 
 By themselves,the victory of the working class in the cities and the transferof all factories to the proletarian state would not have been enough to create and consolidate the foundation of a social -ist system, if we had not also created for ourselves not a general peasant, but a really proletarian buttress in thecountryside. 
 In October, we had to confine ourselves touniting the proletariat and the peasants in general, as a whole. 
 And thanks to this alliance we were able rapidly to destroy the landlord system and sweep it off the face of the earth. 
 But it was only when we proceeded to organise the poor peasants, the peasant proletariat and semi -proletar -iat, that a durable alliance could be formed between themass of the urban proletariat and rural proletariat. 
 Onlythen could the war against the kulaks and the peasantbourgeoisie be fought in real earnest. 
 This radical step continues to be the keystone of our food policy. 
 The second step, less important perhaps, was the decree passed with the participation and on the initiative of ourrepresentatives, the decree on utilising the co -operative societies. 
 There we resolved that we must make use of themachinery created by the co -operatives and capitalist society in general, and which, for obvious reasons, was weaker in Russia than in Western Europe. 
 In this respect we wereguilty of many sins and many omissions in the towns andbig proletarian centres, as well as in the countryside. 
 Herewe are up against a lack of understanding and ability,prejudices and traditions which tend to repel us from the co -operatives. 
 It is quite natural that there should be many non-proletarians in the upper ranks of the co -operative movement. 
 We must fight these people, who are capableof swinging over to the bourgeoisie, and the counter -revo -lutionary elements and their scheming. 
 But at the sametime we must preserve this machinery, the co -operative machinery—which is likewise a capitalist heritage—this machinery of distribution among millions of people, withoutwhich we cannot build socialism with any success. 
 In thisrespect the Food Commissariat has outlined a correct policy,but we have not yet put it fully into effect. 
 The proposalswe are submitting today to the All -Russia Central Execu -tive Committee on behalf of the Communist group, whichinsists that the co -operative machinery be utilised, are one more step in the same direction. 
 We must know how tocombat the undesirable top officials in the co -operative machinery—we have forces and authority enough for that,for it would be silly to think they can put up any serious resistance. 
 We must know how to combat them, but we must utilise the co -operative machinery without fail so as not to squander our forces, so that this machine may be united, and so that the Communists may devote their energies not only to political, but also to organisational work, and make technical use of the machinery which stands ready for this work—the co -operative machinery. 
 The third step in our food policy is the formation of workers’ food organisations. 
 Here, a responsible task con -fronts you, the food workers. 
 Our path is the right pathfor us to follow, and we must see to it that it is followed by all the Commissariats. 
 It is a measure of general social and class importance as well as of importance for food supplies. 
To make the socialist revolution lasting, a new class mustrun the country. 
 We know that prior to 1861 155 it was the feudal landowners who were the power that governed Russia. 
We know that since then, generally speaking, the power that governed was the bourgeoisie, those from the wealthy. 
 The permanence of the socialist revolution will depend onthe extent we can elevate the new class, the proletariat,to the work of government, have Russia governed by theproletariat. 
 We must make this work of government a steptowards the universal training of the working people in the art of governing the state, a training not derived from books or newspapers, speeches or pamphlets, but from prac -tice, enabling everyone to try his hand at this work. 
 That, comrades, is the chief stage in our food policy, which at the same time is indicative of the very characterof its structure. 
 Very responsible duties here confront our food supply comrades. 
 It need scarcely be said that there is no more cruel and dreadful calamity than famine, thatthe people are naturally driven to impatience, anger andindignation by every flop in this sphere, for it is a calamitythat cannot be endured. 
 Nor need it be said that the FoodCommissariat’s task is a most difficult one. 
 You know, and the comrades from the trade unions know it particularly, how much chaos and disorder there is in running the bigfactories, in keeping stock of their output. 
 Yet this is athousand times easier than keeping stock of food whichis gathered in by millions of peasants. 
 But we have no alter -native. 
 There is a general food shortage in the country. 
 There is not enough to go round. 
 What do we mean when we say that certain foodstuffs are scarce? It means we could avoid starvation, although living on reduced rations, if we were now to distribute them among the whole population, if every peasant were to turn over all his produce, if everybody were to cut consumption somewhat below the standard of sufficiency—because there is notenough for a full standard all round—if every peasant wereto agree to reduce his consumption somewhat below thestandard of sufficiency and turn over all the rest to thestate, and if we distributed it all properly. 
 But, if we set ourselves this aim, it is obviously impossible to carry it out by ordinary means amidst the present state of economicdisruption and with our nation -wide inefficiency—we are only just getting the knack; we had nowhere to get it frombefore. 
 If there is a shortage of food, it means ... what doesit mean? It means that if you were to sanction free trade when there is a shortage of vitally essential foodstuffs, the result would be frantic profiteering and prices would beinflated to what is called monopoly or famine prices, andonly a few top people, with incomes considerably abovethe average, would be able to satisfy their needs at thesefantastic prices, while the vast majority of the people would starve. 
 That is what it means when there is a food shortage in the country, when the country is in a state offamine. 
 Ever since the imperialists began to march onRussia, she has been surrounded. 
 They cannot come outopenly with their predatory plans; but that does not meanthe end of their intervention, as Comrade Kamenev has rightly remarked. 
 We are a besieged country, a besieged fortress. 
 In this besieged fortress want is inevitable. 
 Andtherefore the Food Commissariat’s job is the most difficultorganisational job of all the Commissariats. 
 Our enemy today, if we take the enemy within, is not so much the capitalist or landowner—this exploiting minority was easy to vanquish, and it has been. 
 It is the profiteer and the bureaucrat. 
 And every peasant is a profit -eer by inclination, who has a chance to line his pocketstaking advantage of the desperate want and agonisingfamine in the cities and in some of the villages. 
 And youknow very well, especially the comrades from the trade unions, that the urge, the tendency to go in for profiteering occurs in the industrial centres, too, when certain goodsare not to be had, or are scarce, and that everybody who manages to lay his hands on them tries to hoard and make a profit out of them. 
 If we were to allow free trade, prices would at once be inflated to fantastic levels, levels beyond the reach of the vast majority of people. 
 That, comrades, is the situation, and that is why among the less educated people, exhausted as they are and wornout by starvation and suffering, there is a tendency, or anundefined feeling of resentment and anger against the comrades engaged in food supplies. 
 They are all people who cannot think, cannot see further than the end oftheir noses, and it seems to them that food could be procuredsomehow. 
 They have heard that there is food in some placeor other, that somebody went there and got some—but theyare incapable of calculating on a large scale whether there is enough for ten million people, and how much is required for such a number. 
 It seems to them that someone is holdingthings up, that our food workers are putting obstacles intheir way. 
 They do not understand that the food workersare acting like wise and thrifty managers, saying that ifyou observe the utmost stringency and the utmost organisa -tion, you shall at best, at the very best, be able to maintaina standard that will keep you from starvation, even if itdoes fall short of sufficiency. 
 This is the position the countryis in for we have been cut off from the chief food -supplying centres—Siberia and the Donets region; we have been cutoff from fuel and raw material, food for the population and for industry, without which the country is forced to suffer the most desperate agonies. 
 The food workers are acting like sensible managers. 
 They say we must stick together, which is the only way wecan keep going; we must take systematic action against allattempts by individuals acting for themselves only, willing to pay any price to fill their own belly, and who do not give a hang for anything else. 
 We must not think and actindividually, each for himself, for that spells ruin. 
 Wemust combat such tendencies and habits, which have beenfostered in all of us, in the millions of working people,by capitalist private enterprise, by the system of working for the market: “I shall sell and make my bit; the more I make the less I shall starve, and the more others will. 
”That is the accursed legacy of private property, which left the people to starve even when there was enough food in the country, when a measly minority grew rich both on wealth and on poverty, while the people lived in want and perished in the war. 
 That, comrades, is the position with regard toour food policy. 
 That is the economic law which says thatwhen there is a food shortage, frantic profiteering is engen -dered by every step towards what is called free trade. 
 Thatis why all talk about free trade, all attempts to encourage it are utterly pernicious and are a retreat, a step back from that socialist constructive work which the Food Commissar -iat is doing amidst incredible difficulties in a fight againstmillions of profiteers, whom we have inherited from capi -talism with its old petty -bourgeois, private -property maxim: “Every man for himself, and the devil take the hindmost. 
” If we cannot root out this evil, we shall never build socialism. 
 Only unity, only the closest alliance, achieved in everyday life, in everyday work, where it is hardest of all to achieve—in dividing up a crust of bread when bread is short—willallow us really to build socialism. 
 We know that this cannot be accomplished in a single year, that people who have suffered so long from hunger are tremendously impatientand demand that at least from time to time we retreat fromthis only correct food policy. 
 And we do have to retreatfrom it now and then; but we shall not desert or departfrom our policy as a whole. 
 That, comrades, was the situation six months ago, when the food crisis reached its climax, when we had no stocksat all, when the Czech victories had robbed us of the greaterpart of the Volga region. 
 We had to consent to the pood anda half. 
 156 This measure cost us a big fight, a sharp fight— both sides were in a very bad state. 
 The food workers said: “Yes, things are grim, but we must not make them worse. 
 By giving relief to a few for a week, we will be makingthings worse for the millions. 
” Others said: “You aredemanding ideal organisation from people who are exhaustedand starving; you are demanding the impossible; you mustallow some relief, even if it spoils the general policy for a while. 
 This measure will bring new courage, and that is the main thing. 
” That was the plight we were in when weproposed the pood and a half idea. 
 We kept to the general, fundamental, radical line, but when the position became unbearable, we had to retreat from it to afford at least some temporary relief and preserve the people’s courage and morale. 
 The same thing is happening now, when we are on the border line, when six comparatively easy months are behindus and six hard months are about to begin. 
 To make thisclear, let me tell you that during the first half of 1918 the Food Commissariat procured 28,000,000 poods, and during the second half 67,000,000 poods, that is, two and a halftimes as much. 
 So you can clearly see that the first half -year is one of particularly dire and acute want, whereasthe second, owing to the harvest, offers an opportunity ofimprovement. 
 Now, in 1919, the success of our food organi -sations, thanks chiefly to the Poor Peasants’ Committeesin the countryside and the workers’ food inspectors in thetowns is immense and has enabled us to procure two and ahalf times as much grain. 
 But the success of the first yearof our work, when a new edifice had to be built and newmethods tested, was not and could not have been enough to ensure us supplies for the whole year, although it afforded us a six -month respite. 
 That respite is coming to an end, and another six months are beginning, the most difficultand hardest of all. 
 We must bring all our resources into playto help the workers, to secure them a short respite, toimprove their position in every way we can. 
 And it is only natural that the Presidium of the Moscow Soviet and its Chairman, Kamenev, should have been so insistent that welay down our policy as clearly as possible and make a clear -cut division between monopoly and non -monopoly foodstuffs, which would enable us to attain certain results, if only fora time, so that the workers in the towns and the non -agricultural areas might get at least some slight relief andgain new courage and energy. 
 These are particularly neces -sary just now, when we are on the eve of these difficult sixmonths, but when there are signs that the forces in the impe -rialist camp and their attacks on us are slacking off. 
 Comrade Kamenev, it is true, has mentioned not only signs but facts to show that, in spite of the severe trials and reverses we suffered at Perm, the Red Army is beingbuilt on a firm foundation, that it can and will win. 
 The coming six months, however, will be very difficult, and from the very outset we must therefore do whatever is necessary and possible to alleviate the situation and lay down a clear -cut food policy. 
 That is our most urgent task. 
 There was a conflict over the pood and a half idea among us, the Commu -nists, and it sometimes assumed acute forms. 
 But it has not weakened us. 
 Rather, it has led us to examine our policy in an even more critical and cautious way. 
 There may be mutual recriminations, but we are arriving at adecision which is being adopted rapidly and unanimously, and which, at this difficult juncture, when we are beginning another and trying six months, demands that we once moreclarify for ourselves the reason why a situation has arisen which compels us once more to muster all our strength and strain every nerve. 
 We have had an exceptionally hard year, and we are now on the verge of an even harder six months. 
 But every six months since the German revolution and since the beginningof ferment in Britain and France brings us nearer to the victory not only of the Russian revolution, but of the world revolution as well. 
 That is the situation as it now stands. 
 We have decided to present a draft of the fundamentalprinciples of food policy, which we shall request the All -Russia Central Executive Committee to affirm, so that it may be immediately embodied by the food workers inappropriate decrees that will enable us, those in the centre,the workers of the towns and the non -agricultural areas, to multiply our efforts once more. 
 For in our efforts alonelies the pledge that we shall win, that, though we make certain temporary concessions, necessitated by fatigue and famine, we shall uphold the fundamental principles of ourcommunist food policy and preserve them intact until thetime comes when the victory of communism will be completeand world -wide. 
 I shall now read, clause by clause, the motion which the Communist group on the All -Russia Central Executive Committee submits for its consideration: This joint session of the All -Russia Central Executive Committee, the All -Russia Trade Union Congress, the Moscow Soviet, and repre -sentatives of factory committees and trade unions of the city of Moscowhereby lays down the following fundamental principles of food policyand instructs the People’s Commissariat of Food to draw up forthwithdecrees embodying these principles. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR 1. 
 The Soviet food policy is confirmed as correct and unassailable, this policy consisting in: (a) registration and state distribution on the class principle; (b) monopoly of the principal foodstuffs; (c) transfer of supply from private hands to state hands. 
 2. 
 Unless the state monopoly of the chief items of food (bread, sugar, tea and salt) already decreed is strictly enforced, and unless massprocurements of other of the more important foodstuffs (meat, sea -fish, hemp, sunflower -seed and linseed oil, animal fats, except butter, and potatoes) are made by the state at fixed prices, it will be impossible to ensure a regular supply of food to the population under present con -ditions. 
 Furthermore, such mass procurements at fixed prices are only a preliminary measure, in preparation for a state monopoly of thesefoodstuffs, too, which will be the next task of the Food Commissariatto introduce. 
 The procurement and transportation of all foodstuffs enumerated in this clause, with the exception of potatoes, are forbidden to all but the state food bodies. 
 The right to mass procurement of potatoes at the es -tablished fixed prices shall, in addition to state bodies, be granted alsoto workers’ organisations, trade unions and co -operative societies. 
 3. 
 As a temporary measure, workers’ organisations and co -operative societies shall be granted the right to procure all foodstuffs other than those enumerated in Clause 2. 
 4. 
 The local food bodies are hereby compelled to assist the food -procuring organisations in the exercise of this right. 
 From the standpoint of old habits and the old idea of government, the use of the word “compelled” may surpriseyou. 
 You may perhaps say: “Can things be so bad in theSoviet Republic that people have to be compelled to obeythe will of the All -Russia Central Executive Committee?” Yes, we have to compel, and it is better to say so frankly than to hide our heads under our wing and pretend every -thing is going swimmingly. 
 Just let our comrades, the repre -sentatives of the All -Russia Central Executive Committee and the delegates at the All -Russia Trade Union Congress, give good thought to what they say among themselves. 
Let them give a thought to whether they are properly carry -ing out everything decreed long ago concerning theproper registration of foodstuffs and the full delivery to thestate of those foodstuffs which cannot be left for commod -ity exchange purposes. 
 When there is no commodity exchange the peasants say: “No, you’ll get nothing from us for your Kerensky money. 
” If you give a thought to what you say in private among yourselves and bear in mind how many of the orders of the central authorities remain unful -filled, you must admit it is better to tell the truth and say that our local bodies have to be compelled, firmly and ruthlessly. 
 ( Applause . 
) At this meeting, in which the All -Russia Central Executive Committee, as our supreme body, has come together with the All -Russia Trade Union Congress bodies, which have the most numerous representation—andthat just now is the main thing—these most influentialcomrades must firmly say, and make it known in their localities, that the local bodies must get accustomed to the idea that we have to compel them to carry out the policyof the central authorities consistently. 
 That is very diffi -cult, and it is natural that many millions of people, whoare accustomed to looking on the central authorities asrobbers, landowners, exploiters, can have no trust in the centre. 
 But this distrust must be overcome. 
 Socialism cannot be built if it is not, for that means building a centralisedeconomic system, an economic system directed from thecentre, and that can only be done by the proletariat, whichhas been trained in this spirit by the factory and by itswhole mode of life. 
 Only the proletariat can do this. 
 The fight against parochial tendencies, against the habits of the small property -owner, is a difficult one. 
 We know this cannot be done all at once, but we shall never tire of urgingthe workers to reiterate this truth and put it into practice,for socialism cannot be built otherwise. 
 Clause 4 explains further: The transportation and marketing of these foodstuffs shall be abso -lutely unrestricted. 
 No pickets, cordons, guards, etc. 
, shall have the right to prevent the unrestricted transportation and sale of the said foodstuffs in bazaars or markets, from carts, etc. 
 This point is particularly important. 
 Comrade Kamenev has mentioned many things here which, naturally, in the haste of our work, we have not carried out; our Food andother Commissariats have to issue one order on top of another,with the result that our local bodies find it very difficultto get them all straight. 
 We are accused of issuing decrees too hastily; but what are we to do when we have to make haste because of the advance of imperialism, when we arecompelled to make haste by the strongest scourge imagina -ble—the lack of bread and fuel. 
 This being so, we must useevery means to explain our tasks, to elucidate particularmistakes, and that is why the clear and precise demarcation now achieved by this struggle is so important. 
 To achieve this on a far larger scale we must now make sure that the local bodies do not act as if they are a law to themselves, that they do not dare to plead they remembered yesterday’sdecree but forgot today’s. 
 We must make sure they knowquite clearly and definitely which foodstuffs are a statemonopoly, and which are open to unrestricted transpor -tation and sale—that is everything except what is specifi -cally enumerated in clauses 1 and 2. 
 Let this be madegenerally known. 
 Let those who are now about to returnhome convey it to the localities. 
 Let them do what theirofficial position requires of them. 
 Let them take alongwith them copies of the decrees that will be drawn up onthe subject, so that these may be implicitly obeyed and carried out in the localities, so that the orders of the centre may really be carried out, and the former indeci -sion stopped. 
 Further, the end of Clause 4 reads: Note. 
 With respect to eggs and butter, this decision shall apply only to districts where mass procurements of eggs and butter are not madeby the Food Commissariat. 
 Comrades, I am now going to read the remaining clauses of the decree in brief. 
 As I am unable to go into detail,and as there is no need to do so since several other comrades,some of them better qualified than myself, will speak after me, I shall only stress what I consider most important. 
 I shall read only the basic principles which we recommend the All -Russia Central Executive Committee to adopt and instruct the Council of People’s Commissars and all otherauthorities of the Soviet Republic to embody in decrees and carry out unreservedly and implicitly. 
 ( Applause . 
) 5. 
 With a view to increasing procurements, and to the more effi -cient performance of individual tasks, the principle of surplus appro -priation and procurement shall be extended to non -monopoly food -stuffs, and a bonus system introduced for co -operative and other organisations engaged in procuring both monopoly and non -monopoly produce for the state. 
 Measures of organisation for introducing fresh forces into the food bodies and for the wider participation of workers: (a) Workers’ food inspectors shall be widely utilised and their func -tions extended to include control over the way the December 10 decreesare observed by the food bodies, and over the procurement of non -monopoly foodstuffs; (b) Workers’ inspection shall be introduced at the earliest possible date in all food bodies in the localities and extended to the Food Com -missariat departments, with the object of vigorously combatingbureaucracy and red tape; (c) Connections with the workers’ organisations—trade unions and workers’ co -operative societies—shall be strengthened by reinforcing the local bodies with active members of the aforesaid organisations; (d) A system of workers’ trainees shall be introduced in all central and local bodies and institutions in order to train workers as practicalspecialists in food affairs capable of filling responsible posts. 
 6. 
 The co -operative apparatus shall be employed to the full in the work of procurement and distribution. 
 Responsible representatives ofthe state supply bodies shall be appointed to the co -operative societies to control the activities of the co -operative organisations and coordi -nate them with the government’s food policy. 
 That, incidentally, is one of the ways of fighting the top people in the co -operatives. 
 But it would be a great mistake and positively fatal to scorn the entire co -operative appara -tus, to reject it out of hand or in a contemptuous way, saying:“We shall build ourselves a new one; this is no business ofours, this is something for Communists only. 
” We mustmake use of the machinery ready at hand—we cannot build socialism unless we utilise what capitalism has left us. 
 We must utilise everything in the way of cultural valuescapitalism created against our interests. 
 Therein lies thedifficulty of socialism, that it has to be built of materialsmade by our adversaries; but therein lies the only possi -bility for socialism. 
 We all know this theoretically, and now that we have got over this year, we have seen in practice that socialism can only be built from what capitalism hascreated against our interests, and that we must employ allthis to build and consolidate socialism. 
 Clause 7 reads: 7. 
 Supervision to ensure the proper observance of the regulations governing the transportation of foodstuffs and the strict enforcement ofthe monopolies shall devolve on the workers, aided by armed detach -ments formed by the Food Commissariat. 
 All food pickets other than the teams of the Food Commissariat and the Gubernia Food Committees shall be withdrawn immediately. 
 The teams of the Food Commissariat and the Gubernia Food Committees shall be withdrawn as and when the respective bodies of workers’inspectors are formed in the localities. 
 My time is up, comrades, and I shall only point out that here, in these last clauses, we find the main principles underlying our food policy and Soviet policy in general. 
 I have already said that hard times have come, that a more drastic six months has begun, that the respite in food difficulties is over and a most difficult period has commenced. 
Every time the Soviet government encounters difficultiesin the extremely difficult job of building socialism, itknows only one way to overcome them, and that is to turnto the workers, to wider and wider sections of the workers every time. 
 I have already said socialism can be built only when ten and a hundred times more people themselves beginto build the state and the new economic life. 
 Our foodworkers have, as their reports show, already got to a stagewhere no less than one -third of the members of the district food committees are workers, chiefly workers from Petrograd, Moscow and Ivanovo -Voznesensk—the flower of our prole -tarian army. 
 That is good, but it is not enough. 
 What we need is two -thirds, and we must go on working for it. 
 As you know, the advanced sections of the workers have alreadyset about governing the state, building a new life. 
 Weknow we must reach down deeper and more boldly enlist new sections. 
 They still lack training, they will inevitably make mistakes, but we are not afraid of that. 
 We knowthat in this way we shall get young trained workers andrecompense errors a hundredfold by securing scores ofyounger and fresher forces. 
 There is no other source we candraw on. 
 We must move ahead all the time, take our young workers from wherever we can and put them in more and more responsible posts. 
 The present food crisis is due to the fact that a more diffi -cult six months has begun. 
 It is also due to the stateof transport. 
 As I have already said, in the second half of 1918 we procured 67,500,000 poods. 
 But we were unable to get out 20,000,000 of this amount. 
 The latest severe crisis in Petrograd is due to the fact that our stocks are held upon the Volga -Bugulma Railway, and we cannot move them out. 
 The railways are in a desperate state. 
 The rolling stock is in a dreadful state, because no country has suffered sobadly as Russia owing to her prevailing backwardness, and because the rail workers are not so well organised. 
 I would ask you, on leaving this meeting, to make the people awareof our need for numerous workers for food organisation and the railways, who would help us with their experience. 
 Give them a job, keep an eye on the novices, and they will do a lot more than the old organisations. 
 Everybody on food and transport work! Let every organisation, no matterwhich branch it belongs to, review all its forces and askitself whether it has taken enough men, whether it has doneall it should in the way of sending commissars, as we sendthem for the army. 
 The workers are suffering from lack of food. 
 We must put our best people on the job, appoint them all to responsible military, food or transport posts. 
 Every -body can be of use here, even if he is not an expert. 
 On therailways it is sometimes the aid of a Party comrade that isrequired, the influence of an ideologically staunch proletar -ian who has had his schooling and will influence the less proletarian sections of railway employees by control and supervision. 
 Comrades, I once more repeat the slogan:“Everybody on food and transport work!” We must dowhat we did in the army, where we sent our political commis -sars and achieved the tasks we set ourselves. 
 I am sure weshall this time, too, in these difficult six months, conquer famine and devastation! Brief report published in Izvestia No. 
 12, January 18, 1919 First published in full Published according to in 1929 the verbatim report SPEEC H AT THE MOSCO W CITY CONFERENCE OF THE RUSSIA N COMMUNIS T PART Y (BOLSHEVIK S) JANUARY 18, 1919157 BRIEF NEWSPAPER REPORT As far as I can see from the resolutions, from the two drafts submitted after the discussion on the relations between centre and districts—the first for improving Soviet affairs,and the second for completely reconstructing the Sovietapparatus—the second, contained in the motion of a groupof comrades, gives the impression that something is lacking, inasmuch as no definite grounds exist for the change in the Soviet apparatus proposed in this resolution. 
 Our enemy today is bureaucracy and profiteering. 
 We cannot see the improvements for the devastation. 
 But thedevastation can be overcome only by centralisation, byforegoing purely local interests. 
 It looks like it is these interests that have given rise to the opposition to central -ism, which, nevertheless, is the only way out of our present predicament. 
 The group of comrades who submitted thisresolution are abandoning centralism for the quagmire oflocalism. 
 The districts appear to be dissatisfied because certain decisions of the central Soviet authorities are being takenwithout consulting them. 
 If that is so, the districts haveevery right to convene conferences to discuss all ques -tions in which they are interested. 
 We are beingground down by red tape, which is very difficult to copewith. 
 It has to be vigorously fought, and more workingmen have to be appointed to government offices. 
 But when the attack on red tape is directed to the wrong quarter, thingsbecome very dangerous, as, for example, in relation to specialists. 
 The reason we are in a bad way is not because we have got a lot of specialists, but because we have not got strict centralisation. 
 There are fields of Soviet work which suffer from a shortage of specialists. 
 We must appointmore workers of average qualifications to the governmentoffices, who would learn their jobs from the specialists andbe able to replace them eventually and do the practical workindependently. 
 Thus, it is evident that the theses submitted by Comrade Ignatov do not say what these comrades really want. 
 The attack is being levied at the wrong quarter. 
 Pravda No. 
 19, Published according to January 28, 1919 the Pravda text SPEEC H AT THE SECON D ALL-RUSSI A CONGRESS OF INTERNATIONALIS T TEACHER S158 JANUARY 18, 1919 (Stormy applause passing into ovation . 
) Comrades, greetings to your Congress on behalf of the Council of People’s Commissars. 
 The teachers are now faced withtasks of the highest importance. 
 I hope that after theyear we have just been through, after a year of struggle,after what has taken place in international affairs, thestruggle that has been going on among the teachers—between those who took their stand from the very first with the Soviet government to work for the socialist revolution, andthose who have so far stood by the old system, by the oldprejudices that teaching can continue to be based on theold system—must come to an end, and is in fact coming toan end. 
 There can be no doubt that the vast majority of teachers, who stand close to the working class and the work -ing peasants, are now convinced that the socialist revolu -tion is deeply rooted and is inevitably spreading all over the world. 
 And I think that now the vast majority of teacherswill quite sincerely come over to the side of the governmentof working and exploited people in the struggle for the socialist revolution and against those teachers who still stand by the old bourgeois prejudices, the old system andhypocrisies, and imagine that some part of that system canbe salvaged. 
 One of these bourgeois hypocrisies is the belief that the school can stand aloof from politics. 
 You know very well how false this belief is. 
 The bourgeoisie themselves, who advocated this principle, made their own bourgeois politicsthe cornerstone of the school system, and tried to reduce schooling to the training of docile and efficient servants of the bourgeoisie, to reduce even universal education from top to bottom to the training of docile and efficient servants of the bourgeoisie, of slaves and tools of capital. 
They never gave a thought to making the school a meansof developing the human personality. 
 And now it is clearto all that this can be done only by socialist schools, whichhave inseparable bonds with all the working and exploited people and wholeheartedly support Soviet policy. 
 Of course, the reconstruction of education is no easy matter. 
 And, naturally, mistakes have been and still arebeing made, as are attempts to misinterpret the principleof the ties between education and politics and to give ita crude and distorted meaning. 
 Awkward attempts are being made to put politics into the minds of the younger generation when they have not been prepared enough for it. 
Undoubtedly, we shall always have to combat such crudeapplications of this basic principle. 
 But today the chieftask of those members of the teaching profession who havesided with the International and the Soviet government is to work for the creation of a wider and, as nearly as possible, an all -embracing teachers’ union. 
 There is no place in your union, the union of international -ists, for the old teachers’ union, which clung to bourgeoisprejudices and revealed a lack of understanding. 
 It hasbeen fighting longest of all to uphold these privileges, longer even than other top unions, which were formed at the very beginning of the 1917 revolution and which wecombated in all spheres of life. 
 In my opinion, your interna -tionalist union may very well become a single school -teachers’ trade union, siding, like all the other trade unions—as has been very clearly shown by the Second All -Russia Trade Union Congress—with Soviet government policy. 
 The task facing the teachers is immense. 
 They have to com -bat the survivals of the slackness and disunity left by thelast revolution. 
 Next, as regards propaganda and agitation. 
 It is only natural that disunity should still prevail in every sphere of propaganda and education when we consider the lack of confidence in the teachers caused by the sabotage andprejudices of the bourgeois section of the teaching body, who are accustomed to thinking that only the rich are entitled to real education, while the majority of the working people need only be trained to be good servants and good workers, but not real masters of life. 
 This condemns a section ofthe teachers to a narrow sphere, the sphere of pseudo -edu-cation, and has prevented us from properly creating a singleapparatus in which all scholastic forces would merge andcollaborate with us. 
 We shall only succeed when we discard the old bourgeois prejudices. 
 This is where it is your union’s task to draw the broad mass of teachers into your family,to educate the most backward sections of the teachingprofession, to bring them under general proletarian policy,and weld them together into one common organisation. 
 In trade union organisation, the teachers have a big job on their hands with our country in its present predicament, when all the issues of the Civil War are becoming quiteclear, and when the petty -bourgeois democratic people are being compelled by the logic of events to come over to theSoviet government. 
 For they have seen for themselves thatany other course will, whether they like it or not, drive them towards defending the whiteguards and international imperialism. 
 Now that the whole world is faced with onecardinal task, the issue is: either extreme reaction, militarydictatorship and shootings—of which we have had strikingillustrations from Berlin—either this vicious reaction fromthe capitalist brutes who feel they will not go unpunished for these four years of war, and are therefore prepared to go to any lengths, to go on drenching the earth in the bloodof the working people, or the complete victory of the work -ing people in a socialist revolution. 
 Today there can beno middle course. 
 Hence, those teachers who sided withthe International from the very first, and who now clearly perceive that their opponents among the teachers of the other camp cannot put up any serious resistance, mustlaunch into far wider activities. 
 Your union should nowbecome a broad teachers’ trade union embracing vastnumbers of teachers, a union which will resolutely standby Soviet policy and the struggle for socialism through the dictatorship of the proletariat. 
 This is the formula adopted by the Second Trade Union Congress now in session. 
 The Congress demands that every -one engaged in a given trade, in a given sphere of activ -ity, should join a single union. 
 At the same time it declares that the trade union movement cannot hold aloof from the fundamental tasks of the struggle for the emancipation oflabour from capital. 
 And, consequently, only those unionswhich recognise the revolutionary class struggle for social -ism by the dictatorship of the proletariat can be full andequal members of the trade unions. 
 Your union is a union of this kind. 
 If you stand by that position, you will be sure of success in winning over the greater bulk of the teachersand in working to make knowledge and science no longersomething for the privileged, no longer a medium for rein -forcing the position of the rich and exploiters, but a weaponfor the emancipation of the working and exploited people. 
 Allow me to wish you every success in this endeavour. 
 Short report published in Izvestia No. 
 13, January 19, 1919 First published in full Published according to in 1926 the verbatim report SPEEC H AT A PROTEST RALL Y FOLLOWING THE MURDE R OF KAR L LIEBKNECHT AND ROS A LUXEMBURG JANUAR Y 19, 1919159 BRIEF NEWSPAPER REPORT Today the bourgeoisie and the social -traitors are jubilat -ing in Berlin—they have succeeded in murdering Karl Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg. 
 Ebert and Scheidemann,who for four years led the workers to the slaughter for the sake of depredation, have now assumed the role of butchers of the proletarian leaders. 
 The example of the Germanrevolution proves that “democracy” is only a camouflagefor bourgeois robbery and the most savage violence. 
 Death to the butchers! Pravda No. 
 14, Published according to January 21, 1919 the Pravda text REPOR T AT THE SECON D ALL-RUSSIA TRAD E UNIO N CONGRESS160 JANUARY 20, 1919 (Stormy , prolonged applause . 
) Comrades, owing to a slight indisposition, I must first ask you to excuse me for having to confine myself today to only a few remarks onthe question now put before you—the tasks of the tradeunions. 
 The resolution now before you has been submitted to the Trade Union Congress by the Communist group, which has given it thorough deliberation. 
 As the resolution has already been printed, I presume that all present are acquaint -ed with it, and I shall therefore dwell only on two mainpoints, which in my opinion are the most significant ofthose dealt with, generally speaking, in this resolution. 
 I think that the first of these points, a negative one, so to speak, is the statement regarding the slogan of unityor independence of the trade union movement. 
 Clause 3 ofthe resolution refers to this slogan, saying that in practiceit has led the groups behind this slogan to an open struggleagainst the Soviet government, and that this attempt hasplaced them outside the bounds of the working class. 
 This notorious independence slogan deserves attention, I think, from more than the trade union standpoint. 
 In myopinion, only if we realise that the independence sloganis self -deception for some people and plain deception for others, can the struggle over the issue of dictatorship ofthe proletariat or dictatorship of the bourgeoisie, which is now going on all over the world and which is obviously coming to a head with fantastic speed, be properly understoodand properly reckoned with, and enable the working class, its class -conscious representatives, to take a proper part in this struggle. 
 First of all, I should like to point out, if only briefly, how false this slogan is theoretically, and how open it is to criticism from the theoretical point of view. 
 What has lately happened in Germany, the brutal and treacherous murder of Liebknecht and Luxemburg, is notmerely the most dramatic and tragic event in the revolu -tion beginning in Germany. 
 It is something more. 
 It sheds an extraordinarily vivid light on the way the problems of the present -day struggle are presented by the various trends of political thought and in the various theoretical systemsof today. 
 It was from Germany that we heard most talk,for example, on the celebrated subject of democracy, on theslogan of democracy in general, and on the slogan that the working class must be independent of government. 
 These slogans may at first glance seem to be unconnected, butthey are actually very closely connected. 
 They are closelyconnected because they show how strong petty -bourgeois prejudices are to this day, despite the proletariat’s immenseexperience of the class struggle; how to this day often lip service is paid to the class struggle which is not recognised by the minds or hearts of those who talk about it. 
 Indeed,if we recall even the rudiments of political economy aswe learnt it from Marx’s Capital , that theory of the class struggle by which we all firmly stand, how can there beany talk of democracy in general or independence when the struggle has grown as acute and far -flung as it is today, when it is clear that the socialist revolution is facing the wholeworld, and when this has been palpably demonstrated inthe most democratic countries? Whoever thinks there canshows that, as far as the theory of political economy isconcerned, he has not understood a single page of Marx’s Capital , by which all socialists without exception now swear. 
 But, as a matter of fact, although they swear by this work, now that they are on the verge of that cardinal struggleto which Marx’s Capital led, they retreat from this class struggle and imagine there can be an extra -class or above -class democracy. 
 They imagine that in modern society,while the capitalists still retain their property, there can bea democracy other than bourgeois democracy, that is, other than a bourgeois dictatorship masked by false and hypocritical democratic labels. 
 It was from this very Ger -many that we recently heard voices saying that over therethe dictatorship of the proletariat, possibly, in fact mostprobably, would not transcend the bounds of democracy,that there democracy would remain. 
 It was there that peoplewho claim to be teachers of Marxism, people who from1889 to 1914 were the ideologists of the entire Second International, people like Kautsky, unfurled the banner of democracy and failed to understand that as long as propertyremains in the hands of the capitalists democracy is nothingbut a thoroughly hypocritical cover for the dictatorship ofthe bourgeoisie. 
 They failed to understand that there cannotbe any serious question of the emancipation of labour from capital as long as this hypocritical cover is not torn away. 
 Not as long as we do not put the question as Marxalways taught us to put it, and as we have been taught toput it by the proletariat’s day -to-day struggle, by every strike and by every acute turn in the trade union struggle—namely, that while property remains in the hands of the capitalists, all democracy will be nothing but a hypocritical cover for the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie. 
 All talk aboutuniversal suffrage, about the popular will and about equalityat the polls will be a sheer fraud, for there can be no equalitybetween the exploiter and the exploited, between the ownerof capital and property and the modern wage -slave. 
 Of course, compared with tsarism, absolutism, monarchy and all feudal survivals, bourgeois democracy historicallydenotes immense progress. 
 Of course, we shall have toutilise it. 
 And until the time comes for the struggle ofthe working class for full power it is incumbent on us tomake use of the forms of bourgeois democracy. 
 But the fact is that we have now arrived at this decisive moment of the struggle internationally. 
 For the issue now is whether thecapitalists can maintain their power over the means ofproduction and, above all, their ownership of the imple -ments of production. 
 And this means they are preparingfor new wars. 
 The imperialist war has quite clearly demon -strated how capitalist property is connected with thatslaughter of the nations, how it led up to it irresistibly andinexorably. 
 But that being so, all talk of democracy expressing the popular will is obviously sheer deception, nothing but the privilege of the capitalists and the rich to dupe the more backward sections of the working people both through their press, which remains in the hands ofthe property -owners, and by all other means of political influence. 
 There is and can be only one alternative: either the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie, disguised by constituent assemblies, all kinds of voting systems, democracy and similar bourgeois frauds that are used to blind fools, andthat only people who have become utter renegades fromMarxism and socialism all along the line can make play oftoday—or the dictatorship of the proletariat for suppressingwith an iron hand the bourgeoisie, who are inciting the most backward elements against the finest leaders of the world proletariat. 
 This dictatorship means the victory ofthe proletariat for the purpose of suppressing the bourgeoi -sie, who are now putting up a most desperate resistance,which gets all the more furious the more clearly the bourgeoi -sie perceive that it is the people that have raised this issue. 
 Previously, in the vast majority of cases, they regarded dissatisfaction and indignation among the workers as onlya temporary expression of discontent. 
 That, in fact, is theway the matter is quite often regarded to this day by theBritish capitalists, for example, who are perhaps the mostexperienced in deceiving the workers politically, and polit -ically the best trained and the best organised. 
 They realisethat the war has, of course, led to discontent, and that thisdiscontent inevitably gives rise and will continue to giverise to unrest among the workers. 
 But, they argue, theworkers have not yet said who is to head the state, whois to hold state power, and whether the capitalists are to be allowed to retain their property. 
 But events have shown that this is undoubtedly a pressing issue not only in Russia,but in a number of West -European countries as well, and, what is more, not only in countries which took part in thewar, but in neutral countries, too, which have sufferedrelatively little, such as Switzerland and Holland. 
 The bourgeoisie have above all been brought up, and have trained the people, in the spirit of bourgeois parlia -mentarism. 
 Yet it has become perfectly clear that a Soviet movement, a movement for Soviet government, has been ripening among the people. 
 The Soviet movement has ceased to be a Russian form of the power of the proletariat; it has become the policy of the international proletariat inits struggle for power. 
 It has become the second step inthe world -wide development of the socialist revolution. 
 The first step was the Paris Commune, which showed thatthe working class cannot arrive at socialism except by way of dictatorship, by the forcible suppression of the exploit -ers. 
 That is the first thing the Paris Commune showed, namely, that the working class cannot get to socialism viathe old, bourgeois -democratic parliamentary state, but only via a new type of state, which will smash both parlia -mentarism and the bureaucracy from top to bottom. 
 The second step from the point of view of the world -wide development of the socialist revolution was the Sovietgovernment. 
 It was at first considered a purely Russianphenomenon—as it might well have been, and was in factbound to have been when judged only by the facts. 
 Buttoday events have shown that it is also the international form of the struggle of the proletariat. 
 The wars which have reshuffled the proletarian and semi -proletarian masses have furnished them with a new form of organisation which ispatently in direct opposition to rapacious imperialism, tothe capitalist class and its fabulous profits, profits withoutprecedent before the war. 
 The wars have everywhere created these new mass fighting organisations, organisations of the proletariat for the overthrow of the power of the bour -geoisie. 
 Not everybody realised that this in fact was what the Soviets signified when they came into being. 
 Not everybodyrealises it even today. 
 But to us the picture could not be clearer for we saw the germs of these Soviets in 1905 and, after the February Revolution of 1917, we witnessed along period of hesitation and vacillation between the Sovietorganisation of the people and the compromising, treach -erous, petty -bourgeois ideology. 
 It lies before us as though in the palm of our hand, and it is with this picture in mind— and knowing the way the struggle of the proletariat against capitalist property for state power has developed and isgrowing wider and deeper every day—that we approach the matter. 
 And knowing this, what is the sense of all the references to democracy and all talk about “independence” and suchlike, which are constantly tending towards some classless position? We know that in capitalist society itis the bourgeoisie that rule, that capitalist society in factarises from the bourgeoisie’s political and economic power. 
Either the power of the proletariat or dictatorship of thebourgeoisie, there is no middle course on issues of any seriousness for any length of time. 
 And anyone who talks about independence, about democracy in general, consciouslyor unconsciously presupposes something intermediate,something standing between classes or above classes. 
 Inevery case that is self -deception or deception of others. 
 It serves to conceal the fact that as long as capitalist power remains, as long as the capitalists retain the ownership of the means of production, democracy may be broad or nar -row, more or less civilised, and so on and so forth, but itactually remains dictatorship of the bourgeoisie, and allthe more obviously and palpably does civil war spurt fromevery big contradiction. 
 The nearer the French political forms are to democracy, the more easily something like the Dreyfus case causescivil war. 
 The broader democracy is in America, with itsproletariat, its internationalists, and even pure pacifists,the more easily cases of lynching and outbreaks of civilwar arise. 
 The meaning of this is even clearer now, when the first -week of bourgeois freedom, of democracy, in Ger -many has led to a most frenzied outbreak of civil war, far more acute and far more desperate than in our country. 
 And whoever judges these outbreaks from the point of view of whether proceedings were brought by parties,whoever judges them simply from the point of view of the murder of Liebknecht and Luxemburg, reveals blindness and intellectual cowardice, refusing to understand that theseare outbreaks of an irresistible civil war, a war that springsirresistibly from all the contradictions of capitalism. 
There is not and cannot be any middle course. 
 All talk ofindependence or democracy in general, no matter what sauce it may be served up with, is a sheer fraud and a down -right betrayal of socialism. 
 And if the theoretical propaganda of the Bolsheviks, who are now the virtual founders of the International, if the theoretical teaching of the Bolsheviks on civil war did not reach very far and was all too often halted by obstacles of censorship and the military barrages of the imperialist states, today it is no longer the teaching,no longer the theory, but the facts of civil war that arebecoming all the more violent the older the democracy ofthe West -European states and the longer it has lasted. 
 These facts will pierce even the hardest and most obtuse skulls. 
 The people who talk about democracy in general, about independence, may now be called fossils. 
 Nevertheless, bearing in mind the difficult conditions of the struggle in which the trade union movement of Russiahas so recently arisen and grown up—and it has now almostreached full growth—we must, in passing, glance back and recall recent events. 
 Such recollections and reminders are, I think, all the more necessary since the trade union move -ment, as such, is having to undergo a particularly abruptchange now that world -wide socialist revolution has begun. 
 It was in the trade union movement especially that the ideologists of the bourgeoisie tried to fish in troubled waters. 
 They endeavoured to make the economic struggle, which is the basis of the trade union movement, independentof the political struggle. 
 But now, precisely now, especiallyafter the political revolution, which has transferred powerto the proletariat, the time has come for the trade unions,as the broadest organisation of the proletariat on a class scale, to play a very great role, to take the centre of the political stage, to become, in a sense, the chief politicalorgan. 
 For all the old concepts and categories of politicshave been upset and reversed by the political revolutionwhich has turned power over to the proletariat. 
 The oldstate, even the best and most democratic bourgeois republics, was never, I repeat, and never could be, anything but the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie, that is,of those who own the factories, the implements of production,the land, the railways—in a word, all the material means,all the instruments of labour, without the possession of whichlabour remains in slavery. 
 That is why, when political power passed into the prole -tariat’s hands the trade unions had increasingly to take on the tasks of builders of working -class politics, the task of people whose class organisation was to replace the old exploiting class after upsetting all the old traditions and prejudices of the old science which, in the words of one scholar, told the proletariat: “You look after your economicaffairs and the party of the bourgeoisie will look afterpolitics. 
” All these ideas have proved to be a direct weaponin the hands of the exploiting class and its thugs for keepingdown the proletariat, which is beginning to revolt and strug -gle everywhere. 
 And here the trade unions must take up an entirely new question in their state organisation work—the questionof “governmentalising” the trade unions, as it is termed inthe Communist group’s resolution. 
 In this connection thetrade unions must give very serious thought to the profound and famous words of the founders of modern communism to the effect that “the broader and deeper the revolutiongoing on in society, the larger should be the number of peoplewho make the revolution, who are its makers in the truesense of the word”. 
 161 Take the old society of the feudal nobility. 
 There revolutions were absurdly easy, as long as it was only a matter of taking power from one handful of nobles or feudal lords and turning it over to another. 
 Takebourgeois society, which boasts of its universal suffrage. 
In actual fact, as we know, this universal suffrage, thiswhole machine, becomes a fraud, for even in the mostadvanced, cultured and democratic countries the overwhelm -ing majority of the working people are downtrodden andcrushed—crushed by the hell of capitalism, so that actuallythey do not and cannot take any part in politics. 
 Now for the first time in history a revolution has begun which can lead to the complete victory of socialism—pro -vided only that new and large masses of people set about the work of governing independently. 
 The socialist revolution does not imply a change in the form of state, not the replace -ment of a monarchy by a republic, nor new elections inwhich people are assumed to be absolutely “equal” butwhich are actually nothing but an artificial obfuscation,a screen for the fact that some own property and others do not. 
 From the point of view of bourgeois society, once there is “democracy”, and once capitalist and prole -tarian alike take part in the voting, this is the “popular will”, this is “equality” and an expression of the people’s will. 
 We know what an abominable fraud this talk is, which only serves as a cover for butchers and murderers like Ebert and Scheidemann. 
 In bourgeois society, the mass ofthe working people are governed by the bourgeoisie withthe help of more or less democratic forms. 
 They are governedby a minority, the property -owners, those who have a share in capitalist property and who have turned education and science, that supreme bulwark and flower of capitalist civilisation, into an instrument of exploitation, into amonopoly, in order to keep the overwhelming majority ofthe people in slavery. 
 The revolution we have begun andhave been making for two years, and which we are firmlydetermined to carry through to the end ( applause ), is possible and feasible only provided we manage to transfer power to the new class, provided the bourgeoisie, the capi -talist slaveowners, the bourgeois intellectuals, the repre -sentatives of all the owners and property -holders are replaced by the new class in all spheres of government, in all stateaffairs, in the entire business of running the new life, from top to bottom. 
 ( Applause . 
) That is the task before us now. 
 The socialist revolution can only be lasting when this new class learns, not from books,not from meetings or lectures, but from the practical workof government. 
 Only when it enlists the vast mass of work -ing people for this work, when it elaborates forms which will enable all working people to adapt themselves easily to the work of governing the state and establishing lawand order. 
 Only on this condition is the socialist revolutionbound to be lasting. 
 Given this condition, it will constitutea force which will brush away capitalism and all its sur -vivals as easily as straw or dust. 
 From the class standpoint, generally speaking, that is the task before us as a condition for the victory of the social -ist revolution. 
 It is a task closely and directly associatedwith the tasks of those organisations which even undercapitalist society worked for the broadest possible massstruggle to destroy that society. 
 And of the organisations that then existed, the trade unions were the broadest. 
 And now, while formally remaining independent organisations,they can and should, as one of the passages in the resolution before you states, take an active part in the work of the Soviet government by directly working in all government bodies, by organising mass control over their activities, etc. 
, and by setting up new bodies for the registration,control and regulation of all production and distribution,relying on the organised initiative of the broad mass ofthe interested working people themselves. 
 The trade unions have never embraced more than one -fifth of the wage -workers in capitalist society, even under the most favourable circumstances, even in the most advancedcountries, after decades and sometimes even centuries ofdevelopment of bourgeois -democratic civilisation and cul -ture. 
 Only a small upper section were members, and of themonly a very few were lured over and bribed by the capital -ists to take their place in capitalist society as workers’leaders. 
 The American socialists called these people “labourlieutenants of the capitalist class”. 
 In that country of thefreest bourgeois culture, in that most democratic of bourgeoisrepublics, they saw most clearly the role played by thistiny upper section of the proletariat who had virtually entered the service of the bourgeoisie as its deputies, who were bribed and bought by it, and who came to form thosegroups of social -patriots and defence advocates of which Ebert and Scheidemann will always remain the perfectheroes. 
 In our country things are now different. 
 The trade unions are in a position to start the economic development of the state on new lines, making use of everything created bycapitalist culture and capitalist production. 
 They canbuild socialism on that material basis, on that large -scale industry, whose burden used to weigh on us, which wascreated against our interests, was made for the endless oppression of the working people, but which united and welded them, and thus created the vanguard of the newsociety. 
 And since the October Revolution, since the transferof power to the proletariat, this vanguard has begun toperform its real task—to educate the working and exploitedpeople, to enlist them in the work of governing the state and administering industry without officials, without the bourgeoisie and without capitalists. 
 That is why theresolution we submit to you rejects all bourgeois plans and all that treacherous talk. 
 That is why it declares the governmentalisation of the trade unions to be unavoidable. 
 It also takes a step forward. 
 We are no longer raising the question of the governmentalisation of the trade unionsmerely in its theoretical aspect. 
 We have, thank God,passed the stage when such questions were raised purelyas subjects for theoretical discussion. 
 We may even forgetat times the days when we used to engage in such free dis -cussions on purely theoretical themes. 
 Those times havelong since passed, and today we are raising these questionson the basis of a year’s experience of the trade unions,which, in their role as organisers of production, have createdsuch organisations as the Supreme Economic Council. 
 Inthis incredibly difficult business, the trade unions have committed innumerable blunders, and constantly still are committing them, but they are not deterred by themalicious sneers of the bourgeoisie; who say the proletariansdecided to do things themselves and are making a mess of it. 
 The bourgeoisie imagine they made no blunders when they took over from the tsar and the nobles. 
 They imagine the 1861 Reform, which attempted to repair the edifice of serfdom, and left power and abundant sources of revenuein the hands of the serfowners, went off quite smoothlyand that it was not followed by chaos in Russia for severaldecades. 
 There is no country in the world in which thenobility did not scoff at the upstart bourgeoisie and com -moners when they set out to govern the state. 
 It goes without saying that the entire flower, or, rather, sterile blossom, of the bourgeois intellectuals is now alsoscoffing at every mistake the new government is making,especially since the new class, the alliance of all workingpeople, has had to make its revolution at a furious rate because of the frantic resistance of the exploiters and the campaign of the world alliance of exploiters against Rus -sia—one of the weakest and least prepared of countries. 
We had to act under conditions in which we had to thinknot so much of making the course of revolution smooth, asof holding on as best we could until the West -European proletariat came to life. 
 We have accomplished this task. 
 In this respect, we can already say we have done far betterthan the men who made the French Revolution, which was defeated by an alliance of monarchical and backward countries. 
 The French Revolution, in the form of the power of the lower ranks of the bourgeoisie of that time, held on for a year only, and did not at once evoke a similar move -ment in other countries. 
 Nevertheless, it did so much forthe bourgeoisie, for the bourgeois democracy, that the entiredevelopment of civilised humanity throughout the nine -teenth century sprang from the great French Revolution, and was indebted to it for everything. 
 We have done much better. 
 What was done in a year for the development of the bourgeois democracy at thattime, we have done on a far larger scale for the new prole -tarian regime in about the same time. 
 And we have done itso successfully that already now the movement in Russia, whose beginning was due to a special set of circumstances rather than any merit of ours, to special conditions thatput Russia between two imperialist giants of the moderncivilised world—that the effect of this movement and thevictory of the Soviet system during the past year has beento make the movement international. 
 The Communist International has been founded, the slogans and ideals of the old bourgeois democracy have been shattered, andtoday there is no intelligent politician anywhere in theworld, whatever his party may be, who can fail to see thatthe world socialist revolution has begun, really is takingplace. 
 ( Applause . 
) I have digressed somewhat in speaking about how we have left the theoretical aspect of the question far behind and arenow about to tackle its practical solution. 
 We havehad a year’s experience, and we have already accomplishedincomparably more for the victory of the proletariat andits revolution than was accomplished by a year’s dictator -ship of bourgeois democrats for the victory of bourgeoisdemocracy all over the world at the end of the centurybefore last. 
 But, besides this, we have, during thisyear, acquired a vast amount of practical experience. 
This enables us, if not to calculate every one of our stepswith absolute precision, at least to indicate the rate of development, its speed, to see its practical difficulties and take the practical steps which will lead from one partialvictory in overthrowing the bourgeoisie to another. 
 Looking back, we can see the mistakes we have to cor -rect. 
 We can clearly see what we have to build and how we have to build in the future. 
 That is why our resolution is not confined to proclaiming the governmentalisation ofthe trade unions, to proclaiming the dictatorship of theproletariat in principle and the need for us to proceed, asone passage in the resolution states, “inevitably to thefusion of the trade union organisations with state bodies”. 
 That we already know from theory, we outlined it before October, and we should have outlined it even sooner. 
 Butit is not enough. 
 The whole crux of the question has changedfor a party which is now about to tackle the practical jobof building socialism, for trade unions which have alreadyset up bodies to run industry on a countrywide, state scale, which have already formed a Supreme Economic Council, and which have at a cost of thousands of mistakes acquiredthousands of useful bits of experience in organisation. 
 Today we can no longer confine ourselves to proclaiming the dictatorship of the proletariat. 
 The trade unions haveto be governmentalised; they have to be fused with state bodies. 
 The work of building up large -scale industry has to be entrusted entirely to them. 
 But all that is notenough. 
 We must also learn from our practical experience to determine the next immediate step. 
 That is the essence ofour task just now. 
 And that is what the resolution has in mind when it says that if the trade unions were arbitrarily to attempt to take over government functions now, theywould only make a mess of it. 
 We have suffered enough fromthis sort of thing. 
 We have fought hard enough against thesurvivals of the accursed bourgeois system, against theanarchistic and selfish tendencies of the small holder, which are so deeply ingrained even among the workers. 
 The workers were never separated by a Great Wall of China from the old society. 
 And they have preserved a gooddeal of the traditional mentality of capitalist society. 
The workers are building a new society without themselveshaving become new people, or cleansed of the filth of the old world; they are still standing up to their knees in that filth. 
 We can only dream of clearing the filth away. 
 Itwould be utterly utopian to think this could be done all at once. 
 It would be so utopian that in practice it would only postpone socialism to kingdom come. 
 No, that is not the way we intend to build socialism. 
 We are building while still standing on the soil of capi -talist society, combating all those weaknesses and short -comings which also affect the working people and whichtend to drag the proletariat down. 
 There are many oldseparatist habits and customs of the small holder in this struggle, and we still feel the effects of the old maxim: “Every man for himself, and the devil take the hindmost. 
”There used to be quite enough of that in every trade union,in every factory, which often thought only of itself, andleft everything else to the tender care of the Lord and ourbetters. 
 We have been through all that, and know the cost. 
 It has been the cause of so many mistakes, so many dreadful mistakes, that now, on the strength of that exper -ience, we give our comrades a most emphatic warningagainst any arbitrary action in this field. 
 Instead of build -ing socialism, it would mean we had all succumbed to theweaknesses of capitalism. 
 We have now learnt to appreciate the difficulties of the task in front of us. 
 We stand at the very heart of thework of building socialism, and in the interests of thiscardinal work we are against all arbitrary actions. 
 Theclass -conscious workers must be warned against arbitrary actions of this kind. 
 They must be told that we cannot merge the trade unions with the state bodies at once, at one stroke. 
 It would be a mistake. 
 That is not the way totackle the job. 
 We know that the proletariat has promoted several thousands, perhaps several tens of thousands of workers tostate administration. 
 We know that the new class—the proletariat—now has its representatives in every branch of state administration, in every section of the enterprisesalready socialised or about to be socialised, and in everybranch of the economy. 
 The proletariat knows this. 
 Ithas set about the job practically. 
 It can now see that wemust continue along the same lines, that we shall have to take quite a number of steps more before we are in a position to say that the trade union organisations of theworking people have definitely merged with the entire state apparatus. 
 That will be so when the workers completely take over the organs of suppression of one class over the other. 
 And we are quite certain that will be so. 
 I now want to focus your attention on the next practical job. 
 We must go on extending the participation of theworking people in economic administration and in build -ing a new economy. 
 We shall never bring the work of com -munist construction to its completion unless we cope with this task; unless we convert the trade unions into organs for training ten times as many people as at present fordirect participation in state administration. 
 That we realisequite clearly. 
 It is dealt with in our resolution, and it isa matter I want to direct your attention to particu -larly. 
 In this greatest revolution in history, when the prole -tariat has taken state power into its own hands, all the functions of the trade unions are undergoing a profoundchange. 
 The trade unions are becoming the chief buildersof the new society, for only the millions can build thissociety. 
 In the era of serfdom these builders numbered hundreds; in the capitalist era the builders of the state numbered thousands and tens of thousands. 
 The socialistrevolution can be made only with the active and directpractical participation of tens of millions in state admin -istration. 
 That is our goal but we are not there yet. 
 The trade unions should know that there is a higher and more important task than those tasks which are partly still in force and partly have already lapsed, and which,at any rate, even if they are still in force, call only be minorones in our eyes: registration, establishing work standards,amalgamation of organisations. 
 This task is to teach thepeople the art of administration, not from books, not from lectures or meetings, but from practical experience, so that instead of just the vanguard of the proletariat which hasbeen set to command and organise, more and more freshblood may enter the departments, and this new sectionmay be reinforced by ten others like it. 
 This may seem animmense and difficult task. 
 But it will not seem so over -powering if we stop to think how rapidly the experience ofthe revolution has enabled us to cope with the immensetasks that have cropped up since the October Revolution and how the working people who had had no access to and no use for knowledge are now thirsting for it. 
 We shall find that we can cope with this task and teach vast numbers of working people how to run the state andindustry. 
 We shall discover we can develop practical activ -ity, and shatter that pernicious prejudice which for decadesand centuries has been implanted among the workingpeople, namely, that state administration is the preserve of the privileged few, that it is a special art. 
 That is not true. 
 We shall inevitably make mistakes; but now every mistakewill serve to teach, not handfuls of students taking somecourse of theory in state administration, but millions ofworking people who will personally suffer the consequencesof every mistake. 
 They will themselves see that they are faced with the urgent task of registering and distributing products, of increasing labour productivity, and will seefrom experience that power is in their own hands and thatnobody will help them if they do not help themselves. 
That is the new mentality which is awakening in the work -ing class. 
 That is the new task of tremendous historical importance which faces the proletariat and which must, more than any other, strike root in the minds of tradeunionists and the leaders of the trade union movement. 
They are not only trade unions. 
 Today they are trade unionsonly to the extent that they are constituted within theonly possible framework linked with the old capitalist system, and embrace the largest number of working people. 
 But their task is to advance these millions and tens ofmillions of working people from simple to higher forms ofactivity, untiringly drawing new forces from the reserve ofworking people and advancing them to the most difficulttasks. 
 In this way they will teach more and more people the art of state administration. 
 It is their job to identify themselves with the struggle of the proletariat, which hasestablished the dictatorship and is retaining it in the faceof the whole world, every day winning over more industrialworkers and socialists everywhere who only yesterdaytolerated the orders of the social -traitors and social -defence advocates, but who are today coming more and more to accept the banner of communism and the CommunistInternational. 
 Hold on to this banner, and at the same time steadily enlarge the ranks of the builders of socialism. 
 Remember that the tasks of the trade unions are to build the new life and train millions and tens of millions, who will learn byexperience not to make mistakes and will discard the oldprejudices, who will learn by their own experience how torun the state and industry. 
 That is the only sure guaranteethat the cause of socialism will completely triumph, precluding any chance of a reversion to the past. 
 Newspaper reports published January 21, 1919 in Economicheskaya Zhizn No. 
 14 and in Pravda Nos. 
 15, 16, 17 for January 22, 24, 25 Published in 1921 in the book Published according to the Second All-Russia Trade Union book checked with the Congress. 
 Verbatim Report verbatim report and the newspaper texts LETTE R TO THE WORKERS OF EUROPE AND AMERIC A162 Comrades, at the end of my letter to American workers dated August 20, 1918, I wrote that we are in a besieged fortress so long as the other armies of the world socialist revolution do not come to our aid. 
 I added thatthe workers are breaking away from their social -traitors, the Gomperses and Renners. 
 The workers are slowly butsurely coming round to communist and Bolshevik tactics. 
 Less than five months have passed since those words were written, and it must be said that during this time, inview of the fact that workers of various countries haveturned to communism and Bolshevism, the maturing ofthe world proletarian revolution has proceeded very rapidly. 
 Then, on August 20, 1918, only our Party, the Bolshevik Party, had resolutely broken with the old, Second Inter -national of 1889 -1914 which so shamefully collapsed during the imperialist war of 1914 -18. 
 Only our Party had unre -servedly taken the new path, from the socialists andsocial -democracy which had disgraced themselves by alliance with the predatory bourgeoisie, to communism; from petty -bourgeois reformism and opportunism, which had thoroughly permeated, and now permeate, the official Social -Democratic and socialist parties, to genuinely proletarian, revolutionary tactics. 
 Now, on January 12, 1919, we already see quite a number of communist proletarian parties, not only within theboundaries of the former tsarist empire—in Latvia, Finland and Poland, for example—but also in Western Europe— ustria, Hungary, Holland and, lastly, Germany. 
 Thefoundation of a genuinely proletarian, genuinely interna -tionalist, genuinely revolutionary Third International, the Communist International , became a fact when the German Spartacus League, with such world -known and world -famous leaders, with such staunch working -class champions as Liebknecht, Rosa Luxemburg, Clara Zetkin and FranzMehring, made a clean break with socialists like Scheide -mann and Südekum, social -chauvinists (socialists in words, but chauvinists in deeds) who have earned eternal shame by their alliance with the predatory, imperialist German bourgeoisie and Wilhelm II. 
 It became a fact when theSpartacus League changed its name to the CommunistParty of Germany. 
 Though it has not yet been officiallyinaugurated, the Third International actually exists. 
 No class -conscious worker, no sincere socialist can now fail to see how dastardly was the betrayal of socialism by those who, like the Mensheviks and “Socialist -Revolu -tionaries” in Russia, the Scheidemanns and Südekumsin Germany, the Renaudels and Vanderveldes in France, theHendersons and Webbs in Britain, and Gompers andCo. 
 in America, supported “their” bourgeoisie in the 1914 -18 war. 
 That war fully exposed itself as an imperialist, reac -tionary, predatory war both on the part of Germany and on the part of the capitalists of Britain, France, Italy andAmerica. 
 The latter are now beginning to quarrel overthe spoils, over the division of Turkey, Russia, the Africanand Polynesian colonies, the Balkans, and so on. 
 The hypocritical phrases uttered by Wilson and his followers about “democracy” and “union of nations” are exposedwith amazing rapidity when we see the capture of the leftbank of the Rhine by the French bourgeoisie, the captureof Turkey (Syria, Mesopotamia) and part of Russia (Sibe -ria, Archangel, Baku, Krasnovodsk, Ashkhabad, and so on) by the French, British and American capitalists, and the increasing animosity over the division of the spoils betweenItaly and France, France and Britain, Britain and Amer -ica, America and Japan. 
 Beside the craven, half -hearted “socialists” who are thoroughly imbued with the prejudices of bourgeois democracy, who yesterday defended “their” imperialist governments and today limit themselves to platonic“protests” against military intervention in Russia—beside these there is a growing number of people in the Allied countries who have taken the communist path, the path of Maclean, Debs, Loriot, Lazzari and Serrati. 
 These are men who have realised that if imperialism is to be crushed andthe victory of socialism and lasting peace ensured, thebourgeoisie must be overthrown, bourgeois parliamentsabolished, and Soviet power and the dictatorship of theproletariat established. 
 Then, on August 20, 1918, the proletarian revolution was confined to Russia, and “Soviet government”, i. 
e. 
,the system under which all state power is vested in Soviets of Workers’, Soldiers’ and Peasants’ Deputies, still seemedto be (and actually was) only a Russian institution. 
 Now, on January 12, 1919, we see a mighty “Soviet” movement not only in parts of the former tsarist empire, for example, in Latvia, Poland and the Ukraine, but alsoin West -European countries, in neutral countries (Switzer -land, Holland and Norway) and in countries which havesuffered from the war (Austria and Germany). 
 The revolu -tion in Germany—which is particularly important and char -acteristic as one of the most advanced capitalist countries—at once assumed “Soviet” forms. 
 The whole course of theGerman revolution, and particularly the struggle of theSpartacists, i. 
e. 
, the true and only representatives of theproletariat, against the alliance of those treacherousscoundrels, the Scheidemanns and Südekums, with the bour -geoisie—all this clearly shows how history has formulated the question in relation to Germany: “Soviet power” or the bourgeois parliament, no matter under what signboard (such as “National” or “Constituent”Assembly) it may appear. 
 That is how world history has formulated the question. 
 Now, this can and must be said without any exaggeration. 
 “Soviet power” is the second historical step, or stage, in the development of the proletarian dictatorship. 
 Thefirst step was the Paris Commune. 
 The brilliant analysisof its nature and significance given by Marx in his The Civil War in France showed that the Commune had created a new type of state, a proletarian state . 
 Every state, including the most democratic republic, is nothing but a machinefor the suppression of one class by another. 
 The proletarian state is a machine for the suppression of the bourgeoisie by the proletariat. 
 Such suppression is necessary because of the furious, desperate resistance put up by the land -owners and capitalists, by the entire bourgeoisie and all their hangers -on, by all the exploiters, who stop at nothing when their overthrow, when the expropriation of the ex -propriators, begins. 
 The bourgeois parliament, even the most democratic in the most democratic republic, in which the property and rule of the capitalists are preserved, is a machine for thesuppression of the working millions by small groups ofexploiters. 
 The socialists, the fighters for the emancipationof the working people from exploitation, had to utilisethe bourgeois parliaments as a platform, as a base, for propaganda, agitation and organisation as long as our struggle was confined to the framework of the bourgeoissystem . 
 Now that world history has brought up the question of destroying the whole of that system, of overthrowingand suppressing the exploiters, of passing from capitalismto socialism, it would be a shameful betrayal of the prole -tariat, deserting to its class enemy, the bourgeoisie, andbeing a traitor and a renegade to confine oneself to bour -geois parliamentarism, to bourgeois democracy, to presentit as “democracy” in general, to obscure its bourgeois char -acter, to forget that as long as capitalist property exists universal suffrage is an instrument of the bourgeois state. 
 The three trends in world socialism, about which the Bolshevik press has been speaking incessantly since 1915,stand out with particular distinctness today, against thebackground of the bloody struggle and civil war in Germany. 
 Karl Liebknecht is a name known to the workers of all countries. 
 Everywhere, and particularly in the Allied countries, it is the symbol of a leader’s devotion to the interests of the proletariat and loyalty to the socialistrevolution. 
 It is the symbol of really sincere, really self -sacrificing and ruthless struggle against capitalism. 
 It isthe symbol of uncompromising struggle against imperial -ism not in words, but in deeds, of self -sacrificing struggle precisely in the period when “one’s own” country is flushed with imperialist victories. 
 With Liebknecht and the Spar -tacists are all those German socialists who have remained honest and really revolutionary, all the best and dedicated men among the proletariat, the exploited masses who are seething with indignation and among whom there is a growing readiness for revolution. 
 Against Liebknecht are the Scheidemanns, the Südekums and the whole gang of despicable lackeys of the Kaiserand the bourgeoisie. 
 They are just as much traitors to social -ism as the Gomperses and Victor Bergers, the Hendersons and Webbs, the Renaudels and Vanderveldes. 
 They repre -sent that top section of workers who have been bribed by the bourgeoisie, those whom we Bolsheviks called (applyingthe name to the Russian Südekums, the Mensheviks) “agentsof the bourgeoisie in the working -class movement”, and to whom the best socialists in America gave the magnificently expressive and very fitting title: “labour lieutenants of the capitalist class”. 
 They represent the latest , “modern”, type of socialist treachery, for in all the civilised, advanced countries the bourgeoisie rob—either by colonial oppressionor by financially extracting “gain” from formally independentweak countries—they rob a population many times larger than that of “their own” country. 
 This is the economic factor that enables the imperialist bourgeoisie to obtainsuperprofits, part of which is used to bribe the top sectionof the proletariat and convert it into a reformist, oppor -tunist petty bourgeoisie that fears revolution. 
 Between the Spartacists and the Scheidemann men are the wavering, spineless “Kautskyites”, who in words are “independent”, but in deeds are entirely, and all along theline, dependent upon the bourgeoisie and the Scheidemann men one day, upon the Spartacists the next, some followingthe former and some the latter. 
 These are people withoutideas, without backbone, without policy, without honour, without conscience, the living embodiment of the bewil -derment of philistines who stand for socialist revolution in words, but are actually incapable of understanding itwhen it has begun and, in renegade fashion, defend “de -mocracy” in general, that is, actually defend bourgeois democracy. 
 In every capitalist country, every thinking worker will, in the situation varying with national and historical con -ditions, perceive these three main trends among the socialists and among the syndicalists, for the imperialist war and the incipient world proletarian revolution engender identical ideological and political trends all over the world. 
 * * * The foregoing lines were written before the brutal and dastardly murder of Karl Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg by the Ebert and Scheidemann government. 
 Those butchers, in their servility to the bourgeoisie, allowed the Germanwhiteguards, the watchdogs of sacred capitalist property,to lynch Rosa Luxemburg, to murder Karl Liebknecht byshooting him in the back on the patently false plea that he“attempted to escape” (Russian tsarism often used that excuse to murder prisoners during its bloody suppression of the 1905 Revolution). 
 At the same time those butchersprotected the whiteguards with the authority of thegovernment, which claims to be quite innocent and to standabove classes! No words can describe the foul and abominablecharacter of the butchery perpetrated by alleged socialists. 
 Evidently, history has chosen a path on which the role of “labour lieutenants of the capitalist class” must be playedto the “last degree” of brutality, baseness and meanness. 
Let those simpletons, the Kautskyites, talk in their news -paper Freiheit163 about a “court” of representatives of “all” “socialist” parties (those servile souls insist that the Schei -demann executioners are socialists)! Those heroes ofphilistine stupidity and petty -bourgeois cowardice even fail to understand that the courts are organs of state power,and that the issue in the struggle and civil war now beingwaged in Germany is precisely one of who is to hold thispower—the bourgeoisie, “served” by the Scheidemanns as executioners and instigators of pogroms, and by the Kautskys as glorifiers of “pure democracy”, or the prole -tariat, which will overthrow the capitalist exploiters andcrush their resistance. 
 The blood of the best representatives of the world prole -tarian International, of the unforgettable leaders of the world socialist revolution, will steel ever new masses of workers for the life -and-death struggle. 
 And this struggle will lead to victory. 
 We in Russia, in the summer of 1917, lived through the “July days”,164 when the Russian Schei -demanns, the Mensheviks and Socialist -Revolutionaries, also provided “state” protection for the “victory” of the whiteguards over the Bolsheviks, and when Cossacks shotthe worker Voinov in the streets of Petrograd for distribut -ing Bolshevik leaflets. 
165 We know from experience how quickly such “victories” of the bourgeoisie and theirhenchmen cure the people of their illusions about bourgeois democracy, “universal suffrage”, and so forth. 
 * * * The bourgeoisie and the governments of the Allied countries seem to be wavering. 
 One section sees that demor -alisation is already setting in among the Allied troopsin Russia, who are helping the whiteguards and servingthe blackest monarchist and landlord reaction. 
 It realisesthat continuation of the military intervention and attemptsto defeat Russia—which would mean maintaining a million -strong army of occupation for a long time—is the surest and quickest way of carrying the proletarian revolution to the Allied countries. 
 The example of the German occupationforces in the Ukraine is convincing enough of that. 
 Another section of the Allied bourgeoisie persists in its policy of military intervention, “economic encirclement”(Clemenceau) and strangulation of the Soviet Republic. 
 The entire press in the service of that bourgeoisie, i. 
e. 
, the majority of the capitalist -bought daily newspapers in Britain and France, predicts the early collapse of the So -viet government, draws lurid pictures of the horrors ofthe famine in Russia, lies about “disorders” and the “in -stability” of the Soviet Government. 
 The whiteguard armies of the landowners and capitalists, whom the Allies are helping with officers, ammunition, money and auxiliarydetachments, are cutting off the starving central andnorthern parts of Russia from the most fertile regions,Siberia and the Don. 
 The distress of the starving workers in Petrograd and Moscow, in Ivanovo -Voznesensk and other industrial centres is indeed great. 
 If the workers did not understand thatthey are defending the cause of socialism in Russia and throughout the world they would never be able to bear the hardships, the torments of hunger to which they are doomed by the Allied military intervention (often covered up by hypocritical promises not to send their “own” troops, whilecontinuing to send “black” troops, and also ammunition,money and officers). 
 The “Allied” and whiteguard troops hold Archangel, Perm, Orenburg, Rostov -on-Don, Baku and Ashkhabad, but the “Soviet movement” has won Riga and Kharkov. 
 Latvia and the Ukraine are becoming Soviet republics. 
The workers see that their great sacrifices are not in vain,that the victory of Soviet power is approaching, spreading,growing and gaining strength the world over. 
 Every monthof hard fighting and heavy sacrifice strengthens the cause of Soviet power throughout the world and weakens its enemies, the exploiters. 
 The exploiters are still strong enough to murder the finest leaders of the world proletarian revolution, to in -crease the sacrifices and suffering of the workers in occupiedor conquered countries and regions. 
 But the exploiters all over the world are not strong enough to prevent the victory of the world proletarian revolution, which will free mankindfrom the yoke of capital and the eternal menace of newimperialist wars, which are inevitable under capitalism. 
 N. 
 Lenin January 21, 1919 Pravda No. 
 16, Published according to January 24, 1919 the manuscript SPEECH AT THE SECOND CONFERENCE OF HEADS OF ADULT EDUCATION DIVISIONS OF GUBERNIA EDUCATION DEPARTMENTS JANUARY 24, 1919 Comrades, you are all here as representatives of local adult education departments of gubernia Soviets. 
 I havenot got a lot to say since, unfortunately, I am not veryclosely acquainted with your work. 
 Greetings to yourcongress of adult educationalists—you certainly havesome important tasks to fulfil! There are many schoolteachers in our schools trained in the old ways and this makes things difficult to changeover from the capitalist to the socialist system. 
 Althoughit may seem strange, many learned people are puttingup stubborn resistance to us. 
 Those who are used to lookingon the old apparatus as their own private domain, merely look after themselves and serve the propertied class. 
 Adult education is better off than children’s school education. 
 We recently discussed the question in the Council of People’s Commissars of setting up a commission for amal -gamating several scattered educational . 
organisations. 
 Adult education is important for transforming the whole of our life. 
 New ways have to be sought. 
 It must be admitted that some new and inexperienced representatives of the Soviet government frequently usethe old methods and give the government a bad name. 
 I think you adult educationalists have a hard job on your hands. 
 In our Party work we have set our own ways of far -reaching influence on the masses, but they must be linked up with educational methods, and particularly with school and, above all, adult education. 
 This is not always done. 
 In your adult education work you get assistance from the working people in the sense that they thirst for knowledge andthis makes it easier for you to get across to them. 
 Thisis the last place you can gallop ahead, especially withmasses at a very low level of education. 
 You must try towork more closely with Party organisations, as propaganda organs, and get the masses into the adult education campaign. 
 If the popular initiative meets the necessaryresponse from you, you can expect the best results. 
 Allowme to wish you the best of luck. 
 Adult Education No. 
 2-3, Published according to February -March 1919 the journal Adult Education EVERYBODY ON FOOD AND TRANSPORT WORK! I have already had occasion at the last session of the Central Executive Committee to point out that the next six months will be particularly difficult for the Soviet Re -public. 
 During the first six months of 1918 we procured 28,000,000 poods of grain, and during the second 67,000,000poods. 
 The first six months of 1919 will be more difficultthan the preceding. 
 The food shortage is growing more and more acute. 
 Typhus is becoming an extremely serious menace. 
 Heroic efforts are required, but what we are doing is far fromenough. 
 Can we save the situation?Certainly. 
 The capture of Ufa and Orenburg, our victo -ries in the South and the success of the Soviet uprising in the Ukraine166 open up very favourable prospects. 
 We are now in a position to procure far more grain than is required for semi -starvation food rations. 
 Millions of poods of grain have already been delivered in the East. 
 They are being held up by the bad state ofthe transport system. 
 In the South, the liberation of the entire Voronezh Gubernia and part of the Don region from Krasnov’s Cossacks makes it fully possible to procureconsiderable quantities of grain, over and above our previouscalculations. 
 Finally, the grain surplus in the Ukraine istruly enormous, and the Soviet Government of the Ukraineis offering to help us. 
 Not only can we now obviate famine, but we can even fully satisfy the starving population of non -agricultural Russia. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR The whole trouble lies in the bad state of transport and the tremendous shortage of food workers. 
 Every effort must be made and we must stir the mass of workers into action. 
 We must definitely get out of thehabitual, everyday rut of life and work. 
 We must pullourselves together. 
 We must set about the revolutionary mobilisation of people for food and transport work. 
 We must not confine ourselves to “current” work, but go beyond its bounds and discover new methods of securing additional forces. 
 On the most “cautious” and even pessimistic estimate, we now have very weighty grounds for believing that avictory over famine and typhus in these six months (andsuch a victory is perfectly feasible) will lead to a radical improvement in the whole economic situation, for the es -tablishment of contact with the Ukraine and Tashkent removes the main and basic causes of the shortage anddearth of raw materials. 
 Of course, the hungry masses are exhausted, and that exhaustion is at times more than human strength can endure. 
 But there is a way out, and renewed energy is undoubtedly possible, all the more since the growth of the proletarianrevolution all over the world is becoming increasinglyapparent and promises a radical improvement in our foreignas well as our home affairs. 
 We must pull ourselves together. 
 Every Party organisation, every trade union, every group of organised workers, and even workers who are notorganised but are anxious to “tackle” the famine—everygroup of Soviet workers and citizens generally must askthemselves the following questions: What can we do to extend and intensify the national crusade against the famine? Can we replace male labour by female labour and thus release more men for the difficult duties of transport andfood work? Can we provide commissars for the engine and carriage repair shops? Can we provide rank -and-file workers for the food army? Should we not assign every tenth or fifth man from our midst, from our group, from our factory, etc. 
, to the food army, or for exceptionally difficult and arduous work in the railway shops? Are not some of us engaged in Soviet or other work which might be relaxed or even suspended altogether withoutundermining the main foundations of the state? Is it notour duty to mobilise such workers immediately for foodand transport work? Let as many people as possible go into action and deal one more blow to that accursed maxim of the old capitalist society, a maxim which we have inherited from that societyand which infects and spoils every one of us in one degreeor another, the maxim “every man for himself, and thedevil take the hindmost”. 
 It is this heritage from predatory,sordid and bloody capitalism that is stifling us, crushing us, oppressing, ruining and frustrating us more than any -thing else. 
 We cannot rid ourselves of this heritage at once. 
 It must be fought incessantly; more than one crusade willhave to be declared and conducted against it. 
 We can save the millions and tens of millions from famine and typhus. 
 Salvation is at hand. 
 The famine and typhus crisis hovering over us can be vanquished, and vanquished completely. 
 It would be absurd, foolish,shameful to give way to despair. 
 To stampede pellmell, everyman for himself, and each as he knows best, just to “getof the fix” oneself somehow, to shove back the more feebleand push forward alone, would be to desert, to abandon the sick and exhausted comrades and to make the overall situation even worse. 
 We have created the firm foundation of a Red Army, which has now forced its way through incredible difficulties, through the iron wall of the armies of the landowners andcapitalists supported by the fabulously wealthy British and French multimillionaires, forced its way through to the principal sources of raw materials, to grain, cotton andcoal. 
 We created that foundation by working in a new way,by political propaganda at the front, by organising theCommunists of our army, by the self -sacrificing organisation and struggle of the best of the workers. 
 We have gained a number of successes both on the external, military front and on the home front, in the fightagainst the exploiters, against sabotage, and for the dif -ficult, arduous, thorny but correct path of socialist con -struction. 
 We are on the verge of a complete and decisive victory both at home and on an international scale. 
 A little more effort, and we shall escape from the tenacious clutches of famine. 
 What we have done and are doing for the Red Army we must also do, and with redoubled energies, to step up,extend and intensify food and transport work. 
 All our best workers must do this work. 
 A place will be found for everybody who is anxious and able to work. 
 Everybody whowishes can help to achieve an organised and mass victoryover devastation and famine. 
 Every active force, everytalent, every speciality, every trade, every thoughtfulindividual can and must be found employment in this peace army of food and transport workers—a peace army which, to achieve complete victory, must now support theRed Army and consolidate and follow up its victories. 
 Everybody on food and transport work! N. 
 Lenin January 26, 1919 Pravda No. 
 19, Published according to January 28, 1919 the manuscript MEASURE S GOVERNIN G THE TRANSITIO N BOURGEOI S-CO-OPERATIV E TO PROLETARI AN-COMMUNIST SUPPL Y AND DISTRIBUTIO N167 The question of the co -operatives and consumers’ com -munes (see Izvestia , February 2) recently discussed in the Council of People’s Commissars involves the most vital problem of the day, measures of transition from the bourgeois co -operatives to a communist consumers’ and producers’ union of the whole population. 
 Let us imagine co -operatives embrace 98 per cent of the population. 
 This happens in the countryside. 
 Does this make them communes? No, if the co -operative (1) gives advantages (dividends on shares, etc. 
) to a group of special shareholders; (2) pre -serves its own special apparatus which shuts out thepopulation at large, in particular the proletariat andsemi -proletariat; (3) does not give preference in produce distribution to the semi -proletariat over the middle peasants, to the middle peasants over the rich; (4) does not confis -cate the surplus produce first from the rich, then from the middle peasants, and does not rely on the proletariat and semi -proletariat. 
 And so on and so forth. 
 The whole difficulty of the task (and the whole essence of the present task which confronts us right now) springsfrom the fact that we have to work out a system ofpractical measures governing the transition from the old co -operatives (which are bound to be bourgeois since they have a group of shareholders who constitute a minority of the population, as well as for other reasons) to a new and to a real commune . 
 These are measures for the transition from bourgeois -co-operative to proletarian -communist supply and distribution. 
 It is essential (1) to discuss this question in the press; (2) to organise the movement of all the central and local government institutions (particularly of the Supreme Eco -nomic Council and the other Economic Councils, the Food Commissariat and food departments, the Central Statistical Board and the People’s Commissariat of Agriculture) totackle this task; (3) to instruct the Co -operative Department of the Sup -reme Economic Council and the institutions enumerated inpar. 
 2 to work out a programme of these measures and a form for collecting information on such measures and facts which enable us to develop these measures; (4) to award a bonus for the best programme of measures, for the most practicable programme, for the most convenientand effective form and means of collecting informationabout it. 
 Written February 2, 1919 First published in 1931 Published according to the manuscript TELEGRA M TO UFA GUBERNI A REVOLUTIONARY COMMITTE E168 Ufa, Gubernia Revolutionary Committee Chairman Propose not to alienate Khalikov and to grant amnesty on condition that a common front with Bashkir regiments is set up against Kolchak. 
 The Soviet government pledgesits full guarantee for Bashkir national freedom. 
 Butnaturally, you must deal severely with counter -revolution -ries among Bashkir population and achieve de facto control to ensure proletarian reliability of Bashkir forces. 
 Lenin , Stalin Written February 5 or 6, 1919 Published February 16, 1919 Published according to in Zhizn Natsionalnostei the manuscript No. 
 5 (13) DRAFT WIRELESS MESSAGE PEOP LE’S COMMISSAR FOR FOREIGN AFFAIR S169 In reply to your wireless message I hasten to inform you that although we do not consider the Berne Conference either socialist or in any way representative of the working class, we nevertheless permit the commission appointedby you to come to Russia and guarantee it the opportunityto fully acquaint itself with the situation, just as we permitthe entry of any bourgeois commission on a fact -finding mission, directly or indirectly connected with any bourgeois government, even if it is engaged in attacking the Soviet Republic. 
 Permitting the entry of your commission wewould like to know whether your democratic government,and the governments of other democratic countries,whose citizens take part in the commission, will permitthe entry of our commission from the Soviet Republic. 
 Written February 19, 1919 Published February 20, 1919 Published according to in Izvestia No. 
 39 the manuscript CLOSURE OF THE MENSHEVIK NEWSPAPER UNDERMINING THE COUNTRY ’S DEFENCE ALL -RUSSIA CENTRAL EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE DRAFT RESOLUTION170 Taking into consideration that 1) the Menshevik newspaper Vsegda Vperyod published an article “Stop the Civil War” on 20. 
2. 
19, which proved once and for all that it is counter -revolutionary; 2) the slogan “Down with the Civil War”, openly advo -cated in the paper at a time when the landlord and capitalisttroops, led by Kolchak, have captured Perm as well asSiberia, is equivalent to support for Kolchak and anobstacle to the workers and peasants of Russia winning thewar against Kolchak; 3) the Mensheviks, who in their conference resolution condemned the overwhelming majority of Menshevik partymembers who have lined up with the propertied classes,i. 
e. 
, the landowners and capitalists in Siberia, Archangel,on the Volga, in Georgia and the South, are thus now start -ing to pursue the same policy in fact, while hypocriticallydenying it in words; 4) those of the Mensheviks who are not hypocritical friends of the landowners and capitalists are now againdisplaying the spineless vacillation bringing them to serv -ing Kolchak; 5) the Soviet Government, right at the time of the last, decisive and sharpest armed clash with the landlord and capitalist troops, cannot put up with people who are unwilling to endure great sacrifices alongside the workersand peasants fighting for their just cause; 6) such people are again and again leaning towards the Kolchak brand of democracy under which the bourgeoisie and their hangers -on do so well, the Central Executive Committee decrees that a) the newspaper Vsegda Vperyod shall be closed down until the Mensheviks show by actions their resolve to breakonce and for all with Kolchak and firmly stand for thedefence and support of the Soviet government; b) all the necessary measures shall be taken to exile Mensheviks hampering the victory of the workers andpeasants over Kolchak to a life under the Kolchak brandof democracy. 
 Written February 22, 1919 First published in 1945 Published according to in Lenin Miscellany XXXV the manuscript First page of the manuscript “To the People’s Commissariat of Education”. 
 February 1919 Reduced First page of the manuscript “To the People’s Commissariat of Education”. 
 February 1919 Reduced TO THE PEOPL E’S COMMISSARIA T OF EDUCATIO N171 Please pass on to your library departments (both adult education and public library, etc. 
) my supplementary ideas on the question recently raised in the Council of People’s Commissars and let me know your conclusions (and those of the respective departments). 
 * * * More than anything else the libraries, including of course reading huts, all kinds of reading rooms, etc. 
, requirecompetition between individual provincial libraries, groups, reading rooms, etc. 
 The proper way to send in accounts , which is now de -manded by the Council of People’s Commissars, shouldserve three aims: 1) authentic and complete information to the Soviet government and all citizens about what is going on; 2) enlisting the public in library work; 3) encouraging competition among library workers. 
 To these ends lists and forms of accounting should be immediately drawn up that will suit the purposes. 
 Account lists should, I think, be drawn up at the centre and then reprinted in the gubernias and distributed amongall educational departments and all libraries, reading rooms, clubs, etc. 
 These account lists should enumerate (printed, say, in heavy type) the compulsory questions which library man -agers, etc. 
, must answer on pain of prosecution . 
 Apart from these compulsory questions there should be a considerable number of non-compulsory questions (in the sense that failure to answer does not necessarily carry the threat of prosecution). 
 The compulsory questions should include the library’s (or reading room’s, etc. 
) address, name and address of themanager and his board members, quantity of books andnewspapers, working hours, etc. 
 (the big libraries willhave to give more information). 
 The non -compulsory questions should include all im -provements being applied in Switzerland and America(and elsewhere) so that we can reward (by giving bonuses in the form of valuable books, collections, and so on) thosewho make the most improvements and carry them out bestof all. 
 For example: 1) Can you supply precise information to prove more books have been lent from your library? or 2) how many people visit your reading room? 3) bookand newspaper exchange with other libraries and readingrooms? or 4) compilation of a central catalogue? or 5)work on Sundays? or 6) work in the evenings? or 7) encour -agement of new readers, women, children, non -Russians, etc. 
? or 8) satisfaction of readers’ references? or 9) simple and practical means of storing books and newspapers?Saving them? Mechanical means of obtaining the bookand returning it to its place? or 10) lending a book? or11) simplification of guarantees in lending a book? or12) sending it through the post? And so on, ad infinitum .... 
 Bonuses are to be awarded for the best accounts and forthcoming successes. 
 The Library Department of the People’s Commissariat of Education must inform the Council of People’s Commis -sars about the number of accounts received monthly and the answers to which questions are given; and the totals. 
 Written in February 1919 First published in 1933 Published according to in Lenin Miscellany XXIV the manuscript FIRS T CONGRESS OF THE COMMUNIST INTERNATIONA L172 MARCH 2-6, 1919 FIRST CONGRESS OF THE COMMUNIST INTERNATIONAL172 MARCH 2-6, 1919 1 SPEECH AT THE OPENING SESSION OF THE CONGRESS MARCH 2 On behalf of the Central Committee of the Russian Com -munist Party I declare the First Congress of the Communist International open. 
 First I would ask all present to risein tribute to the finest representatives of the Third Inter -national: Karl Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg. 
 ( All rise . 
) Comrades, our gathering has great historic significance. 
 It testifies to the collapse of all the illusions cherished by bourgeois democrats. 
 Not only in Russia, but in the most developed capitalist countries of Europe, Germany forexample, civil war is a fact. 
 The bourgeoisie are terror -stricken at the growing work -ers’ revolutionary movement. 
 This is understandable ifwe take into account that the development of events since the imperialist war inevitably favours the workers’ revo -lutionary movement, and that the world revolution is be -ginning and growing in intensity everywhere. 
 The people are aware of the greatness and significance of the struggle now going on. 
 All that is needed is to findthe practical form to enable the proletariat to establish its rule. 
 Such a form is the Soviet system with the dicta -torship of the proletariat. 
 Dictatorship of the proletariat— until now these words were Latin to the masses. 
 Thanksto the spread of the Soviets throughout the world thisLatin has been translated into all modern languages; apractical form of dictatorship has been found by the working people. 
 The mass of workers now understand it thanks to Soviet power in Russia, thanks to the Spartacus League inGermany and to similar organisations in other countries, such as, for example, the Shop Stewards Committees in Britain. 
173 All this shows that a revolutionary form of the dictatorship of the proletariat has been found, that the proletariat is now able to exercise its rule. 
 Comrades, I think that after the events in Russia and the January struggle in Germany, it is especially importantto note that in other countries, too, the latest form of theworkers’ movement is asserting itself and getting the upper hand. 
 Today, for example, I read in an anti -socialist news -paper a report to the effect that the British Government had received a deputation from the Birmingham Workers’Council and had expressed its readiness to recognise theCouncils as economic bodies. 
 174 The Soviet system has triumphed not only in backward Russia, but also in the most developed country of Europe—in Germany, and in Britain, the oldest capitalist country. 
 Even though the bourgeoisie are still raging, even though they may kill thousands more workers, victory will beours, the victory of the world -wide communist revolution is assured. 
 Comrades, I extend hearty greetings to you on behalf of the Central Committee of the Russian Communist Party. 
I move that we elect a presidium. 
 Let us have nominations. 
 First published in 1920 , in German, in the book Der I. 
 Kongress der Kommu -nistischen Internationale. 
 Protokoll , Petrograd First published in Russian in 1921 Published according to the in the book First Congress of the Russian edition of the minutes Communist International , Minutes , checked with the German Petrograd edition 2 THESES AND REPORT ON BOURGEOIS DEMOCRACY AND THE DICTATORSHIP OF THE PROLETARIAT MARCH 4 1. 
 Faced with the growth of the revolutionary workers’ movement in every country, the bourgeoisie and their agentsin the workers’ organisations are making desperate attemptsto find ideological and political arguments in defence ofthe rule of the exploiters. 
 Condemnation of dictatorship and defence of democracy are particularly prominent among these arguments. 
 The falsity and hypocrisy of thisargument, repeated in a thousand strains by the capitalistpress and at the Berne yellow International Conference inFebruary 1919, are obvious to all who refuse to betray thefundamental principles of socialism. 
 2. 
 Firstly, this argument employs the concepts of “de -mocracy in general” and “dictatorship in general”, without posing the question of the class concerned. 
 This non -class or above -class presentation, which supposedly is popular, is an outright travesty of the basic tenet of socialism,namely, its theory of class struggle, which socialists who have sided with the bourgeoisie recognise in words but disregard in practice. 
 For in no civilised capitalist countrydoes “democracy in general” exist; all that exists is bour -geois democracy, and it is not a question of “dictatorshipin general”, but of the dictatorship of the oppressed class,i. 
e. 
, the proletariat, over its oppressors and exploiters, i. 
e. 
, the bourgeoisie, in order to overcome the resistance offered by the exploiters in their fight to maintain theirdomination. 
 3. 
 History teaches us that no oppressed class ever did, or could, achieve power without going through a period of dictatorship, i. 
e. 
, the conquest of political power and forcible suppression of the resistance always offered by theexploiters—a resistance that is most desperate, most furious,and that stops at nothing. 
 The bourgeoisie, whose domina -tion is now defended by the socialists who denounce “dic -tatorship in general” and extol “democracy in general”, won power in the advanced countries through a series of insurrections, civil wars, and the forcible suppression ofkings, feudal lords, slaveowners and their attempts atrestoration. 
 In books, pamphlets, congress resolutionsand propaganda speeches socialists everywhere have thou -sands and millions of times explained to the people the class nature of these bourgeois revolutions and this bour -geois dictatorship. 
 That is why the present defence of bourgeois democracy under cover of talk about “democracyin general” and the present howls and shouts against pro -letarian dictatorship under cover of shouts about “dicta -torship in general” are an outright betrayal of socialism. 
 They are, in fact, desertion to the bourgeoisie, denial of the proletariat’s right to its own, proletarian, revolution,and defence of bourgeois reformism at the very historicaljuncture when bourgeois reformism throughout the worldhas collapsed and the war has created a revolutionarysituation. 
 4. 
 In explaining the class nature of bourgeois civilisa -tion, bourgeois democracy and the bourgeois parliamentary system, all socialists have expressed the idea formulatedwith the greatest scientific precision by Marx and Engels,namely, that the most democratic bourgeois republic isno more than a machine for the suppression of the working class by the bourgeoisie, for the suppression of the working people by a handful of capitalists. 
 175 There is not a single revolutionary, not a single Marxist among those nowshouting against dictatorship and for democracy who hasnot sworn and vowed to the workers that he accepts thisbasic truth of socialism. 
 But now, when the revolutionary proletariat is in a fighting mood and taking action to destroy this machine of oppression and to establish prole -tarian dictatorship, these traitors to socialism claim that the bourgeoisie have granted the working people “pure democracy”, have abandoned resistance and are prepared to yield to the majority of the working people. 
 They assert that in a democratic republic there is not, and never hasbeen, any such thing as a state machine for the oppressionof labour by capital. 
 5. 
 The Paris Commune—to which all who parade as socialists pay lip service, for they know that the workers ardently and sincerely sympathise with the Commune— showed very clearly the historically conventional natureand limited value of the bourgeois parliamentary systemand bourgeois democracy—institutions which, though high -ly progressive compared with medieval times, inevitablyrequire a radical alteration in the era of proletarian revolution. 
 It was Marx who best appraised the historical significance of the Commune. 
 In his analysis, he revealed theexploiting nature of bourgeois democracy and the bourgeoisparliamentary system under which the oppressed classesenjoy the right to decide once in several years whichrepresentative of the propertied classes shall “represent and suppress” ( ver -und zertreten ) the people in parliament. 
176 And it is now, when the Soviet movement is embracing the entire world and continuing the work of the Communefor all to see, that the traitors to socialism are forgettingthe concrete experience and concrete lessons of the ParisCommune and repeating the old bourgeois rubbish about “democracy in general”. 
 The Commune was not a parlia -mentary institution. 
 6. 
 The significance of the Commune, furthermore, lies in the fact that it endeavoured to crush, to smash to itsvery foundations, the bourgeois state apparatus, thebureaucratic, judicial, military and police machine, and to replace it by a self -governing, mass workers’ organisation in which there was no division between legislative andexecutive power. 
 All contemporary bourgeois -democratic republics, including the German republic, which the trait -ors to socialism, in mockery of the truth, describe as aproletarian republic, retain this state apparatus. 
 We there -fore again get quite clear confirmation of the point thatshouting in defence of “democracy in general” is actuallydefence of the bourgeoisie and their privileges as exploiters. 
 7. 
 “Freedom of assembly” can be taken as a sample of the requisites of “pure democracy”. 
 Every class -conscious worker who has not broken with his class will readily appreciate the absurdity of promising freedom of assemblyto the exploiters at a time and in a situation when theexploiters are resisting the overthrow of their rule andare fighting to retain their privileges. 
 Then the bourgeoisiewere revolutionary, they did not, either in England in 1649 or in France in 1793, grant “freedom of assembly” to the monarchists and nobles, who summoned foreigntroops and “assembled” to organise attempts at restoration. 
If the present -day bourgeoisie, who have long since become reactionary, demand from the proletariat advance guaranteesof “freedom of assembly” for the exploiters, whatever the resistance offered by the capitalists to being expropriated, the workers will only laugh at their hypocrisy. 
 The workers know perfectly well, too, that even in the most democratic bourgeois republic “freedom of assembly”is a hollow phrase, for the rich have the best public andprivate buildings at their disposal, and enough leisure to assemble at meetings, which are protected by the bourgeois machine of power. 
 The rural and urban workersand the small peasants—the overwhelming majority of thepopulation—are denied all these things. 
 As long as thatstate of affairs prevails, “equality”, i. 
e. 
, “pure democracy”,is a fraud. 
 The first thing to do to win genuine equality and enable the working people to enjoy democracy in practice is to deprive the exploiters of all the public andsumptuous private buildings, to give the working peopleleisure and to see to it that their freedom of assembly isprotected by armed workers, not by scions of the nobility orcapitalist officers in command of downtrodden soldiers. 
 Only when that change is effected can we speak of free -dom of assembly and of equality without mocking at the workers, at working people in general, at the poor. 
 Andthis change can be effected only by the vanguard of theworking people, the proletariat, which overthrows theexploiters, the bourgeoisie. 
 8. 
 “Freedom of the press” is another of the principal slogans of “pure democracy”. 
 And here, too, the workersknow—and socialists everywhere have admitted it millions of times—that this freedom is a deception while the best printing -presses and the biggest stocks of paper are appropriated by the capitalists, and while capitalist rule over the press remains, a rule that is manifested throughoutthe world all the more strikingly, sharply and cynicallythe more democracy and the republican system are devel -oped, as in America for example. 
 The first thing to do towin real equality and genuine democracy for the working people, for the workers and peasants, is to deprive capital of the possibility of hiring writers, buying up publishinghouses and bribing newspapers. 
 And to do that the capital -ists and exploiters have to be overthrown and their resist -ance suppressed. 
 The capitalists have always used theterm “freedom” to mean freedom for the rich to get richer and for the workers to starve to death. 
 In capitalist usage, freedom of the press means freedom of the rich to bribethe press, freedom to use their wealth to shape and fabri -cate so -called public opinion. 
 In this respect, too, the defenders of “pure democracy” prove to be defenders ofan utterly foul and venal system that gives the rich control over the mass media. 
 They prove to be deceivers of the people, who, with the aid of plausible, fine -sounding, but thoroughly false phrases, divert them from the concretehistorical task of liberating the press from capitalistenslavement. 
 Genuine freedom and equality will be embodiedin the system which the Communists are building, and in which there will be no opportunity for amassing wealth at the expense of others, no objective opportunities for puttingthe press under the direct or indirect power of money,and no impediments in the way of any workingman (orgroups of workingmen, in any numbers) for enjoying andpractising equal rights in the use of public printing -presses and public stocks of paper. 
 9. 
 The history of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries demonstrated, even before the war, what this celebrated“pure democracy” really is under capitalism. 
 Marxistshave always maintained that the more developed, the“purer” democracy is, the more naked, acute and merciless the class struggle becomes, and the “purer” the capitalist oppression and bourgeois dictatorship. 
 The Dreyfus casein republican France, the massacre of strikers by hired bands armed by the capitalists in the free and democratic American republic—these and thousands of similar facts illustrate the truth which the bourgeoisie are vainly seeking to conceal, namely, that actually terror and bourgeoisdictatorship prevail in the most democratic of republicsand are openly displayed every time the exploiters thinkthe power of capital is being shaken. 
 10. 
 The imperialist war of 1914 -18 conclusively revealed even to backward workers the true nature of bourgeois democracy, even in the freest republics, as being a dicta -torship of the bourgeoisie. 
 Tens of millions were killedfor the sake of enriching the German or the British groupof millionaires and multimillionaires, and bourgeois mil -itary dictatorships were established in the freest republics. 
 This military dictatorship continues to exist in the Allied countries even after Germany’s defeat. 
 It was mostly thewar that opened the eyes of the working people, that strippedbourgeois democracy of its camouflage and showedthe people the abyss of speculation and profiteering thatexisted during and because of the war. 
 It was in the name of “freedom and equality” that the bourgeoisie waged the war, and in the name of “freedom and equality” that themunition manufacturers piled up fabulous fortunes. 
 Noth -ing that the yellow Berne International does can concealfrom the people the now thoroughly exposed exploitingcharacter of bourgeois freedom, bourgeois equality and bourgeois democracy. 
 11. 
 In Germany, the most developed capitalist country of continental Europe, the very first months of full re -publican freedom, established as a result of imperialistGermany’s defeat, have shown the German workers andthe whole world the true class substance of the bourgeois -democratic republic. 
 The murder of Karl Liebknecht andRosa Luxemburg is an event of epoch -making significance not only because of the tragic death of these finest peopleand leaders of the truly proletarian, Communist Interna -tional, but also because the class nature of an advancedEuropean state—it can be said without exaggeration, of an advanced state on a world -wide scale—has been con -clusively exposed. 
 If those arrested, i. 
e. 
, those placed under state protection, could be assassinated by officers and capitalists with impunity, and this under a govern -ment headed by social -patriots, then the democratic republic where such a thing was possible is a bourgeois dictatorship. 
 Those who voice their indignation at the murderof Karl Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg but fail to under -stand this fact are only demonstrating their stupidity, orhypocrisy. 
 “Freedom” in the German republic, one of thefreest and advanced republics of the world, is freedom to murder arrested leaders of the proletariat with impunity. 
 Nor can it be otherwise as long as capitalism remains, forthe development of democracy sharpens rather than dampensthe class struggle which, by virtue of all the results andinfluences of the war and of its consequences, has beenbrought to boiling point. 
 Throughout the civilised world we see Bolsheviks being exiled, persecuted and thrown into prison. 
 This is thecase, for example, in Switzerland, one of the freest bourgeoisrepublics, and in America, where there have been anti -Bolshevik pogroms, etc. 
 From the standpoint of “democracyin general”, or “pure democracy”, it is really ridiculous that advanced, civilised, and democratic countries, which are armed to the teeth, should fear the presence of a fewscore men from backward, famine -stricken and ruined Russia, which the bourgeois papers, in tens of millionsof copies, describe as savage, criminal, etc. 
 Clearly, thesocial situation that could produce this crying contradic -tion is in fact a dictatorship of the bourgeoisie. 
 12. 
 In these circumstances, proletarian dictatorship is not only an absolutely legitimate means of overthrowingthe exploiters and suppressing their resistance, but alsoabsolutely necessary to the entire mass of working people,being their only defence against the bourgeois dictatorship which led to the war and is preparing new wars. 
 The main thing that socialists fail to understand and that constitutes their short -sightedness in matters of theory, their subservience to bourgeois prejudices and theirpolitical betrayal of the proletariat is that in capitalistsociety, whenever there is any serious aggravation of the class struggle intrinsic to that society, there can be no alternative but the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie or thedictatorship of the proletariat. 
 Dreams of some third way are reactionary, petty -bourgeois lamentations. 
 That is borne out by more than a century of development of bour -geois democracy and the working -class movement in all the advanced countries, and notably by the experience ofthe past five years. 
 This is also borne out by the wholescience of political economy, by the entire content of Marx -ism, which reveals the economic inevitability, wherevercommodity economy prevails, of the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie that can only be replaced by the class which the very growth of capitalism develops, multiplies, weldstogether and strengthens, that is, the proletarian class. 
 13. 
 Another theoretical and political error of the social -ists is their failure to understand that ever since therudiments of democracy first appeared in antiquity, its forms inevitably changed over the centuries as one ruling class replaced another. 
 Democracy assumed different formsand was applied in different degrees in the ancient repub -lics of Greece, the medieval cities and the advancedcapitalist countries. 
 It would be sheer nonsense to thinkthat the most profound revolution in human history, the first case in the world of power being transferred from the exploiting minority to the exploited majority, could takeplace within the time -worn framework of the old, bourgeois, parliamentary democracy, without drastic changes, withoutthe creation of new forms of democracy, new institutionsthat embody the new conditions for applying democracy, etc. 
 14. 
 Proletarian dictatorship is similar to the dictator -ship of other classes in that it arises out of the need, as every other dictatorship does, to forcibly suppress theresistance of the class that is losing its political sway. 
 Thefundamental distinction between the dictatorship of theproletariat and the dictatorship of other classes—landlord dictatorship in the Middle Ages and bourgeois dictatorship in all the civilised capitalist countries—consists in thefact that the dictatorship of the landowners and bour -geoisie was the forcible suppression of the resistance offeredby the vast majority of the population, namely, the workingpeople. 
 In contrast, proletarian dictatorship is the forcible suppression of the resistance of the exploiters, i. 
e. 
, an insignificant minority of the population, the landownersand capitalists. 
 It follows that proletarian dictatorship must inevitably entail not only a change in democratic forms and institu -tions, generally speaking, but precisely such a change asprovides an unparalleled extension of the actual enjoymentof democracy by those oppressed by capitalism—the toil -ing classes. 
 And indeed, the form of proletarian dictatorship that has already taken shape, i. 
e. 
, Soviet power in Russia, the Räte -System in Germany, the Shop Stewards Committees in Britain and similar Soviet institutions in other countries,all this implies and presents to the toiling classes, i. 
e. 
,the vast majority of the population, greater practicalopportunities for enjoying democratic rights and libertiesthan ever existed before, even approximately, in the best and the most democratic bourgeois republics. 
 The substance of Soviet government is that the permanent and only foundation of state power, the entire machineryof state, is the mass -scale organisation of the classes oppressed by capitalism, i. 
e. 
, the workers and the semi -prole -tarians (peasants who do not exploit the labour of others and regularly resort to the sale of at least a part of their own labour -power). 
 It is the people, who even in the most democratic bourgeois republics, while possessing equalrights by law, have in fact been debarred by thousandsof devices and subterfuges from participation in politicallife and enjoyment of democratic rights and liberties, that are now drawn into constant and unfailing, moreover, decisive, participation in the democratic administrationof the state. 
 15. 
 The equality of citizens, irrespective of sex, religion, race, or nationality, which bourgeois democracy every -where has always promised but never effected, and never could effect because of the domination of capital, is given immediate and full effect by the Soviet system, or dictator -ship of the proletariat. 
 The fact is that this can only bedone by a government of the workers, who are not interest -ed in the means of production being privately ownedand in the fight for their division and redivision. 
 16. 
 The old, i. 
e. 
, bourgeois, democracy and the parlia -mentary system were so organised that it was the mass of working people who were kept farthest away from the machinery of government. 
 Soviet power, i. 
e. 
, the dictator hip of the proletariat, on the other hand, is so organised as to bring the working people close to the machinery of government. 
 That, too, is the purpose of combining thelegislative and executive authority under the Sovietorganisation of the state and of replacing territorialconstituencies by production units—the factory. 
 17. 
 The army was a machine of oppression not only under the monarchy. 
 It remains as such in all bourgeois republics, even the most democratic ones. 
 Only the Soviets, thepermanent organisations of government authority of theclasses that were oppressed by capitalism, are in a positionto destroy the army’s subordination to bourgeois command -ers and really merge the proletariat with the army; only the Soviets can effectively arm the proletariat and disarm the bourgeoisie. 
 Unless this is done, the victory of social -ism is impossible. 
 18. 
 The Soviet organisation of the state is suited to the leading role of the proletariat as a class most concentratedand enlightened by capitalism. 
 The experience of all revolutions and all movements of the oppressed classes, the experience of the world socialist movement teaches us thatonly the proletariat is in a position to unite and lead thescattered and backward sections of the working and exploit -ed population. 
 19. 
 Only the Soviet organisation of the state can really effect the immediate break -up and total destruction of the old, i. 
e. 
, bourgeois, bureaucratic and judicialmachinery, which has been, and has inevitably had tobe, retained under capitalism even in the mostdemocratic republics, and which is, in actual fact, thegreatest obstacle to the practical implementation of democracy for the workers and working people generally. 
 The Paris Commune took the first epoch -making step along this path. 
 The Soviet system has taken the second. 
 20. 
 Destruction of state power is the aim set by all socialists, including Marx above all. 
 Genuine democracy,i. 
e. 
, liberty and equality, is unrealisable unless this aim is achieved. 
 But its practical achievement is possible only through Soviet, or proletarian, democracy, for by enlistingthe mass organisations of the working people in constant and unfailing participation in the administration of the state, it immediately begins to prepare the complete wither -ing away of any state. 
 21. 
 The complete bankruptcy of the socialists who as -sembled in Berne, their complete failure to understandthe new, i. 
e. 
, proletarian, democracy, is especially appar -ent from the following. 
 On February 10, 1919, Brantingdelivered the concluding speech at the international Con -ference of the yellow International in Berne. 
 In Berlin,on February 11, 1919, Die Freiheit , the paper of the In -ternational’s affiliates, published an appeal from the Party of “Independents” to the proletariat. 
 The appeal acknowl -edged the bourgeois character of the Scheidemann govern -ment, rebuked it for wanting to abolish the Soviets, which it described as Träger und Schützer der Revolution —ve -hicles and guardians of the revolution—and proposed that the Soviets be legalised, invested with governmentauthority and given the right to suspend the operation ofNational Assembly decisions pending a popular referendum. 
 That proposal indicates the complete ideological bank -ruptcy of the theorists who defended democracy andfailed to see its bourgeois character. 
 This ludicrous at -tempt to combine the Soviet system, i. 
e. 
, proletariandictatorship, with the National Assembly, i. 
e. 
, bourgeoisdictatorship, utterly exposes the paucity of thought of theyellow socialists and Social -Democrats, their reactionary petty -bourgeois political outlook, and their cowardly concessions to the irresistibly growing strength of thenew, proletarian democracy. 
 22. 
 From the class standpoint, the Berne yellow Inter -national majority, which did not dare to adopt a formalresolution out of fear of the mass of workers, was right in condemning Bolshevism. 
 This majority is in full agreement with the Russian Mensheviks and Socialist -Revolutionaries, and the Scheidemanns in Germany. 
 In complaining ofpersecution by the Bolsheviks, the Russian Mensheviksand Socialist -Revolutionaries try to conceal the fact that they are persecuted for participating in the Civil War on the side of the bourgeoisie against the proletariat. 
 Similarly, the Scheidemanns and their party have already demon -strated in Germany that they, too, are participating in the civil war on the side of the bourgeoisie against the workers. 
 It is therefore quite natural that the Berne yellow In -ternational majority should be in favour of condemning the Bolsheviks. 
 This was not an expression of the defenceof “pure democracy”, but of the self -defence of people who know and feel that in the civil war they stand with thebourgeoisie against the proletariat. 
 That is why, from the class point of view, the decision of the yellow International majority must be consideredcorrect. 
 The proletariat must not fear the truth, it mustface it squarely and draw all the necessary political con -clusions. 
 Comrades, I would like to add a word or two to the last two points. 
 I think that the comrades who are to report to us on the Berne Conference will deal with it in greaterdetail. 
 Not a word was said at the Berne Conference about the significance of Soviet power. 
 We in Russia have been dis -cussing this question for two years now. 
 At our Party Con -ference in April 1917 we raised the following question,theoretically and politically: “What is Soviet power, whatis its substance and what is its historical significance?” Wehave been discussing it for almost two years. 
 And at ourParty Congress we adopted a resolution on it. 
 177 On February 11 Berlin Die Freiheit published an appeal to the German proletariat signed not only by the leaders of the Independent Social -Democratic Party of Germany, but also by all the members of the Independent Social -Democratic group in the Reichstag. 
 In August 1918, Kaut -sky, one of the leading theorists of these Independents,wrote a pamphlet entitled The Dictatorship of the Prole -tariat , in which he declared that he was a supporter of democracy and of Soviet bodies, but that the Soviets must be bodies merely of an economic character and that theymust not by any means he recognised as state organisations. 
Kautsky says the same thing in Die Freiheit of November 11 and January 12. 
 On February 9 an article appeared by Rudolf Hilferding, who is also regarded as one of the lead -ing and authoritative theorists of the Second International, in which he proposed that the Soviet system be united with the National Assembly juridically, by state legislation. 
 That was on February 9. 
 On February 11 this proposal was adopted by the whole of the Independent Party and published in the form of an appeal. 
 There is vacillation again, despite the fact that the National Assembly already exists, even after “pure democ -racy” has been embodied in reality, after the leadingtheorists of the Independent Social -Democratic Party have declared that the Soviet organisations must not be state organisations! This proves that these gentlemen reallyunderstand nothing about the new movement and aboutits conditions of struggle. 
 But it goes to prove somethingelse, namely, that there must be conditions, causes, forthis vacillation! When, after all these events, after nearly two years of victorious revolution in Russia, we are offered resolutions like those adopted at the Berne Conference,which say nothing about the Soviets and their significance,about which not a single delegate uttered a single word,we have a perfect right to say that all these gentlemenare dead to us as socialists and theorists. 
 However, comrades, from the practical side, from the political point of view, the fact that these Independents,who in theory and on principle have been opposed to thesestate organisations, suddenly make the stupid proposalto “peacefully” unite the National Assembly with theSoviet system, i. 
e. 
, to unite the dictatorship of the bour -geoisie with the dictatorship of the proletariat, shows thata great change is taking place among the masses. 
 We seethat the Independents are all bankrupt in the socialist andtheoretical sense and that an enormous change is takingplace among the masses. 
 The backward masses among theGerman workers are coming to us, have come to us! So, the significance of the Independent Social -Democratic Party of Germany, the best section of the Berne Conference,is nil from the theoretical and socialist standpoint. 
 Still,it has some significance, which is that these waverers serveas an index to us of the mood of the backward sections ofthe proletariat. 
 This, in my opinion, is the great historical significance of this Conference. 
 We experienced something of the kind in our own revolution. 
 Our Mensheviks traversedalmost exactly the same path as that of the theorists of the Independents in Germany. 
 At first, when they had a majority in the Soviets, they were in favour of the Soviets. 
 All we heard then was: “Long live the Soviets!”, “For the Soviets!”, “The Soviets are revolutionary democracy!”When, however, we Bolsheviks secured a majority inthe Soviets, they changed their tune; they said: theSoviets must not exist side by side with the ConstituentAssembly. 
 And various Menshevik theorists made practi -cally the same proposals, like the one to unite the Sovietsystem with the Constituent Assembly and to incorporatethe Soviets in the state structure. 
 Once again it is hererevealed that the general course of the proletarian revo -lution is the same throughout the world. 
 First the sponta -neous formation of Soviets, then their spread and develop -ment, and then the appearance of the practical problem:Soviets, or National Assembly, or Constituent Assembly,or the bourgeois parliamentary system; utter confusionamong the leaders, and finally—the proletarian revolution. 
But I think we should not present the problem in thisway after nearly two years of revolution; we should rather adopt concrete decisions because for us, and particularly for the majority of the West -European countries, spreading of the Soviet system is a most important task. 
 I would like to quote here just one Menshevik resolution. 
 I asked Comrade Obolensky to translate it into German. 
 Hepromised to do so but, unfortunately, he is not here. 
 I shall try to render it from memory, as I have not the full text of it with me. 
 It is very difficult for a foreigner who has not heard anything about Bolshevism to arrive at an independentopinion about our controversial questions. 
 Everythingthe Bolsheviks assert is challenged by the Mensheviks, and vice versa. 
 Of course, it cannot be otherwise in the middle of a struggle, and that is why it is so important thatthe last Menshevik Party conference, held in December1918, adopted the long and detailed resolution publishedin full in the Menshevik Gazeta Pechatnikov . 
 178 In this resolution the Mensheviks themselves briefly outline the history of the class struggle and of the Civil War. 
 The resolution states that they condemn those groups in theirparty which are allied with the propertied classes in the Urals, in the South, in the Crimea and in Georgia—all these regions are enumerated. 
 Those groups of the Men -shevik Party which, in alliance with the propertied classes,fought against the Soviets are now condemned in the reso -lution; but the last point of the resolution also condemnsthose who joined the Communists. 
 It follows that the Men -sheviks were compelled to admit that there was no unityin their party, and that its members were either on the side of the bourgeoisie or on the side of the proletariat. 
 The majority of the Mensheviks went over to the bour -geoisie and fought against us during the Civil War. 
 We,of course, persecute Mensheviks, we even shoot them,when they wage war against us, fight against our Red Armyand shoot our Red commanders. 
 We responded to the bour -geois war with the proletarian war—there can be no otherway. 
 Therefore, from the political point of view, all thisis sheer Menshevik hypocrisy. 
 Historically, it is incom -prehensible how people who have not been officially certi -fied as mad could talk at the Berne Conference, on theinstructions of the Mensheviks and Socialist -Revolution -aries, about the Bolsheviks fighting the latter, yet keepsilent about their own struggle, in alliance with the bour -geoisie, against the proletariat. 
 All of them furiously attack us for persecuting them. 
 This is true. 
 But they do not say a word about the partthey themselves have taken in the Civil War! I think that I shall have to provide the full text of the resolution to be recorded in the minutes, and I shall ask the foreign com -rades to study it because it is a historical document in whichthe issue is raised correctly and which provides excellentmaterial for appraising the controversy between the “so -cialist” trends in Russia. 
 In between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie there is another class of people, who incline first this way and then the other. 
 This has always been thecase in all revolutions, and it is absolutely impossible incapitalist society, in which the proletariat and the bour -geoisie form two hostile camps, for intermediary sectionsnot to exist between them. 
 The existence of these waverers is historically inevitable, and, unfortunately, these ele -ments, who do not know themselves on whose side they will fight tomorrow, will exist for quite some time. 
 I want to make the practical proposal that a resolution be adopted in which three points shall be specifically men -tioned. 
 First : One of the most important tasks confronting the West -European comrades is to explain to the people the meaning, importance and necessity of the Soviet system. 
There is a sort of misunderstanding on this question. 
 Al -though Kautsky and Hilferding are bankrupt as theorists, their recent articles in Die Freiheit show that they cor -rectly reflect the mood of the backward sections of the German proletariat. 
 The same thing took place in ourcountry: during the first eight months of the Russianrevolution the question of the Soviet organisation was verymuch discussed, and the workers did not understand what the new system was and whether the Soviets could be trans -formed into a state machine. 
 In our revolution we advanced along the path of practice, and not of theory. 
 For example,formerly we did not raise the question of the ConstituentAssembly from the theoretical side, and we did not saywe did not recognise the Constituent Assembly. 
 It was only later, when the Soviet organisations had spread throughout the country and had captured political power, thatwe decided to dissolve the Constituent Assembly. 
 Now wesee that in Hungary and Switzerland the question is muchmore acute. 
 On the one hand, this is very good: it givesus the firm conviction that in the West -European states the revolution is advancing more quickly and will yield great victories. 
 On the other hand, a certain danger isconcealed in it, namely, that the struggle will be so precip -itous that the minds of the mass of workers will not keeppace with this development. 
 Even now the significanceof the Soviet system is not clear to a large mass of the politically educated German workers, because they have been trained in the spirit of the parliamentary system and amidbourgeois prejudices. 
 Second : About the spread of the Soviet system. 
 When we hear how quickly the idea of Soviets is spreading inGermany, and even in Britain, it is very important evi-dence that the proletarian revolution will be victorious. 
 Its progress can be only retarded for a short time. 
 It is quiteanother thing, however, when Comrades Albert and Platten tell us that in the rural districts in their countries there are hardly any Soviets among the farm labourers and small peasants. 
 In Die Rote Fahne I read an article opposing peasant Soviets, but quite properly supporting Soviets offarm labourers and of poor peasants. 
 179 The bourgeoisie and their lackeys, like Scheidemann and Co. 
, have alreadyissued the slogan of peasant Soviets. 
 All we need, however,is Soviets of farm labourers and poor peasants. 
 Unfortu -nately, from the reports of Comrades Albert, Platten andothers, we see that, with the exception of Hungary, verylittle is being done to spread the Soviet system in thecountryside. 
 In this, perhaps, lies the real and quiteserious danger threatening the achievement of certainvictory by the German proletariat. 
 Victory can only be considered assured when not only the urban workers, but also the rural proletarians are organised, and organisednot as before—in trade unions and co -operative societies— but in Soviets. 
 Our victory was made easier by the fact thatin October 1917 we marched with the peasants, with allthe peasants. 
 In that sense, our revolution at that time was a bourgeois revolution. 
 The first step taken by our prole -tarian government was to embody in a law promulgated on October 26 (old style), 1917, on the next day after therevolution, the old demands of all the peasants whichpeasant Soviets and village assemblies had put forwardunder Kerensky. 
 That is where our strength lay; that is why we were able to win the overwhelming majority so easily. 
 As far as the countryside was concerned, our revo -lution continued to be a bourgeois revolution, and onlylater, after a lapse of six months, were we compelled with -in the framework of the state organisation to start theclass struggle in the countryside, to establish Committees of Poor Peasants, of semi -proletarians, in every village, and to carry on a methodical fight against the rural bour -geoisie. 
 This was inevitable in Russia owing to the back -wardness of the country. 
 In Western Europe things willproceed differently, and that is why we must emphasisethe absolute necessity of spreading the Soviet system also to the rural population in proper, perhaps new, forms. 
 Third : We must say that winning a Communist majority in the Soviets is the principal task in all countries in which Soviet government is not yet victorious. 
 Our Resolutions’ Commission discussed this question yesterday. 
 Perhaps other comrades will express their opinion on it; but I would like to propose that these three points be adopted as aspecial resolution. 
 Of course, we are not in a position toprescribe the path of development. 
 It is quite likely that therevolution will come very soon in many West -European countries, but we, as the organised section of the working class, as a party, strive and must strive to gain a majority in the Soviets. 
 Then our victory will be assured and no poweron earth will be able to do anything against the communistrevolution. 
 If we do not, victory will not be secured soeasily, and it will not be durable. 
 And so, I would like topropose that these three points be adopted as a special resolution. 
 Theses published March 6, 1919 in Theses published according to the Pravda No. 
 51; report first published Pravda text; report according in 1920 in the German and in 1921 to the Russian edition of the in the Russian editions of the minutes minutes checked with the German of the First Congress of the Commu -edition nist International 3 RESOLUTION TO THE THESES ON BOURGEOIS DEMOCRACY AND THE DICTATORSHIP OF THE PROLETARIAT On the basis of these theses and the reports made by the delegates from the different countries, the Congress of the Communist International declares that the chief task ofthe Communist Parties in all countries where Sovietgovernment has not yet been established is as follows: 1) to explain to the broad mass of the workers the historic significance and the political and historical necessity of the new, proletarian, democracy which must replace bourgeois democracy and the parliamentary system; 2) to extend the organisation of Soviets among the workers in all branches of industry, among the soldiers in theArmy and sailors in the Navy and also among farm labour -ers and poor peasants; 3) to build a stable Communist majority inside the Soviets. 
 Pravda No. 
 54, March 11, 1919 Published according to and the journal Communist the journal checked International No. 
 1, May 1, 1919 with the Pravda text 4 CONCLUDING SPEECH AT THE CLOSING SESSION OF THE CONGRESS MARCH 6 That we have been able to gather, despite all the per -secution and all the difficulties created by the police, that we have been able without any serious differences andin a brief space of time to reach important decisions on allthe vitally urgent questions of the contemporary revolu -tionary epoch, we owe to the fact that the proletarianmasses of the whole world, by their action, have broughtup these questions in practice and begun to tacklethem. 
 All we have had to do here has been to record the gains already won by the people in the process of their revolu -tionary struggle. 
 Not only in the East -European but also in the West -European countries, not only in the vanquished but also inthe victor countries, for example in Britain, the movementin favour of Soviets is spreading farther and farther, andthis movement is, most assuredly, a movement pursuing the aim of establishing the new, proletarian democracy. 
 It is the most significant step towards the dictatorshipof the proletariat, towards the complete victory of com -munism. 
 No matter how the bourgeoisie of the whole world rage, how much they deport or jail or even kill Spartacists and Bolsheviks—all this will no longer help. 
 It will only serve to enlighten the masses, help rid them of the old bourgeois -democratic prejudices and steel them in struggle. 
 The victory of the proletarian revolution on a world scale is assured. 
 The founding of an international Soviet republic is on the way. 
 ( Stormy applause . 
) First published in 1920 in the German Published according to and in 1921 in the Russian editions of the Russian edition of the minutes the minutes of the First Congress of checked with the German edition the Communist International WON AND RECORDED been won by the mass of the proletariat. 
 The only gain worth recording is that which really has been firmly won. 
 The founding of the Third, Communist International in Moscow on March 2, 1919, was a record of what has been gained not only by the Russian workers, but also by theGerman, Austrian, Hungarian, Finnish, Swiss—in a word,by the workers of the world. 
 Precisely because of this the founding of the Third, Communist International really is firm. 
 Only four months ago it was impossible to say that So -viet government, the Soviet form of state, was an inter -national achievement. 
 There was something in it, and moreover something essential, which belonged to allcapitalist countries as well as to Russia. 
 But, until it hadbeen put to the test, it was still impossible to say what changes, of what depth and importance, the development of the world revolution would bring. 
 The German revolution has provided this test. 
 An ad -vanced capitalist country, coming after one of the mostbackward, has demonstrated to the whole world in a matterof a hundred -odd days not only the same principal revolu -tionary forces and principal direction of the revolution,but also the same principal form of the new, proletariandemocracy—the Soviets. 
 At the same time in Britain, a victor country, the richest in colonies, the longest serving model of “social peace”,or so it was reputed, the oldest capitalist country, we can see an extensive, irrepressible, intense and powerful growth of Soviets and of new Soviet forms of mass proletarianstruggle—the Shop Stewards Committees. 
 In America, the strongest and youngest capitalist country, the workers have tremendous sympathy with the Soviets. 
 The ice has been broken. 
 The Soviets have triumphed throughout the world. 
They have triumphed first and foremost because they have won the workers’ sympathy. 
 That is the main thing. 
 Nosavagery by the imperialist bourgeoisie, no persecution ormurder of Bolsheviks can deprive the people of this gain. 
 The more the “democratic” bourgeoisie rage, the firmer the grip these gains will take on the hearts of the workers, ontheir moods, on their minds, and the more they will inspiretheir heroic struggle. 
 The ice has been broken. 
That is why the work of the International Conference of Communists in Moscow which founded the Third Interna -tional has proceeded so easily, so smoothly, with such calm and firm resolution. 
 We have recorded what has already been won. 
 We have written down what has already taken a firm grip on thepeople’s minds. 
 Everyone knew, and what is more, everyone saw, felt, sensed, each from his own country’s experience, that a new proletarian movement was in full swing. 
Everyone realised that this unprecedentedly strong and deep -going movement cannot be confined to any of the oldframeworks, or held in check by the past masters at pettypolitics, neither by the world -schooled, world -skilled Lloyd Georges and Wilsons of British and American “democratic” capitalism, nor by the Hendersons, Renaudels, Brantingsand all the other case -hardened heroes of social -chauvinism. 
 The new movement is heading towards the dictatorship of the proletariat, making headway despite all the vacilla -tion, despite desperate reverses, despite the unparalleled and incredible “Russian” chaos (if one judges superficially as an onlooker). 
 It is heading for Soviet government with the torrential might of millions and tens of millions ofworkers sweeping everything from their path. 
 This is what we have recorded. 
 We have embodied in our resolutions, theses, reports and speeches what has already been won. 
 Marxism, illuminated by the bright light of the new, universally rich experience of the revolutionary workers, has helped us to understand the inevitability of the present development. 
 It will help the workers of the whole world, who are fighting to overthrow capitalist wage -slavery, more clearly to appreciate the aims of their struggle, to marchmore firmly along the path already outlined, more confi -dently and firmly to achieve victory and to consolidate it. 
 The founding of the Third, Communist International heralds the international republic of Soviets, the inter -national victory of communism. 
 March 5, 1919 Pravda No. 
 51, March 6, 1919 Published according to Signed: N. 
 Lenin the Pravda text FOUNDING OF THE COMMUNIST INTERNATIONAL SPEECH AT A JOINT MEETING OF THE ALL -RUSSIA CENTRAL EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE, THE MOSCOW SOVIET, THE MOSCOWCOMMITTEE OF THE RUSSIAN COMMUNIST PARTY (BOLSHEVIKS ), THE ALL -RUSSIA CENTRAL COUNCIL OF TRADE UNIONS, MOSCOW TRADE UNIONS AND FACTORY COMMITTEES TO MARK THE FOUNDING OF THE COMMUNIST INTERNATIONAL MARCH 6, 1919 (Stormy ovation . 
) Comrades, at the First Congress of the Communist International we did not succeed in gettingrepresentatives from all countries where this organisation has most faithful friends and where there are workers whose sympathies are entirely with us. 
 Allow me, therefore, tobegin with a short quotation which will show you that inreality we have more friends than we can see, than weknow and than we were able to assemble here, in Moscow,despite all persecution, despite the entire, seemingly om -nipotent, union of the bourgeoisie of the whole world. 
 Thispersecution has gone to such lengths as to attempt to sur -round us with a sort of Great Wall of China, and to deportBolsheviks in dozens from the freest republics of the world. 
They seem to be scared stiff that ten or a dozen Bolshevikswill infect the whole world. 
 But we, of course, know that this fear is ridiculous—because they have already infected the whole world, because the Russian workers’ strugglehas already convinced working people everywhere that thedestiny of the world revolution is being decided here, inRussia. 
 Comrades, I have here a copy of L’Humanité , 180 a French newspaper whose policy corresponds more to that of our Mensheviks or Right Socialist -Revolutionaries. 
 During the war, this paper was utterly ruthless in its attacks on those who supported our viewpoint. 
 Today it is defending those who during the war went along with their own bour -geoisie. 
 This very newspaper reports in its issue of Jan -uary 13, 1919, that a mammoth meeting (as the newspaperitself admits) took place in Paris of active party and tradeunion members of the Seine Federation, i. 
e. 
, the districtnearest to Paris, the centre of the proletarian movement,the centre of all political life in France. 
 The first speaker was Bracke, a socialist who throughout the war took the same line as our Mensheviks and Right -wing defence ad -vocates. 
 He was meek and mild now. 
 Not a word about asingle burning issue! He ended by saying that he wasagainst his government’s interference in the struggle of theproletariat of other countries. 
 His words were drowned in applause. 
 The next speaker was a supporter of his, a certain Pierre Laval. 
 He spoke of demobilisation, theburning issue in France today—a country which has prob -ably borne greater sacrifices than any other country inthis criminal war. 
 And this country now sees that demo -bilisation is being dragged out, held up, that there is no desire to carry it through, that preparations are being made for a new war that will obviously demand new sacrificesfrom the French workers for the sake of settling how muchmore of the spoils the French or British capitalists willget. 
 The newspaper goes on to say that the crowd listenedto the speaker, Pierre Laval, but when he started running down Bolshevism, the protests and excitement stopped the meeting. 
 After that, citizen Pierre Renaudel was refuseda hearing, and the meeting ended with a brief statement bycitizen Péricat. 
 He is one of the few people in the Frenchlabour movement who in the main is in agreement withus. 
 And so, the newspaper has to admit that the speaker who began to attack the Bolsheviks was immediately pulled up. 
 Comrades, we have not been able to get even one delegate here directly from France, and only one Frenchman, Com -rade Guilbeaux, arrived here, and he with great difficulty. 
( Stormy applause . 
) He will speak here today. 
 He spent months in the prisons of that free republic, Switzerland, being accused of having contact with Lenin and preparing a revolution in Switzerland. 
 He was escorted through Ger -many by gendarmes and officers, for fear, evidently, that he might drop a match that would set Germany on fire. 
 But Germany is ablaze without this match. 
 In France, too, as we can see, there are sympathisers with the Bolshevik movement. 
 The French people are probably among the mostexperienced, most politically conscious, most active andresponsive. 
 They will not allow a speaker at a public meet -ing to strike a false note: he is stopped. 
 Considering theFrench temperament, he was lucky not to have been dragged down from the rostrum! Therefore, when a newspaper hostile to us admits what took place at this big meetingwe can safely say the French proletariat is on our side. 
 I am going to read another short quotation, from an Italian newspaper. 
 The attempts to isolate us from the restof the world are so great that we very rarely receive social -ist newspapers from abroad. 
 It is a rare thing to receivea copy of the Italian newspaper Avanti! , 181 the organ of the Italian Socialist Party, a party which participated inZimmerwald, fought against the war and has now resolvednot to attend the yellow congress in Berne, the congressof the old International, which was to be attended by people who had helped their governments to prolong this criminal war. 
 To this day, Avanti! is under strict censorship. 
 But in this issue, which arrived here by chance, I read an itemon party life in a small locality called Cavriago (probablya remote spot because it cannot be located on the map). 
It appears that the workers there adopted a resolution supporting their newspaper for its uncompromising stand and declared their approval of the German Spartacists. 
Then follow the words “ Sovietisti russi ” which, even though they are in Italian, can be understood all over the world. 
They sent greetings to the Russian “ Sovietisti ” and expressed the wish that the programme of the Russian and German revolutionaries should be adopted throughout the world and serve to carry the fight against the bourgeoisie andmilitary domination to a conclusion. 
 When you read aresolution like that, adopted in some Italian Poshekhonye, 182 you have every right to say to yourself that the Italianpeople are on our side, the Italian people understand what the Russian “ Sovietisti ” are, what the programme of the Russian “ Sovietisti ” and the German Spartacists is. 
 Yet at that time we had no such programme! We had no common programme with the German Spartacists, but the Italian workers rejected all they had seen in their bourgeois press, which, bribed as it is by the millionaires and multimillion -aires, spreads slander about us in millions of copies. 
 It failed to deceive the Italian workers, who grasped what theSpartacists and the “ Sovietisti ” were and declared that they sympathised with their programme, at a time when thisprogramme did not exist. 
 That is why we found our task so easy at this Congress. 
 All we had to do was to record as a programme what had already been implanted in theminds and hearts of the workers, even those cast away insome remote spot and cut off from us by police and militarycordons. 
 That is why we have been able to reach concerteddecisions on all the main issues with such ease and complete unanimity. 
 And we are fully convinced that these decisions will meet with a powerful response among workers else -where. 
 The Soviet movement, comrades, is the form which has been won in Russia, which is now spreading throughout theworld and the very name of which gives the workers a complete programme. 
 I hope that we, having had the good fortune to develop the Soviet form to victory, will not be -come swelled -headed about it. 
 We know very well that the reason we were the first to take part in a Soviet proletarian revolution was notbecause we were as well or better prepared than other workers, but because we were worse prepared. 
 This is why we were faced with the most savage and decrepit enemy, andit is this that accounted for the outward scale of the revo -lution. 
 But we also know that the Soviets exist here to thisday, that they are grappling with gigantic difficulties whichoriginate from an inadequate cultural level and from the burden that has weighed down on us for more than a year, on us who stand alone at our posts, at a time when we aresurrounded on all sides by enemies, and when, as you knowperfectly well, harrowing ordeals, the hardships of famineand terrible suffering have befallen us. 
 Those who directly or indirectly side with the bourgeoisie often try to appeal to the workers and provoke indignation among them by pointing to the severe sufferings of theworkers today. 
 And we tell them: yes, these sufferings are severe and we do not conceal them from you. 
 We tell the workers that, and they know it well from their own exper -ience. 
 You can see we are fighting not only to win socialismfor ourselves, not only to ensure that our children shall onlyrecollect capitalists and landowners as prehistoric mon -sters; we are fighting to ensure that the workers of the wholeworld triumph together with us. 
 And this First Congress of the Communist International, which has made the point that throughout the world the Soviets are winning the sympathy of the workers, shows usthat the victory of the world communist revolution isassured. 
 ( Applause . 
) The bourgeoisie will continue to vent their fury in a number of countries; the bourgeoisie thereare just beginning to prepare the destruction of the best people, the best representatives of socialism, as is evident from the brutal murder of Rosa Luxemburg and Karl Lieb -knecht by the whiteguards. 
 These sacrifices are inevitable. 
We seek no agreement with the bourgeoisie, we are marchingto the final and decisive battle against them. 
 But we knowthat after the ordeal, agony and distress of the war, when the people throughout the world are fighting for demobilisation, when they feel they have been betrayed and appreciate howincredibly heavy the burden of taxation is that has beenplaced upon them by the capitalists who killed tens ofmillions of people to decide who would receive more of theprofits—we know that these brigands’ rule is at an end! Now that the meaning of the word “Soviet” is understood by everybody, the victory of the communist revolutionis assured. 
 The comrades present in this hall saw the found -ing of the first Soviet republic; now they see the foundingof the Third, Communist International ( applause ), and they will all see the founding of the World Federative Republic of Soviets. 
 ( Applause . 
) Brief report published in Pravda No. 
 52, March 7, 1919 Published in full Published according to in May 1919 the verbatim report NOT E TO STALIN ON REORGANISATIO N OF STAT E CONTRO L183 I think the following should be added to the decree on control: 1) formation of central (and local) bodies with workers’ participation; 2) introduction by law of the systematic participation of witnesses from among the workers, with compulsory participation of up to two -thirds women; 3) giving immediate priority to the following as our urgent tasks: (a) lightning inquiries into citizens’ complaints (b) combating red tape (c) revolutionary measures to combat abuses and red tape (d) special attention to boosting labour productivity, and (e) to increasing the quantity of products, etc. 
 Written March 8, 1919 Published according to First published in 1928 the manuscript N O T E S 1 2The session was called because of the critical position of the Soviet Republic which was cut off from her main sources of food supply, raw materials and fuel as a result of the foreign armed intervention and whiteguard revolts. 
 A unanimous resolution was passed on Lenin’s report, moved by the Communist group. 
 p. 
 18 Reference is to a counter -revolutionary revolt of the Czechoslovak army corps engineered by the Entente with the active assistance of the Mensheviks and Socialist -Revolutionaries. 
 The corps was formed in Russia from Czech and Slovak prisoners of war before the October Socialist Revolution. 
 In the summer of 1918 the corps numbered more than 60,000 men (the total number of Czechoslovak prisoners of war was 200,000). 
 After the establishment of Soviet power the corps was financed by the Entente. 
 Tomá X Masaryk, President of the Czechoslovak National Council and leader of the Czech bourgeois nationalists, proclaimed the corps part of the French army, and Entente representatives raised the question of its evacu -ation to France. 
 The Soviet Government agreed to the evacua -tion, provided the Russian troops were allowed to return home from France. 
 The agreement of March 26, 1918, allowed the corps to leave Russia via Vladivostok on the condition that it surrender its arms. 
 But the commanders of the corps did not keep their word and provoked an armed revolt at the end of May on the instigation of the Entente. 
 The governments of the U. 
S. 
A. 
, Britain and France openly supported the revolt in every possible way, while French officers took a direct part in it. 
 Acting in close contact with the whiteguards and kulaks, the mutineers occupied a large part of the Urals, the Volga area and Siberia and restored bourgeois rule. 
 In the occupied areas they formed whiteguard governments with Menshevik and Socialist -Revolutionary participation—the Si -berian government in Omsk, the Committee of Constituent Assemblymembers in Samara, etc. 
 On June 11, the Central Executive Committee of the Czechoslo -vak Communist groups in Russia addressed an appeal to the sol -diers of the corps exposing the counter -revolutionary nature of the revolt and calling on them to join Czechoslovak units of the Red Army. 
 Most Czech and Slovak prisoners of war were sympa -thetic to Soviet power and did not fall for the counter -revolutionary propaganda of the corps commanders. 
 Realising they had been de -ceived, many left the corps, refusing to fight against Soviet power. 
About 12,000 fought for the Red Army. 
 The Volga area was liberated in the autumn of 1918. 
 The white -guard Czechs were completely routed along with Kolchak’s troops. 
 p. 
 18 Lenin refers to the article “The French Millions”, which appeared in the issue of June 28, 1918, of the Czechoslovak Communist news -paper PrUkopník Svobody (The Banner of Freedom ) published in Moscow in 1918 -19. 
 On the same day, the article was reprinted in full in Pravda and partly in Izvestia of the All -Russia Central Executive Committee. 
 p. 
 19 Lenin refers to the counter -revolutionary revolt of the Left Social -ist-Revolutionaries which took place on July 6 -7, 1918, as the Fifth All-Russia Congress of Soviets was meeting in Moscow. 
 The Left Socialist -Revolutionary Party was formed at its First National Congress held in November 1917. 
 Until then its members had belonged to the Left wing of the Socialist -Revolutionary Party which had emerged during the First World War and was headed by M. 
 A. 
 Spiridonova, B. 
 D. 
 Kamkov and M. 
 A. 
 Natanson (Bobrov). 
 At the Second All -Russia Congress of Soviets, Left Socialist -Revo -lutionaries constituted the majority in the Socialist -Revolutionary group. 
 The group split over the question of Congress attendance The Right Socialist -Revolutionaries left the Congress on the direc -tives of the Central Committee of their party and the Left Social -ist-Revolutionaries stayed and voted together with the Bolsheviks on the major items of the agenda. 
 But they rejected the Bolsheviks’ invitation to join the Soviet Government. 
 After long hesitation and so as to retain influence among the peasants, the Left Socialist -Revolutionaries came to an agreement with the Bolsheviks and theirrepresentatives took posts in the Council of People’s Commissars. 
 They clashed with the Bolsheviks, however, on the fundamental questions of the socialist revolution and opposed the dictatorship of the proletariat. 
 In January and February 1918 the Central Com -mittee of the Left Socialist -Revolutionary Party campaigned against the Brest -Litovsk Peace Treaty. 
 Following its conclusion and ratification by the Fourth Congress of Soviets in March 1918 the Left Socialist -Revolutionaries resigned from the Council of Peo -ple’s Commissars, but retained their posts on the boards of People’sCommissariats and in local government bodies. 
 As the socialist revolution developed in the countryside they went into opposition to Soviet power. 
 On June 24 the party’s Central Committee decided on revolt. 
 Defeated at the Fifth Congress of Soviets, the Left Socialist -Revo -lutionaries decided to torpedo the Brest -Litovsk Peace Treaty and embroil the country in a war with Germany. 
 On July 6 they assas -sinated the German Ambassador, Count Mirbach, in Moscow. 
They followed this up with armed revolt. 
 Their strike force was a unit under the command of the Left Socialist -Revolutionary Popov, a Cheka worker. 
 They bombarded the Kremlin and seized the Telephone Exchange and the Telegraph Office which they held for two hours. 
 They issued several provocative messages, bulletins3 4 5 6and telegrams announcing that power had passed into their hands and that the entire population had greeted them enthusiastically, The Fifth Congress of Soviets instructed the government to take urgent measures to suppress the revolt. 
 The Left Socialist -Revolu -tionary group at the Congress was arrested. 
 Twenty -four hours after it had begun, by 2 p. 
m. 
 July 7, the revolt was put down due to the steps taken by the Soviet Government and the concerted action of the Moscow workers and garrison. 
 The revolt was part of the anti -Soviet campaign of the counter -revolutionaries at home and the imperialists abroad, and was secretly supported by foreign diplo -matic missions. 
 The Left Socialist -Revolutionaries tried to start revolts also in Petrograd, Vologda and other towns. 
 Following the suppression of the revolt the Fifth All -Russia Congress of Soviets adopted a decision to remove from the Soviets all Left Socialist -Revolutionaries who supported the reckless policy of their leaders. 
 The Congress received numerous telegrams from workers and peasants all over the country welcoming the sup -pression of the revolt and expressing their readiness to defend So -viet power by arms. 
 p. 
 21 Dashnaktsutyun Party —Armenian nationalist party which arose in the early nineties of the last century and strove for liberation of the Turkish Armenians from subjugation to the sultan of Turkey. 
 Besides the bourgeoisie it included many national intellectuals, petty bourgeoisie and working people who fell for the nationalist and socialist phrase -mongering. 
 During the Revolution of 1905 -07 the party drew close to the Socialist -Revolutionaries. 
 In 1907 a congress of the party adopted a Narodnik type of “socialist” programme. 
 After the February 1917 bourgeois -democratic revolution the Dashnaks supported the Provisional Government policy and, following the October Revolution, they joined the anti -Soviet bloc of Mensheviks, Socialist -Revolutionaries and Mussavatists. 
 Between 1918 and 1920 they headed the counter -revolutionary na -tionalist government of Armenia. 
 Their policy tended to turn Arme -nia into a colony of the imperialists and bridgehead for the British and French imperialists and Russian whiteguards in the struggle against the Soviet Republic. 
 In November 1920 the people of Anne -nia led by the Bolsheviks and Red Army units brought down theDashnak government. 
 After Soviet power had triumphed in Transcaucasia the Dashnaktsutyun organisations were broken up. 
 p. 
 21 Mussavatists —members of the nationalist Mussavat Party of the Azerbaijanian bourgeoisie and landowners, which was formed in 1912. 
 During the October Revolution and Civil War it was the main counter -revolutionary force in Azerbaijan. 
 After the fall of Soviet government in 1918, the Mussavatists came to power with the help of the Turkish and British interventionists. 
 On April 28, 1920, the working people of Azerbaijan and Red Army units over -threw the Mussavatist government. 
 p. 
 22 7 8On July 25, 1918, an emergency session of the Baku Soviet discussed the political and military situation in Baku in connection with the Turkish offensive. 
 Under the pretext of defending Baku, the Mensheviks, Dashnaks and Socialist -Revolutionaries demanded that British troops be called in “for help”. 
 The Bolshevik leaders of the Soviet government in Baku, S. 
 G. 
 Shahumyan, M. 
 A. 
 Azizbekov, P. 
 A. 
 Djaparidze, Y. 
 D. 
 Zevin and others, rejected these treacher -ous demands. 
 They declared that to “invite” the British interven -tionists into Baku would be betraying the Soviet Republic and insisted on taking urgent measures to defend Baku with the forces available. 
 The Bolsheviks, however, were narrowly defeated and a resolution was carried to call in the British. 
 Finding themselves outvoted, the Bolsheviks announced their resignation from the Council of People’s Commissars. 
 But they soon realised their mistake and decided to stay on and utilise every opportunity to isolate and defeat the traitors. 
 At its emergen -cy meeting the Executive of the Baku Soviet decided that thePeople’s Commissars should retain their posts until settlement of the question of power. 
 The Baku city Bolshevik conference held on July 27 decided not to relinquish power without a fight, urgently to organise the city’s defence under the leadership of the Council of People’s Commissars, announce general mobilisation and call on the workers to defend the city and Soviet government. 
 In pursuance of this decision the Baku Council of People’s Commissars declared martial law in the city, instructed the Cheka to cut short counter -revolutionary propaganda and called on the workers of Baku totake to arms in defence of the city However, the efforts of the Communists and many Baku workers were frustrated by the treachery of the Dashnaks, Socialist -Revolu -tionaries and Mensheviks. 
 The Dashnak units left the front andthe Turkish troops advanced through the exposed section. 
 On July 31 Soviet power in Baku fell to the foreign interventionists and their agents. 
 Among other causes of its fall were the failure of the Party organisations of Azerbaijan and the Baku Council of People’s Commissars to secure a firm alliance between the Baku proletariat and the working peasants of Azerbaijan and their mis -takes over the national question, which were taken advantage of bythe Mussavatists, Dashnaks and other counter -revolutionaries to deceive the people. 
 Socialist -Revolutionaries, Mensheviks and Dashnaks, the agents of the Entente, formed a counter -revolutionary government—the Dictatorship of the Central Caspian Area. 
 The Soviet leaders in Azerbaijan were arrested. 
 On the night of September 19 -20 twenty -six Baku Commissars (S. 
 G. 
 Shahumyan, M. 
 A. 
 Azizbekov, P. 
 A. 
Djaparidze, I. 
 T. 
 Fioletov, Y. 
 D. 
 Zevin, G. 
 N. 
 Korganov, M. 
 G. 
 Vezirov and others) were shot by the British with the direct conniv -ance of the Socialist -Revolutionaries and Mensheviks. 
 p. 
 23 This refers to the whiteguard revolt in Yaroslavl which began on July 6, 1918. 
 It was organised by the counter -revolutionary Union for the Defence of the Country and Freedom which was led by the 9Right Socialist -Revolutionary B. 
 V. 
 Savinkov. 
 This revolt, like other counter -revolutionary revolts in Russia at that time, was supported by the Entente imperialists with the active participation of the Mensheviks and Socialist -Revolutionaries. 
 The Union received large sums of money from them. 
 The revolt was part of the general plan of intervention in Russia and was timed to coincide with the revolt of the Left Socialist -Revolutionaries in Moscow (see Note 4). 
 It was also planned to start simultaneous revolts in Murom, Kostroma, Rybinsk and other towns of the Volga area and central Russia. 
 On the eve of the revolt Socialist -Revolutionaries, Mensheviks and whiteguard officers gathered in Yaroslavl in large numbers. 
 The Left Socialist -Revolutionaries, being most influential, filled a number of responsible posts. 
 On July 6, the mutineers occupied the centre of the town, the arsenal, the Post and Telegraph Office and other buildings. 
 Party and Soviet workers were killed. 
 The muti -neers tried to seize the workers’ districts but encountered stubbornand organised resistance. 
 Party organisations of the factories ral -lied the people, and armed workers and Red Army units went intobattle. 
 The Soviet Government sent military units and armed work -ers’ detachments from Moscow, Petrograd, Ivanovo -Voznesensk, Kostroma, Vologda and Rybinsk. 
 On July 21, 1918, the revolt was put down. 
 p. 
 27 Lenin refers to the decree On the Organisation of the Village Poor and Supply to Them of Grain, Prime Necessities and Agricultural Implements which was endorsed by the All -Russia Central Execu -tive Committee on June 11, 1918. 
 The decree provided for the estab -lishment of the Poor Peasants’ Committees on local initiative It charged the Committees with the task of taking stock of the food supplies of the peasant farms, ascertaining the kulaks’ food resources and assisting the Soviet supply bodies in requisitioning surpluses as well as protecting and delivering confiscated grain to the state granaries. 
 The Committees were also to supply the poor peasants with food at the expense of the kulak farms, distribute farm implements and manufactured goods, look after sowing and harvest -ing, protect the crops and combat grain profiteering. 
 By the autumnof 1918 over 80,000 Poor Peasants’ Committees were functioning in the localities. 
 They formed the strongholds and organs of the proletarian dictatorship in the countryside. 
 Their establishment marked the extensive development of the socialist revolution in the villages. 
 They played an outstanding part in suppressing the kulak counter -revolution and undermining the economic power of the kulaks through their partial expropriation. 
 In a comparatively short period of time the Committees confiscated and turned over to the poor and middle peasants 50 million hectares of land, and requisitioned the bulk of the kulaks’ farm implements for distri -bution among the poor and economically weak middle peasants. 
Great credit is due to the Committees for carrying through the abo -lition of landed proprietorship and supplying foodstuffs to the hungryindustrial centres and the Red Army. 
 The Poor Peasants’ Committees 10were active in establishing collective agricultural enterprises, the artels and communes, which together with the state farms were the first stones laid in the foundation of the socialist countryside. 
 According to incomplete data the number of collective farms increased from 240 at the time the Poor Peasants’ Committees were created to 1,600 at the end of 1918. 
 The Committees took the initia -tive in forming Red Army units by recruiting volunteers from amongthe poor peasants. 
 They also helped to consolidate local Soviets and purge them of kulak elements. 
 The Poor Peasants’ Committees were vastly important in strengthening the worker -peasant alliance and in winning over the middle peasants to the Soviet side. 
 As Lenin pointed out, in their activities the Poor Peasants’ Committees were to rely on the middle as well as the poor peasants. 
 They paved the way for a change -over from the policy of neutralising the middle peasants to a firm alliance with them. 
 By the autumn of 1918 the Poor Peasants’ Committees, which played a historic role in the socialist revolution, had outlived their usefulness. 
 The Soviets were consolidated with the help of the Com -mittees and the extensive network of rural Party cells. 
 In view ofthis and also of the need to “consummate Soviet construction by establishing a uniform pattern of Soviets on the entire territory of the Soviet Republic” the Extraordinary Sixth All -Russia Congress of Soviets held in November 1918 decided to merge the Poor Peas -ants’ Committees with the volost and village Soviets. 
 p. 
 28 Lenin refers to the peace treaty concluded between Soviet Russia and the countries of the Quadruple Alliance (Germany, Austria -Hungary, Bulgaria and Turkey) on March 3, 1918, in Brest -Litovsk and ratified on March 15 by the Extraordinary Fourth All -Russia Congress of Soviets. 
 The peace terms were very harsh. 
 Germany and Austria -Hungary were to get Poland, nearly the whole of the Baltic region and part of Byelorussia. 
 The Ukraine was to be severed from Russia and become dependent on Germany. 
 Turkey was to get Arda -han, Batumi and Kars. 
 In August 1918 Germany forced SovietRussia to conclude a supplementary treaty and financial agreement which contained even harsher terms. 
 The Brest -Litovsk Peace Treaty was concluded despite dogged resistance from Trotsky and the anti -Party group of “Left Commu -nists”. 
 Credit for its conclusion was due to Lenin’s efforts to over -come opposition. 
 The peace was a judicious political compromise. 
 It brought a respite from the war and enabled the Soviet govern -ment to demobilise the old demoralised army and create a newRed Army, to launch socialist construction and gather strength for the coming struggle against internal counter -revolution and foreign intervention. 
 The signing of the treaty also promoted the peace struggle, enhanced the revolutionary mood in the armies and among the people of all countries in the war. 
 On November 13, following the revolution in Germany, which led to the downfall of the monarchy, the All -Russia Central Executive Committee repealed the treaty. 
 p. 
 29 11 12 13 14Lenin refers to the historic decree of the Council of People’s Com -missars on the nationalisation of large -scale industry, approved on June 28, 1918, and published in Izvestia No. 
 134 on June 30. 
 Under the decree all big factories with basic capital of 200,000 -1,000,000 rubles and over were nationalised. 
 The decree consummated the socialisation of the major means of production. 
 It was preceded by the nationalisation of banks, big metallurgical plants, sugar refin -eries, coal and oil industries, water transport, etc. 
 While establish -ing state ownership of large -scale industry, the Council of People’s Commissars left the nationalised enterprises, pending their transfer to Soviet economic bodies, “in the hands of their former owners for free use on lease terms”. 
 The owners were held responsible for the maintenance and proper operation of the enterprises. 
 The work -ers, technical staff and managers were brought into the service ofthe Soviet Republic. 
 The Supreme Economic Council was obliged to draw up at short notice and circulate to all the nationalised en -terprises detailed instructions on how to run them. 
 Despite the enor -mous difficulties involved, the nationalisation was completed quickly due to the organisational measures of the Communist Party and the enthusiasm of the workers. 
 By August 31 more than 3,000 enterprises had been nationalised. 
 The decree also announced the nationalisation of all privately -owned railways and communal services (water supply, gasworks,trams, etc. 
), which came under the control of local Soviets. 
 p. 
 29 Black Hundreds —Monarchist gangs in tsarist Russia formed by the police to fight the revolutionary movement. 
 They murdered revolutionaries, hounded progressives among the intellectuals and organised anti -Jewish pogroms. 
 p. 
 29 The Congress was held in Moscow from July 30 to August 1, 1918. 
 There were 122 delegates, of whom 120 were Communists. 
 G. 
 I. 
 Pet -rovsky, People’s Commissar for the Interior of the R. 
S. 
F. 
S. 
R. 
, de -livered a report on the work of the Commissariat of the Interior and its immediate tasks. 
 Other speakers at the Congress dealt with the activity of the local Soviets, the character, tasks and organisational forms of Soviet militia, housing and other subjects. 
 Lenin spoke at the evening session on July 30. 
 The resolutions called for the improvement of the Soviet apparatus and emphasised the need for greater harmony between all its parts, close contact with the centre and complete obedience to the Constitution. 
 The Congress called on the workers and peasants of the Republic to rise in arms in defence of the socialist fatherland. 
 p. 
 35 Reference is to the Constitution of the Russian Socialist Federative Soviet Republic , unanimously adopted at the Fifth All -Russia Congress of Soviets on July 10, 1918, and published on July 19 as the Fundamental Law which went into force on publication. 
 It was the first Soviet Constitution. 
 It gave force of law to the great gains of the October Revolution—the new, Soviet state system, 15 16 17 18the abolition of private capitalist property and landed pro -prietorship, equality of all nations inhabiting Russia, etc. 
 It gave force of law to the dictatorship of the proletariat in the shape of Soviet power, provided for the participation of all working people in state administration and disfranchised the exploiters. 
 Lenin point -ed out: “The world has never known such a constitution as ours. 
It embodies the workers’ experience of struggle and organisation against the exploiters both at home and abroad” (see p. 
 146 of this volume). 
 p. 
 36 The Warsaw revolutionary regiment was formed from Polish vol -unteers and numbered 16,000 men. 
 On many occasions it took part in the fight against the whiteguard troops. 
 On August 2, 1918, on the eve of departure for the front, a regimental meeting addressed by Lenin was held at the former Commercial Institute in Moscow (now the Plekhanov Institute of the National Economy). 
 The meet -ing was organised, among others, by Julian Marchlewski, a promi -nent figure in the Polish working -class movement. 
 p. 
 38 Once a week, on Fridays, the Moscow Committee of the R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
) called big rallies of workers and Red Army men in various districts of Moscow. 
 On Lenin’s suggestion, members of the Central Com -mittee and high -ranking officials regularly addressed these rallies. 
 Lenin often spoke at the rallies, sometimes 3 -4 times a day, and demanded that no high -ranking official shirk his duty of speaking before workers. 
 He liked to keep his ear to the ground and showed a keen interest in the questions and proposals put to the speakers by the workers. 
 On August 2, 1918, rallies were held on the subject “The Soviet Republic Is in Danger”. 
 p. 
 41 Lenin wrote the theses at the time when the country was in the grip of a very severe food crisis and was beating off the interventionists and counter -revolutionaries at home. 
 The theses provided the basis for the six decrees on the food ques -tion which were discussed and adopted at the sessions of the Coun -cil of People’s Commissars on August 3, 4, 5 and 6, 1918: On the Enlistment of the Services of Workers’ Organisations in Grain Col -lection; Decree on Harvesting and Requisitioning Teams; Reg -ulations on (Guard Requisitioning Teams on Railways and Water Routes; Decree on Obligatory Commodity Exchange in the Grain -Growing Areas, On Fixed Prices for the Grain Harvested in 1918,and the appeal of the Council of People’s Commissars to all working people entitled “Join the Grain Campaign”. 
 The decrees were all published in Izvestia on August 6 and 8. 
 The decree on the tax in kind mentioned in Clause 8 of the theses was drafted later and adopted by the Council of People’s Commissars on October 26, 1918. 
 p. 
 45 The draft decision written by Lenin was adopted by the Council of People’s Commissars on August 2, 1918, together with the decree 19 20 21 22 23 24on the regulations governing admission to higher educational estab -lishments of the R. 
S. 
F. 
S. 
R. 
 The decree opened colleges and uni -versities for all over 16 and abolished school leavers’ diplomas or certificates, competitive examinations and tuition fees. 
 The decision and the decree were published in Izvestia on August 6. 
 p. 
 48 Lenin wrote this letter in reply to the report about the meeting of the Yelets branch of the Left Socialist -Revolutionary Party, which appeared in the Yelets Sovetskaya Gazeta on July 31, 1918. 
 The copy of the newspaper carrying the report was delivered to Lenin by K. 
 Grodner, a representative of the Yelets branch of the R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
), who was sent to Moscow for the purpose of refuting the slander of the Left Socialist -Revolutionary Kryukov, with which Lenin deals in his letter. 
 On August 11, Sovetskaya Gazeta carried Lenin’s letter and Grodner’s report, in which the latter said he had ascer -tained from talks with Y. 
 M. 
 Sverdlov, V. 
 A. 
 Avanesov andV. 
 D. 
 Bonch -Bruyevich that they did not say what Kryukov had charged them with saying Sovetskaya Gazeta —organ of the Yelets Uyezd Executive Committee, Orel Gubernia. 
 Appeared from May 16, 1918, to March 2, 1919. 
 p. 
 49 Reference is to the decree on land adopted by the Second All -Rus-sia Congress of Soviets on October 26 (November 8), 1917. 
 The decree abolished private ownership of land and proclaimed its na -tionalisation. 
 However, the Peasant Mandate, which formed part ofthe decree, insisted on the distribution of land among working peasants “in conformity with a labour standard or a subsistence standard quota,” putting forward the idea of land socialisation. 
 Lenin’s comment on the nationalisation of land and “equal land tenure” is to be found on pp. 
 306 -15 of this volume. 
 p. 
 50 The rally at which Lenin spoke was held in Sokolniki Krug (now Sokolniki Park) in Moscow. 
 On that day rallies were held on the subject “The Fifth Year of the World Slaughter”. 
 p. 
 52 Lenin refers to the Czech -occupied towns and areas where white -guard governments had been formed. 
 These governments, with Mensheviks and Socialist -Revolutionaries participating in them, perpetrated mass atrocities. 
 p. 
 55 On August 6, 1918, the Council of People’s Commissars passed a decision “On Fixed Prices for the Grain Harvested in 1918” providing for a threefold increase in grain procurement prices. 
 Lenin first raised the question of putting up procurement prices for grain in his “Theses on the Food Question” which he wrote on August 2 (see pp. 
 45 -47 of this volume). 
 On August 8 the decision was published in Izvestia. 
 p. 
 57 The draft of the telegram was written by Lenin after reports from the localities had mentioned distortions by Party and government 25 26 27bodies of the policy towards the Poor Peasants’ Committees. 
 In a number of areas the slogan calling for the organisation of the Com -mittees was taken to mean that the poor peasants should be opposedto the rest of the peasants, that is, to the kulaks and the middle peasants. 
 The latter were barred from elections to the Poor Peas -ants’ Committees and there were even cases of the Committeesbeing appointed by volost Soviets instead of being elected. 
 On August 17, the telegram based on this draft and signed by Lenin and Tsurupa, the People’s Commissar for Food, was sent to all the gubernia Soviets and food committees. 
 On August 18 it was published in Izvestia . 
p . 
 5 9 On August 6, 1918, the Council of People’s Commissars adopted a decision to raise grain procurement prices and a decree On the Sup -ply of Agriculture with Implements and Metal. 
 The draft of thedecree submitted to the Council of People’s Commissars for approv -al was supplemented by Lenin and in this final form was endorsedon April 24. 
 Three days later it appeared in Izvestia . 
p . 
 5 9 The meeting of the Moscow Committee of the R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
) discussed the question of setting up groups of sympathisers, which had been raised by Lenin. 
 This was dictated by the need to enlist new forces for the Party from among the advanced and politically -conscious working people. 
 Lenin spoke twice during the debate. 
 On Lenin’s suggestion it was decided to start creating the groups and to work out rules of organisation. 
 On August 22, Pravda and Izvestia published the rules approved by the Executive Commission of the Moscow Committee of the R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
). 
 The rules set out the procedure for admittance and the rights and duties of members of the groups. 
 On August 31, the rules were ratified at the Moscow City Conference of the R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
) which by an overwhelming majority declared itself in favour of setting up the groups. 
 This step strengthened the ties between the Party and the masses and drew broad sections of the working people into political life. 
 Later on, the groups of sympathisers developed into the system of candidature for Party membership. 
 p. 
 60 The dispatch of the letter to America was organised by the Bolshe -vik M. 
 M. 
 Borodin, who had recently been there. 
 With the foreign military intervention and the blockade of Soviet Russia this involved considerable difficulties. 
 The letter was delivered to the United States by P. 
 I. 
 Travin (Sletov). 
 Along with the letter he brought the Constitution of the R. 
S. 
F. 
S. 
R. 
 and the Soviet Government’s Note to President Wilson containing the demand to stop the inter -vention. 
 The well -known American socialist and journalist John Reed secured the publication of all these documents in the Ameri -can press. 
 In December 1918 a slightly abridged version of the letter ap -peared in the New York magazine The Class Struggle and the Boston weekly The Revolutionary Age , both organs of the Left wing of the American Socialist Party. 
 The Revolutionary Age was brought out 28 29 30 31by John Reed and Sen Katayama. 
 The letter evoked keen interest among readers and it was published as a reprint from The Class Struggle in a large number of copies. 
 Subsequently it was published many times in the bourgeois and socialist press of the U. 
S. 
A. 
 and Western Europe, in the French socialist magazine Demain No. 
 28 -29, 1918, in No. 
 138 of The Call , organ of the British Socialist Party, the Berlin magazine Die Aktion No. 
 51 -52, 1918, and elsewhere. 
 In 1934 the letter was brought out in New York in the form of a pam -phlet, which contained the passages omitted in earlier publications. 
 The letter was widely used by the American Left Socialists and was instrumental in aiding the development of the labour and com -munist movement in the U. 
S. 
 and Europe. 
 It helped advanced work -ers to appreciate the nature of imperialism and the great revolu -tionary changes effected by the Soviet government. 
 Lenin’s letteraroused a mounting protest in the U. 
S. 
 against the armed inter -vention. 
 p. 
 62 Lenin quotes from Chernyshevsky’s review of the book by the Amer -ican economist H. 
 Ch. 
 Carey, Letters to the President on the Foreign and Domestic Policy of the Union , and its Effects . 
 Chernyshevsky wrote: “The path of history is not paved like Nevsky Prospekt; it runs across fields, either dusty or muddy, and cuts through swamps or forest thickets. 
 Anyone who fears being covered with dust or muddying his boots, should not engage in social activity. 
” p. 
 68 Man in the muffler —a character from Chekhov’s story of the same title, personifying a narrow -minded philistine scared of initiative and new ideas. 
 p. 
 69 Appeal to Reason —American socialist newspaper, founded in Girard, Kansas, in 1895. 
 The newspaper propagated socialist ideas and was immensely popular among the workers. 
 During the First World War it pursued an internationalist policy. 
 Debs’s article appeared in the paper on September 11, 1915. 
 Its title, which Lenin most probably quoted from memory, was “When I Shall Fight”. 
 p. 
 70 In the spring and summer of 1917 there was mounting discontent in the French army against the continuation of the war, inspired by the growth of an anti -war revolutionary movement among the French workers under the impact of the bourgeois -democratic revolution in Russia in February 1917. 
 The presence of Russian sol -diers in France, who had been sent there in 1916, also added to theferment in the French armed forces. 
 After the February 1917 revolution the Russian army units stationed in France set up Soviets of Soldiers’ Deputies to control the actions of the officers. 
 Most Russian soldiers refused to fight and demanded from the Provisional Government that they be sent home. 
 This had its inevitable effect on the French units. 
 In mid May, after the French offensive had failed and scores of thousands of French soldiers had been killed, a revo -lutionary movement began in the army and continued to the end of 32 33 34 35June. 
 War -weary soldiers did not want to stay in the trenches and organised rallies demanding better conditions and cessation of the imperialist war. 
 According to official data, the movement in -volved 75 infantry regiments, 23 rifle battalions and 12 artilleryregiments. 
 The soldiers not only refused to obey officers but even turned their weapons against the government. 
 However, the sol -diers were not prepared for consistent revolutionary action againstthe war, one reason being the absence of a workers’ revolutionary party. 
 The French Government quelled the unrest with the help of social -chauvinists and anarcho -syndicalists. 
 Following this, the French Home Minister Malvy was brought for trial on the charge of failure to deal firmly enough with the “defeatists”. 
 p. 
 82 Lenin refers to the priest Gapon, an agent of the secret police. 
 Bent on provocation, he proposed to hold a peaceful march to the Winter Palace to submit a petition to the tsar on January 9, 1905. 
 The tsar gave the order to open fire on the unarmed workers, their wives and children. 
 Over 1,000 were killed and some 5,000 wounded. 
 On that very day barricades were thrown up in Petrograd and there were armed skirmishes between the workers, and the police and troops. 
 January 9 marked the beginning of the First Russian Revolution. 
 p. 
 83 The Congress was held in Moscow in the building of the Higher Women’s Courses from August 26 to September 4, 1918. 
 The 700 -odd delegates represented departments of education, teachers and edu -cationalists. 
 Lenin was elected honorary chairman and invited toattend. 
 He spoke at the Congress on August 28, the third day of the proceedings. 
 The Congress discussed the Regulations on the Single Labour School of the R. 
S. 
F. 
S. 
R. 
, which were later endorsed by the All -Russia Central Executive Committee and published in Izvestia on October 16. 
 The regulations played a very important part in building the Soviet education system. 
 In connection with the attempt on Lenin’s life made by the So -cialist -Revolutionary terrorist Fanny Kaplan on August 30, 1918, the Congress met in emergency plenary session the next day and adopted a resolution conveying a message of sympathy to Lenin and Krupskaya and expressing firm conviction in the triumph of the revolutionary cause. 
 p. 
 85 The Moscow Committee of the R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
) asked Lenin to speak at a mass rally in Basmanny District of Moscow on the subject “Two Governments (the Dictatorship of the Proletariat and the Dicta -torship of the Bourgeoisie)”. 
 The rally was held at the GrainExchange. 
 p. 
 89 Zemstvos —local government bodies in the central gubernias of Rus -sia run by the nobility and established in 1864. 
 Their authority was confined to purely local affairs (building of hospitals and roads, statistics, insurance, etc. 
) They came under the control of 36 37 38the governors and the Home Minister, who could repeal any deci -sion that did not suit the government. 
 p. 
 89 The meeting was held in a hand -grenade shop of the works. 
 Lenin came straight from the rally in Basmanny District and spoke on the subject “Two Governments (the Dictatorship of the Proletariat and the Dictatorship of the Bourgeoisie)”. 
 At 7. 
30 p. 
m. 
, as he was leaving the premises, the Socialist -Revolutionary Fanny Kaplan shot him. 
 Two bullets found their mark. 
 The news of the attempt on Lenin’s life aroused a storm of indig -nation throughout the country. 
 People demanded that terroristsand the counter -revolutionary bourgeoisie and landowners be ruth -lessly dealt with, and pledged to devote all their strength to de -feating the enemy. 
 The men at the front went into battle eager to take revenge on the enemy for the attempt on Lenin’s life. 
 The Soviet people rallied behind the Communist Party and the Soviet Government and doubled their war efforts. 
 On September 4, 1918, Izvestia carried a report that Kaplan had been shot by decision of the Cheka. 
 p. 
 90 Lenin wrote this letter in reply to the message of greetings sent by the Conference. 
 The First All -Russia Conference of Proletarian Cultural and Edu -cational Organisations was held in Moscow from September 15 -20, 1918. 
 According to the figures supplied by the mandate commission, 330 delegates attended. 
 Lenin’s letter was read at the fifth session, on September 19. 
 The speakers at the Conference included N. 
 K. 
 Krup -skaya, M. 
 N. 
 Pokrovsky and Proletkult leaders A. 
 A. 
 Bogdanov,P. 
 I. 
 Lebedev -Polyansky, F. 
 I. 
 Kalinin and others. 
 The Conference resolutions reflected the erroneous stand of the Proletkult leaders who attempted to shirk the tasks of mass cultu -ral and educational work, to build up a “proletarian culture” inisolation from past culture, a culture divorced from life and the people. 
 Recalling the conditions that gave rise to the letter, Krupskaya wrote. 
 “The Proletkult was a great influence in those days. 
 A short -coming of the Proletkult, in Ilyich’s opinion, was that its workwas insufficiently linked with the general political tasks of the struggle, that it did not do enough towards stimulating the people, promoting workers and preparing them for state administration through the medium of the Soviets. 
 In his message of greetings to the Conference he made it a point of mentioning the political tasks that confronted the Proletkult. 
” (N. 
 K. 
 Krupskaya, Reminiscences of Lenin , Moscow, 1959, p. 
 483. 
) p. 
 94 The Red Army occupied Simbirsk on September 12, 1918. 
 After the capture of the town the men of the First Army sent the follow -ing telegram to Lenin: “Dear Vladimir Ilyich, the capture of yournative town is our reply for one of your wounds, the capture of Samara will be for the other!” In reply Lenin sent the telegram pub -lished in this volume. 
 39 40 41 42 43 44Lenin’s letter was read to the garrison troops of the town of Sviyazhsk. 
 p. 
 100 The letter was read at a joint session of the All -Russia Central Executive Committee, the Moscow Soviet and representatives of factory committees and trade unions held on October 3 on Lenin’s proposal in connection with the political crisis in Germany. 
 The resolution adopted at the session incorporated the main ideas contained in Lenin’s letter. 
 p. 
 101 The Socialist Review —a monthly magazine, organ of the reformist Independent Labour Party of Britain; appeared in London from 1908 till 1934. 
 p. 
 105 Fabians —members of the reformist Fabian Society founded in 1884. 
 It was called after the Roman general Quintus Fabius Maximus, who earned the nickname Cunctator (the Delayer) for his dilatory tactics and avoidance of a decisive encounter with Hannibal. 
 Its members were chiefly bourgeois intellectuals, scientists, writers and politicians (the Webbs, Ramsay MacDonald, George Bernard Shaw and others). 
 The Fabians rejected the need for the workers to wage the class struggle and rejected the socialist revolution, maintain -ing that transition from capitalism to socialism could be effectedby petty reforms and gradual social evolution. 
 Lenin called Fabianism “an extremely opportunist trend” ( Collected Works , Vol. 
 13, p. 
 358). 
 In 1900 the Fabian Society formed a part of the Labour Party. 
 “Fabian socialism” is a source of the Labour Party’s ideology. 
 Lenin also mentions Fabianism in his article “British Pacifism and the British Dislike of Theory” ( Collected Works , Vol. 
 21, pp. 
 260 -65). 
 p. 
 107 Independents —members of the British Independent Labour Party founded by the leaders of the “new trade unions” in 1893, when there was a revival of strikes and a growing movement for the independ -ence of the working class from the bourgeois parties. 
 The I. 
L. 
P. 
united the “new trade unions”, a number of the old trade unions, and also intellectuals and petty bourgeoisie, who were under the influence of the Fabians. 
 The party was led by Keir Hardie and Ramsay MacDonald. 
 From the first days of its existence it pursued a bourgeois reformist policy and concentrated on the parliamentary struggle and parliamentary pacts with the Liberals. 
 Of the Independent Labour Party Lenin wrote: “The Independent Labour Party is actually an opportunist party that has always been dependent on the bourgeoisie. 
” (Lenin, On Britain , Moscow, p. 
 401. 
) p. 
 107 Marx referred to this possibility in his letter to Kugelmann of April 12, 1871 (Marx and Engels, Selected Correspondence , Moscow, 1955, pp. 
 318 -19), and in his speech on the Hague Congress delivered at a meeting in Amsterdam on September 8, 1872 (Marx/Engels, 45 46 47 48Werke , Bd. 
 18, Dietz Verlag, Berlin, 1962, p. 
 160). 
 See also Engels’s preface to the English edition of Volume I of Capital (Karl Marx, Capital , Vol. 
 I, Moscow, 1959, p. 
 6). 
 p. 
 108 Marx and Engels, Selected Correspondence , Moscow, 1955, p. 
 357. 
 p. 
 108 ibid. 
, p. 
 307. 
 p. 
 109Engels, Anti -Dühring , Moscow, 1959, pp. 
 253 -54. 
 p. 
 110 Zimmerwaldists —members of the group formed at the First In -ternational Socialist Conference held in Zimmerwald on September 5-8, 1915. 
 Lenin described it as a first step in the development of the international anti -war movement. 
 Thirty -eight delegates attend -ed from parties and organisations of eleven European countries. 
Lenin and Zinoviev represented the Central Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
(B. 
). 
 Axelrod and Martov represented the Menshevik Organising Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 The International Social -ist Committee was elected as a steering body of the Zimmerwaldgroup. 
 The group was a scene of struggle between the Zimmerwald Left, led by the Bolsheviks, and the Kautskyite Centrist majority (the so -called Zimmerwald Right). 
 The Centrists tried to achieve reconciliation with social -chauvinists and to restore the Second International. 
 The Zimmerwald Left called for a rupture with so -cial-chauvinists and insisted on the need to wage a revolutionary struggle against the imperialist war and to found a new, revolution -ary, proletarian International. 
 After the Kienthal Conference in1916, the Zimmerwald Right took up an undisguised social -chauvin -ist stand. 
 In these conditions Lenin called on the ZimmerwaldLeft supporters to break with the Right -wing majority of the Zim -merwald group and take practical steps to found a Third, CommunistInternational. 
 In September 1917 a Third Zimmerwald Conference was held in Stockholm. 
 V. 
 V. 
 Vorovsky addressed the Conference on behalf of the Central Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
(B. 
), its Bureau abroad, and Polish Social -Democrats. 
 In his strongly -worded speech he demanded that the Conference define its attitude towards the Rus -sian Mensheviks, who, though they were affiliated to the Zimmer -wald group, sent their representatives into the Ministry of Kerensky, the Russian Cavaignac, and were thus fully responsible for the introduction of capital punishment in the army, the June offensive at the front, the suppression of the Bolshevik newspapers, the shoot -ing on the July demonstration, arrests of Bolsheviks, etc. 
 The Bol -sheviks got support from a number of delegates, but the majority led by Haase refused to pass a decision on this question. 
 The motley composition of the Conference explained the compromise nature of its resolutions. 
 The Third Zimmerwald Conference fully bore out Lenin’s conclusion concerning the bankruptcy of the Zimmer -wald movement and the need to immediately break with it andfound a Third, Communist International. 
 The First Congress of the Comintern held in Moscow in March 1919 announced the dissolution of the Zimmerwald group. 
 p. 
 110 The session was held in the Hall of Columns of Trade Union House, Moscow. 
 It discussed the international situation, the question of convening the Extraordinary Sixth All -Russia Congress of So -viets and the dispatch to the front of 300 participants in the session. 
Lenin spoke about the international situation for the first time since his recovery. 
 P. 
 G. 
 Smidovich and Y. 
 M. 
 Sverdlov conveyed a message of greetings to those leaving for the front. 
 The session adopt -ed a resolution drafted by Lenin (see pp. 
 128 -30 of this volume) and endorsed with slight amendments by the Sixth Congress of Soviets on the basis of Lenin’s report on the international situation. 
 The session unanimously decided to convene the Extraordinary Sixth All-Russia Congress of Soviets and approved the agenda for it. 
 p. 
 114 The Independent Social -Democratic Party of Germany was founded at the Inaugural Congress in Gotha in April 1917. 
 Under cover of Centrist phraseology the Independents preached unity with social -chauvinists and renounced the class struggle. 
 The Kautskyite La -bour group in the Reichstag formed the core of the party. 
 For some time the Spartacus group was affiliated with the party, retaining its organisational and political independence and continu -ing its underground work and the struggle to free the Social -Democratic workers from the influence of the Centrist leaders. 
 In 1918 the Spartacus League left the party and later on it formed the core of the Communist Party of Germany. 
 At its Congress in Halle in October 1920 the party split. 
 Many Independents joined the Communist Party in December 1920 and the Right wing founded an independent party adopting the old name—the Independent Social -Democratic Party of Germany. 
 It existed until 1922. 
 p. 
 115 The Italian Socialist Party was founded in 1892. 
 From the very outset a sharp ideological struggle ensued between its opportunist and revolutionary wings, which differed over policy and tactics. 
 At the Congress in Reggio -Emilia in 1912 the outspoken reformists supporters of the war and of co -operation with the government and the bourgeoisie (Bonomi, Bissolati and others), were expelled under pressure from the Left forces. 
 After the outbreak of the war and before Italy’s entry into the war the Italian Socialist Party opposed the war under the slogan “Against War, for Neutrality!” In Decem -ber 1914 a group of renegades (Mussolini and others) who defendedthe imperialist policy of the bourgeoisie and supported the war were expelled from the party. 
 After Italy had joined the war on the side of the Entente in May 1915, three clearly defined trends arose in the party. 
 The Right wing helped the bourgeoisie to wage the war; the Centre, the majority, pursued a policy of “no participation in the war and no sabotage of the war”; the Left wing took a more resolute anti -war stand but failed to conduct a consistent49 50 51 struggle against the war. 
 The Lefts did not realise the need to turn the imperialist into civil war, and to break decisively with the re -formists who were collaborating with the bourgeoisie The Italian Socialist Party held a joint conference with the Swiss socialists in Lugano in 1914 and took part in the international socialist conferences in Zimmerwald and Kienthal, where its repre -sentatives supported the Centrist majority. 
 After the October Revolution the Left wing of the party consid -erably grew in strength. 
 In 1920 its representatives took part inthe Second Congress of the Comintern. 
 p. 
 116 At the Congress of the French Socialist Party, held in Paris from October 6 -11, 1918, Longuet, one of the party leaders, read a letter from Captain Sadoul, a member of the French military mission in Russia, to Romain Rolland, in which he condemned the actions of the Entente in Russia. 
 According to the Geneva correspondent of Pravda , “the letter produced an enormous impression. 
 There were cries from the left: ‘Long live the Soviet Republic!’” ( Pravda No. 
 221, October 13. 
) p. 
 116 This refers to the British Socialist Party, Socialist Labour Party and Independent Labour Party. 
 The British Socialist Party was founded in Manchester in 1911 as a result of a merger of the Social -Democratic Party and other socialist groups. 
 The B. 
S. 
P. 
 conducted propaganda in the spirit of Marxism. 
 In 1913 Lenin wrote that the party “...is not opportun -ist and is really independent of the Liberals” ( Collected Works , Vol. 
 19, p. 
 273). 
 But its small membership and weak contacts with the people left a sectarian imprint on the party. 
 During the First World War a sharp struggle developed in the party between the internationalist wing (Gallacher, Inkpin, Maclean, Rothstein and others) and the social -chauvinist wing led by Hyndman. 
 The internationalists in the party were inconsistent, Centrist on various questions. 
 In February 1916 a group of B. 
S. 
P. 
 members founded the newspaper The Call , which played an important role in rallying the interna -tionalists. 
 The annual conference of the party in Salford in April 1916 denounced the social -chauvinist stand of Hyndman and his supporters, who thereupon left the Party. 
 The British Socialist Party greeted the Great October Socialist Revolution and its members were active in the movement in de -fence of Soviet Russia against foreign intervention. 
 In 1919 most ofthe party’s branches (98 against 4) declared themselves in favour of affiliating to the Communist International. 
 Together with the Communist Unity Group, the British Socialist Party played a major part in founding the Communist Party. 
 At the Unity Congress in 1920 the overwhelming majority of B. 
S. 
P. 
 branches joined the Communist Party. 
 The Socialist Labour Party —a revolutionary Marxist party founded in 1903 in Scotland by a group of Left, largely Scottish, Social -Democrats, who had broken with the Social -Democratic Federation. 
52 53 Its chief organ was the monthly The Socialist . 
 At first the party engaged mainly in propaganda, and later, as the strike movement developed, it took an active part in it. 
 During the First World War many party members conducted a vigorous anti -war propaganda. 
 The party did much to organise the movement of Shop Stewards Committees (see Note 173). 
 It was in solidarity with the October Revolution and supported Soviet Russia. 
 In its political activity the party committed sectarian mistakes. 
 For example, it refused to become a collective member of the Labour Party, which united trade unions, socialist organisations and groups. 
 Lenin criticised the mistakes of this party and of other “Lefts ” in his work “ Left-Wing ” Communism , an Infantile Disorder (Collected Works , Vol. 
 31). 
 The more advanced members of the party, including Arthur McManus and Tom Bell, actively helped to found the Communist Party of Great Britain. 
 The Independent Labour Party —see Note 43. 
 p. 
 116 Reference is to the resolution unanimously adopted by the Eighth Congress of the Spanish workers, held in October 1918, to send greetings to the Soviet Republic. 
 p. 
 116 La Victoire —a daily newspaper published by Gustave Hervé in Paris from early 1916 in place of La Guerre Sociale which had come out under his editorship since 1906. 
 During the First World War it pursued an openly social -chauvinist policy. 
 With the Russian white -guard émigré V. 
 Burtsev at the head of its Russian section, thenewspaper was hostile towards Soviet Russia. 
 By and large its policy was one of defence of vested interests. 
 p. 
 120 This evidently means the Military Revolutionary Council which was established in the German army on the Eastern Front and which published the newspaper Krasny Soldat (Red Soldier ). 
 p. 
 123 The meeting was held in the Hall of Columns of Trade Union House to celebrate the first anniversary of the October Revolution. 
 Rep -resentatives of all trade associations attended. 
 Among the speakerswere members of the Central Committee of the R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
), the All -Russia Central Executive Committee, Moscow Council of Trade Unions, etc. 
 p. 
 132 The Congress was held at the Bolshoi Theatre between November 6 and 9, 1918. 
 Its opening coincided with the celebrations of the anni -versary of the October Revolution. 
 There were 1,296 delegates(963 with voting rights and 333 with voice but no vote), of whom 1,260 were Communists. 
 The agenda included the following items: anniversary of the October Revolution, the international situation, military situation building of Soviet power at the centre, Poor Peasants’ Committees and local Soviets. 
 Lenin was elected honorary chairman of the Congress. 
 After hearing Lenin’s report on the anni -versary of the October Revolution at the first sitting on November 6,the delegates sent greetings to workers, peasants and soldiers of54 55 56 57 58 all countries and their leaders who were fighting for peace and socialism, and to the Red Army. 
 On Sverdlov’s proposal the Congress adopted an appeal to the governments at war with Soviet Russia to start peace negotiations. 
 In view of the strengthening of Soviet power and the victories of the Red Army the Congress adopted a decision on amnesty. 
 At the second session of the Congress on November 8 Lenin made a report on the international situation. 
 The Congress unanimously endorsed a resolution that had been drawn up by Lenin and adopted at the joint session of the All -Russia Central Executive Committee, the Moscow Soviet, factory committees and trade unions on October 22, 1918 (see pp. 
 128 -30 of this volume). 
 On the same day, after hearing the report of People’s Commissar of Justice D. 
 I. 
 Kursky, the Cong -ress passed a resolution on revolutionary legality, drawn up on thebasis of Lenin’s theses. 
 At its last session on November 9 the Congress discussed the military situation and Soviet development, and adopt -ed appropriate resolutions. 
 The Congress decided to merge the PoorPeasants Committees, which had already fulfilled their functions, with volost and village Soviets. 
 The delegates warmly welcomed the news of the revolution in Germany and expressed their solidarity with the German workers, soldiers and sailors. 
 A new All -Russia Central Executive Committee was elected, consist -ing of 207 full members and 39 alternate members. 
 The Congresssummed up the results achieved by Soviet power in the first year of its existence and drew up a programme of work for the Soviet Government in the near future. 
 p. 
 135 This refers to the Congress of the Poor Peasants’ Committees of the Northern Region, which was held in Petrograd between November 3 and 6, 1918. 
 Over 15,000 representatives of the Poor Peasants’ Committees in eight gubernias of the Northern Region and other gubernias took part in Congress work. 
 Party and Soviet organisa -tions of Petrograd and the Northern Region had carried out extensivepreparatory work for the Congress under the guidance of the Organ -ising Bureau headed by S. 
 P. 
 Voskov, People’s Commissar for Foodof the Northern Region. 
 The Congress discussed the current situation, Poor Peasants’ Committees and local Soviets, supply and distri -bution of products, the question of the Red Army, rural educationand posts and telegraphs. 
 The Congress adopted a decision to form model regiments from poor peasants, which was later approved by the Sixth All -Russia Congress of Soviets on the proposal of the Re -gional Congress. 
 Its other resolutions concerned the merger of PoorPeasants’ Committees with local Soviets, the Soviet government’s food policy, educational and other questions. 
 The Congress was of vast political importance, as it strengthened the alliance of the working class and the working peasants. 
 p. 
 143 Reference is to the telegram sent “to all military commissars, mili -tary instructors, army commanders and all Soviets” on November 5, 1918, over the signatures of Lenin, Sverdlov and People’s Commissar for Foreign Affairs Chicherin in connection with the rupture by59 60 Germany of diplomatic relations with Soviet Russia. 
 It was pub -lished in Pravda and Izvestia on November 6. 
 p. 
 150 In 1848 -49 the Russian tsar Nicholas I sent troops to help the Austrian emperor suppress the revolution in Hungary. 
 p. 
 159 In 1863 -64 Russian troops suppressed the liberation insurrection in Poland. 
 p. 
 159 This refers to the sudden refusal of the Dutch Government to permit the entry of a plenipotentiary envoy of the R. 
S. 
F. 
S. 
R. 
, who was already on his way to the country. 
 Before his departure from Rus -sia the plenipotentiary had received from the Dutch Consul inMoscow a visa notifying him of his recognition by the Dutch Government as a plenipotentiary envoy of the R. 
S. 
F. 
S. 
R. 
 at the Hague. 
 p. 
 160 L’Echo de Paris —a reactionary bourgeois paper published in Paris from 1884 to 1938. 
 p. 
 161 III -me Internationale —organ of the French Communists in Soviet Russia, published in Moscow. 
 Its first issue appeared on October 20, 1918. 
 Among its contributors were Jacques Sadoul, Inessa Armand (Y. 
 Blonina) and others. 
 Publication was discontinued in March 1919. 
 p. 
 162 The total sum of debts incurred by Russia through loans received by the tsarist and Provisional governments (including foreign in -vestments in Russian industry) exceeded 16,000 million rubles ingold. 
 All foreign loans contracted by the tsarist government and the Provisional Government were repudiated by the All -Russia Central Executive Committee’s decree of January 21 (February 3), 1918. 
 p. 
 162 Manchester Guardian —a liberal newspaper, one of the most popular and influential bourgeois newspapers. 
 It was founded in 1821 and appeared once a week (in 1857 it became a daily). 
 In the first years after the October Revolution it gave a more or less objective coverage of events in Soviet Russia. 
 The quotation further on is from the article “The Allies and Rus -sia”. 
 p. 
 162 Officer cadets —graduates of officer -training schools in tsarist Rus -sia. 
 During the October Revolution and in the early post -revolution -ary period they put up armed resistance to the Soviet government in Petrograd, Moscow and other towns. 
 p. 
 170 The meeting was called by the editors of Byednota in Moscow and was attended by 450 delegates. 
 Lenin spoke about the tasks of the Poor Peasants’ Committees in the revolution on November 8. 
 p. 
 17161 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 Kerensky notes —money issued in the summer of 1917 by the Provi -sional Government headed by Kerensky. 
 p. 
 174 The First All -Russia Congress of Working Women, called by the C. 
C. 
 R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
), met at Trade Union House, November 16 -21, 1918. 
 There were 1,147 delegates from workers and poor peasants. 
 Lenin spoke on the fourth day of the proceedings. 
 Following his speech, the Congress passed a resolution to the effect that women workers and peasants will justify the hopes placed on them by the Soviet Government and the people in building up a new, communist way of life. 
 Among the speakers at the Congress and its commissions were A. 
 I. 
 Ulyanova -Yelizarova, V. 
 P. 
 Nogin, Y. 
 M. 
 Yaroslavsky, I. 
 F. 
 Armand, A. 
 M. 
 Kollontai, K. 
 N. 
 Samoilova, L. 
 N. 
 Stal and others. 
 The Congress addressed an appeal to all working women to defend the Soviet Republic and adopted decisions on easing women’s conditions by developing social services, on the drawing of women into social activities, child upbringing, protection of child labour, etc. 
 The Congress made a start in the organisation of women workers and peasants. 
 It established commissions for work among women, subordinated to Party committees. 
 Their chief task was to enlighten women politically and draw them into social activity. 
 p. 
 180 The rally was called by the Moscow Committee of the R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
) and the Presnya District Party Committee at the cinema Ars. 
 The two reports made at the rally were entitled “V. 
 I. 
 Lenin as Leader of the Russian Communist Party” and “V. 
 I. 
 Lenin as Fighter for the Third International”. 
 After Lenin’s speech a film was shown, called October Festivities in Moscow. 
 p. 
 183 Volya Naroda (The People ’s Will )—a daily newspaper, organ of the Right wing of the Socialist -Revolutionary Party; appeared in Petrograd from April 29 to November 1917, when it was closed down. 
 Subsequently it appeared under the titles Volya , Volya Volnaya , Volya Narodnaya , Volya Svobodnaya and Volya Strany . 
 In February 1918 it was finally suppressed. 
 p. 
 183 Further on in the article Lenin quotes Pitirim Sorokin’s letter as published in Pravda No. 
 251, November 20, 1918, where it was erroneously said that the letter was originally published in Izvestia of the North Dvina Executive Committee . 
 Actually the newspaper was called Krestyanskiye i Rabochiye Dumy (Peasants ’ and Workers ’ Thoughts ); the letter appeared in issue No. 
 75 dated October 29, 1918. 
 p. 
 185 The resolution was adopted by the emergency congress of the Moscow People’s Bank shareholders on November 16, 1918, and was directed against the proposed nationalisation of the bank. 
 p. 
 193 Red Officers ’ Day was appointed for the purpose of popularising the cause of training officers for the Red Army. 
 On November 24,70 71 72 73 74 75 76 1918, at 2 p. 
m. 
, military cadets paraded on Red Square, from where they marched to Sovetskaya Square to be greeted by Lenin from the balcony of the Moscow Soviet building. 
 p. 
 195 The meeting, held on November 26 -27, 1918, heard and discussed reports of the board and auditing commission of the co -operative, a report on the distribution of foodstuffs in Moscow, and elected a new board. 
 Despite Menshevik and S. 
R. 
 opposition vote was taken on the list of members submitted by the Communist group. 
 At the close of the evening session on the first day of the proceedings Lenin spoke about the role of co-operatives in the socialist economy. 
 p. 
 196 Reference is to the Menshevik C. 
C. 
 appeal, published in Pravda on November 26, 1918. 
 It called for a campaign against foreign in -tervention in the Russian revolution. 
 At the same time the Menshe -viks favoured the interference of the Second International. 
 Thus the Menshevik change of attitude to the armed intervention was on paper only and due to the successes of Soviet power and the develop -ment of the revolutionary movement in Western Europe. 
 They re -mained in fact implacable enemies of the dictatorship of the proletariat and gave support to foreign imperialists and Russian whiteguards in their struggle against the Soviet Republic in the Caucasus, the Ukraine, Siberia and elsewhere. 
 Lenin criticised the stand of the Mensheviks at that time in his draft resolution for the All -Russia Central Executive Committee, “Closure of the Menshevik Newspaper Undermining the Country’s Defence” (pp. 
 447 -48 of this volume), and in other works. 
 p. 
 198 Lenin refers to the discussion of the draft decree on consumers’ co-operatives at the Council of People’s Commissars. 
 He wrote the original draft, which was then enlarged upon by the People’s Commissariat of Food and published in Izvestia on January 19, 1918. 
 The draft aroused frantic opposition from bourgeois co-operators, who were insisting on the independence of co -operatives from the Soviet state. 
 Realising the need to utilise co -operatives in putting trade and distribution on a proper basis, the Council of People’s Commissars made several concessions to co -operators. 
 During the talks between representatives of the Supreme Economic Council, co -operatives and food bodies in March and early April 1918, a draft decree was agreed upon. 
 It was this decree that came up for discussion at the Council of People’s Commissars, which approved it with Lenin’s amendments. 
 On April 11 the All -Russia Central Executive Committee endorsed it and on April 13 it was published in Pravda . 
 Lenin appraised the decree in his work The Immediate Tasks of the Soviet Government (Collected Works , Vol. 
 27, pp. 
 235 -77). 
 p. 
 199 The decree On the Organisation of Supply is meant here. 
 The Coun -cil of People’s Commissars discussed the decree on November 12, 1918, and finally endorsed it on November 21. 
 On November 2477 78 79 80 it was published in Izvestia . 
 Lenin directly participated in formulat -ing the decree and introduced several amendments. 
 p. 
 199 In 1918 the Central Committee of the R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
) regularly called meetings of Party activists to discuss the most important questions of current politics. 
 The meeting in question discussed the proletar -iat’s attitude to petty -bourgeois democrats who swung over to the Soviet government in the autumn of 1918. 
 Lenin’s report on the question evoked heated debate. 
 In his concluding speech Lenin summed up the results of the debate. 
 p. 
 201 Engels’s article “The Peasant Question in France and Germany” was published in the magazine Die Neue Zeit in November 1894. 
 Engels wrote the article after Vollmar, one of the leaders of the Right wing of the Social -Democratic Party of Germany, had made a speech on the agrarian question at the party Congress in Frankfurt in October 1894, in which he distorted Engels’s views on the atti -tude towards small peasants. 
 In his letter to the editors of Vorwärts Engels refuted Vollmar’s inventions and added that he was going to write an article in which he would set down and substantiate his views on the agrarian question. 
 The Frankfurt Congress appointed a special commission to work out an agrarian programme for the next party congress. 
 The draft programme was discussed at the Breslau Congress in October 1895, after Engels’s death. 
 The revisionist draft did not get the required majority of votes and was rejected. 
 The Congress adopted a decision stressing the need for a further study of the laws governing the development of agriculture. 
 p. 
 202 Frederick Engels, “The Peasant Question in France and Germany” (Marx and Engels, Selected Works , Moscow, 1962, Vol. 
 II, p. 
 435). 
 p. 
 202 ibid. 
, p. 
 438. 
 p. 
 202ibid. 
 p. 
 214 Karl Marx, The Civil War in France (Marx and Engels, Selected Works , Moscow, 1962, Vol. 
 I, pp. 
 520 -21). 
 p. 
 215 Frederick Engels, “The Peasant Question in France and Germany” (Marx and Engels, Selected Works , Moscow, 1962, Vol. 
 II, p. 
 433). 
 p. 
 216 Marx and Engels, Selected Correspondence , Moscow, 1955, pp. 
 469 and 476. 
 p. 
 217 Lenin refers to the report submitted by the All -Russia Council of the Office Employees’ Trade Unions to the Council of People’s Commissars and published in the magazine Vestnik Sluzhashchego (Office Employee ’s Herald ) No. 
 11 -12, 1918. 
 The report pointed to the need to enlist members of the office employees’ unions for81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 food work conducted by the People’s Commissariat of Food in pur -suance of the decree of the Council of People’s Commissars of No -vember 21, 1918, On the Organisation of Supply (see Note 80). 
 p. 
 223 Lenin began work on the book The Proletarian Revolution and the Renegade Kautsky at the beginning of October 1918, immedi -ately after he had read Kautsky’s The Dictatorship of the Proletar -iat, which distorted and vulgarised the Marxist theory of the pro -letarian revolution and slandered the Soviet state. 
 Lenin attached great importance to exposure of Kautsky’s opportunist views on the socialist revolution and the dictatorship of the proletariat. 
 In August 1918 the magazine Sozialistische Auslandspolitik carried Kautsky’s article in which he called upon the Social -Democratic parties to light the Bolsheviks. 
 After reading excerpts from the article published in Pravda on September 20, Lenin wrote to V. 
 V. 
 Vorovsky in Stockholm: “The disgraceful nonsense, childish twaddle and most vulgar opportunism of Kautsky warrant the question: Why are we doing nothing to combat Kautsky’s theoretical vulgarisation of Marxism?” ( Collected Works , Vol. 
 35). 
 Lenin asked Vorovsky, the then plenipotentiary envoy of the Soviet Republic in the Scandinavian countries, to send him Kaut -sky’s pamphlet on the dictatorship as soon as it was out and alsoall his articles about the Bolsheviks. 
 Bonch -Bruyevich wrote in his reminiscences that Lenin was car -ried away by his work on The Proletarian Revolution and the Rene -gade Kautsky , “he was literally burning with anger”, “sitting up every day till late at night writing this remarkably hard hitting work”.... 
 On October 9, before the book’s completion Lenin wrote an article under the same title, which appeared in Pravda on Octo -ber 11. 
 On October 10 he sent a note to People’s Commissar for Foreign Affairs G. 
 V. 
 Chicherin and his deputy L. 
 M. 
 Karakhan asking them to forward his article to A. 
 A. 
 Joffe, Y. 
 A. 
 Berzin and V. 
 V. 
 Vorovsky in Berlin. 
 In the accompanying letter he wrote: “Dear comrades, I realise only too well the defects of this very short article against Kautsky. 
 But it is essential to make a stand as quick -ly as possible and express an opinion. 
 Please see that it is translat -ed and published in leaflet form” ( Lenin Miscellany XXXVI , pp. 
 61 -62). 
 The German translation of Lenin’s article was published in Berne in 1918 and in Vienna in 1919. 
 In 1919 it was also published in Milan in Italian. 
 In 1919 Lenin’s pamphlet The Proletarian Revolution and the Renegade Kautsky was published in Britain, France and Germany. 
 p. 
 227 Sotsial -Demokrat —an illegal newspaper, central organ of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, published from February 1908 till January 1917. 
 No. 
 1 was published in Russia and the subsequent issues came out abroad: Nos. 
 2 -32 (February 1909 -December 1913) in Paris, Nos. 
 33 -58 (Novem -ber 1914 -January 1917) in Geneva. 
 Five issues of the total 58 had90 91 supplements. 
 From December 1911 the paper was edited by Lenin. 
 More than 80 articles and short items by Lenin were published in it. 
 During the First World War the newspaper played an important part in combating international opportunism, nationalism and chauvinism, in popularising the Bolshevik slogans and in arousing the working class and working people generally for the fight against the imperialist war and its instigators. 
 The paper published Lenin’s article “On the Slogan for a United States of Europe”, in which he first stated his conviction that socialism could triumph in a single country. 
 The newspaper’s circulation in Russia and the major articles reprinted from it in local Bolshevik newspapers promoted the political enlightenment and internationalist training of the Russian proletariat and helped to prepare the people for the revo -lution. 
 Sotsial -Demokrat did much to rally internationalist elements in the Social -Democratic movement the world over. 
 Despite difficul -ties of wartime, it found its way into many countries. 
 p. 
 229 Kommunist —a journal founded on Lenin’s initiative. 
 Only one double issue appeared in September 1915 carrying Lenin’s articles “The Collapse of the Second International”, “The Voice of an Honest French Socialist” and “Imperialism and Socialism in Italy”. 
 It was published by the editors of Sotsial -Demokrat jointly with G. 
 L. 
 Pyatakov and Y. 
 B. 
 Bosh, who supplied the funds, and N. 
 I. 
 Bukharin as one of the editors. 
 Lenin intended to make the journal an international organ of Left Social -Democrats. 
 But in the course of the preparation of the journal for press serious disagreements arose between the editors of Sotsial -Demokrat and Bukharin, Pyatakov and Bosh, which were aggravated after the publication of the first issue. 
 In view of the anti -Party line of the group the Sotsial -Demokrat editors, on Lenin’s suggestion, announced that they considered it impossible to continue publication. 
 p. 
 229 Reference is to the pamphlet Socialism and War (The Attitude of the R. 
 S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Towards the War ). 
 Lenin decided to write it in connection with the First International Socialist Conference that was about to be convened. 
 He wrote it together with Zinoviev, but the main part of the pamphlet belongs to Lenin who also edited it. 
 The pamphlet was published in Russian and German and circu -lated among the delegates at the Zimmerwald Conference whichmet in September 1915. 
 After the Conference it was also published in France, and in Norway in the Left Social -Democratic newspaper. 
 Lenin more than once tried, though without success, to get it pub -lished in America in English. 
 p. 
 229 The Basle Manifesto on war was adopted at the Extraordinary International Socialist Congress held in Basle on November 24 -25, 1912. 
 It warned against the imminent danger of a world imperial -ist war, exposing its predatory aims and calling on the workersof all countries to wage a determined struggle for peace, “to pit92 93 94 against the might of capitalist imperialism the international soli -darity of the working class”. 
 The Manifesto contained a clause from the resolution of the Stuttgart Congress (1907), which was formulated by Lenin and which said that in the event of an imperialist war so -cialists should take advantage of the resulting economic and politi -cal crisis for effecting a socialist revolution. 
 p. 
 230 This was the original title of Lenin’s Imperialism , the Highest Stage of Capitalism . 
 p. 
 230 Karl Marx, Critique of the Gotha Programme (Marx and Engels, Selected Works , Moscow, 1962, Vol. 
 II, pp. 
 32 -33). 
 p. 
 233 See Engels’s Letter to A. 
 Bebel of March 18 -28, 1875 (Marx and Engels, Selected Correspondence , Moscow, 1955, p. 
 357). 
 Further, on pp. 
 253, 266 of this volume, Lenin quotes the same letter. 
 p. 
 237 This proposition is contained in Engels’s Introduction to Karl Marx’s The Civil War in France (Marx and Engels, Selected Works , Moscow, 1962, Vol. 
 I, p. 
 581). 
 p. 
 240 Marx and Engels, Selected Works , Moscow, 1962, Vol. 
 I, p. 
 630. 
 p. 
 240 Marx and Engels, Manifesto of the Communist Party , Moscow, 1957, pp. 
 8 -9. 
 p. 
 241 Frederick Engels, The Origin of the Family , Private Property and the State (Marx and Engels, Selected Works , Moscow, 1962, Vol. 
 II, p. 
 320). 
 p. 
 243 Karl Marx, The Civil War in France (Marx and Engels, Selected Works , Moscow, 1962, Vol. 
 I, p. 
 585). 
 p. 
 253 p. 
 243 Frederick Engels, The Origin of the Family , Private Property and the State (Marx and Engels, Selected Works , Moscow, 1962, Vol. 
 II, p. 
 332). 
 p. 
 243 Marx and Engels, Selected Works , Moscow, 1962, Vol. 
 I, pp. 
 520 -21. 
 p. 
 244 In 1895 reactionary monarchist circles in France instituted proceed -ings against Dreyfus, a Jewish General Staff officer, on a trumped -up charge of espionage and high treason. 
 The trial of Dreyfus, who was sentenced to life imprisonment, served as a pretext for French reactionary circles to fan anti -Semitism and campaign against re -publican order and democratic liberties. 
 In 1898 socialists and prog -ressive bourgeois democrats (Émile Zola, Jean Jaurès, Anatole France and others) started a campaign for a reconsideration of the Dreyfus case. 
 This gave a political colouring to the matter and the95 96 97 98 99 100 101 102 103 104 105 country split into two camps—republicans and democrats on the one side and the bloc of monarchists, clericals, anti -Semites and nationalists on the other. 
 In 1899, under pressure of public opinion,Dreyfus was pardoned and in 1906 the Court of Appeal acquitted him and reinstated him in the army. 
 p. 
 245 This refers to the suppression of the Irish rebellion in 1910, an at -tempt at liberating the country from the British. 
 In 1916 Lenin wrote: “In Europe ... there was a rebellion in Ireland, which the ‘freedom -loving’ English ... suppressed by executions. 
” ( Collected p. 
 245 See Marx’s article “L’indifferenza in materia politica” (“On Polit -ical Indifferentism”) ( Almanacco Republicano for 1874). 
 p. 
 251 Marx and Engels, Selected Works , Moscow, 1962, Vol. 
 I, p. 
 639. 
 p. 
 251 See Engels’s letter to A. 
 Bebel of March 18 -28, 1875 (Marx and Engels, Selected Correspondence , Moscow, 1955, p. 
 357). 
 p. 
 251 Marx and Engels, Manifesto of the Communist Party , Moscow, 1957, p. 
 85. 
 p. 
 260 Lenin refers to Engels’s Introduction to The Civil War in France by Karl Marx (Marx and Engels, Selected Works , Moscow, 1962, Vol. 
 I, p. 
 484). 
 p. 
 260Lenin’s pamphlet Political Parties in Russia and The Tasks of the Proletariat was published by The Evening Post on January 15, 1918, and by The Class Struggle , the organ of the Left wing of the American Socialist Party, in issue No. 
 4 for November -December 1917. 
 It also appeared as a separate edition. 
 The Evening Post —a bourgeois newspaper published in New York from 1801 (from 1801 to 1832 it was called The New York Evening Post ). 
 For a number of years it followed a liberal policy. 
 After the October Socialist Revolution it published the secret trea -ties concluded between the Allies and the tsarist government. 
 Sub -sequently it became the mouthpiece of the most reactionary impe -rialist circles. 
 It now appears as The New York Post . 
 p. 
 265 On June 14 (27), 1917, the Provisional Government decided to bold elections to the Constituent Assembly on September 17 (30), 1917. 
 In August it postponed the elections until November 12 (25). 
 Elections to the Constituent Assembly took place on the appoint -ed date, November 12 (25), after the October Socialist Revolution. 
 Deputies were elected according to the lists that had been drawn up before the Revolution and in keeping with the regulations endorsed by the Provisional Government. 
 Elections took place at a time when the mass of the people had not yet appreciated the import of106 107 108 109 110 111 112 113Works , Vol. 
 22, p. 
 354. 
) the October Revolution. 
 This put the Right Socialist -Revolutiona -ries at an advantage and as a result they secured a majority of votes in areas outside the capital and industrial centres. 
 The Con -stituent Assembly met in Petrograd on January 5 (18), 1918. 
 Bydecree of the All -Russia Central Executive Committee on January 6 (19), 1918, the Constituent Assembly was dissolved because, through the reactionary majority, it had rejected the Declaration of Rights of the Working and Exploited People submitted by the All -Russia Central Executive Committee and had refused to approve the decrees of the Second Congress of Soviets on peace, land and the transfer of power to the Soviets. 
 p. 
 267 The All -Russia Democratic Conference was called by the Menshevik -Socialist -Revolutionary Central Executive Committee of Soviets to decide the question of power and met in Petrograd in September 1917. 
 Actually, however, it was called in order to divert people’s attention from the mounting revolution. 
 More than 1,500 delegates attended. 
 The Menshevik and Socialist -Revolutionary leaders took all steps to reduce representation of the Soviets of Workers’ and Peasants’ Deputies and increase the number of delegates from vari -ous petty -bourgeois and bourgeois organisations, thereby securing a majority for themselves. 
 Thus, increased representation was grant -ed to municipalities, which sent 300 delegates; Zemstvos sent200 delegates and the co -operatives, which were under the control of the Mensheviks and Socialist -Revolutionaries, sent 120 dele -gates. 
 But the Soviets of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies, which rep -resented the overwhelming majority of the population, had only 230 delegates. 
 The Bolsheviks took part in the Conference for the pur -pose of utilising it as a platform for exposing the Mensheviks andSocialist -Revolutionaries. 
 The Conference adopted a decision to establish a Pre -Parliament (Provisional Council of the Republic). 
 This was an attempt to create a semblance of a parliamentary system in Russia. 
 According to the regulations worked out by the Provisional Government, the Pre-Parliament was to be an advisory government body. 
 Lenin emphatically insisted on boycotting the Pre -Parliament, as to stay in it would have created the impression it could solve the tasks of the revolution. 
 The Central Committee of the Party dis -cussed Lenin’s proposal and decided that Bolsheviks should resigntheir seats in the Pre -Parliament. 
 Only Kamenev and other capitu -lators insisted on participating. 
 At the opening session of the Pre -Parliament on October 7 (20) the Bolsheviks road their declaration and walked out. 
 p. 
 270 This refers to a counter -revolutionary conspiracy of the Russian bourgeoisie in August 1917. 
 Tsarist General Kornilov led the con -spirators. 
 Relying on the top army officers, they planned to use offi -cer cadet and Cossack units to seize Petrograd, crush the Bolshevik Party, dissolve the Soviets and establish military dictatorship in the country. 
 The workers of Petrograd and revolutionary soldiers and sailors rose up in response to the appeal of the Central Committee114 115 of the Bolshevik Party and crushed the Kornilov revolt. 
 Popular pressure compelled the Provisional Government to order the arrest of Kornilov and his associates and bring them to court. 
 Thus the attempt of the bourgeoisie and landowners to crush the revolution fell through. 
 After the defeat of the Kornilov revolt the Bolshe -viks gained more influence among the people. 
 Bolshevisation of theSoviets began. 
 The Bolsheviks again advanced the slogan “All Power to the Soviets!” p. 
 272 Petrushka —a serf servant in Gogol’s novel The Dead Souls . 
 He could read only by syllables and enjoyed the process of reading, never pausing to think over the contents of a book. 
 p. 
 273 Judas Golovlyov —a hypocritical and sanctimonious feudal landowner in Saltykov -Shchedrin’s novel The Golovlyov Family . 
 p. 
 276 Lieberdans —nickname for the Menshevik leaders Lieber and Dan and their supporters, which stuck to them after the Moscow Bolshe -vik newspaper Sotsial -Demokrat had published in its issue No. 
 141 on August 25 (September 7), 1917, Demyan Bedny’s feuilleton en -titled “Lieberdan”. 
 p. 
 276 Activists —a group of Mensheviks who resorted to armed struggle against Soviet power and the Bolshevik Party after the October Revolution. 
 They joined various counter -revolutionary conspira -torial organisations, supported Kornilov, Kaledin and the bour -geois nationalist Ukrainian Rada, actively participated in the white -guard Czech revolt and made common front with the foreign inter -ventionists. 
 In 1918, under the pretext of discussing the food situa -tion, the “activists”, supported by the Menshevik Party, held anumber of conferences of “workers” and their delegates which actual -ly demanded the dissolution of the Soviets. 
 p. 
 276 August Bebel spoke about this at the Magdeburg Congress of the Social -Democratic Party of Germany on September 20, 1910. 
 Lenin mentions the Congress in his article “Two Worlds” ( Collected Works , Vol. 
 16, pp. 
 305 -313). 
 p. 
 277 Frankfurter Zeitung —a daily newspaper, mouthpiece of the stock exchange. 
 It was published in Frankfurt -on-Main from 1856 to 1343. 
 In 1949 it resumed publication under the title Frankfurter Allge -meine Zeitung as organ of the West German monopolists. 
 p. 
 278 Lenin refers to the editorial “Dictatorship or Democracy?” published in Vorwärts No. 
 290, October 21, 1918. 
 Vorwärts —a daily newspaper, central organ of the German Social -Democratic Party. 
 By decision of the Halle Party Congress it was published in Berlin from 1891 under the title Vorwärts Berliner Volksblatt and replaced the newspaper Berliner Volksblatt which appeared from 1884. 
 Through this newspaper Engels combated op -portunism in all its manifestations. 
 In the latter half of the 1890s,116 117 118 119 120 121 122 after Engels’s death, the newspaper fell into the hands of the Right wing of the party and began regularly to feature articles by opportunists. 
 During the First World War it adopted a social -chau -vinist line. 
 After the October Revolution it conducted anti -Soviet propaganda. 
 Its publication continued until 1933. 
 p. 
 278 Zimmerwald Left group was formed on Lenin’s initiative at the In -ternational Socialist Conference in Zimmerwald in September 1915. 
 It united eight delegates from the Central Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 and the Left Social -Democrats of Sweden, Norway, Swit -zerland, Germany, Polish Social -Democratic opposition and Social -Democrats of the Latvian Area. 
 Led by Lenin, the Zimmerwald Left group fought the Centrist majority of the Conference and tabled drafts of a resolution and by a manifesto, which denounced the impe -rialist war, exposed the treachery of the social -chauvinists and emphasised the need for an active struggle against the war. 
 The drafts were defeated by the Centrist majority. 
 However, several im -portant propositions of the draft resolution submitted by the Zim -merwald Left group were included in the manifesto adopted by the Conference. 
 Regarding the manifesto as a first step in the struggle against the imperialist war, the group voted for it. 
 In a special statement the Zimmerwald Left group gave the reasons for its vote and pointed out that the manifesto was inconsistent. 
 At the same time the group declared that, while staying in the common Zimmer -wald association, it would act independently outside of it and spreadits own views. 
 It elected its leading organ, the Bureau, consisting of Lenin, Zinoviev and Radek. 
 The group published the magazine Vorbote in German, in which a number of Lenin’s articles appeared. 
 The Bolsheviks, who alone adopted a consistent internationalist position, were the guiding force in the Zimmerwald Left group. 
 Lenin combated Radek’s opportunist vacillation and the mistakes committed by other Lefts. 
 The Zimmerwald Left group served as the rallying centre for internationalists in the world Social -Demo -cratic movement. 
 At the Second International Socialist Conference,held in the village of Kienthal near Berne in April 1916, the Zim -merwald Left group numbered 12 out of the 43 delegates, and on anumber of questions its proposals got as many as half the votes. 
 The Left Social -Democrats who adhered to the Zimmerwald Left group carried on extensive revolutionary work and played a prominent part in founding Communist Parties in their own countries. 
 p. 
 283 Lenin quotes from Engels’s Introduction to Karl Marx’s The Civil War in France (Marx and Engels, Selected Works , Moscow, 1962, Vol. 
 I, p. 
 475). 
 p. 
 284 Karl Marx, The Civil War in France (Marx and Engels, Selected Works , Moscow, 1962, Vol. 
 I, pp. 
 518 -19). 
 p. 
 284 Spartacists —members of the revolutionary organisation of the German Left Social -Democrats. 
 The Spartacus group was formed after the outbreak of the First World War by Karl Liebknecht,123 124 125 126 Rosa Luxemburg, Franz Mehring, Clara Zetkin, Julian Marchlew -ski, Leon Jogiches (Tyszka) and Wilhelm Pieck. 
 In April 1915 Rosa Luxemburg and Franz Mehring started pub -lication of the magazine Die Internationale , which catered for the main group of German Left Social -Democrats. 
 In 1916 the Internationale group began to publish illegally and circulate “Po -litical Letters” over the signature of Spartacus and assumed the name of Spartacus group. 
 The Spartacists conducted revolutionary propaganda among the people, organised mass anti -war actions, led strikes and exposed the imperialist character of the war and thetreachery of the opportunist Social -Democratic leaders. 
 The Spar -tacists, however, committed serious mistakes on questions of theoryand politics. 
 They denied the possibility of national liberation wars in the imperialist epoch, failed to take a consistent stand with regard to the slogan of turning the imperialist war into civil war, belittled the role of the proletarian party as the vanguard of the working class, underestimated the role of peasants as allies of the workers and did not make a decisive break with the opportunists. 
 Lenin repeatedly criticised the mistakes of the German Left Social -Democrats and helped them to take a correct stand. 
 In April 1917 the Spartacists joined the Independent Social -Democratic Party of Germany, retaining their organisational inde -pendence. 
 In November 1918, during the revolution in Germany, the Spartacists formed the Spartacus League, published their pro -gramme on December 14, 1918, and broke with the Independents. 
At the Inaugural Congress, held on December 30, 1918 -January 1 1919, they founded the Communist Party of Germany. 
 p. 
 291 Karl Marx, The Bourgeoisie and the Counter -Revolution (Marx and Engels, Selected Works , Moscow, 1962, Vol. 
 I, pp. 
 66 -69). 
 p. 
 295 Two new parties—Narodnik Communists and Revolutionary Com -munists—separated from the Left Socialist -Revolutionary Party after the provocative assassination by Left Socialist -Revolutiona -ries of the German Ambassador, Count Mirbach, and their revolt on July 6 -7, 1918. 
 The Narodnik Communists condemned the anti -Soviet activity of the Left Socialist -Revolutionaries and formed their own party at a conference in September 1918. 
 Their programme “Manifesto”was published in the newspaper Znamya Trudovoi Kommuny (The Banner of the Labour Commune ) on August 21. 
 They approved the Bolshevik course for an alliance with the middle peasants. 
 Many of the Narodnik Communists were members of Soviet bodies and some of them, for example G. 
 D. 
 Zaks, sat on the All -Russia Central Executive Committee. 
 On November 6, 1918, at its extraordinarycongress the party decided to dissolve and merge with the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks). 
 The Party of Revolutionary Communism was founded at a con -gress of the newspaper Volya Truda (Freedom of Labour ) supporters held in Moscow, September 25 -30, 1918. 
 The first issue of the paper127 128 appeared on September 14, carrying a policy statement for the coming congress, whose authors denounced terrorist acts by the Left Socialist -Revolutionaries and their attempts to torpedo the Brest -Litovsk Peace Treaty. 
 The Inaugural Congress of the party went onrecord for co -operation with Soviet power. 
 The programme of the “Revolutionary Communists” was very contradictory. 
 While recog -nising that the Soviets created the prerequisites for the establish -ment of socialism, it denied the necessity of the dictatorship of the proletariat during the transition from capitalism to socialism. 
 After the Second Congress of the Communist International had adopted a decision that there must be only one Communist Party in every country, the Party of Revolutionary Communism decided in Sep -tember 1920 to affiliate to the R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
). 
 In October of the sameyear the Central Committee of the R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
) allowed Party organ -isations to admit into their ranks former members of the Party ofRevolutionary Communism. 
 p. 
 296 Heinrich Weber—Otto Bauer. 
 p. 
 298Marx and Engels, Selected Correspondence , Moscow, 1955, pp. 
 318 -19. 
 p. 
 300 The treachery of M. 
 A. 
 Muravyov, Commander of Soviet troops on the Eastern Front, was closely connected with the revolt of Left Socialist -Revolutionaries in July 1918. 
 According to the plans of the mutineers, Muravyov was to raise a revolt against Soviet power and, joining forces with the whiteguard Czechs, to march on Moscow. 
 On July 10 Muravyov arrived in Simbirsk and stated he did not recognise the Brest -Litovsk Peace Treaty and declared war on Germany. 
 The misguided troops occupied the Post, Telegraph and Radio Station and surrounded the building of the Executive Committee and the staff of the Simbirsk army group. 
 Muravyov sent wireless messages calling on the whiteguards and intervention -ists between Samara and Vladivostok to march on Moscow. 
 The Soviet Government took urgent measures to defeat Mura -vyov’s venture. 
 The Communists of Simbirsk carried out extensiveexplanatory work among the garrison troops and the townsmen. 
 The army units which had formerly supported Muravyov now de -clared they were ready to fight him. 
 On the night of July 11 Muravyovwas summoned to the meeting of the Simbirsk Executive Committee. 
 He interpreted this as the Executive Committee’s surrender. 
 When his treacherous messages about the cessation of hostilities against interventionists and whiteguards were read at the meeting, the Com -munists demanded his arrest. 
 Muravyov resisted and was shot;his associates were arrested. 
 p. 
 302 By the July crisis, Lenin means kulak counter -revolutionary revolts in the central gubernias, in the Volga area, the Urals and Siberia in the summer of 1918, which were organised by Mensheviks and So -cialist -Revolutionaries with the assistance of foreign intervention -ists. 
 p. 
 303129 130 131 132 Blanquism —a trend in the French socialist movement led by the prominent revolutionary and exponent of French utopian commu -nism, Louis Auguste Blanqui (1805 -1881). 
 Lenin wrote about Blanquism: “Blanquism expects that mankind will be emancipated from wage -slavery, not by the proletarian class struggle, but through a conspiracy hatched by a small minority of intellectuals” (Collected Works , Vol. 
 10, p. 
 392). 
 In substituting the actions of a secret group of conspirators for the activity of a revolutionary party the Blanquists lost sight of the real conditions necessary or a vic -torious uprising and ignored contacts with the people. 
 p. 
 304 This refers to the Socialist -Revolutionary bill submitted by the Minister for Agriculture S. 
 L. 
 Maslov to the Provisional Government a few days before the October Revolution. 
 It was called “Rules for the Regulation by Land Committees of Land and Agricultural Relations” and was published in part in the newspaper Dyelo Naroda (People ’s Cause ), organ of the Central Committee of the Socialist -Revolutionary Party, on October 18 (31), 1917. 
 “This bill of Maslov’s,” Lenin wrote, “is downright betrayal of the peasants by the S. 
R. 
 Party, and signifies its complete subser -vience to the landed proprietors” ( Collected Works , Vol. 
 26, p. 
 228). 
 The bill set up a special rent fund in the Land Committees, to which state -owned and monastery lands were to be transferred. 
 Landed proprietorship was left intact. 
 Landowners were to turn over to the fund only the land they previously used to rent out and the peasants were to pay the rent for the “rented” land to the landowners. 
 The Provisional Government arrested members of the Land Committees in retribution for peasant revolts and seizures of landed estates. 
 p. 
 305 Karl Marx, Theorien über den Mehrwert , Teil 2, Berlin 1959, S. 
 36. 
 p. 
 313 For “Theses on the Constituent Assembly” see Lenin’s Collected Works , Vol. 
 26, pp. 
 379 -83. 
 p. 
 319 The International Socialist Bureau —executive organ of the Second International set up by decision of the Paris Congress of 1900. 
 p. 
 319 Marx and Engels, Selected Correspondence , Moscow, 1955, p. 
 357. 
 p. 
 324 Lenin refers to the book by M. 
 Ostrogorsky, La Democratic et les Partis Politiques , which was first published in Paris in 1903. 
 The Russian edition of the first volume appeared in 1927 and the second volume in 1930. 
 The book contains rich factual material on the history of Britain and the U. 
S. 
A. 
, which exposes the falsehood and hypocrisy of bourgeois democracy. 
 p. 
 325 This draft decision was submitted by Lenin on December 3, 1918, at a sitting of the commission set up by the Council of Defence (see133 134 135 136 137 138 139 140 Note 151) for the purpose of regulating the work of Soviet bodies and enhancing the country’s defence capacity. 
 The commission’s decision on the question was based on Lenin’s draft. 
 p. 
 326 The Congress was held in Moscow on December 6 -11, 1918. 
 It was attended by 208 voting delegates and 98 non -voting delegates. 
 121 of the voting delegates were Communists and their sympathisers and the other 87 delegates were supporters of “independent” co -operatives, i. 
e. 
, Mensheviks and Right Socialist -Revolutionaries who advocated the independence of the co -operatives from the Soviet state. 
 Lenin spoke about the tasks of workers’ co -operatives at the evening session on December 9. 
 Among other speakers were V. 
 P. 
 No -gin and V. 
 P. 
 Milyutin. 
 The Congress censured the anti -Soviet de -mands for “independence” for the co -operatives and decided to get the workers’ co -operatives to organise food supplies jointly with state food organs. 
 The Congress elected the All -Russia Council of Workers’ Co -operatives of 15 members, 10 of whom were Commu -nists (V. 
 P. 
 Nogin, V. 
 P. 
 Milyutin, I. 
 I. 
 Skvortsov -Stepanov and others). 
 p. 
 329 This refers to the Narodnik Communists and Revolutionary Com -munists who had split away from the Left Socialist -Revolutionary Party (see Note 128). 
 p. 
 336 The Congress was held in Moscow’s Trade Union House on December 11-20, 1918. 
 There were 550 delegates present. 
 Lenin spoke at the evening session on December 11. 
 The Congress was devoted mainly to working out draft regulations on socialist land settlement and measures for transition to socialist farming (the regulations were adopted by the All -Russia Central Executive Committee in Feb -ruary 1919 and published in Izvestia No. 
 34, February 14, 1919). 
 p. 
 338 Lenin wrote these rules for discussion at the Council of Defence. 
 He also drew up a list of comrades to whom they should be forward -ed—L. 
 B. 
 Krasin, N. 
 N. 
 Krestinsky, G. 
 I. 
 Petrovsky, D. 
 I. 
 Kur -sky, Y. 
 M. 
 Sverdlov, V. 
 A. 
 Avanesov, J. 
 V. 
 Stalin and K. 
 I. 
 Lan -der. 
 In the accompanying note Lenin wrote: “Request you to readthis draft which I am proposing for the Council of Defence, show it to comrades and have it discussed by Saturday, December 14. 
 It is desirable to have the amendments in writing by the same date 12. 
12. 
18. 
” p. 
 349 P. 
 A. 
 Stolypin, Chairman of the Council of Ministers, introduced a new land law aimed at creating a firm rural support for the autoc-racy in the form of kulaks. 
 The law of November 9, 1906, gave every peasant the right to leave the commune and receive a land allotment as his personal property, which he now could sell, mort -gage or dispose of in any other way. 
 Village communes were obligedto allocate land for the peasants leaving communes in one place (homestead). 
 The law enabled the kulaks to buy up the land of141 142 143 144 145 poor peasants very cheaply. 
 The Stolypin reform accelerated the development of capitalism in agriculture and intensified the class struggle in the countryside. 
 p. 
 355 Die Rote Fahne (The Red Banner ) was founded by Karl Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg as the central organ of the Spartacus League; later on it became the central organ of the Communist Party of Ger -many. 
 It was published in Berlin from November 9, 1918, and wasrepeatedly banned by the German authorities. 
 Referring to the fight conducted by the paper against the reactionary leaders of German Social -Democracy, Lenin wrote in October 1919: “The heroic struggle waged by Rote Fahne , the Berlin communist newspaper, evokes whole -hearted admiration” ( Collected Works , Vol. 
 30). 
 The newspaper largely contributed to the transformation of the Communist Party of Germany into a mass proletarian revolutionary party and its cleansing of opportunist elements. 
 It conducted a staunch fight against the militarisation of the country and champi -oned working -class unity in the struggle against fascism. 
 Ernst Thälmann, Chairman of the C. 
C. 
 of the German Communist Party regularly contributed articles to the paper. 
 After the establishment of fascist dictatorship it was banned, but continued to appear ille -gally, resolutely opposing the fascist regime. 
 In 1935 the publica -tion of the newspaper was transferred to Prague, and from October 1936 to the autumn of 1939 it was published in Brussels. 
 p. 
 360 Der Weckruf (The Call )—central organ of the Communist Party of German Austria, published in Vienna from November 1918 to January 11, 1919. 
 From January 15, 1919, it appeared under the title Die Soziale Revolution , and from July 26, 1919, under the title Die Rote Fahne . 
 Until October 13, 1920, it remained the central organ of the Communist Party of German Austria, and beginning with October 14 it appeared as the central organ of the Communist Party of Austria. 
 After its banning in July 1933 it appeared ille -gally. 
 In August 1945 its name was changed to Osterreichische Volksstimme , and, beginning with February 21, 1957, it has been called Volksstimme . 
 p. 
 368 Karl Marx, The Class Struggles in France , 1848 to 1850 (Marx and Engels, Selected Works , Moscow, 1962, Vol. 
 I, p. 
 217). 
 p. 
 372 The Congress was held in the Second House of Soviets (the Metropol Hotel) in Moscow. 
 On the sixth day of the proceedings, December 25, Lenin delivered a speech on the international situation and economic tasks of the Soviet Republic. 
 On the basis of Lenin’s report the Congress adopted a resolution on one -man management, which established personal responsibility of heads of enterprises and organisations for their functioning. 
 p. 
 375 Kolupayev and Razuvayev —capitalist sharks described by Saltykov -Shchedrin. 
 p. 
 380146 147 148 149 150 The Council of Defence (The Council of Workers’ and Peasants’ Defence) was set up by the All -Russia Central Executive Committee on November 30, 1918. 
 It was organised in accordance with the decree of the C. 
E. 
C. 
 of September 2, 1918, which proclaimed martial law. 
 The Council of Defence was an emergency organ brought into being by the country’s extreme difficulties. 
 It was vested with full powers for mobilising the country’s resources. 
 Lenin was appointed Chairman of the Council. 
 The decisions of the Council of Defence were binding on the cen -tral and local departments and institutions and on all Soviet citi -zens. 
 During the Civil War and foreign intervention it was the chief military, economic and planning centre of the Republic. 
 It exer -cised constant control over the activity of the Revolutionary MilitaryCouncil and other military organs. 
 From December 1, 1918, to Feb -ruary 27, 1920, it held 101 sessions and discussed some 2,300 ques -tions relating to the country’s defence. 
 Lenin presided at all but two sessions. 
 The Council conducted its work through its members and special commissions which dealt with the most important prob -lems of the country’s defence. 
 To settle urgent local problems, theCouncil delegated its members and prominent Party workers and statesmen. 
 In early April 1920 the Council of Workers’ and Peasants’ De -fence was reorganised into the Council of Labour and Defence. 
 Bydecision of the Eighth All -Russia Congress of Soviets held in De -cember 1920, the Council of Labour and Defence began to functionas a commission of the Council of People’s Commissars, whose main task was to coordinate the work of all departments in the sphere of economic construction. 
 It existed until 1937. 
 p. 
 381 Byednota (The Poor )—a daily peasant newspaper published in Moscow from March 27, 1918, till January 31, 1931. 
 It was started by decision of the Central Committee of the R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
) in place of the newspapers Derevenskaya Byednota (The Village Poor ), De -revenskaya Pravda (The Village Truth ) and Soldatskaya Pravda (The Soldiers’ Truth ). 
 It actively fought to strengthen the worker -peasant alliance, and to organise and rally the poor and middle peasants around the Communist Party and the Soviet Government. 
 The paper played an important part in the political enlightenment and cultural development of the working peasants, in promoting active, public -minded peasants from among the poor and middle peasants and training a large band of village correspondents. 
 On February 1, 1931, Byednota was merged with Sotsialisticheskoye Zemledeliye (Socialist Agriculture ). 
 p. 
 386 On January 1, 1919, in view of the critical situation at Perm, the Central Committee of the Party and the Council of Defence set up a special commission to investigate the causes that had led to the town’s surrender, and to restore the situation at the front defended by the Third Army. 
 The commission was made up of Dzerzhinsky and Stalin, members of the C. 
C. 
 of the Party. 
151 152 153 Lenin sent the telegram in reply to “The Preliminary Report on the Progress of Investigation into the Causes of the Surrender of Perm”, which was compiled by Dzerzhinsky and Stalin and gave account of measures taken by the commission to redress the situa -tion. 
 The measures adopted by the Central Committee of the Partyand the Council of Defence bolstered up the left flank of the East -ern Front, defended by the Third Army. 
 In the latter half ofJanuary 1919 the Third Army units launched an offensive on some sectors of the front. 
 By February 1919 the Third Army had fully recovered its fighting efficiency and took part in the general offensive of troops on the Eastern Front. 
 p. 
 390 The session was called because of the critical food situation. 
 It was held at the Bolshoi Theatre. 
 In his speech, Lenin explained the draft of his theses on food policy which he submitted to the session on behalf of the Bolshevik group in the All -Russia Central Executive Committee. 
 The draft was unanimously approved. 
 The resolution recognised that it was correct to introduce a state monopoly of staple foodstuffs like grain, tea, salt and sugar. 
 The products whose monopolisation was recognised as untimely (meat, sea -fish, etc. 
) were to be procured only by the Food Commissariat’s organs at fixed prices. 
 The basic propositions of the resolution were incorporated in the decree On the Procurement of Foodstuffs, which was endorsed by the Council of People’s Commissars on January 21, 1919, and published in Izvestia on January 24. 
 These government measures formed part of a whole system of measures known as the policy of war communism. 
 p. 
 391 The year 1861 saw the abolition of serfdom in Russia. 
 p. 
 393Lenin refers to the decision of the Moscow Soviet of August 24, 1918, and the decision of the Petrograd Soviet of September 5, which permitted the workers of Moscow and Petrograd free carriage of foodstuffs in quantities up to 1 1/2 poods for personal consumption. 
 This measure was necessitated by the difficult food situation and adopted as an exception from the decision of the Council of People’s Commissars on grain monopoly. 
 The Council of People’s Commissars made these decisions effective until October 1, 1918. 
 p. 
 396 The Conference was called to discuss relations between central and local Soviet bodies and between the Party and the Communist groups in the Soviets. 
 I. 
 V. 
 Tsivtsivadze addressed the Conference on behalf of the Moscow Committee and submitted a draft resolu -tion recognising the need for an improvement in the work of theSoviets and rejecting the demands for the dissolution of the Council of People’s Commissars and a fundamental revision of the Soviet Constitution, which were contained in the draft submitted by the anti -Party group led by Y. 
 N. 
 Ignatov. 
 In his speech Lenin sharply criticised Ignatov’s draft. 
 The Conference adopted by a majority the resolution moved by the Moscow Committee. 
 The Conference resolutely condemned attempts to belittle the Party’s authority over the Communist groups in the Soviets. 
 p. 
 405154 155 156 157 The Congress was held in Moscow from January 12 to January 19, 1919. 
 The union of internationalist teachers was formed shortly after the organisation of the People’s Commissariat of Education and assisted the latter in its work. 
 The union played a considerable role in the struggle against the former All -Russia Teachers’ Union whose Socialist -Revolutionary and Cadet leadership took a counter -revolutionary, anti -Soviet stand, and which was dissolved in December 1918. 
 Members of the internationalist teachers’ union popularised socialist ideas and actively fought against politically backward teachers who maintained that the school should be divorced from politics and separated from the state. 
 Speaking at the Congress, Lenin advocated setting up “a wider and, as nearly as possible, an all -embracing teachers’ union”. 
 The Congress resolution recognised the need for an “All -Russia Union of Workers in Education and Socialist Culture”. 
 The Congress heard several reports on a single labour school and worked out measures for the improvement of cultural and educational work in the Red Army. 
 p. 
 407 On January 15, 1919, Karl Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg were murdered by officers of Noske’s counter -revolutionary troops with the connivance of the government of the Right Social -Democrats Ebert and Scheidemann. 
 News of the murder reached Moscow on January 17 and on the same day it was announced by Y. 
 M. 
 Sverd -lov to a joint session of the All -Russia Central Executive Committee, the Moscow Soviet and All -Russia Congress of Trade Unions. 
 On Jan -uary 18 Izvestia and Pravda published an appeal “To All Soviets in Germany and All Workers” signed by Sverdlov on behalf of the joint session. 
 The Party’s Central Committee and the All -Russia Central Executive Committee called on all Party organisations and all Soviets to hold demonstrations and protest meetings. 
 On January 19 Moscow workers and Red Army units assembled in mourning on Sovetskaya Square. 
 Lenin, Sverdlov, Lunacharsky and others addressed the demonstrators from the balcony of the Moscow Soviet building. 
 p. 
 411 The Congress met in Moscow’s Trade Union House from January 16 to January 25, 1919. 
 At that time the trade unions had 4,420,000 members. 
 The Congress was attended by 648 delegates with the right to vote, of whom 449 were Communists and their sympathisers. 
 The other delegates were Mensheviks, Left Socialist -Revolutiona -ries, Bundists and the Left Menshevik group of “internationalistSocial -Democrats”. 
 The agenda included a report on the activity of the All -Russia Central Council of Trade Unions, the question of the tasks of the trade unions and a number of matters concerning organisation. 
 Lenin spoke on the central item on the agenda—the tasks of trade unions—at the third plenary session which met on January 20. 
 During the debate the Mensheviks and their supporters from other petty -bourgeois parties tried to push through a resolution declaring the “independence of the trade unions from the Soviet state. 
 By a158 159 160 majority of 430 the Congress adopted a resolution moved by the Communist group. 
 It pointed out that an attempt to set the prole -tariat against the Soviet state on the plea of the “unity” and “inde -pendence” of the trade union movement has led “the groups support -ing this slogan to an open struggle against the Soviet governmentand has divorced them from the working class”. 
 The resolution also rejected the anarcho -syndicalist demands that the trade unions be charged with state functions. 
 The Congress worked out measures for eliminating duplication in the work of the People’s Commissariat of Labour and the trade unions. 
 The trade unions were asked to devote particular attention to raising labour productivity and reinforcing labour discipline. 
 The tariff rates of payment were based on the piece rate and bonus sys -tem with fixed rates of additional payment for overfulfilling workquotas. 
 The Congress also devoted much attention to social security and labour protection and enhancing the role of trade unions in training skilled workers. 
 It established the production principle of trade union organisation (until then, workers and other employees of one and the same enterprise were members of differ -ent trade unions). 
 The Congress emphasised the need for the tradeunions to embrace those proletarians and semi -proletarians who had not yet been organised and enlist them for socialist construction. 
 p. 
 412 The quotation is taken from The Holy Family or Critique of Criti-cal Critique by Marx and Engels (Moscow, 1956, p. 
 110). 
 p. 
 419 Lenin’s letter to the workers of Europe and America helped the ad -vanced workers to rally round the Communist Parties and unite their forces in the struggle against international imperialism. 
 The letter was published in Berlin in the March issue of the maga -zine Die Aktion and in the April issue of the magazine Der Arbeiter -Rat (The Workers ’ Council ) for 1919. 
 It also appeared as a separate pamphlet in English. 
 p. 
 429 Die Freiheit —a daily newspaper, organ of the Independent Social -Democratic Party of Germany, published in Berlin from November 15, 1918, to September 30, 1922. 
 p. 
 434 This refers to mass demonstrations in Petrograd on July 3 -4 (16 -17), 1917. 
 The obviously hopeless offensive launched by the Provisional Government and which ended in expected failure aroused indigna -tion among the workers, soldiers and sailors who turned out for ademonstration. 
 The movement was initiated by the 1st Machine -Gun Regiment which took action on July 3 (16) in the VyborgDistrict. 
 The demonstration threatened to develop into armed ac -tion against the government. 
 The Bolshevik Party was opposed to armed action, considering that a revolutionary crisis had not yet matured in the country. 
 At a meeting of the Central Committee called on July 3 (16) at 4 p. 
m. 
 it was decided to attempt to stop the demonstration. 
 A similar161 162 163 164 decision was adopted at the Second Petrograd City Conference of the Bolsheviks, which met at the same time. 
 The delegates went to the factories and the districts to dissuade the people from demon -strating. 
 But it was too late, the demonstration had already begun. 
 Late at night on July 3 (16) the Central and Petrograd Committees and the Military Organisation, taking into account the popularmood, decided to take part in the demonstration with a view to keeping it peaceful and organised. 
 Lenin had been out of town at the time, resting for a few days from the strain of his work. 
 As soon as he learned about the developments in Petrograd, he left for the city where he arrived on the morning of July 4 (17) and took over the leadership of the movement. 
 That same day he addressed the Kronstadt sailors from the balcony of the Kshesinskaya Palace. 
 He called on them to be staunch, steadfast and vigilant. 
 Over 500,000 people took part in the demonstration under the slogan “All Power to the Soviets!” and other Bolshevik slogans. 
 The demonstrators demanded that the Central Executive Committee take over power. 
 The Socialist -Revolutionary and Menshevik leaders did not comply with the demand. 
 With the knowledge and connivance of the Socialist -Revolution -ary-Menshevik Central Executive Committee, the Provisional Government ordered officer cadet and Cossack units to deal with the demonstrators. 
 The troops opened fire. 
 Counter -revolutionary units had been brought from the front to crush the demonstration. 
 The meeting of the Central and Petrograd Committees, which took place on the night of July 4 -5 with Lenin in the chair, decided to call off the demonstration in an organised way. 
 It was a wise move, as it enabled the Party to make a timely retreat and stave off the defeat of the main forces of the revolution. 
 The Mensheviks and Socialist -Revolutionaries actually turned out to have aided and abetted the counter -revolutionary repression. 
 They lined up with the bourgeoisie to attack the Bolshevik Party. 
 Pravda , Soldatskaya Pravda and other Bolshevik papers were suppressed and the printing -plant Trud, acquired with workers’ money, was wrecked. 
 Workers were disarmed and arrests, house searches and pogroms began. 
 Revolutionary units of the Petrograd garrison were withdrawn from the capital and sent to the front. 
 After the July days power in the country completely passed into the hands of the Provisional Government, and the Soviets became its impotent appendage. 
 Dual power came to an end, as did the peaceful period of the revolution’s development. 
 The Bolsheviks were now faced with the task of preparing an armed uprising to over -throw the Provisional Government. 
 Lenin described the July daysin his articles “Three Crises”, “An Answer”, “Marxism and Insur -rection”, “The Russian Revolution and Civil War” and others pp. 
 22 -27 and 28 -42). 
 p. 
 435 Lenin refers to the murder on July 6 (19), 1917, of the Bolshevik I. 
 A. 
 Voinov, an active correspondent of Pravda and a worker at the Pravda print -shop. 
 After the Pravda offices had been wrecked,165(Collected Work s, Vol. 
 25, pp. 
 171-75 and 211-22, and Vol. 
 26, he took part in the publication of Listok Pravdy (Pravda Newssheet ) during the July days and was killed as he was distributing the news -paper on Shpalernaya Street (now Voinov Street). 
 p. 
 435 In November -December 1918 the Ukrainian workers and peasants rose up against the German invaders and their stooge, Hetman Sko -ropadsky. 
 On December 14 Skoropadsky fled from Kiev. 
 On Jan -uary 3, 1919, the Red Army occupied Kharkov, and on February 5, Kiev, capital of the Ukraine. 
 p. 
 439 On Lenin’s instructions this letter was forwarded to the People’s Commissariat of Food, the People’s Commissariat of Finance and to the Supreme Economic Council. 
 The question of the co -operatives and consumers’ communes was discussed at the Council of People’s Commissars on January 28, 1919. 
 p. 
 443 The telegram was sent in reply to the Ufa Gubernia Revolutionary Committee’s inquiry as to how it should act with regard to the spokesman of the Bashkir bourgeois nationalist government, Khali -kov, who had come for negotiations. 
 Khalikov wanted an amnestyfor Bashkirs who had fought Soviet power; he also informed the Committee that Bashkir troops were now joining the Red Army. 
 The telegram, beginning with the words “But naturally”, was written by Lenin. 
 p. 
 445 The draft was written by Lenin in reply to the wireless message of the German Foreign Ministry of February 19, 1919, which conveyed the request of the Berne Socialist Conference to permit entry for a special fact -finding commission appointed by the Conference. 
 Peo -ple’s Commissar for Foreign Affairs Chicherin made the followingaddendum to Lenin’s draft: “Let us know of the exact date when the commission is arriving so that we can take all steps for facili -tating their journey by getting agreement of the Lithuanian andByelorussian Soviet Republics. 
” The telegram signed by Chicherin was broadcast to Germany. 
 The Berne Conference was the first post -war conference of the social -chauvinist and Centrist parties, called for the purpose of restoring the Second International. 
 It met in Berne from February 3 to February 10, 1919. 
 One of the main items on the agenda was the question of democracy and dictatorship. 
 In his report on this question the Centrist Bran -ting tried to prove that the socialist revolution and dictatorshipof the proletariat could not lead to socialism. 
 Kautsky and Bern -stein wanted the Conference to condemn the Bolsheviks and thesocialist revolution in Russia. 
 Branting moved a resolution which, while hypocritically greeting the revolutions in Soviet Russia, Austria -Hungary and Germany, actually denounced the dictator -ship of the proletariat and extolled bourgeois democracy. 
 In viewof the sympathetic attitude of the workers towards Soviet Russia the sponsors of the resolution worded it in very ambiguous terms166 167 168 169 and did not dare to refer specifically to Soviet Russia. 
 The Confer -ence did not discuss the question of the Soviets of Workers’ Deputies. 
 A group of delegates led by Adler and Longuet tabled aresolution suggesting that the Conference refrain from taking a definite stand on Soviet Russia in view of the paucity of information about the situation there. 
 Branting’s resolution received a largenumber of votes. 
 The Conference decided to send a commission to Russia to study the economic and political situation in the country, and to includethe question of Bolshevism in the agenda of the next congress. 
 The commission consisted of Adler, Kautsky, Hilferding and others. 
 While agreeing to admit the commission the Soviet Governmentrequested the admittance of a Soviet commission to the countrieswhose representatives were on the Berne commission. 
 The SovietGovernment, however, received no reply to its request. 
 As it turnedout, the commission of “auditing dignitaries from Berne”, as Lenin called it, did not come to Russia. 
 The First Congress of the Communist International adopted a resolution entitled “On the Attitude Towards ‘Socialist’ Trends andthe Berne Conference”, which criticised the Berne decisions. 
 Inparticular, it denounced the attempts of the Right -wing socialist leaders to compel the Conference to adopt a resolution that would provide a cover for the imperialist armed intervention in Soviet Russia. 
 p. 
 446 Lenin compiled this draft for discussion by the All -Russia Central Executive Committee on the question of the Menshevik newspaperVsegda Vperyod (Always Forward ) (the paper was published in Moscow; one issue appeared in 1918, and in 1919 it appeared from January 22 to February 25). 
 The minutes of the Council of People’s Commissars for February 22, 1919, contain a note from Secretary of the All -Russia Central Execu -tive Committee Avanesov addressed to Lenin: “Have you receivedthe resolution on the Mensheviks?” It appears that Lenin had seen a preliminary draft of the resolution in question and compiled his own draft. 
 On February 25, 1919, the Presidium of the All -Russia Central Executive Committee adopted a decision to close down the news -paper. 
 On the following day the plenary session of the All -Russia Central Executive Committee confirmed the decision and unani -mously passed a lengthy resolution which incorporated the mainideas of Lenin’s draft. 
 On February 27 the decision was published inIzvestia No. 
 45 over the signatures of Sverdlov and Avanesov. 
 p. 
 447 On January 30, 1919, at a meeting of the Council of People’s Com -missars Lenin raised the question of the library service. 
 The decision compiled by Lenin and adopted by the Council of People’s Commissars instructed the People’s Commissar -iat of Education to publish and send to the Council of People’sCommissars brief monthly reports on the progress achieved in170 171 increasing the number of libraries and reading rooms and the circulation of books. 
 p. 
 451 The First Congress of the Communist International met in Moscow from March 2 -6, 1919. 
 In January 1919 a meeting of representatives from a number of Communist Parties and Left -wing Socialist groups, held to discuss the founding of the Third, Communist International, adopted aManifesto entitled “For the First Congress of the Communist In -ternational”, which was worked out with Lenin’s direct participa -tion. 
 It was published on behalf of the Central Committee of theR. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
), foreign bureaus of the Communist Workers’ Party ofPoland, Hungarian Communist Party, Communist Party of Ger -man Austria, the Russian bureau of the Central Committee of theLatvian Communist Party, Central Committee of the Finnish Com -munist Party, Executive Committee of the Balkan Revolutionary Social -Democratic Federation and the Socialist Labour Party of America. 
 At the end of February delegates from many countries arrived in Moscow in response to the Manifesto. 
 On March 1 a preliminarymeeting was held under Lenin’s chairmanship to discuss the agendaof the Congress. 
 March 2, 1919, was the opening day of the International Commu -nist Conference, attended by 52 delegates (34 delegates with vote and 18 delegates with voice but no vote). 
 Among the delegates wereV. 
 I. 
 Lenin, V. 
 V. 
 Vorovsky, G. 
 V. 
 Chicherin, H. 
 Eberlein (M. 
 Al -bert), O. 
 V. 
 Kuusinen, F. 
 Platten, B. 
 Reinstein, S. 
 Rutgers, I. 
 S. 
Unshlikht (Yurovsky), Y. 
 Sirola, N. 
 A. 
 Skrypnik, S. 
 I. 
 Gopner, K. 
 Shteingard (I. 
 Gruber), J. 
 Fineberg, J. 
 Sadoul and others. 
 The following Communist and Socialist parties, groups and organisa -tions were represented: the Communist Parties of Russia, Germany,German Austria, Hungary, Poland, Finland, the Ukraine, Latvia,Lithuania and Byelorussia, Estonia, Armenia, the Volga Germanregion; Swedish Left Social -Democratic Party, Norwegian Social -Democratic Party, Swiss Social -Democratic Party (the Opposi -tion), Balkan Revolutionary Social -Democratic Federation; the Joint Group of the Eastern peoples of Russia, Zimmerwald Leftwing of France; Czech, Bulgarian, Yugoslav, British, French andSwiss Communist groups; Dutch Social -Democratic group; Social -ist Propaganda League and Socialist Labour Party of America; Socialist Workers’ Party of China; Korean Workers’ Union; Tur -kestan, Turkish, Georgian, Azerbaijanian and Persian sections of the Central Bureau of the Eastern peoples, and the ZimmerwaldCommission. 
 The first meeting decided “to hold sessions as an International Communist Conference” and adopted the following agenda: 1) con -stitution; 2) reports; 3) policy statement of the International Com -munist Conference; 4) bourgeois democracy and the dictatorshipof the proletariat; 5) the Berne Conference and attitude towardssocialist trends; 6) the international situation and the Entente’s172 policy; 7) Manifesto; 8) White terror; 9) elections to the Bureau and other questions of organisation. 
 Lenin’s theses and report on bourgeois democracy and the dic -tatorship of the proletariat attracted much attention. 
 The theses in Russian and German were circulated among the delegates. 
 At the third session on March 4, Lenin read his theses and substantiat -ed the last two points of the theses in his report. 
 The Conferenceexpressed its unanimous approval of Lenin’s theses and decided tosubmit them to the Bureau for wide circulation. 
 It also adopted aresolution moved by Lenin as a supplement to the theses (see p. 
 475 of this volume). 
 On March 4, after the adoption of the theses and the resolution on Lenin’s report, the question was raised again of founding theCommunist International in view of the fact that new delegates hadarrived. 
 On the motion of the delegates of the Communist Party ofGerman Austria, Left Social -Democratic Party of Sweden, Balkan Revolutionary Social -Democratic Federation and Hungarian Com -munist Party the Conference resolved “to constitute itself as the Third International and adopt the name of the Communist Inter -national”. 
 On the same day a unanimous resolution was passed toconsider the Zimmerwald association dissolved. 
 The Conferenceformulated the policy statement of the Communist International, which contained the following main propositions: 1) inevitability of the replacement of the capitalist by the communist social system;2) necessity of the proletarian revolutionary struggle for the over -throw of bourgeois governments, and 3) destruction of the bourgeoisstate and its replacement by a new type of state, a proletarian stateof the Soviet type, which would ensure the transition to communist society. 
 The Manifesto to the workers of the world was one of the most important documents of the Congress. 
 It stated that the CommunistInternational carried on the ideas expounded in the Manifesto of the Communist Party . 
 The Congress urged the workers of all coun -tries to support Soviet Russia and demanded from the Entente non-interference in the internal affairs of the Soviet Republic, with -drawal of interventionist troops from her territory, recognition of the Soviet state, lifting of the economic blockade and restoration oftrade relations. 
 The resolution “On the Attitude Towards ‘Socialist’ Trends and the Berne Conference” condemned attempts to restore the Second International, “a tool in the hands of the bourgeoisie”, and declared that the revolutionary proletariat had dissociated itself from theBerne Conference. 
 The founding of the Third, Communist International played an important role in exposing opportunism in the working -class move -ment, restoring the ties between the working people in different countries, and creating and strengthening Communist Parties. 
 p. 
 453 Shop stewards committees —elective labour organisations in various industries, which were particularly widespread during the First173 World War. 
 Unlike the compromising trade unions which pursued a policy of “civil peace” and renounced the strike struggle, the shopstewards committees championed the interests and demands of theworkers, led the strike movement and carried on anti -war propagan -da. 
 Shop stewards were united in shop, district and city committees. 
In 1916 the shop stewards committees and workers’ committeeswere united nationally. 
 After the October Revolution, during the foreign armed inter -vention in the Soviet Republic, the shop stewards committeesactively supported Soviet Russia. 
 Many leaders of the shop stewards committees (William Gallacher, Harry Pollitt, Arthur McManus and others) joined the Communist Party. 
 p. 
 456 Most probably, it is not the Birmingham Workers’ Council that is meant here, but the shop stewards committee. 
 Itis very likely that the newspaper which Lenin read contained incor -rect information. 
 Speaking at the First Congress of the CommunistInternational on March 3, 1919, J. 
 Fineberg, a delegate from theBritish Communist group, said: “In industrial areas local workers’committees were formed, including representatives of the shopstewards committees, for instance, the Clyde workers’ committee,London and Sheffield workers’ committees and so on. 
 The commit -tees served as organisational centres and representatives of organisedlabour in the localities. 
 For some time the employers and the govern -ment refused to recognise the shop stewards committees, but in theend they had to enter into negotiations with these unregisteredcommittees That Lloyd George agreed to recognise the Birming -ham committee as an economic organisation proves that the shop stewards committees have become permanent factors in the Brit -ish movement. 
 In the shop stewards committees, workers’ commit -tees and national conferences of shop stewards committees we have an organisation similar to the one forming the basis of the SovietRepublic” ( First Congress of the Communist International. 
 Min -utes , Moscow, 1933, p. 
 63). 
 p. 
 456 Engels’s Introduction to The Civil War in France by Marx (Marx and Engels, Selected Works , Moscow, 1962, Vol. 
 I, p. 
 485). 
 p. 
 458 Karl Marx, The Civil War in France (Marx and Engels, Selected Works , Moscow, 1962, Vol. 
 I, p. 
 520). 
 p. 
 459 Lenin has in mind the resolution of the Seventh Congress of the R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
) on changing the name of the Party and its programme(Collected Works , Vol. 
 27, pp. 
 140 -41). 
 p. 
 468 Gazeta Pechatnikov (Printers ’ Newspaper )—organ of the Moscow Printers’ Union, appeared from December 8, 1918. 
 At that time the trade union came under Menshevik influence. 
 In March 1919 thepaper was closed down because of its anti -Soviet propaganda. 
 p. 
 470174 175 176 177 178 Lenin refers to Rosa Luxemburg’s article “Der Anfang” (“The Be -ginning”) published in Die Rote Fahne No. 
 3, November 18, 1918. 
 p. 
 473 L’Humanité was founded by Jean Jaurès in 1904 as organ of the French Socialist Party. 
 During the First World War it was in the hands of the extreme Right wing of the French Socialist Party and conducted a social -chauvinist policy. 
 In 1918 Marcel Cachin, a prominent figure in the French and in -ternational labour movement, became its political director. 
 Be -tween 1918 and 1920 the paper exposed the imperialist policy of the French Government which had sent troops to fight against the Soviet Republic. 
 Since December 1920, when the French Socialist Party split and the Communist Party was founded, it has been the central organ of the French Communist Party. 
 p. 
 481 Avanti! —central organ of the Italian Socialist Party, founded in Rome in December 1896. 
 During the First World War the paper took an inconsistent internationalist stand and did not break with the reformists. 
 In 1926 it was closed down by the Mussolini govern -ment, but its publication continued abroad. 
 In 1943 it resumedpublication in Rome. 
 p. 
 483 Poshekhonye —provincial town in tsarist Russia; after the publica -tion of Saltykov -Shchedrin’s novel Old Times in Poshekhonye the name came to denote provincial backwaters. 
 p. 
 483 At its meeting on March 8, 1919, the Council of People’s Commissars discussed a decree on State Control and adopted a resolution moved by Lenin, which incorporated the basic ideas set down in his note to Stalin. 
 A reshaped decree with Lenin’s amendments was endorsed by the All -Russia Central Executive Committee on April 2, 1919, and published in Izvestia No. 
 79, April 12. 
 p. 
 486179 180 181 182 183 THE LIFE AND WORK OF V. 
 I. 
 LENIN Outstanding Dates (?uly 191 8-March 1919 ) July 29 July 30 July 31 August 21918 Lenin speaks on home and foreign affairs at a joint session of the All-Russia Central Executive Com-mittee, the Moscow Soviet, factory committees and trade unions of Moscow. 
 Lenin conducts a meeting of the Council of Peo-ple’s Commissars at which the following questions are discussed: the introduction of military con-scription; supplying the Military Department with transport; assigning money for fighting the Czech mutiny and the Anglo-French intervention, etc. 
 Lenin speaks about the immediate tasks of the So-viet government’s administrative apparatus at a Congress of Chairmen of Gubernia Soviets. 
 Lenin conducts a meeting of the Council of Peo-ple’s Commissars at which the following questions are discussed: monuments to great men of social-ism, science, literature and the arts, and the crea-tion of a Volga fleet, and makes amendments in the draft decision. 
 Lenin conducts a meeting of the Council of People’s Commissars and submits the draft of an appeal from the Council to workers in Entente countries in connection with the hostile actions of their governments against the Soviet state; the meeting also debates the fuel situation, the procurement of grain via the co-operatives, the question of a scien-tific and technical department of the Supreme Economic Council, etc. 
 Lenin speaks at a meeting of propagandists about to leave for the front to work among troops fighting the Czechs. 
 Lenin speaks at meetings in Moscow’s Butyrsky and Zamoskvorechye districts, to the Warsaw Revolutionary Regiment and to Red Army men in Khodynka on the subject “The Soviet Republic Is in Danger”. 
 August 6 August 7 August 8 August 9 August 9-12 August 10 August 11 First half of August August 16 August 17Lenin writes “Letter to Yelets Workers” on Party policy in the countryside. 
 Lenin conducts a meeting of the Council of People’s Commissars at which the question of providing for Red Army men and their families is debated. 
 An appeal from the Council of People’s Commissars, signed by Lenin and addressed to all working peo-ple, “Join the Fight for Bread”, is published in Izvestia. 
 Lenin speaks on the subject “The Fifth Year of the World Slaughter” at a meeting in Moscow’s Sokol-niki District. 
 In several telegrams to the Penza Gubernia Exec-utive Committee, Lenin orders the merciless sup-pression of kulak revolts, the confiscation of the kulaks’ grain and the mass mobilisation of the poor against them. 
 Lenin works on the question of nationalising en-gineering factories and puts forward his proposals for examination by the Council of People’s Commis-sars. 
 Lenin gives orders to the Supreme War Council to reinforce the Eastern Front. 
 Appeals from the Council of People’s Commissars, signed V. 
 Ulyanov (Lenin), are published, they are addressed to “Russian Citizens in France and Britain” and call on them not to fight in the French or British armies. 
 Lenin writes an appeal to the workers: “Comrade Workers, Forward to the Last, Decisive Fight!” Lenin speaks at a meeting of the Moscow Party Committee about organising groups of sympa-thisers. 
 Lenin writes the draft of a telegram to all So-viets of Deputies about a worker-peasant alliance. 
 Lenin sends a telegram to the Zadonsk Execu-tive Committee of Voronezh Gubernia with instruc-tions to deal severely with kulaks and “Left” Socialist-Revolutionaries, and to appeal to and organise the poor. 
 August 19 August 20 August 21 August 23 August 26 August 28 August 29 August 30Lenin conducts a meeting of the Council of People’s Commissars at which the following questions are debated: the food policy; unification of all the Re-public’s armed forces; nationalisation of industrial undertakings, etc. 
 In a telegram to the Zdorovets Executive Commit-tee of Orel Gubernia, Lenin instructs it severely to put down the kulak and “Left” Socialist-Revo-lutionary revolt, to confiscate the kulaks’ grain and to distribute part of it free to the poor. 
 Lenin writes his “Letter to American Workers”. 
 Lenin sends a telegram to the Astrakhan Gubernia Executive Committee demanding their immediate organisation of Astrakhan’s defence against a British attack. 
 Lenin speaks at the Alexeyev People’s House and the Polytechnical Museum on the subject “What Communists Are Fighting For”. 
 Lenin conducts a meeting of the Council of People’s Commissars at which the following questions are debated: establishment of a Moscow Mining Academy; the conscription of workers who had formerly served in artillery, engineer and mainte-nance units; restoration of the buildings destroyed by whiteguards in Yaroslavl, etc. 
 Lenin speaks on current affairs at the First All-Russia Congress on Education. 
 Lenin conducts a meeting of the Council of People’s Commissars at which the following questions are debated: repudiation by the Bolshevik government of treaties signed between the tsarist government and the governments of Germany and Austria-Hun-gary; the accounts of the People’s Commissariats. 
 Lenin writes a draft resolution. 
 Lenin speaks on the subject “Two Governments (the Dictatorship of the Proletariat and the Dic-tatorship of the Bourgeoisie)” at meetings in the Grain Exchange in Moscow’s Basmanny District and at the former Michelson Works in Zamos-kvorechye District As Lenin leaves the works he is shot by Fanny Kaplan. 
 August 30-September 15 September 11 September 16 September 17 September 18 September 19 September 20 September 21 September 22 September 24 or 25Lenin fights for his life. 
 In a telegram to the HQ and troops on the Eastern Front, Lenin congratulates them on the capture of Kazan. 
 For the first time after his illness Lenin takes part in a meeting of the Central Committee of the Rus-sian Communist Party (Bolsheviks). 
 Lenin again presides over a meeting of the Council of People’s Commissars. 
 Lenin writes a congratulatory letter to the Pre-sidium of the Conference of Proletarian Cultural and Educational Organisations. 
 In a telegram to officer cadets in Petrograd, Lenin greets the workers on graduating and joining the ranks of the Red Army. 
 Lenin adds a postscript to the official bulletin on the state of his health: “On the basis of this bul-letin and my general well-being, it is my humble and personal request not to disturb the doctors by telephone calls and questions. 
” Lenin conducts a meeting of the Council of People’s Commissars at which the following questions are debated: a ban on the export of objects of artistic and historic value; the further course of nationali-sation of the banks, etc. 
 Lenin’s article “The Character of Our Newspapers” is published in Pravda No. 
 202. 
 Lenin writes a letter to V. 
 V. 
 Vorovsky in Stock-holm, A. 
 A. 
 Joffe in Berlin and Y. 
 A. 
 Berzin in Berne about the necessity of fighting Kautsky’s vulgarisation of Marxist theory. 
 Lenin conducts a meeting of the Council of People’s Commissars which discusses the imposition of a tax in kind on farms (Lenin formulates the principal clauses of the decree), denunciation of treaties signed by the tsarist government, etc. 
 On behalf of all working people, Lenin congratu-lates the First Army of the Eastern Front on the capture of Simbirsk. 
 Lenin leaves to convalesce at Gorki. 
 September, not later than 27 October 2 or 3 October 9 October, not later than 15 October 22 October 23 October 29 November 2 November 3 November 6-9 November 6In a letter to Red Army men who took part in the 7 capture of Kazan, Lenin congratulates them on their victory. 
 In connection with the political crisis in Germany Lenin sends a letter to a joint meeting of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee, the Moscow Soviet and representatives of factory committees and trade unions. 
 Lenin writes the article “The Proletarian Revolu-tion and the Renegade Kautsky”. 
 Lenin returns to Moscow from Gorki. 
 Lenin delivers a report on the international situa-tion to a joint meeting of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee, the Moscow Soviet, factory committees and trade unions; Lenin’s resolution is approved. 
 Lenin writes the preface to the second edition of his pamphlet “Political Parties in Russia and the Tasks of the Proletariat”, the first edition of which was published in July 1917. 
 On behalf of the Central Committee of the Russian Communist Party, Lenin sends a telegram to A. 
 A. 
 Joffe in Berlin asking him to convey ardent greetings to Karl Liebknecht on his release from prison. 
 Lenin gives a talk to delegates at the First Congress of the Russian Young Communist League; writes to Y. 
 M. 
 Sverdlov asking him to support the League financially. 
 Lenin drafts theses of the resolution on strict ob-servance of the laws, for the examination of the Extraordinary Sixth All-Russia Congress of Soviets. 
 Lenin delivers a speech at a rally to mark the Austro-Hungarian revolution. 
 Lenin conducts the work of the Extraordinary Sixth All-Russia Congress of Soviets of Workers’, Peasants’, Cossacks’ and Red Army Deputies. 
 Lenin speaks at the first session of the Congress on the anniversary of the October Revolution. 
 November 7 November 8 November 10 November 11 November 13 November 14Lenin speaks about the anniversary of the Octo-ber Revolution at the ceremonial meeting of the All-Russia Central and Moscow trade union coun-cils, and at a party organised by the Moscow Pro-letkult. 
 In the afternoon Lenin speaks at the unveiling of a memorial to Marx and Engels on Rev-olution Square and at the unveiling on Red Square of a memorial plaque to those who fell in the October Revolution. 
 In the evening Lenin delivers a speech at a rally and concert for the All-Russia Extraordinary Com-mission staff. 
 Lenin sends a congratulatory telegram to troops of the Second Army after the capture of Izhevsk. 
 Lenin speaks about the international situation at the second session of the Extraordinary Sixth All-Russia Congress of Soviets. 
 Lenin speaks about organising the village poor at a meeting of delegates from Poor Peasants’ Committees of central gubernias. 
 Lenin finishes writing his book The Proletarian Revolution and the Renegade Kautsky. 
 Lenin sends a “Telegram to All Soviets of Deputies, to Everyone” in connection with the commencement of revolution in Germany. 
 Lenin speaks on current affairs at the inaugura-tion of the October Revolution Club in Moscow’s Khamovniki District. 
 Lenin speaks about the international situation at a concert for Moscow Communists in the Bolshoi Theatre. 
 Lenin sends a telegram with instructions to N. 
 A. 
 Shchors to take urgent steps to liberate the Ukraine from foreign invaders and the whiteguards. 
 In a telegram to the Orel Gubernia Committee of the Party, Lenin replies to greetings sent him by German revolutionary soldiers in the Ukraine and calls on their help to liberate the Ukraine from German occupation. 
 Lenin speaks at a meeting of the Council of People’s Commissars about the international situation. 
 November 19 November 20 November 23 November 24November 26November 27November 29 November 30 December 1 December 4Pravda No. 
 246 publishes a decree of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee and Council of People’s Commissars, signed by Lenin and Sverd-lov, annulling the Brest-Litovsk Peace Treaty. 
 Lenin speaks at the First All-Russia Congress of Working Women. 
 Lenin writes the article “The Valuable Admissions of Pitirim Sorokin”. 
 Lenin speaks at a meeting held in his honour as Party and state leader. 
 Lenin receives representatives of Indian peoples who delivered greetings to the Soviet government from the peoples of India. 
 Lenin delivers greetings from the Council of People’s Commissars at a meeting held on Red Officers’ Day. 
 Lenin speaks on the role of the co-operatives in a socialist state to a meeting of delegates from the Moscow Central Workers’ Co-operative. 
 Lenin reports on the attitude of the proletariat; towards petty-bourgeois democrats at a meeting of Party workers in Moscow. 
 Lenin signs telegrams to the Nizhni-Novgorod Gu-bernia Food Department, the Gubernia Military Commissar and the Economic Council on supplying the Nizhni-Novgorod radio laboratory with food and building materials, and a telegram to Command-er-in-Chief I. 
 I. 
 Vatsetis on support by Red Army troops to Soviet governments in Latvia, Estonia, the Ukraine and Lithuania. 
 Lenin signs the decree of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee on the formation of a Council of Workers’ and Peasants’ Defence. 
 Lenin conducts the first session of the Council of Defence; maps out the immediate tasks of the Council and introduces a number of proposals con-cerning the food, transport, fuel and other questions. 
 Lenin conducts a session of the Council of Defence at which the following questions are debated: put-ting the railways in order; draft decision against pa-December 5 December 7 December 8 December 9 December 11 December 12 December 13December 14rochialism and bureaucracy etc. 
; writes the draft decision on stepping up food deliveries and increas-ing their amount. 
 Lenin conducts a session of the Council of Defence commission on cartridges; signs decisions in the name of the Council concerning Tula, Podolsk and Simbirsk munition factories. 
 Lenin conducts a meeting of the Council of People’s Commissars at which the following questions are debated: recognition of the independence of the Estonian Soviet Republic; the railway programme, etc. 
, Lenin makes a proposal to appoint a special correspondent from the Council to report the Coun-cil’s activities in the papers. 
 Lenin speaks about the home and international situation at the Moscow Gubernia Congress of Soviets. 
 Poor Peasants’ Committees and District Committees of the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks). 
 Lenin conducts a session of the Council of De-fence, raises the question of taking stock of military materiel; approves and signs a draft decision against parochialism and bureaucracy. 
 Lenin speaks at the Third Congress of Workers’ Co-operatives about the economic and political tasks of the co-operatives. 
 Lenin speaks about the rural situation at the First All-Russia Congress of Land Departments, Poor Peasants’ Committees and Communes, held in Moscow’s Trade Union House. 
 Lenin conducts a session of the Council of De-fence; approves and signs a draft decision on putting the railways in order; makes a proposal to take urgent steps to improve the food situation. 
 Lenin writes “Rough Draft of Rules for the Admini-stration of Soviet Institutions” for discussion by the Council of Defence. 
 Lenin and Sverdlov issue instructions to the Revolutionary Military Council to send reinforce-ments to Perm. 
 Lenin speaks about the home and international situation at a workers’ conference at the Alexeyev People’s House in Moscow’s Presnya District. 
 Lenin conducts a session of the Council of Defence at which the following questions are discussed: the amount of grain stocks on the railways and in elevators; political agitation in the army and the dispatch of commissars to newly formed divisions. 
 Lenin writes the preface to the second edition of his book The State and Revolution . 
 Lenin conducts a session of the Council of Defence at which the following questions are discussed: determination of army strength; providing the army with cavalry; providing the army with buildings; the construction of an arms factory in Tsaritsyn, etc. 
 Lenin conducts a session of the Council of Defence at which the following questions are discussed: fitting out railway workers; accounts of commissars sent to newly formed divisions; the amount of grain stocks on the railways, etc. 
 Lenin writes an article entitled “’Democracy’ and Dictatorship”. 
 Lenin sends a telegram to the Commander-in-Chief requesting information about the reinforce-ments sent to Perm and the reasons for non-compli-ance with his orders to take Orenburg. 
 Lenin’s article “Heroism of the Presnya Workers” is published in Byednota No. 
 222. 
 Lenin receives a representative from the Melekess Committee of the Russian Communist Party (Bol-sheviks), Samara Gubernia, who reports there are no means of transport in the district for dispatching the grain; in the Council of Defence Lenin raises the question of taking urgent measures to ensure the transport of grain from Samara Gubernia. 
 Lenin speaks on the international situation and economic tasks at the Second All-Russia Congress of Economic Councils held in the Second House of Soviets (the Metropol Hotel). 
 Lenin conducts a session of the Council of Defence at which the following questions are discussed: plans for transporting army materiel, personnel, and food; moving reinforcements up to the Eastern Front; the Simbirsk and Izhevsk arms factories, etc. 
December 15 December 17 December 18 December 22 December 23 December 24 December 25 December 29 Lenin conducts a meeting of the Council of People’s Commissars at which the following questions are debated: financial and economic policy; granting loans to the Government of the Estonian Labour Commune and the worker-peasant Government of Latvia. 
 Lenin gives instructions to the People’s Commissar-iat of Education about writing and publishing popular books; outlines various subjects. 
 Lenin drafts theses for the Central Committee of the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks), “Tasks of the Trade Unions”. 
 Lenin begins the article “A Little Picture in Illu-stration of Big Problems”. 
 It remained unfinished. 
 Lenin conducts a commission for drafting a socialist agricultural policy and measures for the transition to socialist agriculture; he delivers a report to the commission and writes notes to the draft concerning common cultivation of the land. 
 1919 Lenin conducts a meeting of the Council of People’sCommissars, puts forward for examination the question of libraries; the meeting also discusses the question of provision for Red Army men’s families; engineering factories, etc. 
 Lenin conducts a session of the Council of De-fence at which the following questions are discussed: plans for transporting military materiel, per-sonnel and food; permission for the workers to buy unrationed foodstuffs; the Council of Defence created in Astrakhan. 
 Lenin sends a telegram to the Revolutionary Mili-tary Council in connection with preparation for a general assault on Krasnov. 
 In a note to the letter written by Stalin and Dzer-zhinsky about measures for strengthening the Third Army outside Perm, Lenin writes of his agreement with the demands made in the letter and puts the letter forward as an order to be carried out by the After reading “The Preliminary Report on the Progress of Investigation into the Causes of theDecember 30 1918 December 1918-January 1919 late 1918 or early 1919 January 2 January 3 January 8 January 14 Surrender of Perm” drawn up by Dzerzhinsky and Stalin, Lenin instructs them personally to see to the execution of the measures mentioned on the spot for righting the situation on the Third Army’s sector. 
 Lenin speaks on the food policy of the Soviet government at a joint session of the All-Russia Cen-tral Executive Committee, the Moscow Soviet and the All-Russia Congress of Trade Unions hold in the Bolshoi Theatre; introduces a draft resolution. 
 Lenin speaks about relations between Soviet cen-tral bodies and those in the districts at a meeting of the Moscow City Conference of the Russian Com-munist Party (Bolsheviks). 
 Lenin speaks about the tasks before Soviet teach-ers at the Second All-Russia Congress of Interna-tionalist Teachers. 
 Lenin speaks from the balcony of the Moscow Soviet at a protest meeting following the murder of Rosa Luxemburg and Karl Liebknecht. 
 Lenin delivers a report on the tasks of the trade unions at the Second All-Russia Trade Union Con-gress, held in Trade Union House. 
 Lenin writes “Letter to the Workers of Europe and America”. 
 Lenin speaks about the tasks of adult education at the Second Conference of Heads of Adult Education Divisions of Gubernia Education Departments. 
 Lenin instructs the Revolutionary Military Coun-cil to do all it can to take Rostov, Chelyabinsk and Omsk in the next month. 
 Lenin writes an appeal “Everybody on Food and Transport Work!” Lenin conducts a session of the Council of Defence at which the following questions are discussed: sending thanks to workers at the Izhevsk works for increasing their output of rifles; fuel for railways, etc. 
 Lenin writes a letter to the People’s Commissariats of Food, Finance and the Supreme Economic Coun-cil about measures governing the transition fromJanuary 17 January 18 January 19 January 20January 21 January 24 January 26 January 27 February 2 bourgeois-co-operative to proletarian-communist supply and distribution. 
 Lenin grants an interview to Ludovic Naudeau, cor-respondent of Le Temps. 
 Lenin conducts a session of the Council of Defence at which the following questions are discussed: water transport; repair of steam locomotives; the fuel situation on the railways, etc. 
 Lenin conducts a session of the Council of Defence at which the following questions are discussed: organisation of trains for conveying grain and coal; restoration of the railways ruined during the enemy retreat, etc. 
 Lenin drafts a reply from the People’s Commissariat for Foreign Affairs to the radio telegram sent by the German Ministry of Foreign Affairs dated February 19, 1919, requesting permission for the entry of a commission from the Berne Conference of the Second International. 
 Lenin drafts a resolution for the All-Russia Central Executive Committee on the closure of the Menshe-vik newspaper Vsegda Vperyod because of its sedi-tious propaganda. 
 Lenin writes a letter to the People’s Commissariat of Education explaining how to correctly arrange the accountability of the libraries. 
 Lenin begins an article “Concerning the Appeal of German Independents”. 
 The article remained unfinished. 
 Lenin writes “Theses on Bourgeois Democracy and the Dictatorship of the Proletariat” for the First Congress of the Communist International. 
 Lenin conducts a preparatory session of a group of delegates to the First Congress of the Communist International, convened in connection with the opening of the Congress for debating problems of organisation. 
 First Congress of the Communist International. 
 Lenin takes a leading part in the work of the Con-gress; he is elected to the presidium. 
 Lenin delivers the opening speech at the Congress. 
February 5 February 10 February 17 February 19 February 22 February Latter half of February Late February-early March March 1 March 2-6 March 2 Lenin delivers a report to the third session of the Comintern Congress about bourgeois democracy and the dictatorship of the proletariat and reads his theses. 
 Lenin writes the article “Won and Recorded” about the founding of the Communist International. 
 Lenin delivers the concluding speech at the fifth session of the Comintern Congress. 
 Lenin speaks about the founding of the Communist International at a joint meeting of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee, the Moscow Soviet, the Moscow Committee of the R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
), the All-Russia Central Council of Trade Unions and other organisations, which was held in the Bolshoi Thea-tre. 
 Lenin conducts a meeting of the Council of People’s Commissars which debates the question of co-ope-ration—the decision is based on Lenin’s theses. 
 Lenin speaks to the first group finishing six-week courses organised by the Mother and Child Protec-tion Department of the People’s Commissariat of Social Security. 
 Lenin presides over a meeting of the Council of People’s Commissars; in connection with discussion of the report on reorganising State Control, Lenin writes his observations and a note to Stalin. 
 He suggests additions to the decree on reorganisation of State Control. 
March 4 March 5 March 6 March 7 March 8 Printed in the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics B. 
 n. 
 leHnH coЧnHeHnr TOM 28 На английскот языке