# Volume 25

==========

## Table of contents







Lenin Collected Works: Volume 25







Lenin
      Collected Works: Volume 25



 
Lenin Collected Works: Volume 25
June - September 1917


Preface




June - September 1917



First All-Russia Congress of Soviets of Workers' and Soldiers' Deputies 
82k

Economic Dislocation and the Proletariat’s Struggle Against It

12k

The Thousand and First Lie of the Capitalists 
5k

The Diehards of June 3 Favour an Immediate Offensive 
8k

An Alliance to Stop the Revolution

8k

Gratitude 
3k

Is There a Way to a Just Peace?

5k

The Enemies of the People 
5k

Note 
2k

“The Great Withdrawal” 
10k

The Use of Sticking to the Point in Polemics 
4k

An Epidemic of Credulity 
6k

A Bird in the Hand or Two in the Bush 
2k

Introduction of Socialism or Exposure of Plunder of the State? 
6k

Confused and Frightened 
8k

Insinuations 
4k

“Rumours Agitating the Population”
2k

A Riddle
2k

Draft Statement by the C.C. R.S.D.L.P.(B.) and the Bureau of the Bolshevik Group to the All-Russia Congress of Soviets Regarding the Ban on the Demonstration

6k


Speech on the Cancellation of the Demonstration, Delivered at a Meeting of the Petrograd Committee of the R.S.D.L.P.(B.), June 11 (24), 1917

8k


The Turning-Point

5k


Letter to the Editor

2k


The Foreign Policy of the Russian Revolution

7k


A Contradictory Stand 
9k

The Ukraine

7k

The Class Origins of Present-Day and “Future” Cavaignacs

10k


How to Fight Counter-Revolution

6k


The Ukraine and the Defeat of the Ruling Parties of Russia

10k


Prosecute Rodzyanko and Junkovsky for Concealing an Agent Provocateur!

3k


Strange Misquotations

6k


Ruling and Responsible Parties

8k


Another Commission

3k


The Eighteenth of June

8k


The Revolution, the Offensive, and Our Party

9k


In What Way Do You Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik Gentlemen Differ From Plekhanov?

2k


How Rodzyanko is Trying to Justify Himself

3k


To What State Have the Socialist-Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks Brought the Revolution?

7k


Can “Jacobinism” Frighten the Working Class?

7k


The Need for an Agricultural Labourers' Union in Russia

13k


A Disorderly Revolution

12k


A Class Shift

8k


Miracles of Revolutionary Energy

7k


Phrases and Facts

7k


How the Capitalists Conceal Their Profits.

Concerning
    the Issue of Control

6k


Crisis Is Approaching, Dislocation Is Increasing

8k


Just How Is It To Be Done?

6k


How and Why the Peasants Were Deceived

8k


Who Is Responsible?

5k


What Could the Cadets Have Counted On When They Withdrew from the Cabinet?

6k


All Power to the Soviets! 
5k

Where Is State Power and Where Is Counter-Revolution?

20k


Foul Slander by Ultra-Reactionary Newspapers and Alexinsky

3k


Slander and Facts

5k


Close to the Truth

3k


A New Dreyfus Case?

5k


Appeal of the Executive Commission of the Petrograd Committee of the R.S.D.L.P.(B.).

2k


Dreyfusiad

9k


In Refutation of Sinister Rumours

2k


Three Crises 
14k


The Question of the Bolshevik Leaders Appearing in Court

5k


The Political Situation

(Four Theses)

9k


Letter to the Editors of Novaya Zhizn

8k


Letter to the Editors of Proletarskoye Dyelo

6k


On Slogans

21k


Our Thanks to Prince G. Y. Lvov

8k


Constitutional Illusions

41k


An Answer

28k


The Beginning of Bonapartism

13k


Lessons of the Revolution 
44k

Kamenev’s Speech in the C.E.C. on the Stockholm Conference 
7k

Rumours of a Conspiracy 
25k

They Do Not See the Wood for the Trees 
16k

Political Blackmail 
10k

Paper Resolutions 
10k

The Stockholm Conference 
25k

From a Publicist’s Diary (Peasants and Workers) 
23k

Slanderers 
4k

To the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P. 
9k

From a Publicist’s Diary 
30k

Concerning the Party Programme

4k

On Zimmerwald 
4k

Violations of Democracy in Mass Organisations 
4k

On Compromises 
18k

Draft Resolution on the Present Political Situation 
18k

The Impending Catastrophe and How to Combat It 
4k

One of the Fundamental Questions of the Revolution 
20k

How to Guarantee the Success of the Constituent Assembly
On Freedom of the Press

14k

The State and Revolution

9k

 



      Volume 25 Transcription/Mark-up: Charles Farrell, David
    Walters and Brian Baggins,  1999, 2000; 
      •
    R. Cymbala & David Walters, 2002;
    
    • Converted to “tx2html”, Aug. 2006.

  







 
Previous

 | 
 Next 

 
Lenin
      Collected Works 
 | 
 Lenin
      Internet Archive 

 




 


 
 
 







==========

## First All-Russia Congress of Soviets of Workers' and Soldiers' Deputies









Lenin: First All-Russia Congress of Soviets of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies







V. I.  

      Lenin
First All-Russia Congress of Soviets of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies
JUNE 3–24 (JUNE 6–JULY 7), 1917




Published:
Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 15-42.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2000

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

    

1
Speech On The Attitude Towards The Provisional Government
      June 4 (17)
    

Comrades, in the brief time at my disposal, I can dwell—and
      I think this best—only on the main questions of principle
      raised by the Executive Committee rapporteur and by subsequent
      speakers.


The first and fundamental issue before us was: what is this
      assembly we are attending, what are these Soviets now
      gathered at the All-Russia Congress, and what is this
      revolutionary democracy that people here speak so much about to
      conceal their utter misunderstanding and complete repudiation of
      it? To talk about revolutionary democracy at the All-Russia
      Congress of Soviets and obscure this institution’s character,
      its class composition and its role in the revolution—not to
      say a word about this and yet lay claim to the title of
      democrats really is peculiar. They map out a programme to us for
      a bourgeois parliamentary republic, the sort of programme that
      has existed all over Western Europe; they map out a programme to
      us for reforms which are now recognised by all bourgeois
      governments, including our own, and yet they talk to us about
      revolutionary democracy. Whom are they talking to? To the
      Soviets. But I ask you, is there a country in Europe, a
      bourgeois, democratic, republican country, where anything like
      these Soviets exists? You have to admit there isn’t. Nowhere is
      there, nor can there be, a similar institution because you must
      have one or the other: either a bourgeois government
      with “plans” for reforms like those just mapped out to us and
      proposed dozens of times in every country but remaining on
      paper, or the institution to which they are now
      referring, the new type of “government” created by the
      revolution, examples of which

    

      can be found only at a time of greatest revolutionary upsurge,
      as in France, 1792 and 1871, or in Russia, 1905. The Soviets are
      an institution which does not exist in any ordinary
      bourgeois-parliamentary state and cannot exist side by side with
      a bourgeois government. They are the new, more democratic type
      of state which we in our Party resolutions call a
      peasant-proletarian democratic republic, with power belonging
      solely to the Soviets of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies. People
      are wrong in thinking that this is a theoretical issue. They are
      wrong in pretending that it can be evaded and in protesting that
      at present certain institutions exist side by side with the
      Soviets of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies. Yes, they do exist
      side by side. But this is what breeds countless
      misunderstandings, conflicts and friction. And this is why the
      original upswing, the original advance, of the Russian
      revolution is giving way to stagnation and to those steps
      backwards which we can now see in our coalition
      government,
      in its entire home and foreign policy, in
      connection with preparations for an imperialist offensive.


One or the other: either the usual bourgeois government, in
      which case the peasants’, workers’, soldiers’ and other Soviets
      are useless and will either be broken up by the generals, the
      counter-revolutionary generals, who keep a hold on the armed
      forces and pay no heed to Minister Kerensky’s fancy speeches, or
      they will die an inglorious death. They have no other
      choice. They can neither retreat nor stand still. They can exist
      only by advancing. This is a type of state not invented by the
      Russians but advanced by the revolution because the revolution
      can win in no other way. Within the All-Russia Congress,
      friction and the struggle of parties for power are
      inevitable. But this will be the elimination of possible
      mistakes and illusions through the political experience of the
      masses themselves (commotion), and not through the
      reports of Ministers who refer to what they said yesterday, what
      they will write tomorrow and what they will promise the day
      after tomorrow. This, comrades, is ridiculous from the point of
      view of the institution created by the Russian revolution and
      now faced with the question: to be or not to be? The Soviets
      cannot continue to exist as they do now. Grown people, workers
      and peasants, are made to meet, adopt resolutions and listen to
      reports that cannot

    

be subjected to any documentary
      verification! This kind of institution is a transition to a
      republic which will establish a stable power without a police
      and a standing army, not in words alone but in action, a power
      which cannot yet exist in Western Europe and without which the
      Russian revolution cannot win in the sense of victory over the
      landowners and over imperialism.


Without this power there can be no question of our gaining such
      a victory by ourselves. And the deeper we go into the programme
      recommended to us here, and into the facts with which we are
      confronted, the more glaringly the fundamental contradiction
      stands out. We are told by the rapporteur and by other speakers
      that the first Provisional
      Government was a bad one! But when the Bolsheviks, those
      wretched Bolsheviks, said, "No support for and no confidence in
      this government", how often we were accused of “anarchism”! Now
      everybody says that the previous government was a bad one. But
      how does the coalition government with its near socialist
      Ministers differ from the previous one? Haven’t we had enough
      talk about programmes and drafts? Haven’t we had enough of them?
      Isn’t it time to get down to business? A month has passed since
      May 6 when the coalition government was formed. Look at the
      facts, look at the ruin prevailing in Russia and other countries
      involved in the imperialist war. What is the reason for the
      ruin? The predatory nature of the capitalists. There’s your real
      anarchy. And this is admitted in statements published, not in
      our newspaper, not in any Bolshevik newspaper—Heaven
      forbid!—but in the ministerial Rabochaya
      Gazeta which has reported that industrial coal prices
      were raised by the “revolutionary” government!! The
      coalition government hasn’t changed a thing in this respect. We
      are asked whether socialism can be introduced in Russia, and
      whether, generally speaking, radical changes can be made at
      once. That is all empty talk comrades. The doctrine of Marx and
      Engels, as they always explained, says: "Our doctrine is not a
      dogma, but a guide to
action.”[1] Nowhere in the world is there pure
      capitalism developing into pure socialism, nor can there be in
      war-time. But there is something in between, something new and
      unprecedented, because hundreds of millions of people who have
      been involved in the criminal war among the capitalists

    

are
      losing their lives. It is not a question of promising
      reforms—that is mere talk. It is a question of taking the
      step we now need.
    

If you want to talk of "revolutionary" democracy, then
      you must distinguish this concept from reformist
      democracy under a capitalist Ministry, because it is high time
      to stop talking about "revolutionary democracy", handing out
      mutual congratulations on "revolutionary democracy", and get on
      with a class definition, as we have been taught by
      Marxism, and by scientific socialism generally. It is being
      proposed that we should pass to reformist democracy under a
      capitalist Ministry. That may be all well and good from the
      standpoint of the usual West-European models. A number of
      countries, however, are today on the brink of destruction, and
      we can clearly see the practical measures said to be too
      complicated to carry out easily, and in need of special
      elaboration, according to the previous speaker, the Minister of
      Posts and Telegraphs. He said there was no political party in
      Russia expressing its readiness to assume full power. I reply:
      "Yes, there is. No party can refuse this, and our Party
      certainly doesn’t. It is ready to take over full power at any
      moment." (Applause and laughter.) You can laugh as much
      as you please, but if the Minister confronts us with this
      question side by side with a party of the Right, he will receive
      a suitable reply. No party can refuse this. And at a time when
      liberty still prevails, when threats of arrest and exile to
      Siberia—threats from the counter-revolutionaries with whom
      our near socialist Ministers are sharing government—are
      still no more than threats, every party says: give us your
      confidence and we shall give you our programme.
    

This programme was given by our conference on
      April 29.[2] Unfortunately,
      it is being ignored and not taken as a guide. It seems to need a
      popular exposition. I shall try to give the Minister of Posts
      and Telegraphs a popular exposition of our resolution and our
      programme. With regard to the economic crisis, our programme is
      immediately—it need not be put off—to demand the
      publication of all the fabulous profits—running as high as
      500 and 800 per cent—which the capitalists are making on
      war supplies, and not as capitalists in the open market under
      “pure” capitalism. This is where workers’ control really is
      necessary and possible. This is a

    

measure which, if you call
      yourselves “revolutionary” democrats, you should carry out in
      the name of the Congress, a measure which can be carried out
      overnight. It is not socialism. It is opening the people’s eyes
      to the real anarchy and the real playing with imperialism, the
      playing with the property of the people, with the hundreds of
      thousands of lives that tomorrow will be lost because we
      continue to throttle Greece. Make the profits of the capitalists
      public, arrest fifty or a hundred of the biggest
      millionaires. Just keep them in custody for a few weeks, if only
      in the same privileged conditions in which Nicholas Romanov is
      being held, for the simple purpose of making them reveal the
      hidden springs, the fraudulent practices, the filth and greed
      which even under the new government are costing our country
      thousands and millions every day. That is the chief cause of
      anarchy and ruin. That is why we say that everything remains as
      of old, that the coalition government hasn’t changed a thing and
      has only added a heap of declarations, of pompous
      statements. However sincere people may be, however sincerely
      they may wish the working people well, things have not
      changed—the same class remains in power. The
      policy they are pursuing is not a democratic policy.
    

You talk to us about "democratisation of the central and local
      power". Don’t you know that these words are a novelty only in
      Russia, and that elsewhere dozens of near-socialist Ministers
      have given their countries similar promises? What are they worth
      when we are faced by the real, concrete fact that while the
      population elects the authorities locally, the elementary
      principles of democracy are violated by the centre claiming the
      right to appoint or confirm the local authorities? The
      capitalists continue to plunder the people’s property. The
      imperialist war continues. And yet we are promised reforms,
      reforms and more reforms, which cannot be accomplished at all
      under these circumstances, because the war crushes and
      determines everything. Why do you disagree with those who say
      the war is not being waged over capitalist profits?
      What is the criterion? It is, first of all, which class is in
      power, which class continues to be the master, which class
      continues to make hundreds of thousands of millions from banking
      and financial operations. It is the same capitalist class and
      the war therefore continues to be

    

imperialist. Neither the first
      Provisional Government nor the government with the
      near-socialist Ministers has changed anything. The secret
      treaties remain secret. Russia is fighting for the Straits,
      fighting to continue Lyakhov’s
      policy in Persia, and so on.
    

I know you don’t want this, that most of you don’t want it, and
      that the Ministers don’t want it, because no one can want it,
      for it means the slaughter of hundreds of millions of
      people. But take the offensive which the Milyukovs and Maklakovs
      are now talking about so much. They know full well what that
      means. They know it is linked with the question of power, with
      the question of revolution. We are told we must distinguish
      between political and strategic issues. It is ridiculous to
      raise this question at all. The Cadets
      perfectly understand that the point at issue is a political
      one.
    

It is slander to say the revolutionary struggle for peace that
      has begun from below might lead to a separate peace treaty. The
      first step we should take if we had power would be to arrest the
      biggest capitalists and cut all the threads of their
      intrigues. Without this, all talk about peace without
      annexations and indemnities is utterly meaningless. Our second
      step would be to declare to all people over the head of their
      governments that we regard all capitalists as
      robbers—Tereshchenko, who is not a bit better than
      Milyukov, just a little less stupid, the French capitalists, the
      British capitalists, and all the rest.
    

Your own
      Izvestia
      has got into a muddle and proposes to keep the status
      quo instead of peace without annexations and
      indemnities. Our idea of peace "without annexations" is
      different. Even the Peasant
      Congress comes nearer the truth when it speaks of a
      “federal” republic, thereby expressing the idea that the Russian
      republic does not want to oppress any nation, either in the new
      or in the old way, and does not want to force any nation, either
      Finland or the Ukraine, with both of whom the War Minister is
      trying so hard to find fault and with whom impermissible and
      intolerable conflicts are being created. We want a single and
      undivided republic of Russia with a firm government. But a firm
      government can be secured only by the voluntary agreement of all
      people concerned. "Revolutionary democracy" are big

    

words, but
      they are being applied to a government that by its petty
      fault-finding is complicating the problem of the Ukraine and
      Finland, which do not even want to secede. They only say, "Don’t
      postpone the application of the elementary principles of
      democracy until the Constituent Assembly!”
    

A peace treaty without annexations and indemnities cannot be
      concluded until you have renounced your own annexations. It is
      ridiculous, a comedy, every worker in Europe is laughing at us,
      saying: You talk very eloquently and call on the people to
      overthrow the bankers, but you send your own bankers into the
      Ministry. Arrest them, expose their tricks, get to know the
      hidden springs! But that you don’t do although you have powerful
      organisations which cannot be resisted. You have gone through
      1905 and 1917. You know that revolution is not made to order,
      that revolutions in other countries were made by the hard and
      bloody method of insurrection, and in Russia there is no group,
      no class, that would resist the power of the Soviets. In Russia,
      this revolution can, by way of exception, be a peaceful
      one. Were this revolution to propose peace to all peoples today
      or tomorrow, by breaking with all the capitalist classes, both
      France and Germany, their people, that is, would accept very
      soon, because these countries are perishing, because Germany’s
      position is hopeless, because she cannot save herself, and
      because France—(Chairman: "Your time is up.")
    

I shall finish in half a minute. (Commotion;
      requests from the audience that the speaker continue;
      protests and applause.)
    

      (Chairman: "I inform the Congress that the Steering
      Committee proposes the speaker’s time be extended. Any
      objections? The majority are in favour of an extension.")
    

I stopped at the point that if the revolutionary democrats in
      Russia were democrats in fact and not merely in words, they
      would further the revolution and not compromise with the
      capitalists, not talk about peace without annexations and
      indemnities but abolish annexations by Russia, and declare in so
      many words that they consider all annexations criminal and
      predatory. It would then be possible to avert the imperialist
      offensive which is threatening death to thousands and millions
      of people over the partitioning of Persia and the Balkans. The
      way to peace would then be open, not an easy

    

way—we do not
      say it is easy—and one which does not preclude a truly
      revolutionary war.
    

We do not put this question as Bazarov does in today’s Novaya
      Zhizn.[3] All we say is that Russia has been placed in
      such a position that at the end of the imperialist war her tasks
      are easier than might have been expected. And her geographical
      position is such that any power would have a hard job on its
      hands if it risked using capital and its predatory interests and
      risked rising against the Russian working class and the
      semi-proletariat associated with it, i.e., the poor
      peasants. Germany is on the brink of defeat, and since the war
      was joined by the United States, which wants to swallow up
      Mexico and which tomorrow will probably start fighting Japan,
      Germany’s position has become hopeless, and she will be
      destroyed. France, who suffers more than the others because of
      her geographical position and whose state of exhaustion is
      reaching the limit—this country, while not starving as much
      as Germany, has lost infinitely more people than Germany. Now if
      the first step were to restrict the profits of the Russian
      capitalists and deprive them of all possibility of raking in
      hundreds of millions in profits, if you were to propose to all
      nations a peace treaty directed against the capitalists of all
      countries and openly declare that you will not enter into any
      negotiations or relations with the German capitalists and with
      those who abet them directly or indirectly or are involved with
      them, and that you refuse to speak with the French and British
      capitalists, then you would be acting to condemn them in the
      eyes of the workers. You would not regard it as a victory that a
      passport has been issued to
MacDonald,[4]
      a man who has never waged a revolutionary struggle against
      capital and who is being allowed to come because he has never
      expressed the ideas, principles, practice or experience of the
      revolutionary struggle against the British capitalists, a
      struggle for which our Comrade MacLean
      and hundreds of other British socialists are in prison, and for
      which our Comrade Liebknecht
      is confined to a convict prison because he said, "German
      soldiers, fire on your Kaiser!”
    

Wouldn’t it be more proper to consign the imperialist
      capitalists to that penal servitude which most of the
      Provisional Government members in an expressly reconstituted

    

      Third Duma—I don’t know, incidentally, whether it is the
      Third or the Fourth Duma—are daily preparing for us and
      promising us and about which the Ministry of Justice is already
      drafting new Bills? MacLean and Liebknecht—those are the
      names of socialists who are putting the idea of a revolutionary
      struggle against imperialism into practice. That is what we must
      say to all governments if we want to fight for peace. We must
      condemn them before their people. You will then put all the
      imperialist governments in a difficult position. But now you
      have complicated your own position by addressing your Peace
      Manifesto of March 14 to the people and saying, "Overthrow
      your tsars, your kings and your bankers!" while we who possess
      an organisation unprecedentedly rich in number, experience and
      material strength, the Soviet of Workers’ and Soldiers’
      Deputies, join a bloc with our bankers, institute a coalition,
      near-socialist government, and draft the kind of reforms that
      have been drafted in Europe for decades. People there in Europe
      laugh at this kind of peace struggle. There they will understand
      it only when the Soviets take power and act in a revolutionary
      way.
    

Only one country in the world can at the moment take steps to
      stop the imperialist war on a class scale, in the face of the
      capitalists and without a bloody revolution. Only one country
      can do it, and that country is Russia. And she will remain the
      only one as long as the Soviet of Workers’ and Soldiers’
      Deputies exists. The Soviet cannot exist long side by side with
      the ordinary type of Provisional Government, and will remain
      what it is only until the offensive is taken. The offensive will
      be a turning-point in the whole policy of the Russian
      revolution, that is, it will be a transition from waiting, from
      paving the way for peace by means of a revolutionary uprising
      from below, to the resumption of the war. The path that opened
      up was transition from fraternisation on one front to
      fraternisation on every front, from spontaneous fraternisation,
      such as the exchange of a crust of bread with a hungry German
      worker for a penknife—which is punishable by penal
      servitude—to conscious fraternisation.
    

When we take power into our own hands, we shall curb the
      capitalists, and then the war will not be the kind of
      war that is being waged now, because the nature of a war is

    

      determined by what class wages it, not by what is written on
      paper. You can write on paper anything you like. But as long as
      the capitalist class has a majority in the government the war
      will remain an imperialist war no matter what you write, no
      matter how eloquent you are, no matter how many near-socialist
      Ministers you have. Everyone knows that, and everyone can see
      it. And the cases of Albania, Greece and
Persia[5] have shown
      this so clearly and graphically that I am surprised everyone is
      attacking our written declaration about the
offensive,[6] and no one
      says a word about specific cases! It is easy to promise Bills,
      but specific measures are being postponed time and again. It is
      easy to write a declaration about peace without annexations, but
      the Albanian, Greek and Persian events took place after
      the coalition Ministry was formed. After all, it was Dyelo
      Naroda,[7] not an organ of our Party, but a government
      organ, a ministerial organ, which said that it is Russian
      democracy that is being subjected to this humiliation, and that
      Greece is being strangled. And this very same Milyukov, whom you
      imagine to be heaven knows who, although he is just an ordinary
      member of his party—Tereshchenko in no way differs from
      him—wrote that the pressure exerted on Greece came from
      Allied diplomats. The war remains an imperialist war, and
      however much you may desire peace, however sincere your sympathy
      for the working people and your desire for peace—I am fully
      convinced that by and large it must be sincere—you are
      powerless, because the war can only be ended by taking the
      revolution further. When the revolution began in Russia, a
      revolutionary struggle for peace from below also began. If you
      were to take power into your hands, if power were to pass to the
      revolutionary organisations to be used for combating the Russian
      capitalists, then the working people of some countries would
      believe you and you could propose peace. Then our peace would be
      ensured at least from two sides, by the two nations who are
      being bled white and whose cause is hopeless—Germany and
      France. And if circumstances then obliged us to wage a
      revolutionary war—no one knows, and we do not rule out the
      possibility—we should say: "We are not pacifists, we do not
      renounce war when the revolutionary class is in power and has
      actually deprived the capitalists of the opportunity to
      influence things

    

in any way, to exacerbate the economic
      dislocation which enables them to make hundreds of millions."
      The revolutionary government would explain to absolutely every
      nation that every nation must be free, and that just as the
      German nation must not fight to retain Alsace and Lorraine, so
      the French nation must not fight for its colonies. For, while
      France is fighting for her colonies, Russia has Khiva and
      Bokhara, which are also something like colonies. Then the
      division of colonies will begin. And how are they to be divided?
      On what basis? According to strength. But strength has
      changed. The capitalists are in a situation where their only way
      out is war. When you take over revolutionary power, you will
      have a revolutionary way of securing peace, namely, by
      addressing a revolutionary appeal to all nations and explaining
      your tactics by your own example. Then the way to peace secured
      by revolutionary means will be open to you, and you will most
      probably be able to avert the deaths of hundreds of thousands of
      people. Then you may be certain that the German and French
      people will declare in your favour. As for the British, American
      and Japanese capitalists, even if they wanted a war against the
      revolutionary working class—whose strength will grow
      tenfold once the capitalists have been curbed and put down and
      control has passed into the hands of the working class—even
      if the American, British and Japanese capitalists wanted a war,
      the chances would be a hundred to one against them being able to
      wage it. For peace to be ensured, you will only have to declare
      that you are not pacifists, that you will defend your republic,
      your workers’, proletarian democracy, against the German, French
      and other capitalists.
    

That is why we attached such fundamental importance to our
      declaration about the offensive. The time has come for a radical
      turn in the whole history of the Russian revolution. When the
      Russian revolution began it was assisted by the imperialist
      bourgeoisie of Britain who imagined Russia to be something like
      China or India. Yet, side by side with a government in which the
      landowners and capitalists now have a majority, the Soviets
      arose, a representative institution unparalleled and
      unprecedented anywhere in the world in strength, an institution
      which you are killing by taking part in a coalition Ministry of
      the bourgeoisie. In reality,

    

the Russian revolution has made the
      revolutionary struggle from below against the capitalist
      governments welcome every where, in all countries, with three
      times as much sympathy as before. The question is one of advance
      or retreat. No one can stand still during a revolution. That is
      why the offensive is a turn in the Russian revolution, in the
      political and economic rather than the strategic sense. An
      offensive now means the continuation of the imperialist
      slaughter and the death of more hundreds of thousands, of
      millions of people—objectively, irrespective of the will or
      awareness of this or that Minister, with the aim of strangling
      Persia and other weak nations. Power transferred to the
      revolutionary proletariat, supported by the poor peasants, means
      a transition to revolutionary struggle for peace in the surest
      and most painless forms ever known to mankind, a transition to a
      state of affairs under which the power and victory of the
      revolutionary workers will be ensured in Russia and throughout
      the world. (Applause from part of the audience.) 

First published in Pravda Nos. 82 and 83, June 28 and 29 (15 and 16), 1917

Published according to the Pravda text checked with the verbatim report edited by Lenin



    

      II

Speech On The War June 9 (22)
      

Comrades, allow me, by way of an introduction to an analysis of
      the war issue, to remind you of two passages in the Manifesto to
      all countries published by the Petrograd Soviet of Workers’ and
      Soldiers’ Deputies on March 14. "The time has come," said the
      Manifesto, "to begin a resolute struggle against the predatory
      designs of the governments of all countries. The time has come
      for the people to take the decision on war and peace into their
      own hands." Another passage in the Manifesto, addressed to the
      workers of the Austro-German coalition, reads: "Refuse to serve
      as tools of conquest and violence in the hands of kings,
      landowners and bankers." These are the two passages that have
      been repeated in different wordings in dozens, hundreds and, I
      should even imagine, thousands of resolutions by Russia’s
      workers and peasants.
    

I am sure these two passages show best of all the contradictory
      and hopelessly complicated position in which the revolutionary
      workers and peasants find themselves owing to the present policy
      of the Mensheviks and
      Narodniks.[8]
      On the one hand, they support the war. On the other, they belong
      to classes which have no interest in the predatory designs of
      the government of any country, and they cannot help saying
      so. This psychology and ideology, much as it may be vague, is
      unusually deep-rooted in every worker and peasant. It is
      realisation that the war is being waged because of the predatory
      designs of the governments of all countries. But, together with
      this, it is very vaguely understood, or even not understood at
      all, that a government, whatever its form, expresses the
      interests of definite classes and that,

    

therefore, to contrast
      the government to the people, as the first passage I quoted
      does, is an awful theoretical muddle, utter political
      helplessness, and means condemning yourself and the whole of
      your policy to the shakiest and most unstable position and
      trend. By exactly the same token, the closing words in the
      second passage I have quoted—that excellent call, "Refuse
      to serve as tools of conquest and violence in the hands of
      kings, landowners and bankers"—are splendid. Only including
      your own, because if you Russian workers and peasants turn to
      the workers and peasants of Austria and Germany, whose
      governments and ruling classes are waging the same kind of
      predatory war of plunder as the Russian capitalists and bankers,
      and as those of Britain and France—if you say: "Refuse to
      serve as tools in the hands of your bankers" but admit your own
      bankers into the Ministry and give them a seat next to socialist
      Ministers, you are reducing all your appeals to nothing, and in
      fact you are refuting your whole policy. Your excellent
      aspirations or wishes might just as well not exist, for you are
      helping Russia to wage the very same imperialist war, the very
      same predatory war. You are coming into conflict with the masses
      you represent, because these masses will never adopt the
      capitalist point of view, openly expressed by Milyukov, Maklakov
      and others, who say: "No idea could be more criminal than that
      the war is being waged in the interests of capital.”
    

I wonder whether that idea is criminal. I have no doubt that
      from the point of view of those who half-exist today and will
      perhaps no longer exist tomorrow, the idea actually is
      criminal. But it is the only correct idea. It alone expresses
      our conception of this war. It alone expresses the interests of
      the oppressed classes as a struggle against their
      oppressors. And when we say the war is capitalist and predatory,
      we must have no illusions—there is not the slightest hint
      that the crimes of individuals, of individual kings, could have
      provoked this kind of war.
    

Imperialism is a definite stage in the development of world
      capital. Capitalism, which has been developing for decades,
      created a situation in which a small group of immensely rich
      countries—there are no more than four: Britain, France,
      Germany and the U.S.A.—amassed wealth amounting to hundreds
      of thousands of millions, and

    

concentrated vast power in the
      hands of the big banks and big capitalists—there are only a
      couple or half a dozen of them at most in each of these
      countries—immense power encompassing the whole world, and
      literally divided the whole globe territorially by setting up
      colonies. These powers had colonies in every country of the
      world. They re-divided the globe among themselves economically
      as well, because concessions, and the threads of finance
      capital, penetrated into every single part of the globe. This is
      the basis for annexations. Annexations are not a figment of the
      imagination. They did not arrive because people who loved
      liberty unexpectedly became reactionaries. Annexations are
      nothing but a political expression and political form of the
      domination of giant banks that has arisen inevitably from
      capitalism, through no one’s fault, because shares are the basis
      of banks and because the accumulation of shares is the basis of
      imperialism. And the big banks, which dominate the whole world
      through hundreds and thousands of millions in capital and link
      entire industries with capitalist and monopoly
      alliances—that is where we have imperialism, which has
      split the whole world into three groups of immensely rich
      plunderers.
    

One group—the first, which is closer to us in
      Europe—is headed by Britain, and the other two, by Germany
      and the U.S.A. The other accomplices are compelled to help while
      capitalist relations persist. Therefore, if you have a clear
      idea of the essence of the matter, which every oppressed person
      realises instinctively and which every Russian worker and the
      vast majority of peasants realise instinctively—if you have
      a clear idea of it, you will see how laughable is the idea of
      fighting the war with words, manifestos, leaflets and socialist
      congresses. It is laughable because the banks are still
      omnipotent no matter how many declarations you issue, no matter
      how many political revolutions you carry out—you have
      overthrown Nicholas Romanov in Russia and have to some extent
      made her a republic; Russia has taken a gigantic stride forward,
      and may be said to have overtaken, almost overnight, France,
      which in different conditions required a hundred years to do as
      much and yet remained a capitalist country. And the capitalists
      are still there. They have lost some ground. They did so in 1905
      as well, but did that

undermine their strength? While this may
      be new to Russians, in Europe every revolution showed that with
      every upswing of the revolutionary movement the workers achieved
      something more than they had before, but capitalist power
      remained. The struggle against the imperialist war is impossible
      unless it is a struggle waged by the revolutionary classes
      against the ruling classes on a world scale. It is not a
      question of landowners in general. There are landowners in
      Russia and they play a greater role in Russia than in any other
      country but they are not the class which brought imperialism
      into being. It is a question of the capitalist class led by the
      biggest finance magnates and banks, and there will be no way out
      of this war until this class, which dominates the oppressed
      workers allied with the poor peasants, the semi-proletarians, as
      our programme calls them, until this class is overthrown. The
      illusion that you can unite the working people of the world by
      leaflets and appeals to other nations can only come from the
      narrow Russian outlook, ignorant of how the press in Western
      Europe, where the workers and peasants are used to political
      revolutions and have seen dozens of them, laughs at such phrases
      and appeals. They don’t know that the mass of workers has
      actually risen in Russia, where most of the workers are
      absolutely sincere in their faith and condemn the predatory
      designs of the capitalists of every country and want to see the
      people freed from the bankers. But they, the Europeans, cannot
      understand why you, who have an organisation which no one else
      on earth has, the Soviets of Workers’, Peasants’ and Soldiers’
      Deputies, which are armed—why you make Ministers of your
      socialists. After all, you are handing power to the
      bankers. People abroad accuse you not only of
      naïveté—this is not the worst—Europeans can no
      longer understand naïveté in politics, they cannot
      understand that there are tens of millions of people in Russia
      who are stirring to life for the first time, and that people in
      Russia know nothing of the link between the classes and the
      government, of the link between the government and war. War is a
      continuation of bourgeois politics, nothing else. The ruling
      class shapes the country’s policy in war-time as well. War is
      politics from beginning to end. It is pursuit of the same old
      aims by these classes using a different method. That is why,
      when you write in your workers’ and peasants’ appeals

    

“overthrow
      your bankers", every politically-conscious worker in a European
      country either laughs at you or cries bitterly over you, saying
      to himself: "What can we do since people there have overthrown a
      half-savage idiot and monster of a monarch, the kind we did away
      with a long time ago—this is the only crime we have
      committed—and now, with their ’near-socialist’ Ministers,
      they back the Russian bankers?!”
    

The bankers remain in power. They pursue a foreign policy
      through an imperialist war, fully supporting the treaties
      concluded by Nicholas II in Russia. This is particularly evident
      in our country. All the principles of Russia’s imperialist
      foreign policy were predetermined not by the present day
      capitalists, but by the previous government and Nicholas Romanov
      whom we have overthrown. He concluded those treaties, they
      remain secret, and the capitalists cannot publish them because
      they are capitalists. But no worker or peasant can see his way
      clear of this tangle because he tells himself: "Since we call
      for the overthrow of the capitalists in other countries, we must
      first of all get rid of our own bankers, otherwise nobody will
      believe in us and nobody will take us seriously. People will say
      we are naïve Russian savages who put on paper words that are
      excellent in themselves but lack political substance, or, worse
      still, they will think us hypocrites. You would see these things
      in the foreign press if that press, every shade of it, passed
      freely into Russia across the frontier instead of being stopped
      by the British and French authorities at Tornea. You would see
      from a mere selection of quotations from foreign newspapers the
      glaring contradiction in which you find yourselves. You would
      see how incredibly ridiculous and erroneous is this idea of
      fighting the war with socialist-conferences, with agreements
      with the socialists at congresses. Had imperialism been the
      fault or crime of individuals, socialism could remain
      socialism. Imperialism is the final stage of capitalism’s
      development, a stage at which it has gone as far as to divide
      the whole world, and two gigantic groups are locked in a
      life-and-death struggle. You must serve one group or the other,
      or overthrow both groups. There is no other way. When you reject
      a separate peace treaty, saying you don’t want to serve the
      German imperialists, you are perfectly right, and that is why
      we, too, are against a separate peace treaty. Yet in effect, and
      in

    

spite of yourselves, you continue to serve the Anglo-French
      imperialists, who have predatory designs of the kind that the
      Russian capitalists have translated into treaties with the aid
      of Nicholas Romanov. We do not know the texts of those treaties,
      but anyone who has followed political writing and has glanced
      through at least one book on economics or diplomacy must be
      familiar with the content of the treaties. Moreover, as far as I
      can remember, Milyukov wrote in his books about those treaties
      and promises that they would plunder Galicia, the Straits and
      Armenia, retain what they had annexed earlier and get plenty of
      other territories. Everyone knows that, but still the treaties
      are kept secret, and we are told that if we annul them it will
      mean breaking with our Allies.
    

With regard to a separate peace treaty, I have already said
      there can be no separate peace treaty for us, and our Party
      resolution leaves not the slightest room for doubt that we
      reject it as we reject all agreement with the capitalists. To
      us, a separate peace treaty means coming to terms with the
      German plunderers, because they are plundering in the same way
      as the others. Coming to terms with Russian capital within the
      Russian Provisional Government is the same kind of separate
      peace treaty. The tsarist treaties remain, and they, too, help
      to plunder and strangle other peoples. When it is said, "Peace
      without annexations and indemnities", as every worker and every
      peasant in Russia should say because life teaches him so,
      because he has no interest in bank profits and because he wants
      to live, I reply: Your leaders in the present Soviet of Workers’
      and Soldiers’ Deputies from the Narodnik and Menshevik parties
      have become tangled up in that slogan. They have said in their
      Izvestia that it means retaining the status
      quo, that is, the pre-war state of affairs, going back to
      what existed before the war. Isn’t that capitalist peace? And
      what capitalist peace, too! Since you are putting forward that
      slogan, you must remember that the course of events may bring
      your parties to power. That is possible during a revolution, and
      you will have to do what you say. But if you propose peace
      without annexations now, the Germans will accept and the British
      will not, because the British capitalists have not lost an inch
      of territory but have grabbed plenty in every part of the

    

      world. The Germans grabbed a lot too, but they also lost a lot,
      and not only lost a lot but found themselves up against the
      U.S.A., a most formidable enemy. If you who propose peace
      without annexations mean retaining the status quo, you
      are drifting into a situation in which your proposal will
      produce a separate peace treaty with the capitalists, because,
      if you propose that, the German capitalists, being faced by the
      U.S.A. and Italy with whom they signed treaties in the past,
      will say: "We shall accept that peace treaty without
      annexations. It will not be a defeat for us, it will be victory
      over the U.S.A. and Italy." Objectively, you are drifting into
      the same kind of separate peace treaty with the capitalists
      which you accuse us of, because fundamentally you are not
      breaking—in your policy, in reality, in your practical
      moves—with those bankers expressing imperialist domination
      all over the world whom you and your “socialist” Ministers
      support in the Provisional Government.
    

You are thereby creating a contradictory and precarious
      situation for yourselves in which the masses misunderstand
      you. The masses, who have no interest in annexations, say: "We
      refuse to fight for any capitalist’s sake." When we are told
      that this sort of policy can be ended by means of congresses and
      agreements among the socialists of the world, we reply: "It
      probably could, if only imperialism were the handiwork of
      individual criminals; but imperialism is an outgrowth of world
      capitalism with which the working-class movement is connected.”
    

Imperialism’s victory is the beginning of an inevitable,
      unavoidable split of the socialists of all countries into two
      camps. Anyone who keeps on talking about the socialists as an
      integral body, as something that can be integral, is deceiving
      himself and others. The entire course of the war, the two and a
      half years of it, has been leading to this split—ever since
      the Basle
      Manifesto, signed unanimously, which said that imperialist
      capitalism was at the root of this war. The Basle Manifesto does
      not say a word about "defence of the fatherland". No other
      manifesto could have been written before the war, just as today
      no socialist would propose writing a manifesto about "defence of
      the fatherland" in the war between Japan and the U.S.A., in
      which it is not a matter of risking his own skin, his own
      capitalists and his

    

own Ministers. Draft a resolution for
      international congresses! You know that war between Japan and
      the U.S.A. is a foregone conclusion. This war has been brewing
      for decades. It is no accident. Tactics do not depend on who
      fires the first shot. That is ridiculous. You know very well
      that Japanese and U.S. capitalism are equally predatory. There
      will be talk about "defence of the fatherland" on both sides. It
      will be a crime or an indication of terrible weakness due to the
      “defence” of the interests of our capitalist enemies. That is
      why we say that socialism has been split irrevocably. The
      socialists have completely departed from socialism—or
      rather, those who have deserted to their government, their
      bankers and their capitalists, no matter what they may say
      against them and however much they may condemn
      them. Condemnation is beside the point. Sometimes, however,
      condemnation of the Germans’ backing for their capitalists
      covers up defence of the same “sin” by the Russians! If you
      accuse the German social-chauvinists, i.e., people who are
      socialists in words—many of them may well be socialists at
      heart—but chauvinists in fact, people who actually defend
      the dirty, selfish and predatory German capitalists rather than
      the German people, then don’t defend the British, French and
      Russian capitalists. The German social-chauvinists are no worse
      than those in our Ministry who continue the policy of secret
      treaties, of plunder, and cover this up with pious wishes in
      which there is much that is kind, and which I admit are
      absolutely sincere from the point of view of the masses, but in
      which I do not and cannot see a single word of political
      truth. It is merely your wish, while the war remains as
      imperialist and is being waged for the same secret treaties as
      ever! You are calling on other peoples to overthrow the bankers,
      yet you are backing your own! When you spoke of peace, you did
      not say what peace. No one answered us when we pointed out the
      glaring contradiction in a peace treaty on the basis of the
      status quo. In your resolution, speaking of peace
      without annexations, you cannot say that it will not mean
      retaining the status quo. You cannot say that it will
      mean retaining the status quo, that is, restoration of
      the pre-war state of affairs. What will it be, then? Taking the
      German colonies away from Britain? Try that through peaceful
      agreements! Everyone will laugh

    

at you. Try to take away from
      Japan, without a revolution, Kiaochow or the Pacific islands she
      has grabbed!
    

You have got yourselves mixed up in hopeless
      contradictions. When we say "without annexations", we mean that
      this slogan is only a subordinate part of the struggle against
      world imperialism. We say we want to liberate all peoples and
      begin with our own. You talk of war against annexations and of
      peace without annexations, but in Russia you continue the policy
      of annexations. That’s simply ridiculous. You and your
      government, your new Ministers, actually continue the policy of
      annexations in regard to Finland and the Ukraine. You find fault
      with the Ukrainian congress and, through your Ministers,
      prohibit its
sittings.[9] Isn’t that annexation? It amounts to a
      mockery of the rights of a nationality which was tormented by
      the tsars because its children wanted to speak their mother
      tongue. That means being afraid of separate republics. From the
      point of view of the workers and peasants, there is nothing
      terrible about that. Let Russia be a union of free
      republics. The workers and peasants will not fight to prevent
      that. Let every nation be free, and first of all let all the
      nationalities with which you are making the revolution in Russia
      be free. By not taking that step, you are condemning yourselves
      to being "revolutionary democrats" in words while your entire
      policy is in fact counter-revolutionary.
    

Your foreign policy is anti-democratic and
      counter-revolutionary. A revolutionary policy may mean you have
      to wage a revolutionary war. But that is not inevitable. This
      point has been dealt with at length by the main speaker, and
      lately by the newspapers as well. I should very much like to
      dwell on this point.
    

What is the practical way out of this war as we see it? We say:
      the way out of this war lies only through revolution. Support
      the revolution of the classes oppressed by the capitalists,
      overthrow the capitalist class in your country and thereby set
      an example to other countries. That alone is socialism. That
      alone means fighting the war. Everything else is empty promises,
      phrase-mongering or pious wishes. Socialism has been split all
      over the world. You continue to confuse things by associating
      with socialists who back their governments. You forget that in
      Britain and Germany, the

    

true socialists, who express the
      socialism of the masses, are isolated and have been thrown into
      gaol. Yet they alone express the interests of the proletarian
      movement. But what if in Russia the oppressed class found itself
      in power? When asked how we shall break out of the war by
      ourselves, we answer: you cannot break out of it by
      yourself. All our Party resolutions and all speakers at our
      public meetings call it absurd to say you can break out of this
      war by yourself. This war involves hundreds of millions of
      people and hundreds of thousands of millions in capital. The
      only way out is the transfer of power to the revolutionary class
      which must really break imperialism, its financial, banking and
      annexationist threads. Until this happens nothing will have been
      done. The revolution was limited to your getting, in place of
      tsarism and imperialism, a near-republic which is imperialist
      through and through and which cannot treat Finland and the
      Ukraine democratically, i.e., without being afraid of division,
      even through revolutionary worker and peasant representatives.
    

It is untrue to say that we are seeking a separate peace
      treaty. We say: No separate peace treaty with any capitalists,
      least of all with the Russian capitalists. But the Provisional
      Government has a separate peace treaty with the Russian
      capitalists. Down with that separate peace treaty!
      (Applause.) We recognise no separate peace treaty with
      the German capitalists and we shall not enter into any
      negotiations. Nor must there be a separate peace treaty with the
      British and French imperialists. We are told that to break with
      them would mean coming to terms with the German
      imperialists. That is not true. We must break with them
      immediately because it is an alliance for plunder. It is said
      that the treaties cannot be published because that would mean
      showing up the whole of our government and the whole of our
      policy in the eyes of every worker and peasant. If we were to
      publish these treaties and plainly tell the Russian workers and
      peasants at meetings, especially in every remote hamlet: "What
      you are now fighting for is the Straits, and because they want
      to keep Armenia," they would all say: "We want no such war."
      (The Chairman: "Your time is up." Voices: "Let
      him speak.") I ask for ten minutes more. (Voices: "Let
      him speak.")
    
 

I say that this contrast—"either with the British or with
      the German imperialists"—is wrong. It implies that if we
      make peace with the German imperialists we must fight the
      British, and vice versa. This contrasting suits those who are
      not breaking with their capitalists and bankers, and who accept
      any alliance with them. But it doesn’t suit us. We speak of our
      defending the alliance with the oppressed class, with the
      oppressed people. Remain loyal to this alliance, and then you
      will be revolutionary democrats. It’s no easy task. This task
      will not let you forget that under certain circumstances we
      shall be unable to do without a revolutionary war. No
      revolutionary class can rule out revolutionary war, or it will
      doom itself to ridiculous pacifism. We are not Tolstoyans. If
      the revolutionary class takes power, if its state keeps no
      annexed territories, and if no power is left to the banks and
      big capital, which is not easy to do in Russia, then that class
      will be waging a revolutionary war in reality and not merely in
      words. You cannot rule out this kind of war. That would mean
      succumbing to the Tolstoyan philosophy and to philistinism,
      forgetting the whole of Marxist science and the experience of
      all European revolutions.
    

You cannot pull Russia alone out of the war. But she is winning
      more and more great allies who do not believe you now because
      your attitude is contradictory or naïve, and because you
      advise other peoples to "end annexations" while introducing them
      in your own country. You tell other peoples to overthrow the
      bankers. Yet you do not overthrow your own. Try another
      policy. Publish the treaties and show them up in front of every
      worker and peasant and at public meetings Say: No peace with the
      German capitalists, and a complete break with the Anglo-French
      capitalists. Let the British get out of Turkey and stop fighting
      for Baghdad. Let them get out of India and Egypt. We refuse to
      fight for the retention of booty that has been seized, just as
      we shall not put an ounce of energy into helping the German
      plunderers to keep their booty. If you do that—so far you
      have only talked about it, and in politics words are not
      credited, which is just as well—if you do that,
      and talk about it, then the allies you now have will show what
      they can do. Think of the mood of every oppressed worker and
      peasant. They sympathise with you and regret that you are so
      weak you leave the

    

bankers alone even though you have arms. It
      is the oppressed workers of the world that are your allies. It
      will be just what the revolution of 1905 showed in practice. It
      was tremendously weak at first. But what is its international
      effect? How did that policy, and the history of 1905, shape the
      foreign policy of the Russian revolution? Today you are
      conducting the Russian revolution’s whole foreign policy with
      the capitalists. Yet 1905 showed what the Russian revolution’s
      foreign policy should be like. It is an indisputable fact that
      October 17,
1905,[10] was followed by mass unrest and
      barricade-building in the streets of Vienna and Prague. After
      1905 came 1908 in Turkey, 1909 in Persia and 1910 in
China.[11] If, instead of
      compromising with the capitalists, you call on the truly
      revolutionary democrats, the working class, the oppressed, you
      will have as allies the oppressed classes instead of the
      oppressors, and the nationalities which are now being rent to
      pieces instead of the nationalities in which the oppressing
      classes now temporarily predominate.
    

We have been reminded of the German front where the only change
      we proposed is the unrestricted dissemination of our appeals
      written in Russian on one side of the sheet and German on the
      reverse. In them we say: The capitalists of both countries are
      robbers. To get them out of the way would be merely a step
      towards peace. But there are other fronts. I don’t know how
      strong our army is on the Turkish front. Let us assume it is
      roughly three million strong. It would be better if that army,
      which is now kept in Armenia and is carrying out annexations
      that you tolerate while preaching peace without annexations to
      other peoples, although you have strength and authority—if
      that army adopted this programme, and if it made Armenia an
      independent Armenian republic and gave her the money which the
      financiers of Britain and France take from us.
    

It is said that we cannot do without the financial support of
      Britain and France. But this support “supports” us like the rope
      supporting a hanged man. Let the Russian revolutionary class
      say: down with that support, I refuse to recognise debts
      contracted with the French and British capitalists, and I call
      for a general revolt against the capitalists. No peace treaty
      with the German capitalists and no alliance with the British and
      French! If this policy were actually pursued,

    

our army fighting
      the Turks could be released and sent to other fronts, because
      all Asian peoples would see that the Russian people do not
      merely proclaim peace without annexations on the basis of
      self-determination but that the Russian worker and peasant are
      in fact placing themselves at the head of all oppressed
      nationalities, and that with them, the struggle against
      imperialism is not a pious wish nor a high-flown ministerial
      phrase but a matter of vital concern to the revolution.
    

As we stand now, a revolutionary war may threaten us, but this
      war is not bound to take place, since the British imperialists
      will hardly be able to wage war against us if you act as a
      practical example to the peoples surrounding Russia. Prove that
      you are liberating the Armenian republic and reaching agreement
      with the Soviets of Workers’ and Peasants’ Deputies in every
      country, that you are for a free republic, and then the Russian
      revolution’s foreign policy will become really revolutionary and
      really democratic. At present it is that only in words. In
      reality it is counter-revolutionary, because you are bound hand
      and foot by the Anglo-French imperialists and refuse to say so
      openly, you are afraid to admit it. Instead of issuing that
      appeal "to overthrow foreign bankers", you would have done
      better to tell the Russian people, the workers and peasants, in
      so many words: "We are too weak, we cannot throw off the tyranny
      of the Anglo-French imperialists, we are their slaves and are
      therefore fighting." It would have been a bitter truth that
      would have been of revolutionary significance. It would actually
      have brought this predatory war closer to its end. That means a
      thousand times more than an agreement with the French and
      British social-chauvinists, than the convening of congresses
      which they would agree to attend, than the continuation of this
      policy by which you are actually afraid to break with the
      imperialists of one country while remaining the allies of
      another. You can draw on the support of the oppressed classes of
      Europe, of the oppressed people of the weaker countries which
      Russia strangled under the tsars and which she is still
      strangling now, as she is strangling Armenia. With their
      support, you can bring freedom by helping their workers’ and
      peasants’ committees. You would put yourselves at the head of
      all the oppressed classes, all

    

oppressed peoples, in the war
      against the German and British imperialists, who cannot join
      forces against you because they are locked in a life-and-death
      struggle against each other, and because they are in a hopeless
      position, in which the Russian revolution’s foreign policy, a
      sincere and real alliance with the oppressed classes, the
      oppressed peoples, can be successful it has 99 chances in 100 of
      being successful!
    

Recently we read in our Moscow Party newspaper a letter from a
      peasant commenting on our programme. I should like to bring my
      speech to a close with a brief quotation from that letter,
      showing what a peasant makes of our programme. The letter was
      printed in No. 59 of 
Sotsial-Demokrat,our
      Moscow Party newspaper, and was reprinted in Pravda
      No. 68.[12]


      “We must," says the letter, "press the bourgeoisie harder to
      make them burst at the seams. Then the war will be over. But
      things will turn out badly if we don’t press the bourgeoisie
      hard enough." (Applause.)
    

First published in Pravda Nos. 95, 96 and 97, July 13, 14 and 15 (June 30, July 1 and 2), 1917

Published according to the Pravda text checked with the verbatim report edited by Lenin



 
Notes
 
 



[1]

K. Marx and F. Engels, Selected Correspondence, Moscow, 1965,
p. 395.




[2]
Lenin is referring to the resolutions of the Seventh (April)
All-Russia Conference of the R.S.D.L.P.(B.), held in Petrograd from
April 24 to 29 (May 7–12), 1917 (see The C.P.S.U. in Resolutions
and Decisions of Congresses, Conferences and Plenary Meetings of
the C.C., 7th ed., Part I, 1954, pp. 332–53 [in Russian]).




[3]
Novaya Zhizn (New Life)—a daily newspaper of a Menshevik trend
published by a group of Social-Democrats who called themselves
“internationalists”. The group comprised the Mensheviks who
supported Martov, and certain intellectuals with semi-Menshevik
leanings. It vacillated continuously between the conciliators and
the Bolsheviks.

Novaya Zhizn appeared in Petrograd from April 1917. After
the October Revolution it adopted a hostile attitude to the Soviet
state. It was closed down in July 1918.





[4]
Lenin has in mind the British Government issuing a passport
to Ramsay MacDonald, the British Independent Labour Party
leader, who was invited to Russia by the Executive Committee
of the Petrograd Soviet of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies. The
trip was frustrated by the British Seamen’s Union, which refused
to man the ship in which MacDonald was to sail to Russia.





[5]
In June 1917 Italy overran Albania and proclaimed her
independence under Italy’s virtual protectorate.

In Greece, a coup d’état was carried out under the pressure of
Britain and France. By launching an economic blockade that caused
a terrible famine, and by occupying a number of Greek provinces,
the Allies forced King Constantine to abdicate, and put Venizelos,
their adherent, in power. Greece was dragged into the war on the
side of the Entente, contrary to the will of the vast majority of
her people.

During the First World War Persia (Iran) was occupied by
British and Russian troops. By early 1917 Persia, having lost all
independence, was occupied by the Russians in the north and the
British in the south.

Provisional Government diplomats backed all these acts of
imperialist tyranny.





[6]
Reference is to the declaration which the bureau of the Bolshevik
group and the bureau of the united internationalist Social–
Democrats made at the First All-Russia Congress of Soviets. They
demanded that the Congress first of all discuss the offensive at the front
for which the Provisional Government was preparing. The
declaration pointed out that the offensive was being imposed by the
magnates of the imperialist Allies and that the Russian
counter-revolutionaries expected thereby to concentrate power in the hands
of the military-diplomatic and capitalist groups, and to deliver
a blow to the revolutionary fight for peace and to the positions
gained by the Russian democrats. The declaration warned the
working class, the armed forces and the peasants of the danger
threatening the country, and called on the Congress to immediately repel
the counter-revolutionaries’ onslaught.

The Congress rejected the proposal made by the bureau of the
R.S.D.L.P.(B.) group.





[7]
Dyelo Naroda (People’s Cause)—an S.R. daily published in
Petrograd between March 1917 and Juno 1918. It changed its title several
times. It adopted a defencist and conciliatory stand and supported
the bourgeois Provisional Government. Its publication was resumed
in Samara in October 1918 (three issues were brought out) and in

   

Moscow in March 1919 (ten issues). The paper was closed down the
same year for its counter-revolutionary trend.





[8]
Lenin described as Narodniks three petty-bourgeois parties of
a Narodnik type: the Trudoviks, Socialist-Revolutionaries and
Popular Socialists.





[9]
Allusion is to the prohibition of the All-Ukraine Army Congress
by Kerensky, the Provisional Government’s War Minister. Despite
the ban, the Congress sat from June 5–12 (18–25), 1917, in Kiev.
It was attended by some 2,000 delegates. It passed the “Universal
Act” on the autonomy of the Ukraine, published by the Ukrainian
Central Rada.

The counter-revolutionary policies of the Provisional
Government and the Menshevik and S.R. parties towards the Ukraine were
denounced by Lenin in the articles “The Ukraine” and “The Ukraine
and the Defeat of the Ruling Parties of Russia” (see pp. 91–92 and
99–102 of this volume).





[10]
Reference is to the tsar’s Manifesto of October 17, 1905, promising
“civil liberties” and a “legislative” Duma. The Manifesto was
a concession wrested from the tsarist regime by the revolution.
The autocracy wanted to gain time, split the revolutionary forces,
foil the All-Russia Strike and crush the revolution. The Bolsheviks
exposed this political manoeuvre. On October 18 (31), 1905, the
C.C. R.S.D.L.P. issued the appeal “To the Russian People”
revealing the spurious character of the tsar’s Manifesto and calling on
the working people to continue their revolutionary struggle.





[11]
The Russian revolution of 1905–07 gave rise to revolutionary
movements among the peoples of the East. In 1908 a bourgeois revolution
broke out in Turkey. In 1900 there was a bourgeois revolution
in Persia, resulting in the overthrow of the shah in 1909. The year
1910 saw the rise of a revolutionary movement in China against
the feudal lords and foreign imperialists. The movement led to
a revolution, and to the establishment of a bourgeois republic
in December 1911.





[12]
Pravda (The Truth)—a Bolshevik daily newspaper published
legally. Its first issue appeared in St. Petersburg on April 22 (May 5),
1912.

Lenin, who guided Pravda ideologically, contributed to the
paper almost daily. He gave recommendations to its editors with
a view to making it a militant revolutionary paper.

A substantial part of the Party’s organising work was done
through Pravda, Conferences with representatives of local Party
cells were held in its offices, which also received information on
Party work in factories and passed on directives of the Party’s
Central and Petrograd Committees.

Pravda was doggedly persecuted by the police and was closed
down on July 8 (21), 1914.

It did not resume publication until after the February
bourgeois-democratic revoluion of 1917. =

From March 5 (18), 1917, onwards
it was brought out as a paper of the Central and Petrograd
Committees of the R.S.D.L.P.

Upon his arrival in Petrograd Lenin joined the editorial board,
and Pravda launched a campaign for his plan to bring about the
development of the bourgeois-democratic revolution into a socialist
revolution.

From July to October 1917 the paper, being persecuted by the
counter-revolutionary Provisional Government, had to change its
title more than once. It appeared as Listok “Pravdy”, Proletary,
Rabochy and Rabochy Put. Since the victory of the October Socialist
Revolution it has been published—beginning with October 27
(November 9), 1917—under its original title, Pravda.

Pravda holds a prominent place in the history of the Bolshevik
press. The generation of advanced workers it educated played
an outstanding part in the October Revolution and in socialist
construction. Pravda was the first mass paper of the working class to
be published legally. It marked a new stage in the development
of the press of Russia’s working class and the world proletariat.

The day when the first issue of Pravda appeared has been
celebrated as the workers’ Press Day ever since 1914.









<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## Economic Dislocation and the Proletariat’s Struggle Against It









Lenin: Economic Dislocation and the Proletariat’s Struggle Against It







V. I.  

      Lenin
Economic Dislocation and the Proletariat’s Struggle Against It




Published:

      First published in Pravda No. 73, June 17 (4), 1917.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 43-45.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and C. Farrell
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2000

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 
We are publishing in this issue the resolution on economic
    measures for combating dislocation, passed by the Conference of
    Factory
      Committees.[1]


The main idea of the resolution is to indicate the conditions
      for actual control over the capitalists and production
      in contrast to the empty phrases about control used by
      the bourgeoisie and the petty-bourgeois officials. The
      bourgeoisie are lying When they allege that the systematic
      measures taken by the state to ensure threefold or even tenfold
      profits for the capitalists are “control”. The petty
      bourgeoisie, partly out of naïveté, partly out of
      economic interest, trust the capitalists and the capitalist
      state, and content them selves with the most meaningless
      bureaucratic projects for control. The resolution passed by the
      workers lays special emphasis on the all-important
      thing, that is, on what is to be done I) to prevent the actual
      “preservation” of capitalist profits; 2) to tear off the veil of
      commercial secrecy; 3) to give the workers a majority in the
      control agencies; 4) to ensure that the organisation (of control
      and direction), being “nation-wide” organisation, is directed by
      the Soviets of Workers’, Soldiers’ and Peasants’ Deputies
      and not by the capitalists.


Without this, all talk of control and regulation is either
      sheer bunkum or outright deception of the people.
    

Now it
      is against this truth, as plain as can be to every
      politically-conscious and thinking worker, that the leaders of
      our petty bourgeoisie, the Narodniks and Mensheviks
      (Izvestia, Rabochaya Gazeta), are up in
      arms. Unfortunately, those who write for Novaya Zhizn,
      and who have repeatedly wavered between us and them, have this
      time sunk to the same level.
    
 

Comrades Avilov and Bazarov
      try to cover up their descent Into the swamp of petty-bourgeois
      credulity, compromise, and bureaucratic project-making by
      Marxist-sounding arguments.
    

Let us look into these arguments.
    

We Pravda people are said to be
      deviating from Marxism to syndicalism just because we defend the
      resolution of the Organising Bureau (approved by the
      Conference). Shame on you, Comrades Avilov and Bazarov! Such
      carelessness (Or such trickery) is fit only for
      Rech[2]
      and
      Yedinstvo[3]!
      We suggest
      nothing like the ridiculous transfer of the railways to the
      railwaymen, or the tanneries to the tanners. What we do suggest
      is workers’ control, which should develop into complete
      regulation of production and distribution by the workers, into
      "nation-wide organisation" of the exchange of grain for
      manufactured goods, etc. (with "extensive use of urban and rural
      co-operatives"). What we suggest is "the transfer of
      all state power to the Soviets of Workers’, Soldiers’
      and Peasants’ Deputies".
    

Only people who had not read the resolution right through, or
      who cannot read at all, could, with clear conscience, find any
      syndicalism in it.
    

And only pedants, who understand Marxism as Struve and all
      liberal bureaucrats “understood” it, can assert that "skipping
      state capitalism is utopian" and that "in our country, too, the
      very type of regulation should retain its state- capitalist
      character".
    

Take the sugar syndicate or the state railways in Russia or the
      oil barons, etc. What is that but state capitalism? How can you
      “skip” what already exists?
    

The point is that people who have turned Marxism into a kind of
      stiffly bourgeois doctrine evade the specific issues
      posed by reality, which in Russia has in practice produced a
      combination of the syndicates in industry and the small- peasant
      farms in the countryside. They evade these specific issues by
      advancing pseudo-intellectual, and in fact utterly meaningless,
      arguments about a "permanent revolution", about “introducing”
      socialism, and other nonsense.
    

Let us get down to business! Let us have fewer excuses and keep
      closer to practical matters! Are the profits made from war
      supplies, profits amounting to 500 per cent or more,

    

 to be left
      intact! Yes or no? Is commercial secrecy to be left intact? Yes
      or no? Are the workers to be enabled to exercise control? Yes or
      no?
    

Comrades Avilov and Bazarov give no answer to these practical
      questions. By using
“Struvean”
      arguments sounding “near-Marxist”, they unwittingly stoop to the
      level of accomplices of the bourgeoisie. The bourgeoisie want
      nothing better than to answer the people’s queries about the
      scandalous profits of the war supplies deliverers, and about
      economic dislocation, with “learned” arguments about the
      “utopian” character of socialism.
    

These arguments are ridiculously stupid, for what makes
      socialism objectively impossible is the small-scale
      economy which we by no means presume to expropriate, or even to
      regulate or control.
    

What we are trying to make something real instead of a
      bluff is the "state regulation" of which the
      Mensheviks, the Narodniks and all bureaucrats (who have carried
      Comrades Avilov and Bazarov with them) talk in order to dismiss
      the matter, making projects to safeguard capitalist
      profits and orating to preserve commercial secrecy. This is the
      point, worthy near-Marxists, and not the “introduction” of
      socialism!
    

Not regulation of and control over the workers by the capitalist
      class, but vice versa. This is the point. Not
      confidence in the “state”, fit for a Louis Blanc, but demand for
      a state led by the proletarians and semi-proletarians—that
      is how we must combat economic dislocation. Any other
      solution is sheer bunkum and deception.
    

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
The factory committees, which came into being in March 1917,
immediately after the victory of the February Revolution, were
class organisations of the workers. The factory elders’ councils and
other elected bodies formed from provisional strike committees
in the periods of revolutionary upsurge are considered the
forerunners of the factory committees.

The factory committees became very active as soon as they
were set up. They formulated the workers’ economic demands and

   

presented them to the factory owners, introduced an eight-hour
day by their own decision, exercised control over the employment
and discharge of labour power, formed workers’ militia units,
combated sabotage on the part of the employers, secured raw
materials and fuel for the factories concerned to prevent stoppages,
and so on. They took an active part in the October Revolution.
In 1918 they were merged with the trade unions and became
primary units of the latter.

The First Petrograd Conference of Factory Committees was held
from May 30 to June 3 (June 12–16), 1917. The 568 delegates
attending it represented the factory committees, trade union
bureaus, and other workers’ organisations of Petrograd and vicinity.
The conference discussed the state of industry and the problem of
controlling and regulating production in Petrograd, the tasks of
the factory committees, their role in the trade union movement,
etc.

The Conference became a scene of bitter struggle between the
Bolsheviks and Mensheviks over the role and tasks of the factory
committees and over workers’ control. The Mensheviks tried to
nullify the political and economic role of the factory committees
and to substitute state control involving bourgeois parties for
workers’ control. The conference carried the Bolshevik motion.
The conference was very important in that it enabled the factory
committees to exchange experience and join forces in the campaign
for workers’ control. To this end it elected a standing Central
Council of Factory Committees of 25.

Lenin took part in the conference. He drafted the “Resolution
on Measures to Cope with Economic Dislocation”, which was carried
by a vast majority, and analysed the conference resolutions in his
articles “The Petty-Bourgeois Stand on Economic Dislocation”
and “Economic Dislocation and the Proletariat’s Struggle Against
It”, criticising the Menshevik stand at the conference and
upholding the Bolsheviks’ tactics on workers’ control over production.





[2]
Rech (Speech)—Central Organ of the Cadet Party published daily
in St. Petersburg from February 1906. It was closed down by the
Military Revolutionary Committee under the Petrograd Soviet.
On October 26 (November 8), 1917. It continued publication under
different titles till August 1918.





[3]
Yedinstvo (Unity)—mouthpiece of the Right wing of the defencist
Mensheviks headed by G. V. Plekhanov; it was published in
Petrograd. Four issues appeared in May and June 1914. From
March to November 1917 the paper was published daily. In
December 1917 and January 1918 it appeared under the title Nashe
Yedinstvo (Our Unity). Supporting the Provisional Government and
advocating coalition with the bourgeoisie and firm power, Yedinstvo
waged a fierce struggle against the Bolsheviks, very often resorting
to the gutter press methods. Its reaction to the October Revolution
and the establishment of Soviet rule was hostile.









<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## The Thousand and First Lie of the Capitalists









Lenin: The Thousand and First Lie of the Capitalists







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Thousand and First Lie of the Capitalists




Published:

      First published in Pravda No. 73, June 17 (4), 1917.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 46-47.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and C. Farrell
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2000

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

In today’s leader, Rech writes:

“If Germany had her own Lenin acting with the
    kind foreign collaboration of the Robert Grimms and the Rakovskys,
    one could only suppose that the International did not wish to
    prevent the great Russian revolution from consolidating its
    position, and, more important still, from growing in depth. But so
    far the Germans have politely replied that they do not need a
    republic and are satisfied with their Wilhelm.
      
Vorwärts,[1]

      for example, is even more amiable in arguing that the
      Russian democrats ought not to tolerate secret treaties. And the
      socialist organ modestly fails to mention the German
      democrats.”


It is a lie to say that “the Robert Grimms and the Rakovskys"
      have “collaborated” with the Bolsheviks (with whom they have
      never agreed) in any way.

To confuse the “German” Plekhanovs (it is they
      and only they who are writing for Vorwärts) with the
      German revolutionary internationalists, who (like Karl
      Liebknecht) are thrown into German prisons by the
      hundred, is the thousand and first, and the most
      infamous and brazen, lie of Rech and the capitalists
      generally.

There are two Internationals: 1) the International of
      the Plekhanovs, j. e., of those who have betrayed
      socialism, i. e., of people who have deserted to their
      governments: Plekhanov, Guesde, Scheidemann, Sembat,
      Thomas, Henderson, Vandervelde, Bissolati and Co.; and 2) the
      International of the revolutionary internationalists
      who even in war-time fight everywhere in a revolutionary mood
      against their governments, against their
      bourgeoisie.
 

      “The great Russian revolution" can become “great”, can
      "consolidate its position" and ’"grow in depth" only if it stops
      supporting the imperialist “coalition” government, the
      imperialist war which that government is waging, and the
      capitalist class as a whole.
    

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Vorwärts (Forward)—Central Organ of the German Social–
Democratic Party published daily in Berlin from 1891 to 1933.

Engels used the columns of Vorwärts to fight against all
manifestations of opportunism. In the second half of the nineties, after
Engels’s death, the paper found itself in the hands of the party’s
Right wing, and continuously published opportunist articles.
It carried biased reports on the struggle against opportunism and
revisionism in the R.S.D.L.P. It backed the Economists and then,
after the split in the Party, the Mensheviks. In the years of reaction
it published slanderous articles by Trotsky, while denying Lenin
and other Bolsheviks the opportunity to refute the slander and
present an objective picture of the situation in the Party.

During the First World War Vorwärts took a social-chauvinist
stand. After the October Socialist Revolution it conducted
anti-Soviet propaganda.









<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## The Diehards of June 3 Favour an Immediate Offensive









Lenin: The Diehards of June 3 Favour an Immediate Offensive







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Diehards of June 3[1] Favour an Immediate Offensive




Published:

      First published in Pravda No. 74 June 19 (6), 1917.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 48-50.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and C. Farrell
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2000

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The gentlemen
    of June 3, who after 1905 helped Nicholas Romanov drench our
    country in blood, strangle the revolutionaries and re-establish
    the unlimited power of the land owners and capitalists, are
    holding their meetings simultaneously with the Congress of
    Soviets.[2]


While Tsereteli, who found himself in bourgeois captivity, tried
      by a thousand tricks to hush up the vital importance and urgency
      of the political question of an immediate offensive, the
      diehards of June 3, companions-in-arms of Nicholas the Bloody
      and Stolypin the Hangman, landowners and capitalists, did not
      hesitate to put the question straight forwardly and openly. Here
      is the latest and most essential resolution on the offensive
      which they adopted unanimously:
    

“The Duma (??) considers that only an immediate
    offensive and close co-operation with the Allies will guarantee a
    speedy termination of the war and consolidation of the liberties
    won by the people.”
    

That is clear enough.
    

These people are real politicians, men of action, faithful
      servants of their class, of the landowners and
      capitalists.
    

And how do Tsereteli, Chernov and the rest serve their
      class? They offer pious wishes in words and support the
      capitalists in actions.
    

Tsereteli asserted that the question of an immediate
      offensive could not even be raised, for were he, Minister
      Tsereteli. to know anything about an “immediate” offensive, he,
      a Minister, would say nothing about it to anyone. In saying

    

      that, Tsereteli had no inkling (poor innocent man) that he was
      refuted by the diehards of June 3, refuted by
      actions, for they did not hesitate to speak, even in a
      resolution, and in everyone’s hearing, about an offensive—not an offensive in general, but an immediate
      offensive. And they were right, for this is a political issue,
      an issue bearing on the destiny of our revolution as a whole.
    

There is no middle course. You must either be for or against an
    "immediate offensive". You cannot abstain from expressing an
    opinion. In this situation, to evade the issue by referring or
    alluding to military secrecy would be positively unworthy of a
    responsible politician.
    

To favour an immediate offensive means being in favour of
    continuing the imperialist war, slaughtering Russian workers and
    peasants in order to strangle Persia, Greece, Galicia, the Balkan
    peoples, etc., reviving and strengthening the counter-revolution,
    completely nullifying all the phrases about "peace without
    annexations", and waging war for annexations.
    

To be against an immediate offensive means being in favour of
    all power passing to the Soviets, of arousing the revolutionary
    initiative of the oppressed classes, of an immediate
    offer by the oppressed classes of all countries of "peace
    without annexations", peace based on the precise condition of
    overthrowing the tyranny of capital and liberating all
    colonies, all the oppressed nationalities, or
    nationalities not enjoying full rights, bar none.
    

The former way is, together with the capitalists, in the
    interests of the capitalists and for attaining the aims of the
    capitalists. It is the way of confidence in the capitalists, who
    for more than two years have been promising everything under the
    sun and many things besides, provided the war is “carried on to
    victory".
    

The latter way is one of breaking with the capitalists, of
      distrusting them, of curbing their vile self-interest, of
      putting an end to their business of making hundreds of millions
      in profits from contracts. It is the way of confidence in the
      oppressed classes, primarily in the workers of all
      countries, the way of confidence in a world workers’
      revolution against capital, the way of supporting it in
      full measure.
    
 

You must choose the one or the other. Tsereteli, Chernov and
    the rest prefer a middle course. But there is no middle course. If
    they vacillate or try to get away with mere talk, they, Tsereteli,
    Chernov and the rest, will completely make themselves tools in the
    hands of the counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie.
    

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
In Russian political writing, the term diehards was applied to the
extreme Right wing of the reactionary landowners.





[2]
The term “gentle men of June 3” applies to the bourgeois and
landowner parties (Right-wing, Octobrist and Cadet) which won a vast
superiority in the Third and Fourth Dumas under the
counter-revolutionary electoral law passed by the tsarist government on
June 3 (16), 1907. The law curtailed the already limited suffrage
of the workers and peasants.

The June 3 parties periodically held so-called private meetings
of Deputies to the Fourth Duma. One of these meetings took place
on June 3 (16), 1917, that is, the day the All-Russia Congress of
Soviets of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies was convened. This
was not mere coincidence, for the counter-revolutionary parties
of the Russian bourgeoisie and landowners were trying to exert
political pressure on the petty-bourgeois conciliators, the
Mensheviks and S.R.s, who commanded a majority at the Congress.

Among the items, the meeting discussed foreign policy matters.
It was addressed by V. A. Maklakov, P. N. Milyukov, V. V.
Shulgin and other Octobrist and Cadet leaders. They insisted on the
vigorous fulfilment of commitments in respect of the Allies and
on putting an end to the revolution. The resolution adopted by
the meeting said as much.









<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## An Alliance to Stop the Revolution









Lenin: An Alliance to Stop the Revolution







V. I.  

      Lenin
An Alliance to Stop the Revolution




Published:

      First published in Pravda No. 74, June 19 (6), 1917.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 51-53.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and C. Farrell
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2000

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

That the new coalition government is precisely this sort of
    alliance between the capitalists and the Narodnik and Menshevik
    leaders is far from obvious to all. Perhaps it is not obvious even
    to the Ministers belonging to these parties. Yet it is a
    fact.
    

This fact became all the more evident on Sunday, June
      4, when the morning papers carried reports on speeches made by
      Milyukov and Maklakov at the meeting of the counter
      revolutionaries of the Third Duma (called the "State Duma", by
      tradition of Nicholas Romanov and Stolypin the Hang man), and
      when, in the evening, Tsereteli and other Ministers made speeches
      in defence of the government and of the policy of an offensive at
      the All-Russia Congress of Soviets of Soldiers’ and Workers’
      Deputies.
    

Milyukov and Maklakov, like all capitalist and counter
      revolutionary leaders of any merit, are men of action who
      appreciate full well the meaning of the class struggle when it
      concerns their class. That is why they put the question
      of an offensive with such perfect clarity, without wasting a
      single minute on utterly meaningless talk about the offensive
      from the strategic point of view—the kind of talk with
      which Tsereteli deceived himself and others.
    

The Cadets certainly know their business. They know that the
      question of an offensive is now posed by reality as a
      political and not a strategic question, as the question of a
      radical turn in the Russian revolution as a whole. It
      is from the political point of view that the Cadets raised it in
      the "State Duma", just as the Bolsheviks, and internationalists
      generally, raised it on Saturday evening in their written

    

      statement to the Steering Committee of the Congress of
      Soviets.


      “Russia’s fate is in her own hands," announced Maklakov, the
      well-known accomplice of Stolypin the Hangman, "and it will he
      decided very soon [hear, hear!]. If we do succeed in launching
      an offensive and waging the war, not only by means of
      resolutions, not only by speeches at public meetings and by
      banners borne through the city, but by waging the war as
      intently as we have been waging it so far [listen to this—it is a capitalist leader speaking these historic words: "as we
      have been waging it so far"!], then it will not be long before
      Russia recovers completely.”
    


These are remarkable words which should be learned by heart and
      thought about time and again. They are remark able because they
      tell the class truth. This was repeated, in a slightly
      different way, by Milyukov, who reproached the Petrograd Soviet:
      "Why is it that its [the Soviet’s] statement says nothing about
      an offensive?", and stressed that the Italian imperialists had
      put “a modest [Mr. Milyukov’s irony!] question: ’Are you going
      to take the offensive or not?’ Moreover, no specific answer was
      given [by the Petrograd Soviet] to this question of theirs,
      either”. Maklakov voiced his “profound respect” for
      Kerensky, and Milyukov explained:


      “I have a very uneasy feeling that what our War Minister [“our”
      is right, meaning one who is in the hands of the capitalists!]
      has organised may again be disorganised from here and that we
      shall miss the last opportunity we still have [mark the “still”]
      of answering our Allies, who are asking whether we are going to
      attack or not, in a manner satisfactory both to ourselves and to
      them.”
    


      “Both to ourselves and to them”, meaning both to the Russian and
      to the Anglo-French and other imperialists! An offensive can
      “still” “satisfy” them, i.e., help them finish off Persia,
      Albania, Greece and Mesopotamia, and ensure that they retain all
      the booty snatched from the Germans and take away the booty
      seized by the German plunderers. This is the point. This is the
      class truth concerning the offensive’s political
      significance. It is to satisfy the appetites of the imperialists
      of Russia, Britain, etc., protract the imperialist, predatory
      war, and take the road not of peace without annexations
      (this road is possible only if the revolution continues),
      but of war for annexations.

That is the meaning of an offensive from the standpoint of
      foreign policy. Maklakov defined its meaning, in the

    

historic
      phrase quoted above, from the standpoint of home
      policy. What Maklakov means by "Russia’s complete recovery" is
      the complete victory of the counter-revolution. Those who have
      not forgotten Maklakov’s excellent speeches about the period of
      1905 and 1907-13 see almost his every speech reaffirm this
      appraisal.
    

To wage the war "as we have been waging it so far"—"we" being the capitalists with the tsar at the head!—to wage this imperialist war means enabling Russia to
      “recover”, i. e., ensuring the victory of the capitalists and
      the land owners.
    

This is the class truth.
    

An offensive, whatever its outcome may be from the military
      point of view, means politically strengthening imperialist
      morale, imperialist sentiments, and infatuation with
      imperialism. It means strengthening the old, unchanged army
      officers ("waging the war as we have been waging it so
      far"), and strengthening the main position of the
      Counter revolution.


Quite independently of whether they wish it or not, and whether
      they are aware of it or not, Tsereteli and Kerensky, Skobelev
      and Chernov. as leaders of the Narodnik and Menshevik parties,
      not as individuals, have given their sup port to the
      counter-revolution, gone over, at this decisive moment,
      to its side, and taken a stand inside the alliance for stopping
      the revolution and continuing the war "as we have been
      waging it so far".

 There must be no illusions on this score.
    

 
Notes
 
 







<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## Gratitude









Lenin: Gratitude







V. I.  

      Lenin
Gratitude




Published:

      First published in Pravda No. 74, June 19 (6), 1917.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      page 54.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and C. Farrell
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2000

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

We are very grateful to the chauvinist newspaper, Volya
Naroda[1]
      for publishing (in its issue of June 4) our documents
    relating to our passage through Germany. It is evident from these
    documents that even at that time we found Grimm’s
    behaviour “ambiguous” and declined his services.
That is a
    fact, and facts cannot be talked away.
Our answer to the
    vague insinuations of Volya Naroda is: don’t be cowards,
    gentlemen, accuse us openly of such- and-such a crime or
    misdemeanour! Have a go! Is it really hard to understand that it
    is dishonest to make vague insinuations because of a fear
    to come out with an accusation over one’s signature?

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Volya Naroda (People’s Will)—a daily newspaper published by the
Right wing of the Socialist-Revolutionary Party in Petrograd
in 1917. It was closed down in November 1917. Afterwards it
reappeared under other titles, and was suppressed altogether in
February 1918.









<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## Is There a Way to a Just Peace?









Lenin: Is There a Way to a Just Peace?







V. I.  

      Lenin
Is There a Way to a Just Peace?




Published:

      First published in Pravda No. 75, June 20 (7), 1917.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 55-56.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and C. Farrell
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2000

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

    

Is there a way to peace without an exchange of annexations,
      without the division of spoils among the capitalist robbers?

There is: through a workers’ revolution against the capitalists
      of the world.

Russia today is nearer to the beginning of such a revolution
      than any other country.

Only in Russia can power pass to existing institutions, to the
      Soviets, immediately, peacefully, without an uprising, for the
      capitalists cannot resist the Soviets of Workers’, Soldiers’ and
      Peasants’ Deputies.

With such a transfer of power it would be possible to curb the
      capitalists, now making thousands of millions in profits from
      contracts, to expose all their tricks, arrest the millionaire
      embezzlers of public property, break their unlimited power.

Only after the transfer of power to the oppressed classes could
      Russia approach the oppressed classes of other countries, not
      with empty words, not with mere appeals, but calling their
      attention to her example, and immediately and explicitly
      proposing clear-cut terms for universal
      peace.

      “Comrade workers and toilers of the world,” she would say
      in the proposal for an immediate peace. “Enough of the
      bloodshed. Peace is possible. A just peace means peace without
      annexations, without seizures. Let the German capitalist robbers
      and their crowned robber Wilhelm know that we shall not come to
      terms with them, that we regard as robbery on their part not
      only what they have grabbed since the war, but also Alsace and
      Lorraine, and the Danish and Polish areas of Prussia.
 

      “We also consider that Poland, Finland, the Ukraine, and
      other non-Great-Russian lands were seized by the Russian tsars
      and capitalists.

      “We consider that all colonies, Ireland, and so
      on, were seized by the British, French and other
      capitalists.

      “We Russian workers and peasants shall not hold
      any of the non-Great-Russian lands or colonies (such as
      Turkestan, Mongolia, or Persia) by force. Down with war for the
      division of colonies, for the division of annexed (seized)
      lands, for the division of capitalist spoils!”

The example of the Russian workers will be followed inevitably,
      perhaps not tomorrow (revolutions are not made to order), but
      inevitably all the same by the workers and all the working
      people of at least two great countries, Germany and
      France.

For both are perishing, the first of hunger, the second
      of depopulation. Both will conclude peace on our terms, which
      are just, in defiance of their capitalist governments. 

The road to peace lies before us.

Should the capitalists of England, Japan and America try to
      resist this peace, the oppressed classes of Russia and
      other countries will not shrink from a revolutionary war
      against the capitalists. In this war they will
      defeat the capitalists of the whole world, not just
      those of the three countries lying far from Russia and taken up
      with their own rivalries.

The road to a just peace lies before us. Let us not be afraid to
      take it.

 
Notes
 
 







<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## The Enemies of the People









Lenin: The Enemies of the People







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Enemies of the People




Published:

      First published in Pravda No. 75, June 20 (7), 1917.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 57-58.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and C. Farrell
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2000

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 
Plekhanov’s Yedinstvo (which even the
    Socialist-Revolutionary Dyelo Naroda justly calls a
    newspaper at one with the liberal bourgeoisie) has recently
    recalled the law of the French Republic of 1793 relating to
    enemies of the people.
    

A very timely recollection.
    

The
      Jacobins of 1793 belonged to the most revolutionary class of the
      eighteenth century, the town and country poor. It was against
      this class, which had in fact (and not just in words) done away
      with its monarch, its landowners and its moderate bourgeoisie by
      the most revolutionary measures, including the guillotine—against this truly revolutionary class of the eighteenth
      century—that the monarchs of Europe combined to wage war.


The Jacobins proclaimed enemies of the people those "promoting
      the schemes of the allied tyrants directed against the
      Republic".
    

The Jacobins’ example is instructive. It has not become obsolete
      to this day, except that it must be applied to the revolutionary
      class of the twentieth century, to the workers and
      semi-proletarians. To this class, the enemies of the people in
      the twentieth century are not the monarchs, but the landowners
      and capitalists as a class.
    

If the “Jacobins” of the twentieth century, the workers and
      semi-proletarians, assumed power, they would proclaim enemies of
      the people the capitalists who are making thou sands of millions
      in profits from the imperialist war, that is, a war for
      the division of capitalist spoils and profits.
    

The “Jacobins” of the twentieth century would not guillotine the
      capitalists—to follow a good example does not mean

    

copying
      it. It would be enough to arrest fifty to a hundred financial
      magnates and bigwigs, the chief knights of embezzlement and of
      robbery by the banks. It would be enough to arrest them for a
      few weeks to expose their frauds and show all exploited
      people "who needs the war". Upon exposing the frauds of the
      banking barons, we could release them, placing the banks, the
      capitalist syndicates, and all the contractors “working” for the
      government under workers’ control.
    

The Jacobins of 1793 have gone down in history for their great
      example of a truly revolutionary struggle against the class
      of the exploiters by the class of the working people and the
      oppressed who had taken all state power into their
      own hands.
    

The miserable Yedinstvo (with which the Menshevik
      defencists were ashamed to form a bloc) wants to borrow
      Jacobinism in letter and not in spirit, its exterior trappings
      and not the content of its policy. This amounts in effect to a
      betrayal of the revolution of the twentieth century, a betrayal
      disguised by spurious reference to the revolutionaries of the
      eighteenth century.

 
Notes
 
 







<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## Note









Lenin: Note







V. I.  

      Lenin
Note




Published:

      First published in Pravda No. 74 June 20 (7), 1917.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      page 59.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and C. Farrell
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2000

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 
On June 6 Novoye
    Vremya said:
    


      “Why is it that in these days of freedom this black hand has
      reached out from somewhere and is moving the puppets of Russian
      democracy? Lenin! But his name is legion. At all cross-roads, a
      Lenin pops up. And it is quite obvious that strength lies not in
      Lenin himself but in the receptiveness of the soil to the seeds
      of anarchy and madness.”
    


Anarchy, as we see it, is the making of scandalous profits from
      war supplies by the capitalists. Madness, as we see it, is the
      waging of a war for the division of annexed territories, for the
      division of capitalist profits. And if these views find sympathy
      “at all cross-roads", it is because they properly express the
      interests of the proletariat, the interests of all working
      people and all the exploited.

 
Notes
 
 







<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## “The Great Withdrawal”









Lenin: ’The Great Withdrawal’







V. I.  

      Lenin
“The Great Withdrawal”




Published:

      First published in Pravda No. 76, June 21 (8), 1917.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 60-62.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and C. Farrell
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2000

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 
“The great withdrawal of the bourgeoisie from the government."
    This is what the main speaker of the Executive Committee, in a
    report he submitted last Sunday, called the formation of the
    coalition government and the entry of former socialists into the
    Ministry.
    

Only the first three words in this phrase are correct. "The
      great withdrawal" does indeed characterise and explain May 6
      (the formation of the coalition government). It was on that day
      that "the great withdrawal" really began, or, to be exact,
      manifested itself most clearly. Only, it was not a great
      withdrawal of the bourgeoisie from the government but a great
      withdrawal of the Menshevik and Narodnik leaders
      fromthe revolution.
    

The significance of the Congress of Soviets of Soldiers’ and
      Workers’ Deputies now in session lies in the fact that it has
      made this circumstance clearer than ever.
    

      May 6 was a triumph for the bourgeoisie. The bourgeois
      government was on the verge of defeat. The masses were
      definitely and absolutely, sharply and irreconcilably opposed to
      it. One word from the Narodnik and Menshevik leaders of the
      Soviet would have sufficed to induce the government to
      relinquish its power unquestioningly. Lvov had to admit that
      openly at the sitting in the Mariinsky Palace.
    

The bourgeoisie resorted to a skilful manoeuvre which was new to
      the Russian petty bourgeoisie and to Russia’s masses in general,
      which intoxicated the intellectual Menshevik and Narodnik
      leaders, and which took proper account of their Louis Blanc
      nature. The reader may recall that Louis Blanc was a renowned
      petty-bourgeois socialist who entered

    

the French Government in
      1848 and became as sadly famed in 1871. Louis Blanc imagined
      himself to be the leaderof the "labour democrats" or
      ’socialist democrats" (the term “democracy” was used in the
      France of 1848 as frequently as in
      Socialist-Revolutionary[1]
      and Menshevik writing in 1917),
      but in reality he was the tail-endof the bourgeoisie, a
      play thing in their hands.
    

During the almost seventy years that have elapsed since then,
      that manoeuvre, which is a novelty in Russia, has been made many
      times by the bourgeoisie in the West. The purpose of this
      manoeuvre is to make the "socialist democratic" leaders who
      “withdraw” from socialism and from the revolution harmless
      appendagesof a bourgeois government, to shield this
      government from the people by means of near-socialist Ministers,
      to cover up the counter-revolutionary nature of the bourgeoisie
      by a glittering, spectacular faíade of “socialist”
      ministerialism.
    

This method has been developed to a veritable art in France. It
      has also been tested on many occasions in Anglo-Saxon,
      Scandinavian, and many of the Latin countries. It is this
      manoeuvre that was made in Russia on May 6, 1917.
    

      “Our” near-socialist Ministers found themselves in a situation
      in which the bourgeoisie began to use themas their
      cat’s paw, to do through themwhat the bourgeoisie could
      never have done without them.
    

Through Guchkov it would have been impossible to lure the people
      into continuing the imperialist,predatory war, a war
      for redivisionof the colonies and annexed territories
      in general. Through Kerensky (and Tsereteli, who was busier
      defending Tereshchenko than defending the post and telegraph
      workers), the bourgeoisie were able, as correctly admitted by
      Milyukov and Maklakov, to begin “organising” the continuation of
      this kind of war.
    

Through Shingaryov it would have been impossible to ensure the
      preservation of the landed estates system at least until the
      convocation of the Constituent Assembly (if an offensive were to
      take place, it would “enable Russia to re cover completely",
      said Maklakov. That means that the Constituent Assembly itself
      would be “healthier”). Through Chernov, this can be brought
      about. The peasants have been told, although they have not been
      very glad to hear it, that

    

to rent land from the landowners by
      agreement with each individual owner is “order”, while to
      abolish the landed estates at one stroke and rent from the
      people,pending the convocation of the Constituent Assembly,
      land formerly owned by the landowners is “anarchy”. This
      counter-revolutionary idea of the landowners could only be put
      into effect through Chernov.
    

Through Konovalov it would have been impossible to ensure the
      safeguarding (and the increase—seewhat the
      ministerial newspaper, Rabochaya Gazeta, writes about
      the coal industrialists) of the scandalous profits from war
      contracts. Through Skobelev, or with his participation, this
      safeguarding can be ensured by allegedly preserving the old
      order, by near-“Marxist” rejection of the possibility of
      “introducing” socialism.
    

Becausesocialism cannot be introduced the scandalously
      high profits made by the capitalists not from their purely
      capitalist business but from supplies to the armed forces,
      to thestate—these profits canbe both
      concealed from the people and retained!—this is the
      wonderful Struvean argument which has brought together
      Tereshchenko and Lvov, on the one hand, and the “Marxist”
      Skobelev, on the other.
    

Popular meetings and the Soviets cannot be influenced through
      Lvov, Milyukov, Tereshchenko, Shingaryov and the rest. But they
      can be influenced through Tsereteli, Chernov and Co. in the same
      old bourgeois direction. And one can pursue the same
      oldbourgeois-imperialist policy by means of particularly
      impressive, particularly “nice”-sounding phrases, to the point
      of denying the people the elementary democratic right to
      electlocal authorities and prevent both their
      appointment and confirmation from above.
    

By denying this right, Tsereteli, Chernov and Co. have
      unwittingly turned from ex-socialists into ex-democrats.
    

A “great withdrawal", all right!
    

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Socialist-Revolutionaries (S.R.s)—a petty-bourgeois party founded
in Russia in late 1901 and early 1902 as a result of the
amalgamation of various Narodnik groups and circles. Their views were an
eclectic hodgepodge of Narodnik and revisionist ideas. During
the First World War most of the S.R.s advocated social-chauvinist
views.

After the February bourgeois-democratic revolution of 1917 the
S.R.s and Mensheviks were the mainstay of the counter–
revolutionary, bourgeois-landowner Provisional Government, and S.R.
leaders (Kerensky, Avksentyev, Chernov) were members of the
cabinet. The S.R. Party refused to support the peasants’ demand
for the abolition of the landed estates, and advocated their
preservation. The S.R. numbers of the Provisional Government sent
punitive expeditions against peasants who had seized landed
estates.

At the end of November 1917 the Left S.R.s formed an
independent party. To retain their influence on the peasants, they
nominally recognised Soviet power and reached agreement with
the Bolsheviks. But shortly afterwards they began to fight against
Soviet rule.

During the foreign military intervention and the Civil War the
S.R.s engaged in counter-revolutionary subversion, actively
supported the invaders and whiteguards, took part in counter–
revolutionary conspiracies, and organised acts of terrorism against Soviet
statesmen and Communist Party leaders. After the Civil War they
continued their hostile activity inside the country and abroad,
where they joined the White émigrés.









<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## The Use of Sticking to the Point in Polemics









Lenin: The Use of Sticking to the Point in Polemics







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Use of Sticking to the Point in Polemics




Published:

      First published in Pravda No. 76 June 21 (8), 1917.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 63-64.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and C. Farrell
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2000

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 
Dear comrades writing for Novaya
    Zhizn, you resent our criticism, which you call angry. We
    shall try to be mild and kind.
    

To begin with, we wish to take up the two questions you raised.
    

Can one seriously speak of control over production, to say
      nothing of regulating it, without ending the "inviolability of
      commercial secrecy"?
    

We have maintained that Novaya Zhizn has not answered
      this “practical” question. Novaya Zhizn objects, saying
      that we can ’find" the answer “even” in Rabochaya
      Gazeta.


We cannot find it, dear comrades! Nor can you ever find it. Look
      more carefully and you will see you cannot find it.
    

You will pardon us for saying so, but Novaya Zhizn has
      sinned because, while holding forth about “control”, it has not
      raised the practical question of the inviolability of commercial
      secrecy in a practical way.
    

Second question: can one confuse the immediate introduction of
      socialism (which Novaya Zhizn has been arguing against
      and which we have never suggested) with the immediate assumption
      of actual control over the banks and trusts? When, in answer to
      that, we pointed out that we did not propose to expropriate,
      regulate, or exercise control over small-scale economy,
      Novaya Zhizn commented that we had made a "valuable
      confession", a “legitimate” one, but had done it “overhastily”.
    

Have a heart, dear comrades, how can you call it "over hasty"
      when it is just a brief paraphrase of the long and

    

detailed
      resolution passed by our conference? Or didn’t you care enough
      to read that resolution?
    

In polemics, one should stick to the point. It is harmful in
      this kind of polemics to try to quibble the issue away.
    

 
Notes
 
 







<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## An Epidemic of Credulity









Lenin: An Epidemic of Credulity







V. I.  

      Lenin
An Epidemic of Credulity




Published:

      First published in Pravda No. 76 June 21 (8), 1917.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 65-66.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and C. Farrell
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2000

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 
“Comrades, the resistance of the capitalists has apparently
    been broken.”
    

We gather this pleasant news from a speech by Minister
      Peshekhonov. It is staggering news! ’The resistance of the
      capitalists has been broken.”
    

And such ministerial speeches are heard and applauded! What is
      this but an epidemic of credulity?
    

On the one hand, they use "the dictatorship of the proletariat"
      more than anything else to scare themselves and other people. On
      the other hand, what is the difference between the idea of the
      "dictatorship of the proletariat" and breaking the resistance of
      the capitalists? None whatsoever. The dictatorship of the
      proletariat is a scientific term indicating the class which
      plays the leading role in it and the special form of state power
      called dictatorship, i.e., power based not on law or elections,
      but directly on the armed force of a particular section of the
      population.
    

What is the purpose and significance of the dictatorship of the
      proletariat? To break the resistance of the capitalists! And if
      "the resistance of the capitalists has apparently been broken"
      in Russia, it is as much as saying "the dictatorship of the
      proletariat has apparently been realised" here.
    

The “only” trouble is that this is no more than a ministerial
      phrase. Something like Skobelev’s brave exclamation: "I shall
      take 100 per cent
      profit!”[1]
      It is one of the gems of the
      “revolutionary-democratic” eloquence that is now overwhelming
      Russia, intoxicating the petty bourgeoisie, befogging and
      corrupting the people, and spreading by the handful the germs of
      an epidemic of credulity.
    
 

A scene in a certain French comedy—the French seem to
      excel at the game of socialist ministries—has a
      gramophone record that repeats, before audiences of voters in
      every part of France, a speech full of promises by a “socialist”
      Minister. We think Citizen Peshekhonov should pass on his
      historic phrase, "Comrades, the resistance of the capitalists
      has apparently been broken", to a record company. It would be
      very convenient and useful (for the capitalists) to spread this
      phrase throughout the world, in every language. Here we have, it
      would say, the splendid achievements of the Russian experiment
      in having a bourgeois and socialist coalition Ministry.
    

Still, it would be a good idea if Minister Peshekhonov, whom
      both the Mensheviks and the Socialist-Revolutionaries (who in
      1906 dissociated themselves from him in their press, regarding
      him as a petty bourgeois who had moved too far to the right)
      call a socialist now that he has entered the Ministry
      together with Tsereteli and Chernov,answered the following
      simple and modest question:
    

Isn’t it too much for us to try to break the resistance of the
      capitalists? Shouldn’t we rather try to expose before the labour
      unions and all the major parties the fantastic profits made by
      the capitalists? Shouldn’t we try to abolish commercial secrecy?
    

Isn’t it too much for us to speak of the “dictatorship of the
      proletariat” (“breaking the resistance of the capitalists")?
      Shouldn’t we rather try to expose embezzlement and
      misappropriation?
    

If the price of coal supplies has been raisedby the
      revolutionary government, as reported by the ministerial
      “Rabochaya Gazeta”, doesn’t it look like plunder of the
      state? Hadn’t we better publish, at least once a week, the
      "letters of guarantee" of the banks, and other documents
      relating to war contracts and to the prices paid under those
      contracts, rather than make speeches about "the resistance of
      the capitalists having been broken"?

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Reference is to the speech which the Menshevik Skobelev, Labour
Minister of the Provisional Government, made at the meeting of
the Petrograd Soviet of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies on May 13
(26), 1917, saying that taxation of the propertied classes should
be increased “to 100 per cent of their profits”.









<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## A Bird in the Hand or Two in the Bush









Lenin: A Bird in the Hand or Two in the Bush







V. I.  

      Lenin
A Bird in the Hand or Two in the Bush




Published:

      First published in Pravda No. 76, June 21 (8), 1917.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      page 67.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2000?

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 
Minister Peshekhonov uttered many beautiful and high-sounding
    phrases in his speech. He said that "we must divide equitably all
    we have", that "the resistance of the capitalists has apparently
    been broken", and many more phrases of that kind.
But he cited only one exact figure, only one exact fact in his
    speech, devoting six lines to it out of eight columns. Here it is:
    nails leave the factory at 20 kopeks a pound, but they reach the
    consumer at 2 rubles a pound.
Isn’t it possible, since "the resistance of the capitalists has
    been broken", to pass a law on publishing (1) all letters of
    guarantee concerning prices of supplies under the war con tracts;
    (2) all prices of supplies to the state in general; (3) the cost
    price of products delivered to the state; (4) isn’t it possible to
    give the workers’ organisations an opportunity to verify all these
    facts?

 
Notes
 
 







<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## Introduction of Socialism or Exposure of Plunder of the State?









Lenin: Introduction of Socialism or Exposure of Plunder of the State?







V. I.  

      Lenin
Introduction of Socialism or Exposure of Plunder of the State?




Published:

      First published in Pravda, No. 77, June 22, 1917.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 68-69.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2000

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

It has been decided and laid down that socialism cannot
      be introduced in Russia. This was proved, in
      near-Marxist fashion, by Mr. Milyukov at a meeting of the June 3
      diehards, following the ministerial Menshevik Rabochaya
      Gazeta.And it was subscribed to by the largest party in
      Russia in general and in the Congress of Soviets in particular,
      the Socialist-Revolutionary Party, which, besides being the
      largest party, is also the party with the greatest ideological
      (disinterested) fear of seeing the revolution develop towards
      socialism.
    

Strictly speaking, a mere glance at the resolution passed by the
      Bolshevik Conference held from April 24 to 29, 1917, reveals
      that the Bolsheviks, too, recognise the impossibility of
      immediately “introducing” socialism in Russia.
    

What is the argument about, then? Why the fuss?
    

By the hue and cry against the “introduction” of socialism in
      Russia, some people are sustaining (many of them unwittingly)
      the efforts of those who are opposed to the exposure of
      plunder of the state.


Let us not quibble over words, citizens! It is unworthy of
      "revolutionary democrats" and, indeed, of grown-ups in
      general. Let’s not talk about the “introduction” of socialism,
      which “everybody” rejects. Let’s talk about the exposure of
      plunder.
    

When capitalists work for defence. i.e., for the state, it is
      obviously no longer “pure” capitalism but a special form of
      national economy. Pure capitalism means commodity
      production. And commodity production means work for an
      unknownand free market. But the capitalist “working”
      for defence does not “work” for the market at all—he
      works on government orders,very often with money loaned
      by the state.
    
 

We believe that to conceal the amount of profit made on this
      peculiar operation and to appropriate the profit in excess of
      what is necessary to cover the living expenses of a person
      actually participating in production is embezzlement.


If you disagree, then you are clearly out of step with the
      overwhelming majority of the population. There is no shadow of
      doubt that by far most of the workers and peasants of Russia
      agree with us and would say so in plain language were the
      question put to them without evasions, excuses or diplomatic
      tricks.
    

But if you do agree, then let us fight together against excuses
      and tricks.
    

To make the greatest possible concessions on a
      commonundertaking such as this fight and to show a
      maximum of tractability, we are proposing the following draft
      resolution to the Congress of Soviets:
    

      “The first step towards any regulation of, or even simple
      control over, production and distribution [note that does not
      belong to the text of the draft: even Minister Peshekhonov
      promised to strive to ensure "that all we have is divided
      equitably"], the first step in any serious struggle against
      economic dislocation and the catastrophe threatening the
      country, must be a decree abolishing commercial (including
      banking) secrecy in all transactions arising from supplies to
      the state or for defence in general. Such a decree should be
      supplemented immediately by a law treating as criminal offences
      all direct or indirect attempts to conceal pertinent documents
      or facts from persons or groups who have mandates from:
    

      “(a) any Soviet of Workers’ or Soldiers’ or Peasants’ Deputies;
    

      “(b) any trade union of industrial workers or office employees,
      etc.;
    

      “(c) any major political party (the idea of ’major’ should be
      defined specifically, at least on the basis of votes received).”
    

Everybody agrees that the immediate introduction of socialism in
      Russia is impossible.
    

Does everybody agree that the exposure of plunder of the state
      is an immediate necessity?
    

 
Notes
 
 







<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## Confused and Frightened









Lenin: Confused and Frightened







V. I.  

      Lenin
Confused and Frightened




Published:

      First published in Pravda, No. 79, June 24, 1917.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 70-72.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2000

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The atmosphere in Petrograd is one of fright and confusion
      reaching truly unparalleled dimensions.
    

This was illustrated by a small incident prior to the big
      incident of banning the demonstration fixed by our Party for


Saturday.[1]


This small incident was the seizure of Durnovo’s
      country-house. Minister Pereverzev first ordered the house
      cleared, but then declared at the Congress that he was letting
      the people use the garden and that the trade unions were not to
      be evicted from the house! All that was necessary, he said, was
      to
      arrest
      certain
anarchists.[2]


If the seizure of Durnovo’s country-house was unlawful, then it
      was wrong either to leave the garden for the people’s
      use or to allow the trade unions to remain in the house. If
      there were lawful grounds for arrest, the arrest had
      no bearing on the house, for it could have occurred
      either in the house oroutside it. As it
      happened, the house was not “vacated”, nor were any arrests
      made. The government found itself confused and frightened. Had
      they not become nervous, there would have been no “incident”,
      for nothing has clanged anyway.
    

The big incident was the demonstration. Our Party’s Central
      Committee, together with a number of other organisations,
      including the Trade Union Bureau, resolved to call a peaceful
      demonstration, a march through the streets of the capital. In
      all constitutional countries, the holding of such a
      demonstration is an absolutely incontestable civil right.

    

A
      peaceful street demonstration calling, incidentally, for an
      amendment of the Constitution or a change in the government is
      in no way regarded as unlawful by the legislation of any free
      country.
    

People who were confused and frightened, including, in
      particular, the majority at the Congress of Soviets, made an
      awful “fuss” over the demonstration. The Congress majority
      adopted a devastating resolution against the demonstration, full
      of abuse against our Party, and prohibited all
      demonstrations, including peaceful ones, for three days.
    

When this formal decision had been adopted, the Central
      Committee of our Party, as early as 2 a. m. on Saturday,
      resolved to cancel the demonstration. The cancellation was
      effected on Saturday morning at an emergency meeting with
      district representatives.
    

The question remains: how does our second "government
      the Congress of Soviets, explain its ban? Agreed that
      every party in a free country has the right to hold
      demonstrations, and every government can, after proclaiming a
      state of emergency, prohibit them. But the political question
      remains:
      why was the demonstration banned?
    

Here is the only political motive, clearly stated in the
      resolution of the Congress of Soviets:
    


      “We know that concealed counter-revolutionaries want to take
      advantage of your demonstration [i. e., the one planned by our
      Party] ....”
    


That is the reason why the peaceful demonstration was
      banned. The Congress of Soviets “knows” that there are
      "concealed counter-revolutionaries" and that they wanted to
      "take advantage" of the action which our Party had planned.
    

This statement by the Congress of Soviets is highly
      significant. And we must re-emphasise this
      factual statement, which by virtue of its factualness
      stands out from the spate of abuse levelled at us. What measures
      is our second government taking against the "concealed
      counter-revolutionaries"? What exactly does this government
      “know”? How exactly did the counter-revolutionaries want to take
      advantage of one pretext or another?
    

The people cannot and will not wait patiently and passively
      until those concealed counter-revolutionaries act.
    
 

If our second government does not want to remain like people who
      by bans and torrents of abuse try to cover up their confusion
      and the fact that they have allowed them selves to be frightened
      by the Right, it will have to tell the people a great
      deal about the "concealed counter-revolutionaries" and
      do a great deal to combat them seriously.
    

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Lenin is referring to the First All-Russia Congress of Soviets
banning the demonstration fixed by the Bolshevik Central Committee
for June 10 (23), 1917.

Early in June tension in Petrograd grew. The prolongation
of the war by the Provisional Government, preparations for an
offensive at the front, and food shortages, all caused resentment
and indignation among the workers and soldiers. The government’s
order to troops to take over the Durnovo country-house and evict
the workers’ organisations of the Vyborgskaya Storona district
from it gave rise to a strike. On June 7 (20) four factories went on

   

strike, and next day, twenty-eight. The masses were eager to hold
a street demonstration.

To ward off provocation and unnecessary loss of life, a joint
meeting of the Central and Petrograd Committees, the Military
Organisation, and district delegates from the workers and delegates
from troop units, held on June 8 (21), carried Lenin’s motion to
hold a peaceful organised demonstration. The action was set for
June 10 (23).

The Bolshevik Central Committee’s decision to hold a
demonstration brought a ready response from the masses and alarmed the
government, as well as the Mensheviks and Socialist–
Revolutionaries, who resolved to foil the demonstration. On the evening of
June 9 (22) the First All-Russia Congress of Soviets, led by them,
passed a resolution banning all street demonstrations for three days.

On a motion by Lenin, the Central Committee of the Bolshevik
Party, not wishing to go against the Congress decision, resolved
on the night of June 9–10 to call off the demonstration. Members of
the Central and Petrograd Committees and other prominent
members of the Party were sent to factories and barracks to
dissuade the workers and soldiers from demonstrating. As a result of
their explanatory work, the workers and soldiers agreed that it
would be unwise to hold a demonstration just then. This indicated
the Party’s growing influence, its ability to keep in touch with
the people, and the flexibility of the Bolshevik leadership. Two
clays later the S.R. and Menshevik leadership of the Congress of
Soviets decided to hold a demonstration on June 18 (July 1)—the
day when the Russian troops were to take the offensive—as proof
of the people’s “confidence” in the Provisional Government.

Under Lenin’s personal leadership, the Central and Petrograd
Committees did a great deal to ensure that the demonstration
reflected the true sentiment of the people and win that important
peaceful battle against the Mensheviks and S.R.s for influence
among the people. Lenin took part in preparations for the
demonstration by formulating watchwords, checking the preparation o(
streamers and banners, giving directions to correspondents, writing
telegrams to be sent to local Bolshevik organisations, taking steps
to guarantee that there would be an adequate number of Bolshevik
speakers, putting his own name on the list of speakers, and
attending the Marsovo Polye meeting.

On June 18 (July 1) the demonstration brought some 500,000
Petrograd workers and soldiers out into the streets. By far most of
the demonstrators carried Bolshevik revolutionary slogans. Only
small groups carried the conciliating parties’ slogans expressing
confidence in the Provisional Government. The demonstration
revealed the heightened revolutionary spirit of the people and the
vastly increased influence and prestige of the Bolshevik Party.
It also revealed the complete failure of the petty-bourgeois
conciliating parties backing the Provisional Government. Lenin
dealt with the June demonstration in “The Eighteenth of June”,
“Three Crises” (see pp. 110–12 and 171–75 of this volume) and other
articles.





[2]
After the victory of the February revolution the workers’
organisations of the Vyborgskaya Storona district (the bakers’ union, the
district branch of the people’s militia, etc.), joined by the
anarchists, took over the vacant country-house of tsarist ex-Minister
Durnovo and the adjoining garden (20 dessiatines in area), which
the workers of the district subsequently used as recreation grounds.

On June 7 (20) the Provisional Government, backed by the S.R.
and Menshevik majority on the Petrograd Soviet and then by the
First All-Russia Congress of Soviets, ordered the country-house
to be vacated. The order brought protests from the Petrograd
workers, particularly those of Vyborgskaya Storona. Several factories
struck. The government yielded but on the night of June 18–19
(July 1–2) it sent a contingent of Cossacks and soldiers which took the
country-house by assault, killing two anarchists and arresting
59 people. As the overwhelming majority of the arrested had
nothing to do with the anarchists, they had to be released shortly after.
The raid deeply angered the workers.

For several weeks the bourgeois press was busy playing up the
“horrors” which it alleged to have taken place at the country-house,
and used this particular incident to the hilt to campaign against
the revolutionary-minded masses and the Bolsheviks.









<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## Insinuations









Lenin: Insinuations







V. I.  

      Lenin
Insinuations




Published:

      First published in Pravda, No. 79, June 24 (11), 1917.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 73-74.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2000

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Those who rant and rage and fulminate, who gnash their teeth and
      pour a ceaseless torrent of abusive and riot-raising words upon
      our Party, do not accuse us of anything directly. They merely
      “insinuate”.
    

Insinuate what?
    

There is only one thing they can insinuate: the Bolsheviks
      wanted to effect a coup d’état, they are
      Catilines,[1]
and consequentlythey are monsters deserving to be torn
      to pieces.
    

Our enemies cannot bring themselves to make this foolish
      statement openly, and so they are compelled to “insinuate” and
      rage in “rhetorics”. For this accusation is exceedingly
      stupid. A coup d’état through a peaceful demonstration,
      decided upon on Thursday, planned for Saturday and announced on
      Saturday morning! Now, gentlemen, whom are you trying to fool
      with your ridiculous insinuations?
    

      “A demand for the overthrow of the Provisional Government," says
      the resolution of the Congress of Soviets. So the removal of
      some of the Ministers from the Provisional Government (one of
      the inscriptions on the planned streamers was to have read:
      “Down with the bourgeois members of the government!") is a coup
      d’état, eh?
    

Why, then, has no one tried, or even threatened, to institute
      proceedings against those who have repeatedly appeared in the
      Petrograd streets carrying the banner: "All power to the
      Soviet"?
    

Those who rage have been frightened by their own shadow.
    

A government which knows that it is supported in its

    

      entiretyby the will of the majority of
      the people should not fear demonstrations announced in
      advance.

It would not ban such demonstrations.

Only those who realise they have no majority to back them, and
      who lack popular approval, can behave so savagely and make
      such insinuationsin malicious articles.

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Catiline (Lucius Sergius Catilina)—Roman politician and soldier.
In 63 B.C. he engineered a conspiracy to effect a coup d’état,
abolish the republic and establish a military dictatorship.









<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## “Rumours Agitating the Population”









Lenin: ’Rumours Agitating the Population’







V. I.  

      Lenin
“Rumours Agitating the Population”




Published:

      First published in Pravda No. 79, June 24 (11), 1917.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      page 75.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The Provisional Government is calling upon the
      “population” today to stay calm in face of “the
      rumours that are being spread in the city and are agitating the
      population”.
    

Doesn’t the Provisional Government think that one sentence in the
      resolution passed by the Congress of Soviets is, and should he, a
      thousand times more agitating than all “rumours"? That sentence
      reads:
    

      “We know that concealed counter-revolutionaries want to take
      advantage of your [Bolshevik] demonstration.”
    

This is “more than rumours”. How can they fail to
      agitate the population?
    

 
Notes
 
 







<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## A Riddle









Lenin: A Riddle







V. I.  

      Lenin
A Riddle




Published:

      First published in Pravda No. 79, June 24 (11), 1917.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      page 76.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

What is the difference between an ordinary bourgeois government
      and a government which is extraordinary, revolutionary, and
      which does not regard itself as bourgeois?
    

Answer:


An ordinary bourgeois government can ban demonstrations only on
      constitutional grounds and after declaring martial law.
    

An extraordinary and near-socialist government can ban
      demonstrations without any grounds and on the strength of
      “facts” known to it alone.
    

 
Notes
 
 







<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## Draft Statement by the C.C. R.S.D.L.P.(B.) and the Bureau of the Bolshevik Group to the All-Russia Congress of Soviets Regarding the Ban on the Demonstration









Lenin: Draft Statement by the C.C. R.S.D.L.P.(B.) and the Bureau of the Bolshevik Group to the All-Russia Congress of Soviets Regarding the Ban on the Demonstration







V. I.  

      Lenin
Draft Statement by the C.C. R.S.D.L.P.(B.) and the Bureau of the Bolshevik Group to the All-Russia Congress of Soviets Regarding the Ban on the Demonstration[1]




Written: Written on June 11 (24), 1917 

Published:

      First published in 1924, in Byloye No. 24.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 77-78.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

We hold that the unique institution known as the
      Soviets of Workers’, Soldiers’ and Peasants’ Deputies is
      the nearest approach to a popular body expressing the
      will of the majority of the people, to a revolutionary
      parliament.
    

On principle we have been, and are, in favour of all power
      passing into the hands of such a body, despite the fact that at
      present it is in the hands of the defencist Mensheviks and
      Socialist-Revolutionaries, who are hostile to the party of the
      proletariat.
    

The fact that the position of the Soviets is internally
      contradictory, shaky and unstable, and powerless in regard to
      the counter-revolution, is due to their tolerating a nest of
      counter-revolution—the ten bourgeois Ministers—and
      to their not breaking with Anglo-French imperialist capital. The
      shakiness of their position accounts for the nervousness of the
      present majority of the Soviets and their touchiness towards
      those who point out this shakiness.
    

We refuse to co-ordinate our struggle against the counter
      revolution with the “struggle” of the defencist and
      ministerialist parties.
    

We cannot recognise the decisions of the Soviets as proper
      decisions taken by a proper government as long as there remain
      the ten bourgeois, counter-revolutionary Ministers who are part
      and parcel of the Milyukov spirit, and the Milyukov class. But
      even if the Soviets seized all power (which we

      want and would always support), and even if they became an
      omnipotent revolutionary parliament, we would not submit
      to decisions that restrained our freedom of propaganda, for
      instance, prohibiting leaflets at the front or in the

    

rear,
      banning peaceful demonstrations, and so on. In that event we would
      prefer to become an illegal, officially persecuted party, rather
      than give-up our Marxist, internationalist principles.
  

We shall act similarly if the Congress of Soviets sees fit to
      brand us officially before the entire population of Russia as
      “enemies of the people” or as “enemies of the
      revolution”.
    

We regard only one of the motives given for banning the
      demonstration for three days as conditionally valid, namely,
      that concealed counter-revolutionaries lying in wait wanted to
      take advantage of the demonstration. If the facts underlying
      this motive are correct, and if the names of the counter
      revolutionaries are known to the entire Soviet (as they are
      known to us privately from the verbal information given by
      Lieber and others on the Executive Committee), then these
      counter-revolutionaries should be immediately proclaimed enemies
      of the people and arrested, and their followers and helpers
      tried in court.
    

As long as the Soviet does not take such measures, even its
      valid motive is only conditionally valid, or altogether in
      valid.
    

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
The basic provisions of the draft were incorporated in the
declaration of the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P.(B.) and the Bureau
of the Bolshevik group at the First All-Russia Congress of Soviets
concerning the Congress ban on the peaceful demonstration fixed
by the Bolshevik Party for June 10 (23).









<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## Speech on the Cancellation of the Demonstration, Delivered at a Meeting of the Petrograd Committee of the R.S.D.L.P.(B.), June 11 (24), 1917









Lenin: Speech on the Cancellation of the Demonstration, Delivered at a Meeting of the Petrograd Committee of the R.S.D.L.P.(B.), June 11 (24), 1917







V. I.  

      Lenin
Speech on the Cancellation of the Demonstration, Delivered at a Meeting of the Petrograd Committee of the R.S.D.L.P.(B.), June 11 (24), 1917




Published:

      First published in 1923, in Krasnaya Letopis No. 9.

      Published according to the minutes of the meetings of the Petrograd Committee of the R.S.D.L.P.(B.), 1917.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 79-81.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The dissatisfaction voiced by most comrades over the
      cancellation of the demonstration is quite natural, but the
      Central Committee had no alternative for two reasons:
      first, we were formally banned from holding the demonstration
      by the semi-organ of power; secondly, the motive for the ban was
      stated as follows: "We know that concealed forces of the
      counter-revolution want to take advantage of your
      demonstration." In support of this motive, we were given names,
      such as that of a general, whom they promised to arrest within
      three days, and others. And they declared that a demonstration
      of the Black
      Hundreds[1]
      had been arranged for June 10 with the
      intention of breaking into our demonstration and turning it
      into a skirmish.
    

Even in ordinary warfare, it sometimes happens that a planned
      offensive has to be cancelled for strategic reasons. This is all
      the more likely to occur in class warfare, depending on the
      vacillation of the middle, petty-bourgeois groups. We must be
      able to take account of the situation and be bold in adopting
      decisions.
    

The cancellation was absolutely necessary, as subsequent
      developments proved. Today Tsereteli has delivered his
      historical and hysterical
      speech.[2]
      Today the revolution
      has entered a new phase of its development. They began by
      banning our peaceful demonstration for three days, and now they
      want

      to ban it for the entire duration of the Congress. They

    

demand
      that we obey the decision of the Congress under threat of
      expulsion from the Congress. But we have declared that we prefer
      arrest rather than renounce freedom of propaganda.
    

Tsereteli, whose speech showed him up as a blatant
      counter-revolutionary, declared that the Bolsheviks must not be
      fought by words and resolutions, but must be deprived of all the
      technical means they have at their disposal. The result of all
      bourgeois revolutions is: first arm the proletariat and then
      disarm it to prevent it from going any further. The fact that a
      peaceful demonstration had to be banned shows that the situation
      must be very serious.
    

Tsereteli, who emerged from the depths of the Provisional
      Government to attend the Congress, clearly expressed a desire to
      disarm the workers. He was savagely furious in demanding that
      the Bolshevik Party be ousted from the ranks of the
      revolutionary democrats. The workers must clearly realise that
      there can now be no question of a peaceful demonstration. The
      situation is far more serious than we thought. We were going to
      hold a peaceful demonstration in order to exercise maximum
      pressure on the decisions of the Congress—that is our
      right—but we are accused of hatching a plot to arrest the
      government.
    

Tsereteli says that there are no counter-revolutionaries apart
      from the Bolsheviks. The meeting that passed judgment on us
      was organised with particular solemnity. It consisted of the
      Congress Steering Committee, the Executive Committee of the
      Soviet of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies in full force and the
      bureaus of the groups of all the parties
      attending the Congress. At that meeting they blurted out
      the whole truth, namely, that they are calling an offensive
      against us.
    

The proletariat must reply by showing the maximum calmness,
      caution, restraint and organisation, and must remember that
      peaceful processions are a thing of the past.
    

We must give them no pretext for attack. Let them attack, and
      the workers will realise that it is an attack on the very
      existence of the proletariat. But reality is on our side, and it
      is a moot point whether their attack will succeed—at the
      front there are the troops, among whom discontent is

    

      very strong, and in the rear there is the high cost of living,
      economic dislocation and so on.
    

The Central Committee does not want to force your decision. Your
      right, the right to protest against the actions of
      the Central Committee, is a legitimate one, and your decision
      must be a free one.
    

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Black Hundreds—monarchist bands formed by the tsarist police
to fight the revolutionary movement. They assassinated
revolutionaries, attacked progressive intellectuals and carried out
anti-Jewish pogroms.





[2]
Reference is to the speech made by the Menshevik Tsereteli, member
of the Provisional Government, on June 11 (24), 1917, at the joint
meeting of the Steering Committee of the First All-Russia Congress
of Soviets, the Executive Committee of the Petrograd Soviet of
Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies, the Executive Committee of
the Congress of Peasants’ Deputies, and the bureaus of all Congress
parties. The meeting was arranged by the S.R. and Menshevik
leaders to strike a blow at the Bolshevik Party, taking advantage
of the majority they commanded. In his speech, which ho hold
in a hysterical key, Tsereteli said the demonstration which the
Bolsheviks had scheduled for June 10 (23) was “a Bolshevik
conspiracy to overthrow the government and seize power”. The speech
was slanderous and counter-revolutionary throughout. The
Bolsheviks left the meeting in protest against the slanders spread by



Tsereteli and other S.R. and Menshevik loaders. Lenin, who had
been against the meeting from the outset, did not attend.









<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## The Turning-Point









Lenin: The Turning-Point







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Turning-Point




Published:

      First published in Pravda No. 80 June 26 (13), 1917.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 82-83.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

    



The Turning-Point
      

At the first stage of its development the Russian revolution
      transferred power to the imperialist bourgeoisie, and created,
      alongside of that power, the Soviets of Deputies, with the
      petty-bourgeois democrats in the majority. The second stage of
      the revolution (May 6) formally removed from power the cynically
      frank spokesmen of imperialism, Milyukov and Guchkov, and
      virtually transformed the majority parties in the Soviets into
      governing parties. Our Party remained, before and after May 6, a
      minority opposition. This was inevitable, for we are the party
      of the socialist proletariat, a party holding an
      internationalist position. A socialist proletariat whose outlook
      during an imperialist war is internationalist cannot but be in
      opposition to any power waging that war, regardless of whether
      that power is a monarchy or republic, or is held by defencist
      “socialists”. And the party of the socialist
      proletariat is bound to attract an increasingly large mass of
      people who are being ruined by the protracted war and are
      growing distrustful of “socialists” committed to the
      service of imperialism, in the same way as they previously grew
      distrustful of imperialists themselves.
    

The struggle against our Party, therefore, began in the very
      first days of the revolution. And however infamous and
      abominable the forms of struggle carried on by the Cadets and
      the Plekhanov people against the party of the proletariat, the
      meaning of the struggle is quite clear. It is
      the same struggle as the imperialists and the Scheidemann people
      waged against Liebknecht and Adler (both of whom were, in fact,
      declared “mad” by the central organ of the German

    

      “socialists”, to say nothing of the bourgeois press,
      which

      described these comrades simply as “traitors” working
      for Britain). This is a struggle of the whole of
      bourgeois society, including the petty-bourgeois
      democrats, however r-r-revolutionary they may be, against the
      socialist, internationalist proletariat.
    

In Russia, this struggle has reached a stage where the
      imperialists are trying, through the petty-bourgeois-democratic
      leaders, the Tseretelis, Chernovs, etc., to destroy the growing
      power of the workers’ party at a single hard and decisive
      blow. As a pretext for this decisive blow, Minister Tsereteli
      has struck upon a method repeatedly used by
      counter-revolutionaries: the charge of conspiracy. This
      charge is a
      mere pretext. The point is that the petty-bourgeois democrats,
      who take their cue from the Russian and the Allied imperialists,
      need to do away with the internationalist socialists once
      and for all. They think that the moment is ripe for the
      blow. They are agitated and frightened, and under the whip of
      their masters they have made up their minds: now or never.
    

The socialist proletariat and our Party must be as cool and
      collected as possible, must show the greatest staunchness and
      vigilance. Let the future
      Cavaignacs[1]
      begin first. Our Party
      conference has already given warning of their arrival. The
      workers of Petrograd will give them no opportunity to disclaim
      responsibility. They will bide their time, gathering their
      forces and preparing for resistance when those
      gentlemen decide to turn from words to action.
    

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Cavaignac, Louis Eugene—French general who after the February
revolution of 1848 became War Minister of the Provisional
Government. In June 1848 he led the suppression of the Paris workers’
uprising.









<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## Letter to the Editor









Lenin: Letter to the Editor







V. I.  

      Lenin
Letter to the Editor




Published:

      First published in Pravda No. 80, June 26 (13), 1917.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      page 84.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

I am being asked about the reason for my absence at the meeting
      held on Sunday evening by the Executive Committee, the Steering
      Committee of the Congress and the bureaus of all groups. The
      reason is that I upheld the refusal of the Bolsheviks, as a
      matter of principle, to participate in the meeting, and urged
      that they present a written statement to the effect that they
      refuse to participate in any meetings on such questions (the ban
      on demonstrations).
    

 
Notes
 
 







<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## The Foreign Policy of the Russian Revolution









Lenin: The Foreign Policy of the Russian Revolution







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Foreign Policy of the Russian Revolution




Published:

      First published in Pravda No. 81, June 27 (14), 1917.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 85-87.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

No idea could be more erroneous or harmful than to separate
      foreign from home policy. The monstrous falsity of this
      separation becomes even more monstrous in war-time. Yet the
      bourgeoisie are doing everything possible and impossible to
      suggest and promote this idea. Popular ignorance of foreign
      policy is incomparably greater than of home policy. The
      “secrecy” of diplomatic relations is sacredly
      observed in the freest of capitalist countries, in the most
      democratic republics.
    

Popular deception has become a real art in foreign
      “affairs”, and our revolution suffers very badly
      from this deception. The poison of deception is spread far and
      wide by the millions of copies of bourgeois newspapers.
    

You must side with one of the two immensely wealthy and
      immensely powerful groups of imperialist predators—that is
      how capitalist reality poses the basic issue, of present-day
      foreign policy. That is how this issue is posed by the
      capitalist class. And that, it goes without saying, is how it is
      posed by the broad mass of the petty bourgeoisie who have
      retained their old, capitalist views and prejudices.
    

Those whose thinking does not go beyond capitalist relations
      cannot understand why the workers, if they are politically
      conscious, cannot side with either group of imperialist
      plunderers. Conversely, the worker cannot understand why
      socialists who remain true to the fraternal alliance of the
      workers of the world against the capitalists of the world are
      accused of being inclined towards a separate peace treaty with
      the Germans, or of virtually serving such a peace treaty. Under
      no circumstances can these socialists (and hence

    

      the Bolsheviks) agree to a separate peace treaty between the
      capitalists. The basis for the foreign policy of the
      politically-conscious proletariat is no separate peace treaty
      with the
      German capitalists and no alliance with the Anglo-French
      capitalists.
    

By rising up in arms against that programme because they fear a
      break with “Britain and France”, our Mensheviks and
      Socialist-Revolutionaries are virtually carrying out a
      capitalist foreign policy programme, while embellishing it with
      florid and innocent phrases about “revision of
      treaties”, declarations in support of “peace without
      annexations”, etc. All these pious wishes are doomed to
      remain hollow phrases, for capitalist reality puts the
      issue bluntly: either submit to the imperialists of one of the
      two groups, or wage a revolutionary struggle against all
      imperialists.
    

Have we any allies for this struggle? Yes. The oppressed classes
      of Europe, primarily the proletariat. The peoples oppressed by
      imperialism, primarily our neighbours in Asia.
    

The Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries, who call
      themselves “revolutionary democrats”, are in fact
      pursuing a counter-revolutionary and anti-democratic foreign
      policy. Were they revolutionaries, they would advise the workers
      and peasants of Russia to march at the head of all peoples
      oppressed by imperialism and of all the oppressed classes.
    

      “But in that event the capitalists of all other countries
      would rally against Russia,” the frightened philistines
      object. That is not impossible. No
      “revolutionary” democrat has the right to
      renounce revolutionary war in advance. But the practical
      likelihood of such a war is not very great. The British and
      German imperialists will not be able to “come to
      terms” against revolutionary Russia.
    

The Russian revolution, which as early as 1905 led to
      revolutions in Turkey, Persia and China, would have placed the
      German and British imperialists in a very difficult position if
      it had begun to establish a truly revolutionary alliance of the
      workers and peasants of the colonies and semi-colonies against
      the despots, against the khans, for expulsion of the Germans
      from Turkey, the British from Turkey, Persia, India, Egypt, etc.
    

Social-chauvinists, both French and Russian, like to refer to
      1793. By this spectacular reference they try to cover

    

      up their betrayal of the revolution. But people here refuse to
      think that the truly “revolutionary”
      democrats in Russia could and should act in the spirit
      of 1793 towards the oppressed and backward nations.
    

The foreign policy of the capitalists and the petty bourgeoisie
      is “alliance” with the imperialists, that
      is, disgraceful dependence on them. The foreign policy of the
      proletariat is alliance with the revolutionaries of the
      advanced countries and with all the oppressed nations against
      all and any imperialists.
    

 
Notes
 
 







<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## A Contradictory Stand









Lenin: A Contradictory Stand







V. I.  

      Lenin
A Contradictory Stand




Published:

      First published in Pravda No. 81, June 27 (14), 1917.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 88-90.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and C. Farrell
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2000

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The Congress resolution in today’s papers condemning our Party
      will no doubt be compared by every class-conscious worker and
      soldier with our Party’s statement addressed to the All-Russia
      Congress of Soviets, a statement made public on the 11th, and
      printed in today’s 
Pravda.[1]


The contradictory nature of the stand taken by the Congress
      leaders has been revealed by their resolution and particularly
      by our statement. 

      “The basis for the success and strength of the Russian
      revolution is the unity of all revolutionary democrats—the
      workers, soldiers, and peasants," reads the first and cardinal
      clause of the Congress resolution. And, of course, this point
      would undoubtedly he correct if what it meant by “unity” were
      

unity in the struggle against the counter-revolution
      . But what if through their leaders a certain number of the
      "workers, soldiers and peasants" form a bloc and units with the
      counter-revolution? Isn’t it clear that this section of the
      “democrats” is  in reality no longer
      “revolutionary”?

The Narodniks (Socialist-Revolutionaries) and the Mensheviks
      mill probably be indignant at the mere fact that we think it
      possible, that we think it conceivable, for any section of the
      "workers, soldiers and peasants" to “unite” with the
      counter-revolution. 

To those who attempted to obscure our arguments and hush up the
      issue by indignation, we would reply by simply referring them to
      the third clause of the same resolution: ”... 

the  resistance of the counter-revolutionary  groups  of
the  propertied classes is growing." This is an
important statement. It would have been perfectly correct if
it had said: the bourgeoisie, or capitalists, and landowners
(instead

    

 of the "propertied classes", which include the
well-to-do section of the petty bourgeoisie). 

Unquestionably, the resistance of the bourgeoisie is growing. 

But then it is the bourgeoisie that control the majority in the
      Provisional Government with whom the Socialist- Revolutionary
      and the Menshevik leaders have united, not only in general
      political terms, but also organisationally, in one institution,
      the Ministry! 

This is the pivot of the contradictory stand taken by the
      leaders of the Congress, this is the fundamental source of the
      instability of their entire policy. They are allied with the
      bourgeoisie via the government, where they are controlled by the
      bourgeois Ministers forming the majority. At the same time, they
      are 

forced
      to admit that "the resistance of the counter-revolutionary
      groups of the propertied classes is growing"’

It is obvious that, under the circumstances, the party of the
      revolutionary proletariat can accept “unity” with the
      “revolutionary” democrats (revolutionary in word but not deed)
      only up to a certain point. We are for unity with them as long
      as they fight against the counter-revolution. We are against
      unity with them as long as they ally themselves with the
      counter-revolution. 

The "growing resistance" of the counter-revolutionary
      bourgeoisie is an urgent problem posed by reality. To evade this
      main and fundamental issue through non-committal phrases about
      "the unity and co-ordinated actions of the revolutionary
      democrats", thereby glossing over the unity or co-ordination
      between a section of the revolutionary democrats and the
      counter-revolution, would be illogical and foolish. 

Hence, all the arguments in the Congress resolution condemning
      our demonstration as “clandestine” and maintaining that mass
      actions and demonstrations are permissible only with the
      knowledge or consent of the Soviets, fall to the ground as a
      matter of principle. These arguments are of no consequence at
      all. The workers’ party will never accept them, as we have
      already said in our statement to the All-Russia Congress. For
      every demonstration is 

merely
      a means of agitation as long as it is peaceful, and you can
      neither ban agitation not impose uniformity on it. 
 

On the formal side, the resolution is even weaker. To ban or
      decree you must be vested with state power. First achieve that,
      you gentlemen who now lead the Congress—we are in favour of
      it, although you are our opponents—and then you will have
      the right to ban or decree. At the moment you do not wield state
      power, at the moment you allow your selves to be swayed by the
      ten bourgeois Ministers—you are caught in the meshes of
      your own weakness and indecision. 

Phrases like a "clearly expressed will", and so on, will not
      do. A will, if it is the will of the state, must be expressed in
      the form of a  law established by the state.
      Otherwise the word “will” is an empty sound. The moment you
      thought of  law , gentlemen, you would have been
      certain to recall that the Constitution of a free republic 
      cannot ban peaceful demonstrations or any mass actions by
      any party or group. 

A contradictory stand has bred very strange revolutionary
      ideas—ideas as to the struggle against the
      counter-revolution, ideas about the state (Constitution), and
      ideas of law in general. With the furious abuse against our
      Party refuted, nothing is left, nothing whatsoever! 

Despite the furious abuse against our proposed demonstration,
      the demonstration is to be held a week later. 

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Reference is to the statement which the Central Committee of the
R.S.D.L.P.(B.) and the Bureau of the Bolshevik group at the
First All-Russia Congress of Soviets made regarding the ban on
the peaceful demonstration appointed by the Bolshevik Party for
June 10 (23), 1917. The statement exposed the provocative conduct
of the Menshevik and S.R. loaders of the Congress of Soviets, who
banned the demonstration, and the counter-revolutionary policies
of the Provisional Government. It warned that the revolution was
in danger, and called oil the working class to be staunch and
vigilant.

The statement was road at the joint meeting of the Congress
Steering Committee, the Executive Committee of the Petrograd
Soviet, the Executive Committee of the Congress of Peasants’
Deputies, and the bureaus of all Congress parties on June 11 (24).
The Bolsheviks had wanted the statement to be read at the Congress
sitting on June 12 (25), but the chairman of the meeting denied
the Bolsheviks the floor. The statement was therefore handed to the
Congress Steering Committee. The same sitting passed a resolution
condemning the Bolshevik Party despite the fact that the
Bolsheviks had called off the demonstration.









<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## The Ukraine









Lenin: The Ukraine







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Ukraine




Published:

      First published in Pravda No. 82, June 28 (15), 1917.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 91-92.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The new, coalition Provisional Government’s policy failure is
      becoming more and more obvious. The Universal Act on the
      organisation of the Ukraine, issued by the Ukrainian Central
      Rada[1]
      and adopted on June 11, 1917, by the
      All-Ukraine Army Congress, plainly exposes that policy and
      furnishes documentary proof of its failure.
    


      “Without seceding from Russia, without breaking away from
      the Russian State," reads the Act, “let the Ukrainian
      people have the right to shape their own life on their own
      soil.... All laws by which order is to be established here in
      the Ukraine shall be passed solely by this Ukrainian
      Assembly. And laws establishing order throughout the Russian
      State
      must be passed by the All-Russia Parliament.”
    


These are perfectly clear words. They state very specifically
      that the Ukrainian people do not wish to secede from Russia at
      present. They demand autonomy without denying the need for the
      supreme authority of the “All-Russia Parliament”. No
      democrat, let alone a socialist, will venture
      to deny the complete legitimacy of the Ukraine’s demands. And
      no democrat can deny the Ukraine’s right to freely
      secede from Russia. Only unqualified recognition of this right
      makes it possible to advocate a free union of the Ukrainians and
      the Great Russians, a voluntary association of the two
      peoples in one state. Only unqualified recognition of this right
      can actually break completely and irrevocably with the accursed
      tsarist past, when everything was done to bring about a
      mutual estrangement of the two peoples so close to each
      other in language, territory, character and history. Accursed
      tsarism made the Great Russians executioners of the Ukrainian
      people, and fomented in them a hatred for

    

      those who even forbade Ukrainian children to speak and study in
      their native tongue.
    

Russia’s revolutionary democrats, if they want to be truly
      revolutionary and truly democratic, must break with that past,
      must regain for themselves, for the workers and peasants of
      Russia, the brotherly trust of the Ukrainian workers and
      peasants. This cannot be done without full recognition of the
      Ukraine’s rights, including the right to free
      secession.
    

We do not favour the existence of small states. We stand for the
      closest union of the workers of the world against “their
      own” capitalists and those of all other countries. But
      for this union to be voluntary, the Russian worker, who does not
      for a moment trust The Russian or the Ukrainian bourgeoisie in
      anything, now stands for the right of the Ukrainians to secede,
      without imposing his friendship upon them, but
      striving to win their friendship by treating them as an
      equal, as an ally and brother in the struggle for socialism.
    
 *     *  * 

Rech, the paper of the embittered bourgeois counter
      revolutionaries, who are half demented with rage, savagely
      attacks the Ukrainians for their “unauthorised”
      decision. “That act by the Ukrainians," it says, “is
      a downright crime under the law, and calls for the immediate
      application of severe legitimate punitive measures." There is
      nothing to add to this attack by the savage bourgeois
      counter-revolutionaries. Down with the counter-revolutionary
      bourgeoisie! Long live the free union of free peasants and
      workers of a free Ukraine with the workers and peasants of
      revolutionary Russia!
    

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
The Ukrainian Central Rada (Council) was a counter-revolutionary
bourgeois nationalist organisation founded in April 1917 at the
All-Ukraine National Congress in Kiev by a bloc of Ukrainian
bourgeois and petty-bourgeois nationalist parties and groups.
M. S. Grushevsky, an ideologue of the Ukrainian bourgeoisie, was
its chairman and V. K. Vinnichenko its vice-chairman. Among
its members were Petlyura, Yefremov, Antonovich and other
nationalists. Socially, the Rada relied for support on the urban
and rural bourgeoisie, the kulaks, and the petty-bourgeois
nationalist intellectuals. It tried to consolidate the power of the Ukrainian
bourgeoisie and landowners and to establish a Ukrainian bourgeois
state, taking advantage of the national liberation movement in the
Ukraine. Under the guise of lighting for national independence, it
strove to win the support of the Ukrainian people, divert thorn from
the all-Russia revolutionary movement, bring thorn under the
sway of the Ukrainian bourgeoisie, and prevent the victory of the
socialist revolution in the Ukraine. The Rada supported the
Provisional Government despite differences over the issue of granting
autonomy to the Ukraine.

Following the victory of the October Socialist Revolution
the Rada declared itself the supreme organ of the “Ukrainian
People’s Republic” and campaigned openly against Soviet rule.

   

It was one of the principal centres of the counter-revolutionaries
of the whole of Russia.









<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## The Class Origins of Present-Day and “Future” Cavaignacs









Lenin: The Class Origins of Present-Day and ’Future’ Cavaignacs







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Class Origins of Present-Day and “Future” Cavaignacs




Published:

      First published in Pravda No. 83, June 29 (16), 1917.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 93-96.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

      “When a real Cavaignac comes, we shall fight in the same
      ranks with you," we were told in No. 80 of Rabochaya
      Gazeta, organ of the very same Menshevik party whose
      member,
      Minister Tsereteli, in his notorious speech, went to such
      lengths as to threaten to disarm the Petrograd workers.
    

The above-quoted statement clearly brings out the fundamental
      errors of Russia’s two ruling parties, the Mensheviks and
      Socialist-Revolutionaries, and therefore deserves attention. The
      ministerial organ’s arguments mean that you are looking for
      Cavaignacs at the wrong time and in the wrong place.
    

Remember the class role played by Cavaignac. In February 1848
      the French monarchy was overthrown. The bourgeois republicans
      came to power. Like our Cadets, they wanted “order”,
      by which they meant the restoration and strengthening of
      monarchic instruments for oppressing the masses:

      the police, the standing army and the privileged
      bureaucracy. Like our Cadets, they wanted to put an end to the
      revolution, for they hated the revolutionary workers with their
      “social” (i. e., socialist) aspirations, at that
      time very hazy. Like our Cadets, they were implacably hostile to
      the policy of extending the French Revolution to the rest of
      Europe, the policy of transforming it into a world proletarian
      revolution. Like our Cadets, they skilfully used the
      petty-bourgeois “socialism” of Louis Blanc by making
      him a Minister and so transforming him from leader of the
      socialist workers, which he had wanted to be, into an appendage,
      a hanger-on, of the bourgeoisie.
    

These were the class interests, the position and policy of the
      ruling class.
    
 

The petty bourgeoisie, vacillating, frightened by the red
      spectre, and falling for the outcries against the
      “anarchists”, were another basic social
      force. Dreamily and bombastically “socialist” in
      their aspirations, and readily calling themselves
      “socialist democrats” (even this term is now taken
      up by the Socialist-Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks!), the
      petty bourgeoisie were afraid to entrust themselves to the
      leadership of the revolutionary proletariat, and did not realise
      that fear condemned them to entrusting themselves to the
      bourgeoisie. For there can be no “middle”
      course in a society rent by bitter class struggle between the
      bourgeoisie and the proletariat, particularly when this
      struggle is inevitably aggravated by a revolution. And the whole
      essence of the class position and aspirations of the petty
      bourgeoisie is that they want the impossible, that they aspire
      to
      the impossible, i. e., to a “middle course”.
  

The third decisive class force was the proletariat, which
      aspired not to “reconcile itself” with the
      bourgeoisie, but to defeat them, to fearlessly promote the
      revolution, doing so, moreover, on an international scale.
    

That was the objective historical soil which brought
      forth Cavaignac. The vacillation of the petty bourgeoisie
      “debarred” them from an active role, and the French
      Cadet, General Cavaignac, taking advantage of the petty
      bourgeoisie’s fear of entrusting themselves to the proletariat,
      decided to disarm the Paris workers and shoot them down
      en masse.
    

The revolution ended in that historic shooting. The petty
      bourgeoisie, while numerically superior, had been and remained
      the politically impotent tail of the bourgeoisie, and three
      years later France saw the restoration of a particularly vile
      form of Caesarist monarchy.
    

Tsereteli’s historic speech on June 11, clearly inspired by the
      Cadet Cavaignacs (perhaps directly inspired by the bourgeois
      Ministers, or perhaps indirectly prompted by the bourgeois press
      and bourgeois public opinion—it does not matter which),
      was remarkable and historic in that Tsereteli let out,
      with inimitable naïveté, the “secret
      malady” of the
      entire petty bourgeoisie, both Socialist-Revolutionary and
      Menshevik. This ’secret malady” consists, first, in a
      complete inability to pursue an independent policy; secondly, in
      the fear to entrust themselves to the revolutionary

    

proletariat
      and wholeheartedly support the independent policy of
      the latter; thirdly, in a drift—inevitably following
      from this—towards submitting to the Cadets or to the
      bourgeoisie in general (i.e., submitting to the
      Cavaignacs).
    

This is the heart of the matter. Tsereteli, Chernov and even
      Kerensky are not destined as individuals to play the role of
      Cavaignacs. There will be other people to do that, people who at
      the right moment will tell the Russian Louis Blancs:

      "Step aside." But the Tseretelis and Chernovs are leaders
      pursuing a petty-bourgeois policy that makes the appearance of
      Cavaignacs possible and necessary.
    

      “When a real Cavaignac comes, we shall be with you"—an excellent promise, a splendid intention! Only, it is a pity
      that it reveals a misunderstanding of the class struggle,
      typical of the sentimental or timid petty bourgeoisie. For a
      Cavaignac is not an accident, his “advent” is not an
      isolated development. A Cavaignac represents a class (the
      counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie) and carries out the policies
      of
      that class. And it is that class and those policies that you
      Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik gentlemen support
      today. It is to that class and its policies that
      you, who at the moment admittedly command a majority in
      the country, give predominance in the government,
      i. e., an excellent basis on which to work.
    

Indeed, the All-Russia Peasant Congress was almost entirely
      dominated by the Socialist-Revolutionaries. At the All-Russia
      Congress of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies, the
      Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik bloc had a vast
      majority. The same is true of the elections to the Petrograd
      district councils. The fact is there: the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks are the ruling party
      now. And this ruling
      party is voluntarily ceding power (the majority in the
      government) to the party of the Cavaignacs!!
    

Wherever there’s a swamp there’s sure to be the devil. Once
      there is a shaky, vacillating petty bourgeoisie dreading the
      revolution’s progress, the Cavaignacs are sure to appear.
    

In Russia there are many things now that make our revolution
      different from the French Revolution of ’1848: the imperialist
      war, the proximity  of more advanced countries (and not of more
      backward ones, as was the case of France at the time), an
      agrarian and a national movement. But all

    

      this may modify only the form in which the Cavaignacs come
      forward, the moment, the external causes, etc. It cannot change
      the essence of the matter, for the essence lies in the class
      relationships.
    

In words, Louis Blanc, too, was as far removed from Cavaignac as
      heaven is from earth. Louis Blanc, too, made countless promises
      “to fight in the same ranks" as the revolutionary workers
      against the bourgeois counter revolutionaries. Nevertheless, no
      Marxist historian, no socialist, would venture to doubt that it
      was the weakness, the instability, the credulity of the Louis
      Blancs with regard to the bourgeoisie that brought forth
      Cavaignac and assured his success.
    

The Russian Cavaignacs are inevitable products of the
      counter-revolutionary character of the Russian bourgeoisie led
      by the Cadets and of the instability, timidity and vacillation
      of the petty-bourgeois parties of the Socialist-Revolutionaries
      and the Mensheviks. Whether the Russian Cavaignacs will win or
      lose the battle depends solely on the staunchness, vigilance,
      and strength of Russia’s revolutionary workers.
    

 
Notes
 
 







<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## How to Fight Counter-Revolution









Lenin: How to Fight Counter-Revolution







V. I.  

      Lenin
How to Fight Counter-Revolution




Published:

      First published in Pravda No. 84, June 30 (17), 1917.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 97-98.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Only a few days ago, Minister Tsereteli declared in his
      “historic” speech that there was no
      counter-revolution. Today the ministerial Rabochaya
      Gazeta strikes an entirely different note in the article
      “Dangerous Symptoms”.
    

      “There are clear indications that a counter-revolution
      is afoot .”
    

Thanks for finally admitting the fact at least.
    

But the ministerial organ goes on to say: "We do not know
      where it [the counter-revolution] has its headquarters, nor to
      what extent it is organised.”
    

Is that so? You don’t know where the counter-revolution has its
      headquarters! Permit us to help you out of your ignorance. The
      counter-revolution which is afoot has its head quarters in the
      Provisional Government, in the very same coalition Ministry in
      which you gentlemen have six of your colleagues! The
      counter-revolution has its headquarters within the walls of the
      conference hall of the Fourth Duma, where Milyukov, Rodzyanko,
      Shulgin, Guchkov, A. Shingaryov, Manuilov and Co. rule, for the
      Cadets in the coalition Ministry are the right hand of Milyukov
      and Co. The staff of the counter-revolution is recruited from
      among the reactionary generals. It includes certain retired
      high-ranking officers.
    

If you want to do more than merely complain about the
      counter-revolution, if you want to fight it, you must join us in
      saying: Down with the ten capitalist Ministers!
    

Rabochaya Gazeta later points out that the
      counter-revolution’s chief instrument is the press, which is
      fomenting
      anti-semitism, inciting the masses against the Jews. That is
      correct. But what is the conclusion? You are a ministerial

    

      party, gentlemen, aren’t you? What have you done to curb the
      infamous counter-revolutionary press? Do you think you can,
      while calling yourselves “revolutionary democrats”,
      refuse to take revolutionary measures against the unbridled,
      blatantly counter-revolutionary press? And then, why don’t you
      start a government organ that would publish advertisements and
      deprive the infamous counter-revolutionary press of its chief
      source of income and hence of its main chance to deceive the
      people? What evidence is there, indeed, that thou sands upon
      thousands of people must now be kept away from productive labour
      in order to publish Novoye
      Vremya, Malenkaya
Gazeta,[1]
Russkaya
Volya[2]
      and other reptiles?
    

What have you done to fight the counter-revolutionary press
      which is doing all it can to bait our Party? Nothing! You
      yourselves have supplied material for that baiting. You have
      been busy fighting the danger on the Left.
    

You are reaping what you have sown, gentlemen.
    

So it was, so it will be—as long as you continue to
      vacillate between the bourgeoisie and the revolutionary
      proletariat.
    

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Malenkaya Gazeta (The Little Newspaper)—a yellow reactionary
newspaper published in Petrograd from September 1914 to July
1917 by A. A. Suvorin, Jr. From May 1917 on, it appeared under
the subtitle of “An Extra-Party Socialist Newspaper”, speculating
on the people’s sympathy for socialism. After the February
bourgeois-democratic revolution of 1917 it opposed the Bolshevik
Party and conducted a vicious slander campaign against Lenin.





[2]
Russkaya Volya (Russia’s Will)—a bourgeois daily newspaper
founded by A. D. Protopopov, the tsarist Minister of the Interior,
and financed by the big banks. It was published in Petrograd from
December 1916. After the February revolution it carried on a smear
campaign against the Bolsheviks. It was closed down by the
Military Revolutionary Committee on October 25 (November 7), 1917.









<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## The Ukraine and the Defeat of the Ruling Parties of Russia









Lenin: The Ukraine and the Defeat of the Ruling Parties of Russia







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Ukraine and the Defeat of the Ruling Parties of Russia




Published:

      First published in Pravda No. 84, June 30 (17), 1917.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 99-102.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The ruling parties of Russia, i. e., the Cadets, who have a
      majority in the government and the omnipotence of
      capital in the economy, and the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks, who now have an
      obvious majority in the country (but who are powerless in the
      government and in the country’s capitalist economy), have
      all suffered an obvious defeat over the Ukrainian
      issue, and what is more, a nation-wide defeat over an issue of
      vast importance.
    

The Socialist-Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks put up with the
      fact that the Provisional Government of the Cadets, i. e., of
      the counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie, had not done its
      elementary democratic duty, had not declared itself
      in favour of the Ukraine’s autonomy and of her right to
      freely secede. According to Minister Chernov’s report in today’s
      Dyelo Naroda, the Ukrainians demanded far less than
      that. They only wanted the Provisional Government “to
      declare by a special act that it is not opposed to the
      Ukrainian people’s right to autonomy”. This is a most
      modest and legitimate demand. The other two demands are just as
      modest: (1) The Ukraine should through her own people elect one
      representative to the central Russian Government. The modesty
      of this demand can be seen from the fact that in 1897 the Great
      Russians in Russia were estimated at 43 per cent, and the
      Ukrainians at 17 percent of the population. In other words, the
      Ukrainians could have insisted on having not one but six
      Ministers out of the sixteen!! (2) In the Ukraine

    

there should
      be “one representative of the central Russian Government
      elected by the local population”. What could be more
      legitimate than this? By what right does a democrat make free to
      depart from the principle, proved in theory and confirmed by the
      experience of democratic revolutions, that “no officials
      for the local population should be appointed from above”??
    

The Provisional Government’s rejection of these very modest and
      legitimate demands was an instance of utter shamelessness, of
      savage impertinence, on the part of the counter-revolutionaries,
      and a true manifestation of the policy of
      Derzhimorda. [1]
      The
      Socialist-Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks made a mockery of
      their own party programmes by tolerating that in the government,
      and are now defending it in their papers! I To what a disgraceful
      level the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks have fallen!
      How pitiful the subterfuges of their organs, Dyelo Naroda
      and Rabochaya Gazeta, are today!
    

Chaos, confusion, “Leninism over the national
      question”, anarchy—these are a wild landowner’s
      outcries[2]
      that the two newspapers are hurling at the
      Ukrainians.
    

Let us ignore their outcries. What is the substance of their
      argument?
    

Their only argument is that until a Constituent Assembly is
      convened it will be impossible to settle in a
      “regular” manner the issue of the Ukraine’s
      boundaries, her freedom, her right to collect taxes, and so on
      and so forth. They insist on a “guarantee of
      regularity”—this expression used in Rabochaya
      Gazeta’s editorial gives the whole gist of their
      argument.
    

But that is an obvious lie, gentlemen, it is a manifestly
      shameless thing on the part of the counter-revolutionaries. For
      to advance such an argument means actually helping real traitors
      to the revolution!!
    

      “Guarantees of regularity” ... stop and think for a
      second. Nowhere in Russia, neither in the central
      government nor in any local department (except in a very
      small institution, the Petrograd district councils), is there
      any guarantee of regularity. In fact, there is admittedly
      no regularity. There is admittedly no
      “regularity” in the existence of the Duma or of the
      Council of
      State.[3]

 

There is admittedly no “regularity” in the
      composition of the Provisional Government, for its composition
      is a mockery of the will and intelligence of the majority of
      Russia’s workers, soldiers and peasants. There is admittedly no
      “regularity” in the composition of the Soviets (of
      Workers’, Peasants’ and Soldiers’ Deputies), for these
      institutions have not yet worked out any guarantees of really
      complete and strictly democratic elections. Still, this does not
      prevent either our Party or the mass of the workers and
      peas ants from regarding the Soviets as the best
      exponent of the will of the majority of the population so
      far. Nowhere in Russia are there, can there be, or have
      there ever been at a revolutionary time like the present
      any “guarantees of regularity”. Everyone realises
      that, no one asks anything different, everyone is aware that it
      is inevitable.
    

It is only for the Ukraine that “we” demand
      “guarantees of regularity”!
    

You are paralysed with fear, Socialist-Revolutionary and
      Menshevik gentlemen, having yielded to the counter revolutionary
      howls of the Great-Russian landowners and capitalists led by
      Rodzyanko, Milyukov, Lvov, Tereshchenko, Nekrasov, Shingaryov
      and Co. You are already the perfect picture of people overawed
      by the rising Cavaignacs (and those “lying
      low?”).
    

There is absolutely nothing terrible, not the shadow of anarchy
      or chaos, either in the resolutions or in the demands of the
      Ukrainians. Accede to their most legitimate and most modest
      demands and authority will be just as effective in the Ukraine
      as it is everywhere in Russia, where the Soviets (which have
      no “guarantees of regularity”!!) are the
      sole authority. You and all the peoples of Russia will
      be given a “guarantee of regularity” by the future
      Diets, by the future Constituent Assembly, not only in regard to
      the Ukrainian issue, but in regard to all issues. For
      at this moment there is admittedly no “regularity”
      in Russia about any issue. Accede to the
      Ukrainians—common sense demands it. For, unless you do,
      things will be worse. Force will not check the Ukrainians. It
      will only embitter them. Accede to the Ukrainians, and you will
      open the way to mutual confidence and brotherly union between
      the two nations on the basis of equality!
    
 

The Socialist-Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks, who constitute
      ruling parties, have been defeated over the Ukrainian issue by
      yielding to the counter-revolutionary Cadet Cavaignacs.
    

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Derzhimorda—a policeman in Gogol’s Inspector-General, a boorish,
insolent oppressor, a petty tyrant.





[2]
Wild Landowner—a character in M. Saltykov-Shchedrin’s fairy-tale
of the same name.





[3]
The Council of State—one of the supreme organs of state power in
tsarist Russia; was established in 1810, according to M. M.
Speransky’s plan, as a legislative-advisory body whose members were
appointed and confirmed by the tsar. A reactionary institution,
it voted down even moderate Bills approved by the Duma.









<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## Prosecute Rodzyanko and Junkovsky for Concealing an Agent Provocateur!









Lenin: Prosecute Rodzyanko and Junkovsky for Concealing an Agent Provocateur!







V. I.  

      Lenin
Prosecute Rodzyanko and Junkovsky for Concealing an Agent Provocateur!




Published:

      First published in Pravda No. 84, June 30 (17), 1917.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      page 103.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The findings of the committee of inquiry into the case of the
      agent provocateur Malinovsky indicate that the following fact
      has been established:
    

Both Junkovsky and Rodzyanko knew, not later than May
      7, 1914, that Malinovsky was an agent
      provocateur.[1]


Neither of the two leaders warned the
      political parties in the Duma, primarily the Bolsheviks, of the
      agent provocateur operating in their midst!!
    

Isn’t that a crime?
    

How can Junkovsky and Rodzyanko be tolerated after that
      among honest citizens?
    

Let all political parties think it over, and let them voice
      their opinion!
    

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Junkovsky, tsarist Deputy Minister of the Interior, was informed
in 1914 that Malinovsky, Deputy to the Fourth Duma, was an
agent provocateur. He conveyed the information to Rodzyanko,
Chairman of the Fourth Duma, who pledged his “honour” that he
would not divulge the secret. The two decided to remove
Malinovsky from the Duma, doing it, however, in such a way as “not
to expose either the Duma or the Ministers to scandal”. Malinovsky
resigned as Deputy and left Russia with the aid of the police. He
was exposed in 1917, on the strength of evidence derived from the
Police Department archives. In 1918 he was tried by decision
of the Soviet Government and was shot under the sentence of
the Revolutionary Tribunal.









<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## Strange Misquotations









Lenin: Strange Misquotations







V. I.  

      Lenin
Strange Misquotations




Published:

      First published in Pravda No. 84, June 30 (17), 1917.

      Signed: N. Lenin.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      page 104.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The newspapers
      
Dyen[2]
      and Novaya
      Zhizn, which yesterday published a more detailed report of
      the findings of the committee of
      inquiry,[3]
      have
      quoted a passage from my testimony that is missing in
      
Birzhevka,[4]
      which in certain respects has
      published an even more complete report of the findings.
    

Both of the first-mentioned papers printed a quotation from my
      testimony that begins with the words: “I do not believe
      there are any agents provocateurs involved here.” There are no
      dots before the quotation, and the perfectly absurd inference is
      that now “I do not believe”.
    

Only an extremely strange misquotation by both papers could
      result in such nonsense. What I did testify was this:

      “I personally have often had to (before Malinovsky
      was found to be an agent provocateur) reason as follows: after
      the
      Azef[5]
      case nothing can surprise me. But I do not believe
      there are any agents provocateurs involved here, not only
      because I see neither proof nor evidence, but also
      because” (and so on, as quoted by Dyen: had
      Malinovsky been an agent provocateur, the secret police would
      not have gained as much as they had expected, for we have been
      doing everything through two legal posts, etc.).
    

And so, my testimony concerned the past. Dyen and
      Novaya
Zhizn[1]

      have by a strange misquotation attributed
      to me an absurdity implying that I spoke of the present.
    

The result is the direct opposite of what I actually said.
    

 
Notes
 

[1]
Both newspapers contain another misprint: “The Bolsheviks will
not organise an armed rising.” The word not should be taken out.
—Lenin
 



[2]
Dyen (The Day)—a liberal bourgeois daily newspaper published
in St. Petersburg from 1912. Among its contributors were
Menshevik liquidators, who took it over completely after the February
revolution. Dyen was closed down by the Military Revolutionary
Committee under the Petrograd Soviet on October 26 (November 8),
1917.





[3]
On June 16 (29), 1917, Dyen, Novaya Zhizn and Birzheviye
Vedomosti published the findings of the extraordinary committee of
inquiry appointed by the Provisional Government to investigate
the crimes of the tsarist regime. The committee published evidence
against the agent provocateur Malinovsky.





[4]
Birzhevka, short for Birzheviye Vedomosti (Stock-Exchange
Recorder)—a bourgeois newspaper founded in 1880. It was published
in St. Petersburg, first three and then four times a week, and in
the end daily. From 1902 onwards it was brought out twice a day.
Time-serving, venality and lack of principle made its title a byword.
After the February revolution the paper conducted riot-raising
propaganda against the Bolshevik Party and Lenin. It was closed
down by the Military Revolutionary Committee under the
Petrograd Soviet at the end of October 1917.





[5]
Reference is to the treachery of Azef, member of the S.R. Party’s
Central Committee, who for a number of years was a secret police
agent. In 1908 he was exposed, and fled from the country.









<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## Ruling and Responsible Parties









Lenin: Ruling and Responsible Parties







V. I.  

      Lenin
Ruling and Responsible Parties




Published:

      First published in Pravda No. 85, July 1 (June 18), 1917.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 105-107.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The formation of a united or federal Central Committee by the
      Congress of Soviets and the Executive Committee of the Peasant
      Congress is due to take place in the next few days. This
      question is up for discussion and will be settled in a matter of
      days. The petty squabble between the Socialist-Revolutionaries
      and the Mensheviks over the forms in which the Central Committee
      should be constituted deserves no attention whatsoever, for this
      fight between two parties, both of which advocate defencism
      (i.e., support for the predatory war) and ministerialism, i.e.,
      support for the government of the counter-revolutionary
      bourgeoisie, is much too petty.
    

The formation of a Central Committee is of vast importance as
      the ultimate feature showing the distinction between the latest
      political situation and previous ones. Typical of the new
      political situation is the final establishment that most people
      today follow the Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik parties,
      which, as we know, form a bloc.
    

The All-Russia Peasant Congress and the All-Russia Congress of
      Soviets of Soldiers’ and Workers’ Deputies, now in session, have
      finally established, after the elections to the Petrograd
      district councils, that the Socialist-Revolutionary and
      Menshevik bloc is the ruling party in Russia.
    

That bloc admittedly has a majority now among the people. There
      can be no doubt that it will also have a majority in the united
      or federal Central Committee of Soviets (or the Council of
      Soviets—no decision seems to have been taken on the name
      so far) now being formed.
    

The Socialist-Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks are ruling and
      responsible parties.
    

This is the fundamental fact about the new political
      situation. Prior to the elections in Petrograd, and prior to

    

the
      Peasant Congress and the Congress of Soviets, the Mensheviks and
      the Socialist-Revolutionaries were in a position to take refuge,
      at least with a hint of plausibility, in the argument that the
      will of the majority was unknown, that the Cadets were probably
      likewise close to the majority, and so on and so forth. But
      these subterfuges cannot be used any longer. The fog which some
      people artificially worked up has dispersed.
    

You have a majority, gentlemen of the Socialist-Revolutionary
      and Menshevik parties, you are the ruling parties, or rather the
      ruling bloc. You are responsible.
    

In propaganda and agitation in general, and in the Constituent
      Assembly election campaign in particular, our chief task now is
      to explain to the mass of the workers and peasants, as
      carefully, efficiently and clearly as possible, that it is the
      Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik parties, the ruling
      parties, that are responsible for our country’s policy
      today. The situation was different before, because they had not
      yet revealed their majority as parties, and readily posed as an
      “opposition” to the ruling Cadets. But now it is
      beyond doubt that the Socialist-Revolutionaries and the
      Mensheviks command a majority.
    

They are responsible for the entire policy of the country.
    

They are now responsible for the results of the six weeks’ rule
      of the “coalition Ministry”.
    

They are responsible for the fact that most of the cabinet
      Ministers represent the party of the counter-revolutionary
      bourgeoisie. Everyone knows, sees and feels that these Ministers
      could not have kept their posts for a single day with out
      the consent of the Congress of Soviets and the All-Russia
      Peasant Congress.
    

The Socialist-Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks are responsible
      for the fundamental policy contradictions that are making
      themselves felt more and more sharply and pain fully, and are
      imposing themselves on the people more and more obviously.
    

In words, they “condemn” the predatory war, and
      “demand” peace without annexations. In reality they
      continue the predatory war in alliance with notorious predators,
      the

      imperialists of Britain, France, etc. In reality they are
      preparing for an offensive at the instance of these allies, in

    

      keeping with the secret predatory treaties which Nicholas II
      concluded with a view to enriching the Russian landowners and
      capitalists.
    

In reality their policy is one of annexation, i.e., the forcible
      incorporation of nations (Albania, Greece) in one country
      or one group of imperialists, a policy of annexation also
      inside “revolutionary” Russia (which is,
      however, following a counter-revolutionary course), and
      treating Finland and the Ukraine as if they were annexed
      nations and not really free, really equal nations having an
      indisputable right both to autonomy and to secession.
    

In words, “the resistance of the capitalists has
      apparently been broken”, as Peshekhonov, a Minister of the
      bloc, boasted. In reality, even the resolution of the Congress
      of Soviets had to admit that “the resistance of the
      propertied classes [i.e., the counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie,
      who have 10 capitalist Ministers out of the 16 and are virtually
      all-powerful in the country’s economy] is mounting”.
    

In words, they promise to establish control and regulation and
      to take away 100 per cent of the profits (Minister Skobelev). In
      reality, nothing of the sort has happened in six
      weeks! Positively not a single effective and important step has
      been taken against the capitalists who resort to lock outs,
      against the profiteering marauders, the knights who capitalise
      on war contracts, or the big bankers!!
    

Don’t let us go on listing these crying contradictions. We have
      indicated enough.
    

Economic dislocation is getting worse. A crisis is
      imminent. Disaster is drawing irresistibly near. The Mensheviks
      and Socialist-Revolutionaries reason with the capitalists,
      threatening to take away 100 per cent. They boast that the
      capitalists’ resistance is broken, they draft resolutions and
      make
      plans, make plans and draft resolutions.
    

Disaster is on the way. The entire responsibility for
      it will fall on the ruling Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik
      bloc.
    

 
Notes
 
 







<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## Another Commission









Lenin: Another Commission







V. I.  

      Lenin
Another Commission




Published:

      First published in Pravda No. 85, July 1 (June 18), 1917.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 108-109.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Economic disintegration has begun. The- bourgeoisie are
      attacking all along the line. Decisive measures must be taken.
    

What does the Provisional Government intend to do?
    

To save Russia, to combat economic disintegration, to normalise
      the economy, it has a project for a new organisation, a detailed
      plan for combating economic ruin.
    

The business of “organising the national economy and
      labour” is to be the concern of an Economic
      Council.
    

At last they are taking measures, passing from words to
      deeds. Excellent, they are long overdue!
    

But what is the composition of this Economic Council?
    

Who is going to fight economic ruin? Who is going to carry on
      the struggle against the criminal policy of the capitalists, the
      employers, the factory owners?
    

It turns out that the overwhelming majority of the Council will
      be capitalists. Isn’t that a mockery?!
    

Here is the composition of that worthy body:
    





The Council membership includes the Ministers of War and of
      Labour, and three members of the co-operatives.
    
 

It is clearly the capitalists who will take decisions.
    

Another body is to be set up that at best will benefit no
      one.
    

Further, there are to be, as usual, countless commissions,
      sub-commissions, committees, etc.
    

That is how they intend to combat economic disintegration.
    

A shark has been thrown into the water.
   

 
Notes
 
 







<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## The Eighteenth of June









Lenin: The Eighteenth of June







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Eighteenth of June




Published:

      First published in Pravda No. 86, July 3 (June 20), 1917.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 110-112.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

In one way or another, June 18 will go down as a turning-point
      in the history of the Russian revolution.
    

The mutual position of the classes, their correlation in the
      struggle against each other, their strength, particularly in
      comparison with the strength of the parties, were all revealed
      so distinctly, so strikingly, so impressively by last Sunday’s
      demonstration that, whatever the course and pace of further
      development, the gain in political awareness and clarity has
      been tremendous.
    

The demonstration in a few hours scattered to the winds, like a
      handful of dust, the empty talk about Bolshevik conspirators
      and showed with the utmost clarity that the vanguard of the
      working people of Russia, the industrial proletariat of the
      capital, and the overwhelming majority of the troops support
      slogans that our Party has always advocated.
    

The measured step of the battalions of workers and
      soldiers. Nearly half a million demonstrators. A concerted
      onslaught. Unity around the slogans, among which overwhelmingly
      predominated: “All power to the Soviets”,
      “Down with the ten capitalist Ministers”,
      “Neither a separate peace treaty with the Germans nor
      secret treaties with the Anglo-French capitalists”,
      etc. No one who saw the demonstration has any doubt left about
      the victory of these slogans among the organised vanguard of
      Russia’s workers and soldiers.
    

The demonstration of June 18 was a demonstration of the strength
      and policy of the revolutionary proletariat, which is showing
      the direction for the revolution and indicating the way out of
      the impasse. This is the tremendous historical significance of
      last Sunday’s demonstration,

    

and its essential difference from
      the demonstrations

      during the funeral of the victims of the revolution and on May
      Day. Then it was a universal tribute to the
      revolution’s first victory and to its heroes. The people looked
      back over the first stage of the road to freedom, which they had
      passed very rapidly and very successfully. May Day was a
      holiday of hopes and aspirations linked with the
      history of the world labour movement and with its ideal of peace
      and socialism.
    

Neither of the two demonstrations was intended to point the
      direction for the revolution’s further development, nor
      could it do so. Neither demonstration put before the people, or
      raised in the name of the people, specific, definite and urgent
      questions as to how and in what
      direction the revolution should proceed.
    

In this sense, June 18 was the first political demonstration of
      action, an explanation of how the various classes act,
      how they want to and will act, in order to further the
      revolution—an explanation not given in a book or
      newspaper,
      but on the streets, not through leaders, but through the people.
    

The bourgeoisie kept out of the way. They refused to participate
      in that peaceful demonstration of a dear majority of
      the people, in which there was freedom of party slogans, and the
      chief aim of which was to protest against counter
      revolution. That is natural. The bourgeoisie are the
      counter-revolution. They hide from the people. They organise
      real
      counter-revolutionary conspiracies against the people. The
      parties now ruling Russia, the Socialist-Revolutionaries and
      Mensheviks, clearly showed themselves on that historic day, June
      18, as waverers. Their slogans spoke of wavering, and it was
      obvious to all that the supporters of their slogans were in a
      minority. By their slogans and wavering they advised
      the people to remain where they were, to leave everything
      unchanged for the time being. And the people felt, and they
      themselves felt, that that was impossible.
    

Enough of wavering, said the vanguard of the proletariat, the
      vanguard of Russia’s workers and soldiers. Enough of
      wavering. The policy of trust in the capitalists, in
      their government, in their vain attempts at
      reform, in their war, in their policy of an
      offensive, is a hopeless policy. Its collapse is imminent. Its
      collapse is inevitable. And that

    

collapse will also be the
      collapse of the ruling parties, the Socialist-Revolutionaries
      and the Mensheviks. Economic disruption
      is coming nearer. There is no escaping it except by the
      revolutionary measures of the revolutionary class which has
      taken power.
    

Let the people break with the policy of trust in the
      capitalists. Let them put their trust in the revolutionary
      class—the proletariat. The source of power lies in it and only
      in it, It alone is the pledge that the interests of the
      majority will be served, the interests of the working
      and exploited people, who, though held down by war an  capital,
      are capable of defeating war and capital!
    

A crisis of unprecedented scale has descended upon Russia and
      the whole of humanity. The only way out is to put trust in the
      most organised and advanced contingent of the working and
      exploited people, and support its policy.
    

We do not know whether the people will grasp this lesson soon or
      how they will put it into effect. But we do know for certain
      that apart from this lesson there is no way out of the impasse,
      that possible waverings or brutalities on the part of the
      counter-revolutionaries will lead nowhere.
    

There is no way out unless the masses put complete confidence
      in their leader, the proletariat.
    

 
Notes
 
 







<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## The Revolution, the Offensive, and Our Party









Lenin: The Revolution, the Offensive, and Our Party







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Revolution, the Offensive, and Our Party




Published:

      First published in Pravda No. 87, July 4 (June 21), 1917.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 113-115.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

      “The Russian revolution has reached a
      turning-point," said Tsereteli informing the Congress of Soviets
      that the
      offensive[1]
      had begun. Yes, the whole course of the
      world war as well as the Russian revolution has reached a
      turning-point. After three months of vacillation the Russian
      Government has actually come to the decision demanded by the
      “Allied” governments.
    

The offensive has been declared in the name of peace. And It is
      also “in the name of peace” that the imperialists of
      the world send their troops into battle. Every time there is an
      offensive the generals in every belligerent country try to raise
      their troops’ morale by holding out the real hope of that
      particular offensive leading to early peace.
    

The Russian “socialist” Ministers have garnished
      this common imperialist method with very high-sounding phrases
      in which words about socialism, democracy, and revolution sound
      like rattles in the hands of a clever juggler. But no
      high-sounding phrases can conceal the fact that the
      revolutionary armies of Russia have been sent into battle in the
      name
      of the imperialist designs of Britain, France, Italy, Japan, and
      America. No arguments from Chernov, once a
      Zimmerwaldist[2]
      and
      now Lloyd George’s partner, can conceal the fact that while the
      Russian Army and the Russian proletariat do not really pursue
      any annexationist aims, this does not in the least change the
      imperialist, predatory nature of the struggle between the two
      world trusts.

    

Until the secret treaties binding Russia to the
      imperialists of other countries are revised, and as long as
      Ribot, Lloyd

      George and Sonnino, Russia’s allies, continue to talk about the
      annexationist aims of their foreign policy, the offensive of
      the Russian troops will continue to serve the imperialists.
    

Tsereteli and Chernov object, however, that they have repeatedly
      declared their renunciation of all annexations. So much the
      worse, we reply. That means your actions do not accord with your
      words, for your actions serve both Russian and foreign
      imperialism. And when you begin to co-operate actively with the
      imperialist “Allies” you render splendid service to
      the Russian counter-revolution. The joy of all the Black
      Hundreds and all counter-revolutionaries over the decisive turn
      in your policy is the best evidence of that. Yes, the Russian
      revolution has come to a turning-point. Through its
      “socialist” Ministers, the Russian Government has
      done something which the imperialist Ministers, Guchkov and
      Milyukov, could not do. It has put the Russian Army at the
      disposal of the general staffs and the diplomats who act in the
      name and on the basis of unabrogated secret treaties, in the
      name of designs frankly proclaimed by Ribot and Lloyd
      George. The government could only fulfil its task, however,
      because the army trusted and followed it. The army marched to
      death because it believed it was making sacrifices for freedom,
      the revolution and early peace.
    

But the army did so because it is only a part of the people, who
      at this stage of the revolution are following the
      Socialist-Revolutionary and the Menshevik parties. This general
      and
      basic fact, the trust of the majority in the petty-bourgeois
      policy of the Mensheviks and the Socialist-Revolutionaries
      which is dependent on the capitalists, determines our Party’s
      stand and conduct.
    

We shall keep up our efforts to expose government policy,
      resolutely warning the workers and soldiers, as in the past,
      against pinning their hopes on unco-ordinated and disorganised
      actions.
    

It is a question of a phase in the people’s revolution. The
      Tseretelis and Chernovs, having become dependent on imperialism,
      are putting into effect a phase of petty-bourgeois

    

illusions
      and petty-bourgeois phrases, which serve to disguise the same
      old cynical imperialism.
    

This phase must be brought to an end. Let us help to end it as
      speedily and as painlessly as possible. This will rid the people
      of the last petty-bourgeois illusions and bring about
      the transfer of power to the revolutionary class.
    

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
This refers to the offensive launched by the Provisional Government
in June 1917, at the instance of the Russian and Anglo-French
imperialists. Kerensky, the War Minister, ordered the offensive
on June 16 (29). On June 18 (July 1) the Russian troops took the
offensive on the South-Western Front. The operation was successful
at first and the Russians made headway, taking several thousand
prisoners. Later on fatigue, the troops’ incomprehension of the
purpose of the offensive, and inadequate technical preparation
resulted in the German troops effecting a break-through and forcing
the Russian troops into a disorderly retreat. The Russian Army
sustained a crushing defeat, losing about 60,000 men and officers
in ten days.

The miscarriage of the offensive defeated the entire policy of
the Provisional Government and the S.R. and Menshevik defencist
bloc backing it. The defeat at the front made for an increase in
Bolshevik influence on the workers and soldiers, who satisfied
themselves more and more that the Bolsheviks were right. The
news of the enormous casualties which the offensive had involved
angered the working people and hastened a now political crisis
in the country.





[2]
The Zimmerwaldists were members of the group formed at the first
conference of internationalists held in Zimmerwald from
September 5 to 8, 1915.

During the conference a struggle developed between the
revolutionary internationalists led by Lenin and the Kautskyite majority.
Lenin formed of the Left internationalists the Zimmerwald Left
group in which the Bolshevik Party was the only one to take
a correct and consistently internationalist stand against the war.
The conference adopted a manifesto describing the world war
as an imperialist war. It condemned the conduct of those “socialists”

   

who voted for war credits and were members of bourgeois cabinets.
It called on the workers of Europe to begin fighting against the
war, for peace without annexations and indemnities. The conference
also passed a resolution expressing sympathy with the war victims,
and elected the International Socialist Committee.









<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## In What Way Do You Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik Gentlemen Differ From Plekhanov?









Lenin: In What Way Do You Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik Gentlemen Differ From Plekhanov?







V. I.  

      Lenin
In What Way Do You Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik Gentlemen Differ From Plekhanov?




Published:

      First published in Pravda No. 87, July 4 (June 21), 1917.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      page 116.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Dyelo Naroda repeatedly called Yedinstvo
      social-imperialist. Rabochaya Gazeta officially
      condemned the election bloc with Yedinstvo (after
      elections had taken place to almost all the district councils).
    

Today, the offensive that has begun is clearing away the fog of
      empty phrases, showing the people the naked truth. Everyone sees
      that Plekhanov and the Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik
      leaders are at one over the serious and important issue
      of the current offensive.
    

It means, therefore, that you—Yedinstvo, Kerensky
      and Chernov, Tsereteli and Skobelev—are all
      “social-imperialists” (to use Dyelo
      Naroda’s expression).
    

 
Notes
 
 







<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## How Rodzyanko is Trying to Justify Himself









Lenin: How Rodzyanko is Trying to Justify Himself







V. I.  

      Lenin
How Rodzyanko is Trying to Justify Himself




Published:

      First published in Pravda No. 87 July 4 (June 21), 1917.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      page 117.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Russkaya Volya No. 143 has published an interview with
      Rodzyanko, who regards as “unfair” the charge (made
      by Pravda and Rabochaya Gazeta) that he
      sheltered Malinovsky. It appears that as early as April 22,
      1914, Junkovsky told Rodzyanko that Malinovsky was an agent
      provocateur but made Rodzyanko give his “word of
      honour” (!!!) that he would say nothing about it to
      anyone.
    

Incredible, but there it is.. Rodzyanko pledged his “word
      of honour” to a member of the secret police and told
      the Duma members nothing about the agent provocateur. And
      our Party and the whole of society, among whom the agent
      provocateur Malinovsky was still operating, continued to
      labour under a delusion—because Rodzyanko had given
      the secret police his “word of honour” that he would
      not betray the agent provocateur.
    

How can we tolerate that?
    

How can we fail to consider Rodzyanko a criminal?
    

 
Notes
 
 







<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## To What State Have the Socialist-Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks Brought the Revolution?









Lenin: To What State Have the Socialist-Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks Brought the Revolution?







V. I.  

      Lenin
To What State Have the Socialist-Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks Brought the Revolution?




Published:

      First published in Pravda No. 88, July 5 (June 22), 1917.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 118-120.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

They have brought it to a state of subjection to the
      imperialists.
    

The offensive is a renewal of the imperialist war. Nothing
      essential has changed in the relations between the two gigantic
      capitalist blocs waging war on one another. Even after the
      revolution of February 27, Russia remains under the complete
      sway of the capitalists, who are bound to Anglo- French
      imperialist capital by alliance and by the old, tsarist, secret
      treaties. Both ·the economics and politics of the
      continuing war are the same as before: the same old imperialist
      banking capital dominating economic life, and the same old
      secret treaties, the same old foreign policy of alliances of one
      group of imperialists against another.
    

The empty phrases of the Mensheviks and
      Socialist-Revolutionaries are still empty phrases, in practice
      only serving to
      adorn the resumption of the imperialist war, which quite
      naturally meets with enthusiastic howls of approval from all the
      counter-revolutionaries, the whole bourgeoisie, and Plekhanov,
      “who tails after the bourgeois press”, as the
      Menshevik Rabochaya Gazeta put it, which itself tails
      after the whole horde of social-chauvinists.
    

But we must not overlook the distinguishing features of this
      particular resumption of the imperialist war. The resumption
      came after three months of hesitation, during which time the
      mass of workers and peasants thousands of times expressed their
      condemnation of a war of conquest (while continuing in practice
      to support the government of the predatory Russian bourgeoisie
      bent on conquest).

    

      The masses hesitated, as though they were about to carry out
      at home the advice which the March 14 appeal to the
      peoples of the world gave to other peoples, namely,
      “Refuse to serve as tools of conquest and violence in the
      hands of the bankers!” But here at home, in
      “revolutionary-democratic” Russia, the masses have
      remained in effect an instrument of conquest and violence in
      “the hands of the bankers”.
    

A distinguishing feature of this situation is that it was
      created by the Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik par ties at
      a time when the people enjoyed a comparatively large measure of
      freedom of organisation. It is these par ties that have gained
      the majority at the moment: the All- Russia Congress of Soviets
      and the All-Russia Peasants’ Congress have undoubtedly proved
      this.
    

It is these parties that are at present responsible for Russia’s
      policy.
    

It is these parties that are responsible for the resumption of
      the imperialist war, for more hundreds of thousands of lives
      sacrificed virtually with the aim of enabling certain
      capitalists to “overcome” other capitalists, and for
      the further aggravation of the economic dislocation inevitably
      resulting from the offensive.
    

Here we had, in the purest form, the self-deception of the
      petty-bourgeois masses and the deception of them by the
      bourgeoisie with the aid of the Socialist-Revolutionaries and
      Mensheviks. These parties both claim to be “revolutionary
      democrats”. But in fact it was they who placed the
      people’s fate in the hands of the counter-revolutionary
      bourgeoisie, the Cadets; it was they who deserted the revolution
      to continue the imperialist war, who deserted democracy
      to make “concessions” to the Cadets on the issue of
      power (take, for instance, the “confirmation” from
      above of the election of authorities by the local population),
      on the land issue (the Mensheviks’ and
      Socialist-Revolutionaries’ renunciation of their own
      programme, namely, to
      support the revolutionary actions of the peasants,
      including confiscation of the landed estates), and on
      the national question (defence of the undemocratic attitude of
      the Cadets towards the Ukraine and Finland).
    

The petty-bourgeois masses cannot help vacillating between the
      bourgeoisie and the proletariat. This has been

    

      the case in all countries, especially between 1789 and 1871. And
      it is also the case in Russia. The Mensheviks and
      Socialist-Revolutionaries have induced the masses to
      submit to the policy of the counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie.
    

That is the heart of the matter. That is the meaning of the
      offensive. That is the peculiarity of the situation: it was not
      violence, but trust in the Socialist-Revolutionaries and
      Mensheviks that led the people astray.
    

Will it be for long?
    

No, not long. The masses will learn from their own
      experience. The sad experience of the new stage of the war (a
      stage
      already begun), of further ruin accentuated by the offensive,
      will inevitably lead to the political downfall of the
      Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik parties.
    

The task of the workers’ party is, first of all, to help the
      masses realise and take proper account of this experience, to
      prepare properly for this great downfall, which will show the
      masses their true leader—the organised urban proletariat.
    

 
Notes
 
 







<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## Can “Jacobinism” Frighten the Working Class?









Lenin: Can ’Jacobinism’ Frighten the Working Class?







V. I.  

      Lenin
Can “Jacobinism” Frighten the Working Class?




Published:

      First published in Pravda No. 90, July 7 (June 24), 1917.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 121-122.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The bourgeois and chauvinistic Dyen, an organ of
      “socialist thought”
      (don’t laugh!), returns in issue No. 91 to Rech’s
      really interesting editorial of June 18. Dyenhas
      completely failed to understand that
      editorial, in which a historian speaks out alongside an
      embittered counter-revolutionary
      bourgeois. Dyenreads into the editorial
      “the Cadets’
      intention—which has become a firm resolve—to with
      draw from the coalition government”.
    

That is nonsense. The Cadets threaten so as to frighten the
      Tseretelis and Chernovs. That is not serious.
    

What is serious and interesting is how the Rech
      editorial on June 18 posed the question of power from a
      historian’s standpoint.
    


      “Whereas,” he wrote, “with the previous government
      composition it was possible, at least to some extent, to direct
      the course of the Russian revolution, from now on it is
      apparently destined to develop in accordance with the
      spontaneous laws of all revolutions.... The inadvisability of
      the
      further existence of a government arrangement that has not
      justified itself is a question already being put not only by the
      Bolsheviks [note this: not only by the Bolsheviks!]
      ...
      and not only by the majority in the Soviet.... It is a question
      which the capitalist Ministers themselves must raise.”
    


The historian is correct in admitting that not only the
      Bolsheviks, but the entire interrelation of classes, the life of
      society as a whole, has brought to the fore the question of
      “the inadvisability of the further existence of a
      government arrangement that has not justified
      itself”. What we
      actually have is vacillation. The offensive is a possible road
      to victory for the imperialist bourgeoisie. Is there any other
      possible road?
    
 

The historian in Rech answers this question as follows:
    


“Once they have got ‘all power’ the Soviets will soon see that
      they have very little power. And they will have to make up for
      lack of power by resorting to the historically tested methods of
      the Young
      Turks[1]
      or the Jacobins... Will they, once the whole issue has again been
      raised, be willing to stoop to Jacobinism and terrorism, or will
      they make an attempt to wash their hands of it? This is the
      pressing question that will be answered in a few days.”
      


The historian is right. In a few days or not in a few days, that
      is the question that will soon be answered. Either the
      offensive, a turn to counter-revolution, a success (for how
      long?) for the cause of the imperialist bourgeoisie, “a
      washing of hands” by the Chernovs and Tseretelis,
      or “Jacobinism”.
    

Bourgeois historians see Jacobinism as a fall ("to
      stoop"). Proletarian historians see Jacobinism as one of the
      highest peaks in the emancipation struggle of an
      oppressed class. The Jacobins gave France the best models of a
      democratic revolution and of resistance to a coalition of
      monarchs against a republic. The Jacobins were not destined to
      win complete victory, chiefly because eighteenth-century France
      was surrounded on the continent by much too backward countries,
      and because France herself lacked the material basis for
      socialism, there being no banks, no capitalist syndicates, no
      machine industry and no railways.
    

      “Jacobinism” in Europe or on the boundary line
      between Europe and Asia in the twentieth century would be the
      rule of the revolutionary class, of the proletariat, which,
      supported by the peasant poor and taking advantage of the
      existing material basis for advancing to socialism, could not
      only provide all the great, ineradicable, unforgettable things
      provided by the Jacobins in the eighteenth century, but bring
      about a lasting world-wide victory for the working people.
    

It is natural for the bourgeoisie to hate Jacobinism. It is
      natural for the petty bourgeoisie to dread it. The
      class-conscious workers and working people generally put their
      trust in
      the transfer of power to the revolutionary, oppressed class for
      that is the essence of Jacobinism, the only way out of
      the present crisis, and the only remedy for economic dislocation
      and the war.
    

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Young Turks—European name of the members of Unity and
Progress, a Turkish bourgeois and landowner nationalist party founded
in Istanbul in 1889. They strove to restrict the sultan’s absolute
power, transform the feudal empire into a bourgeois constitutional
monarchy and thereby enhance the role of the Turkish bourgeoisie
in the country’s economic and political life. In July 1908 they took
power as a result of a revolution accomplished by the top section
of the bourgeoisie, with support from the armed forces. The
government they formed preserved the monarchy and pursued a
reactionary policy. After Turkey had been defeated in the First World War
(autumn 1918) the Young Turk Party dissolved itself.









<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## The Need for an Agricultural Labourers' Union in Russia









Lenin: The Need for an Agricultural Labourers’ Union in Russia







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Need for an Agricultural Labourers’ Union in Russia




Published:

      First published in Pravda Nos. 90 and 91, July 7 (June 24) and July 8 (June 25), 1917.

      Signed: N. Lenin.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 123-127.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

   ARTICLE ONE

There is a highly important question which the All-Russia
      Trade. Union Conference now in session in
      Petrograd[1]
      should consider. It is the question of founding an
      all-Russia union of agricultural labourers.
    

All classes in Russia are organising. Only the class which is
      the most exploited and the poorest of all, the most disunited
      and downtrodden—the class of Russia’s agricultural
      wage-labourers—-seems to have been forgotten. In some non–
      Russian border regions, such as the Latvian territory, there
      are organisations of agricultural wage-labourers. The rural
      proletariat in the vast majority of the Great-Russian and
      Ukrainian gubernias has no class organisations.
    

It is the indisputable and paramount duty of the vanguard of
      Russia’s proletariat, the industrial workers’ trade unions, to
      come to the aid of their brothers, the rural workers. The
      difficulties involved in organising the rural workers are
      clearly enormous, as is borne out by the experience of other
      capitalist countries.
    

This makes it all the more necessary to set about using
      political liberty in Russia as speedily and vigorously as
      possible and to immediately found a country-wide union of
      agricultural labourers. This can and must be done by the trade
      union conference. It is the more experienced, more developed,
      more class—conscious representatives of the proletariat
      gathered at this conference who can and must issue a call to the
      rural workers, urging the’ latter to join them in the ranks of
      the independently organising workers, in the ranks of their
      trade unions. It is the wage-workers at the

    

      factories who must take the initiative and use the trade union
      cells, groups and branches scattered all over Russia to awaken
      the rural worker to independent action and to active
      participation in the struggle to improve his position and uphold
      his class interests.
    

It may seem to many, and perhaps even to most at the moment,
      that with the peasants organising throughout Russia and calling
      for the abolition of private ownership of land and for
      “equalised” land tenure, this is not the right time
      to set up a rural workers’ union.
    

Quite the contrary. This is precisely the time when it is
      particularly opportune and urgent. Those who share the
      proletarian class point of view can have no doubt as to the
      correctness of the proposition which the Mensheviks approved at
      the Stockholm Congress of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour
      Party in 1906 on the initiative of the Bolsheviks, and which has
      ever since been part of the R.S.D.L,P. programme. That
      proposition reads:
    


“The Party should in all eventualities, and
      whatever the situation with regard to democratic
      agrarian reforms, consider it as its task to
      steadfastly strive for independent class
      organisation of the rural proletariat and explain to
      it the irreconcilable antithesis between its interests and the
      interests of the peasant bourgeoisie, to warn it against
      illusions about the small-holding system, which can never, as
      long as commodity production exists, do away with the poverty of
      the masses, and, lastly, to point to the need for a complete
      socialist revolution as the only means of abolishing all poverty
      and exploitation.”
      


Every class-conscious worker, every union member, would agree
      that these propositions are correct. They must be carried out by
      the trade unions, since it is a question of independent
      class organisation of the rural workers.
    

We hope that at this revolutionary moment, when the urge to
      express themselves, to chart their own path, to see that life is
      not shaped anew without the workers themselves independently
      deciding labour issues, is making itself felt among the working
      people in general and the workers in particular—that at
      this time the trade unions will not confine themselves to narrow
      craft interests and forget their weaker brethren, the rural
      workers, but will exert all their energy to help them by
      founding a union of Russia’s rural workers.
    
 

In the next article, we shall try to outline some practical
      steps in this direction.
    
ARTICLE TWO

In the previous article we dealt with the fundamental
      significance of a rural workers’ union in Russia. Here we shall
      touch upon certain practical aspects of the question.
    

A union of Russia’s rural workers should group all who are
      engaged mainly, or even partly, as labourers at
      agricultural undertakings.
    

Experience will show whether or not it will be necessary to
      subdivide these unions into those of pure agricultural labourers
      and those of part-time labourers. At any rate, this is not the
      main thing. The main thing is that the fundamental class
      interests of all who sell their labour power are
      identical and that the unity of all who gain at least
      part of their livelihood by hiring themselves out is absolutely
      necessary.
    

The wage-workers in the cities, in the factories, are bound by
      thousands and millions of ties with the wage-workers in the
      countryside. A call issued by the former to the latter cannot go
      unheeded. But issuing a call is not the only thing to be
      done. The urban workers have far more experience, knowledge,
      means and forces. Some of their forces should be
      directly used to help the rural workers on to their
      feet.
    

All organised workers should give one day’s wages to promote and
      strengthen the unity of town and country wage-workers. Let a
      certain part of this sum be fully used as a contribution from
      the urban workers to the class unity of the rural workers. Let
      this fund be drawn on to cover the expenses of putting out a
      series of the most popular leaflets, of publishing a rural
      workers’ newspaper—at least a weekly to begin
      with—and of sending at least a few agitators and
      organisers to the countryside to immediately set up
      unions of agricultural labourers in the various Localities.
    

Only the experience gained by those unions themselves will help
      find the right method of furthering this work. Each union should
      first of all try to improve the condition of those who sell
      their labour power to agricultural under takings and to secure
      higher pay, better housing conditions, better food, etc.
    
 

A most determined war must be declared on the preconceived
      notion that the coming abolition of private land ownership can
      “give land” to every farm-hand and day labourer and
      undermine the very foundations of wage-labour in
      agriculture. This is a preconceived notion and, moreover, an
      extremely harmful one. The abolition of private land ownership
      is a tremendous and unquestionably progressive reform that
      unquestionably meets the interests of economic development and
      the interests of the proletariat, a reform which every
      wage-worker will back to the utmost but which in no way
      eliminates wage-labour.
    

You cannot eat land. You cannot farm without livestock,
      implements, seed, a reserve of produce, or money. To rely on
      “promises” from anyone—that the
      wage—workers in the countryside will be
      “helped” to acquire livestock, implements,
      etc.—would be the worst kind of error, unpardonable
      naiveté.
    

The basic rule, the first commandment, of any trade union
      movement is not to rely on the “state” but to rely
      only on the strength of one’s own class. The state is
      an organisation of the ruling class.
    

Don’t rely on promises. Rely only on the strength of the unity
      and political consciousness of your class!
    

That is why it must be made the immediate task of the rural
      workers’ trade union not only to fight for better conditions
      for the workers in general, but in particular to defend
      their interests as a class during the coming great land
      reform.
    

Many peasants and Socialist-Revolutionaries maintain that
      “labour power must be put at the disposal of the volost
      committees”. The class of agricultural labourers holds the
      opposite view—it wants the volost committees to be put at
      the disposal of labour power! It is clear enough where the
      master and the labourer stand.
    

      “Land for the whole people.” This is correct. But the
      people are divided into classes. Every worker knows, sees,
      feels, experiences this truth which the bourgeoisie deliberately
      obscure and the petty bourgeoisie always forget.
    

When alone, a poor man is helpless. No “state” will
      help the rural wage-worker, the farm-hand, the day-labourer, the
      poor peasant, the semi-proletarian, if he does not help

    

      himself. The first step in this direction is independent
      class organisation of the rural proletariat.
    

We hope the all-Russia trade union conference will tackle this
      task with the greatest energy, will issue a call to all Russia
      and hold out a helping hand, the mighty hand of the organised
      vanguard of the proletariat, to the rural workers.
    

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
The All-Russia Trade Union Conference was held in Petrograd
between June 21 and 28 (July 4–11), 1917. It was attended by
211 delegates, 73 of them being Bolsheviks, and the rest Mensheviks,
S.R.s, Bundists and non-party people. Among the items on the
agenda were the trade union movement and development and the
economic struggle. The Bolsheviks moved resolutions or
amendments on all the major issues. The conference carried by a slight
majority of 10 or 12 the motions tabled by the defencist
Mensheviks. It elected a provisional Central Council of Trade Unions.









<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## A Disorderly Revolution









Lenin: A Disorderly Revolution







V. I.  

      Lenin
A Disorderly Revolution




Published:

      First published in Pravda No. 91, July 8 (June 25), 1917.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 128-130.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

      “The Bolsheviks are to blame for everything”—this is
      agreed on both by the Cadets, who are leading the counter
      revolution, and by the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks,
      who call themselves “revolutionary
      democrats”, probably because of their pretty little bloc’s
      daily departures from the principles of democracy and
      revolution.
    

      “The Bolsheviks are to blame for everything”—for the
      growing economic dislocation, against which no measures are
      being taken, for the poor state of food supplies, and for the
      “failure” of the Provisional Government over the
      Ukraine and Finland. You might well imagine that an evil
      Bolshevik had wormed his way into the midst of the modest,
      moderate,
      prudent Finns and “misled” the whole people!
    

The universal howl of anger and fury against the Bolsheviks,
      the dirty slander campaign carried on by the dirty Zaslavskys
      and the anonymous writers of Rech and Rabochaya
      Gazeta all indicate a desire, inevitable with
      representatives of a disorderly revolution, to vent their anger
      on
      someone over certain of their policy “failures”.
    

The Cadets are the party of the counter-revolutionary
      bourgeoisie. This has even been admitted by the Socialist-
      Revolutionary and Menshevik ruling bloc, which declared in a
      resolution passed by the Congress of Soviets that the resistance
      of the propertied classes is growing and that it constitutes the
      backbone of the counter-revolution. Yet this bloc, which
      Rech accuses daily of lack of character, has in turn
      formed a bloc with the Cadets and, moreover, a most original
      bloc, confirmed by the composition of the Provisional
      Government!
    

Russia is ruled by two blocs: the bloc of the Socialist
      Revolutionaries and Mensheviks, and the bloc of this bloc
      with the Cadets, who constitute a bloc with all the political

    

      parties to the right of them. The inevitable result is a
      disorderly revolution, for all parts of this ruling “bloc of
      blocs” are loose.
    

The Cadets have no faith in their own republicanism, arid this
      applies even more to the
      Octobrists[1]
      and the
      monarchists of other shades who are now hiding behind the Cadets
      and
      voting for them. The Cadets have no faith in the “social
      bloc people”, and they willingly use the Ministers of that
      bloc as errand boys for all kinds of “pacification”
      even as they hiss in anger and indignation at the
      “excessive demands” of the mass of peasants and the
      section of workers who have now entrusted themselves to the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks in response to pompous
      promises (“to satisfy the working people without offending
      the capitalists”) but who are impudent enough to expect and
      demand the actual fulfilment of these promises!
    

The social-bloc people have no faith in each other: the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries have no faith in the Mensheviks, and
      vice versa. So far neither “spouse” has ventured an
      explicit and frank public statement, made officially and in a
      principled manner, as to how, why, for what purpose and to what
      extent the adherents of a Struvean “Marxism” and the
      advocates of the “right to the land” have
      united. Unity is bursting at the seams even within each of the
      two “spouses”; the Socialist-Revolutionary Congress
      black-balled Kerensky by a vote of 136 to 134, which led to the
      withdrawal of
      “Grandmother”[2]
      herself from the Central
      Committee and to the Central Committee clarification saying that
      Kerensky had not been elected only because he was over burdened
      (unlike Chernov) with ministerial duties. The
      “Right” Socialist-Revolutionaries of Volya
      Naroda revile their party and its congress, and the Lefts,
      who have taken refuge in Zemlya i
Volya,[3]
      have the
      audacity to maintain that the masses do not want this war, which
      they continue to regard as an imperialist war.
    

The Right wing of the Mensheviks has migrated to Dyen;
      it is headed by Potresov, at whom “love’s tender
      glances” are cast by Yedinstvo itself (which only
      recently, during the Petrograd elections, was in a bloc with the
      whole Menshevik party). The Left wing is sympathetic to
      internationalism and is founding its own paper. A bloc of the
      banks and the

    

      Potresovs through Dyen; a bloc of all the Mensheviks,
      including Potresov and Martov, through a “united”
      Menshevik party.
    

Surely that is loose enough.
    

      “Defencism” is doing a poor job of concealing this
      disorderly revolution, for even now, even after the resumption
      of the imperialist war, even amid the ecstatic cries evoked by
      the offensive, the “offensive” of Potresov’s
      followers against his opponents in one alliance, and of
      Kerensky’s followers against his opponents in the other
      alliance, has gained in intensity.
    

The “revolutionary democrats” no longer believe in
      the revolution. They are afraid of democracy. They fear a break
      with the Anglo-French capitalists more than anything else and
      they fear the displeasure of the Russian
      capitalists. (“Our revolution is a bourgeois
      revolution”—Minister Chernov “himself” has
      come to believe in this “truth”, so amusingly
      distorted by Dan, Tsereteli, and Skobelev.) The Cadets hate the
      revolution and democracy.
    

Surely that is loose enough.
    

The universal savage howl of anger and fury against the
      Bolsheviks is a common complaint by the Cadets, Socialist-
      Revolutionaries and Mensheviks about their own looseness.
    

They are in the majority. They are in power. They have formed a
      bloc with one another. And they see that nothing comes of their
      efforts!! How can they help raging against the Bolsheviks?
    

The revolution has posed problems of unusual difficulty, of
      colossal importance, of world-wide scope. It is impossible
      either to cope with economic dislocation or to break free from
      the terrible grip of the imperialist war without taking the most
      drastic revolutionary measures that will be backed by the
      unbounded heroism of the oppressed and exploited and without
      them trusting and supporting their organised vanguard, the
      proletariat.
    

The masses are still looking for the “easiest” way
      out—through the bloc of the Cadets with the bloc of the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks.
    

But there is no way out.
    

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
The Octobrists were members of the Octobrist Party (or Union of
October 17), founded in Russia upon the publication of the tsar’s
manifesto of October 17 (30), 1905. The party was counter–
revolutionary and defended the interests of the big bourgeoisie and of the
landed proprietors farming on capitalist lines. It was led by
A. I. Guchkov, a noted industrialist and house-owner in Moscow,
and M. V. Rodzyanko, a big landowner. The Octobrists fully
supported the tsarist government’s home and foreign policies.

During the First World War the Octobrists, who saw that the
tsarist regime was unable to win the war, formed the “progressive bloc”,
an opposition group which demanded that a responsible Ministry
be set up, that is, a government enjoying the confidence of the
bourgeoisie and landed proprietors.

After the February revolution the Octobrists became a ruling
party and fought against the approaching socialist revolution.
Guchkov was War Minister in the first Provisional Government.
After the October Revolution the Octobrists fought against Soviet
rule.





[2]
Reference is to the Third Congress of the Socialist-Revolutionary
Party, held in Moscow between late May and early June 1917.
The Congress revealed sharp differences between the party’s Right

   

and Left wings over certain issues, including that of the attitude
to the war, the Left S.R.s opposing the Provisional Government’s
policy of prolonging the war. The Central Committee was elected
on June 2 (15). In publishing the results of the vote it was stated
that many delegates had voted against electing A. F. Kerensky
to the Central Committee because he was overburdened with work
in the War and Naval ministries, that is, for practical and not
political reasons.

When Y. Breshko-Breshkovskaya (“Grandmother of the Russian
Revolution”), one of the founders and veteran members of the S.R.
Party, heard that Kerensky had not been elected, she construed that
as an intrigue and resigned from the S.R. Party’s Central
Committee in protest, making a relevant statement for the press.





[3]
Zemlya i Volya (Land and Freedom)—a Socialist-Revolutionary
newspaper published in Moscow from March 1917 to May 1918.









<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## A Class Shift









Lenin: A Class Shift







V. I.  

      Lenin
A Class Shift




Published:

      First published in Pravda No. 92, July 10 (June 27), 1917.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 131-133.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Every revolution, if it is a real revolution, amounts to a class
      shift. Therefore, the best way of enlightening the people, and
      of fighting those who deceive the people by invoking the
      revolution, is to analyse the class shift that has taken or is
      taking place in the present revolution.
    

From 1904 to 1916, in the last years of tsarism, the
      relative positions of the classes in Russia became particularly
      clear. A handful of semi-feudal landowners, headed by Nicholas
      II, was in power and maintained the closest alliance with the
      financial magnates who were reaping profits unheard of in Europe
      and for whose benefit predatory treaties were concluded with
      foreign countries.
    

The liberal bourgeoisie, led by the Cadets, were in
      opposition. They were more afraid of the people than of reaction
      and
      were moving closer and closer to power by compromising with the
      monarchy.
    

The people, i.e., the workers and peasants, whose leaders had
      been driven underground, were revolutionary. They constituted
      the “revolutionary democrats”—proletarian and
      petty-bourgeois.
    

The revolution of February 27, 1917, swept away the monarchy and
      put the liberal bourgeoisie in power, who, operating in direct
      concord with the Anglo-French imperialists, had wanted a minor
      court revolution. Under no circumstances were they willing to go
      beyond a constitutional monarchy with an electoral system
      conditioned by various qualifications. And when the revolution
      actually went further, completely abolishing the monarchy and
      establishing Soviets (of Workers’, Soldiers’ and Peasants’

    

      Deputies), the entire liberal bourgeoisie became
      counter-revolutionary.
    

Now, four months after the revolution, the counter-revolutionary
      character of the Cadets, the main party of the liberal
      bourgeoisie, is as clear as day. Everyone sees that. And
      everyone is compelled to admit it. But not nearly everyone is
      willing to face up to it and think about what it implies.
    

Russia today is a democratic republic governed by a free
      agreement between political parties which are freely
      advocating their views among the people. The four months since
      February 27 have fully consolidated and given final shape to
      all parties of any importance, showed them up during
      the elections (to the Soviets and to local bodies), and
      revealed their links with the various classes.
    

In Russia, the counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie are in power
      today, while the petty-bourgeois democrats, namely, the
      Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik parties, have be come
      “His Majesty’s
      opposition”.[1]
      The policy
      of these parties is essentially one of compromise with
      the counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie. The petty-bourgeois
      democrats are rising to power by filling local bodies to begin
      with (just as the liberals did under tsarism—by first
      winning places in the
      zemstvos[2]).
      These petty-bourgeois
      democrats want to share power with the bourgeoisie but
      not overthrow them, in exactly the same way as the Cadets wanted
      to share power with the monarchy but not overthrow it. The
      petty-bourgeois democrats (the Socialist-Revolutionaries and the
      Mensheviks) compromise with the Cadets because of the close
      class kinship between the petty and the big bourgeoisie, just as
      the class kinship between the capitalist and the landowner,
      living in the twentieth century, made them embrace each other at
      the feet of their “adored” monarch.
    

It is the form of compromise that has changed. Under
      the monarchy it was crude, and the tsar allowed a Cadet no
      further than the Duma backyard. In a democratic republic,
      compromise has become as refined as in Europe, the petty
      bourgeoisie being permitted, in a harmless minority, to occupy
      harmless (for capital) posts in the Ministry.
    

The Cadets have taken the place of the monarchy. The Tseretelis
      and Chernovs have taken the place of the Cadets.

    

Proletarian
      democracy has taken the place of a truly revolutionary
      democracy.
    

The imperialist war has hastened developments fantastically. Had
      it not been for this war, the Socialist-Revolutionaries and
      Mensheviks might have sighed for decades for
      ministerial posts. The same war, however, is hastening further
      developments. For it poses problems in a revolutionary
      rather than a reformist manner.
    

The Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik parties could have
      given Russia many a reform by agreement with the
      bourgeoisie. But the objective situation in world politics is
      revolutionary and it cannot be dealt with by reforms.
    

The imperialist war is crushing the peoples and threatens to
      crush them completely. The petty-bourgeois democrats can perhaps
      stave off disaster for a while. But It is only the revolutionary
      proletariat that can prevent a tragic end.
    

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
The expression “His Majesty’s Opposition” was used by P. N.
Milyukov, the Cadet leader. Speaking at a luncheon given by the Lord
Mayor of London on June 19 (July 2), 1909, Milyukov said: “So
long as Russia has a legislative chamber controlling the budget,
the Russian opposition will remain an opposition of, and not to,
His Majesty.”





[2]
Zemstvos—rural self-government bodies set up in the central
gubernias of tsarist Russia in 1864. They were dominated by the
nobility, and their jurisdiction was limited to purely local economic and
welfare matters—hospital and road building, statistics, insurance,
etc. They functioned under the control of the governors of the
gubernias and the Minister of the Interior, who could block any
decisions the government found undesirable.









<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## Miracles of Revolutionary Energy









Lenin: Miracles of Revolutionary Energy







V. I.  

      Lenin
Miracles of Revolutionary Energy




Published:

      First published in Pravda No. 92, July 10 (June 27), 1917.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 134-136.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Our near-socialist Ministers are developing near-incredible
      energy. Peshekhonov has declared that “the resistance of
      the capitalists has apparently been broken” and that
      everything we have here in Holy Russia will be
      “equitably” distributed. Skobelev has declared that
      the capitalists will have to give up 100 per cent of their
      profits. Tsereteli has declared that the offensive in this
      imperialist war is the most righteous thing from the point of
      view of both democracy and socialism.
    

But Minister Chernov has without a doubt outdone everyone in
      these manifestations of miraculous energy. At the last meeting
      of the Provisional Government, Chernov made the Cadet gentlemen
      hear his report on the general policy of the department
      entrusted to him, and said he was introducing as many as
      ten Bills!
    

Surely that was a miracle of revolutionary energy. Less than six
      weeks have passed since May 6, and yet as many as ten Bills have
      been promised in this short period! And what Bills! The
      ministerial Dyelo Naroda reports that these Bills
      “in their totality encompass all the principal aspects of
      the economic activity of the countryside”.
    

      “All aspects”—no more no less. What a whopper!
    

The only suspicious thing is that the ministerial news paper
      devotes more than one hundred lines to a description of
      some of those splendid Bills without saying anything
      definite about any of them. “Suspension of
      certain legislative acts concerning the peasants”—we are
      not told which. The Bill on the “courts of
      conciliation” is the most interesting. We are not told
      who are to be conciliated and how.

    

“The regulation of rent
      relations”—we are kept completely
      in the dark; we are not even told whether it is a question
      of leasing the landed estates, which are expected to be
      expropriated without compensation.
    

      “A reform in the sense of greater democratisation of the
      local land committees.” Wouldn’t it be better if you authors of
      sweeping promises immediately listed at least a dozen local land
      committees, giving, in exact terms, their present,
      post-revolutionary, yet, according to your own admission, not
      fully democratic composition?
    

The point is that the tireless activity of Minister Chernov, as
      well as of the other Ministers mentioned above, is the best
      illustration of the difference between a liberal bureaucrat and
      a revolutionary democrat.
    

The liberal bureaucrat submits to his “higher-ups”,
      i.e., Lvov, Shingaryov and Co., voluminous reports on hundreds
      of Bills that are supposed to benefit mankind. All he offers the
      people is palaver, fine promises,
      Nozdrev[1]
      phrases (such as the one about 100 per cent profit or a
      “socialist” offensive at the front, and so on).
    

The revolutionary democrat, while submitting a report to his
      “higher-ups”, or even before submitting it, reveals
      and exposes every evil and every shortcoming before the people
      to arouse their, activity.
    

      “Peasants, expose the landowners, expose how much they
      take from you by way of ’rent’, how much they have had ad judged
      to them in the ’courts of conciliation’ or the local land
      committees, how much cavilling or interference they have been
      guilty of as regards cultivating all the lands and using the
      landowners’ implements and livestock to meet the needs of the
      people, particularly the poorest sections! Expose it yourselves,
      peasants, and I, a minister of revolutionary Russia’, ’a
      minister of the revolutionary democrats’, shall help
      you to publish all such exposures and to remove all oppression
      through your pressure from the bottom and mine from the top!!!”
      Surely, this is how a true “revolutionary democrat”
      would speak and act.
    

Nothing of the kind here! Nothing at all! Here is the language
      used by the ministerial newspaper in regard to Chernov’s
      “report” to Lvov and Co. “While he does not
      deny that there are a number of agrarian excesses in some

    

      gubernias, V. M. Chernov thinks that, on the whole, rural
      Russia has proved to be much more balanced than one would have
      expected....”
    

Yet not a word was said about the hold-up of the only
      Bill named specifically—the one about “suspending
      the sale and purchase of land”. For the peasants had long
      since been promised the immediate suspension of sale and
      purchase. It was promised as early as May, but on June 25 we
      read in the papers that Chernov had presented a
      “report” and that the Provisional Government
      “has not yet taken a final decision”!!!
    

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Nozdrev—a blustering liar in Gogol’s Dead Souls.









<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## Phrases and Facts









Lenin: Phrases and Facts







V. I.  

      Lenin
Phrases and Facts




Published:

      First published in Pravda No. 94, July 12 (June 29), 1917.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 137-139.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Minister Skobelev has published an appeal to all workers of
      Russia. In the name of “our” (that is what it says:
      our) socialist ideal, in the name of the revolution, on behalf
      of revolutionary democrats, and so on, and so forth, he urges
      the workers to accept “courts of conciliation” and
      severely condemns all “unauthorised” actions.
    

This is how well the near-socialist Minister Skobelev ’the
      Menshevik sings his part:
    


      “You [workers] have every reason to be outraged by the
      enrichment of the propertied classes that has been taking place
      during this war. The tsar’s government has wasted thousands of
      millions of the people’s money. The revolutionary government
      must restore this money to the people’s treasury.”
      


He sings well, but where will he alight?
    

      Mr. Skobelev’s appeal was published on June 28. The coalition
      Ministry was formed on May 6. But during all this time, in which
      economic dislocation and an unprecedented catastrophe have been
      advancing on the country with seven-league strides, the
      government has not taken a single real step against the
      capitalists who have made “thousands of
      millions”. To “restore” these
      thousands of millions “to the people’s
      treasury”, a law should have been enacted on
      May 7  abolishing all commercial and bank secrecy and
      establishing immediate control over the capitalist banks. and
      syndicates, for otherwise it is impossible to find, let
      alone “restore”, these thousands of millions.
    

Does the Menshevik Minister Skobelev really imagine that the
      workers are babes in the wood whom one can feed with promises of
      the impossible (for it is impossible to

    

“restore”
      the “thousands of millions”—may God help us to end
      plunder of the state and to restore at least one or two hundred

      millions) without doing the possible and the necessary
      for weeks on end?
    

As luck would have it, on the very same day the Menshevik
      Minister Skobelev presented the workers with another basketful
      of the most florid republican, revolutionary and
      “socialist” phrases, Comrade Avilov, who wants to
      “unite” the defencists (i.e., the chauvinists) with
      the workers, hit on the unusually, extraordinarily fortunate
      idea of con tributing an article to Novaya Zhizn in
      which he gave facts without making deductions.
    

Nothing on earth could be more eloquent than these simple facts.
    

On May 5, the coalition Ministry was formed. In a solemn
      declaration it promised control, and even
      “organisation of production”.
    

On May 16, the Executive Committee of the Petrograd Soviet
      adopted “directions” for its Ministers, demanding
      “the immediate [listen to this! I and most energetic
      realisation [this is how it reads, believe it or not!] of
      government
      regulation of production”, and so on, and so forth.
    

Energetic realisation began.
    

On May 19, Konovalov resigned, making a very
      “energetic” statement against “the extreme
      socialists”! On June 1, the All-Russia conference of
      representatives of industry and commerce took place. The
      conference declared emphatically against control. The
      three Deputy Ministers remaining after Konovalov’s resignation
      began to “realise energetically”:
      in the conflict of the Donets mine owners (who are wrecking the
      industry by a “go-slow strike”), Stepanov, the first
      Deputy Minister, backed the employers. After that the
      employers rejected all Skobelev’s conciliatory proposals.
    

Palchinsky, the second Deputy Minister, sabotaged the
      “fuel conference”.
    

Savvin, the third Deputy Minister, instituted “a crude and
      even silly caricature” of regulation in the form of an
      “inter-departmental conference”.
    

On June 10, first Deputy Minister Stepanov presented a
      report” to the Provisional Government taking
      issue with the Executive Committee’s programme.
    
 

On June 21, the Congress of Soviets passed another resolution.
    

The people began to set up supply committees on their own
      initiative, from below. From above, a chief “Economic
      Council” was promised. Second Deputy Minister Palchinsky
      explained: “It is hard to say when it [the Economic
      Council] will begin to function.”
    

It sounds like mockery, but these are the facts.
    

The capitalists mock at the workers, at the people, by continuing the
      policy of secret lock-outs and of concealing their outrageous
      profits, and send the Skobelevs, Tseretelis and Chernovs to
      “reassure” the workers with empty phrases.
    

 
Notes
 
 







<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## How the Capitalists Conceal Their Profits









Lenin: How the Capitalists Conceal Their Profits







V. I.  

      Lenin
How the Capitalists Conceal Their Profits




Published:

      First published in Pravda No. 94, July 12 (June 29), 1917.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 140-141.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

      CONCERNING THE ISSUE OF CONTROL

How much they talk about control! And how little it all
      means. How they dodge the issue by resorting to general phrases,
      grandiloquent turns of speech, and solemn “projects”
      doomed for ever to remain projects only.
    

Now the issue is that unless commercial and bank secrecy is
      abolished, and unless a law is immediately passed making the
      books of commercial firms open to the trade unions, all phrases
      on control and all projects for it will be so much meaningless
      verbiage.
    

Here is a small but instructive illustration. A comrade who is a
      bank employee has sent us the following information showing how
      profits are concealed in official reports.
    

On May 7, 1917, Vestnik
Finansov[1]
      No. 18
      published a report of the Petrograd Loan and Discount Bank. The
      report gives the bank’s net profit as 13,000,000 rubles (the
      exact figure is 12,960,000; we shall use round numbers in the
      text and give exact figures in parentheses).
    

On closer scrutiny, a well-informed person will see at once that
      that is not the whole profit at all and that a consider
      able part of the profit is cleverly concealed under other items,
      so that no “tax”, “compulsory loan” and,
      in general, no financial measure will ever bring it out unless
      commercial and bank secrecy is completely abolished. Indeed, the
      amount of 5,500,000 rubles is given as reserve capital. Profits
      are quite often entered for concealment as so-called reserves,
      or reserve capital. If I am a millionaire who has made a profit
      of 17,000,000 rubles and wants to reserve 5,000,000, I only
      have to enter this 5,000,000 as “reserve capital” to
      do the

    

trick! In this way I dodge all the various laws on
      “state control”, “state taxation of
      profits” and so on.
    

Again, the report indicates slightly less than 1,000,000 rubles
      (825,000) as money made in interest and commissions. “The
      question is,” writes the bank employee, “what are the sums
      that generally constitute the bank’s profit, since the money
      made in interest is not listed under profits??”
    

Moreover, the sum of 300,000 rubles, listed as remaining profit
      made in previous years, is not included in the total
      profits! Together, then, with the foregoing item, we have
      more than another sweet million in profit hidden
      away. Similarly, the sum of 224,000 rubles of “unpaid
      dividends to shareholders” is missing in the
      total profit, although everyone knows that dividends are paid
      out of net profits.
    

Furthermore, the report lists the sum of 3,800,000 rubles as
      “carry-overs”. “Whoever has not taken a direct
      part in the business will find it hard to establish what these
      carry overs are,” the comrade writes. “One thing is
      certain: in preparing a report, one can easily conceal a part of
      the profit by listing it under ’carry-overs’ and then
      transferring It to ’where it belongs’.”
    

To sum up. The profit has been listed as 13,000,000 rubles, but,
      in point of fact, it must be somewhere between 19 and 24
      million, or almost 80 per cent profit on a basic capital of 30
      million.
    

Isn’t it obvious that the government’s threats to the
      capitalists, the government’s promises to the workers, the
      government’s Bills and laws aimed at taking 90 per cent of the
      profits of the big capitalists are useless, absolutely use less,
      as long as there is commercial and bank secrecy?
    

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Vestnik Finansov, Promyshlennosti i Torgovli (Finance, Industry
and Trade Messenger)—a weekly journal published by the Ministry
of Finance in St. Petersburg from November 1883 to 1917. It
published government decisions, economic articles, and surveys.









<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## Crisis Is Approaching, Dislocation Is Increasing









Lenin: Crisis Is Approaching, Dislocation Is Increasing







V. I.  

      Lenin
Crisis Is Approaching, Dislocation Is Increasing




Published:

      First published in Pravda No. 95, July 13 (June 30), 1917.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 142-144.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

We are compelled to sound the alarm daily. All kinds of foolish
      people have accused us of being “too much in a hurry” to
      transfer all state power to the Soviets of Soldiers’, Workers
      and Peasants’ Deputies. They think it would be more
      “moderate and
      proper”[1]
      to “wait”
      with dignity for a dignified Constituent Assembly.
    

Today, even the most foolish of those petty-bourgeois fools can
      see that reality will not wait and that it is not we
      but economic dislocation that is “in a
      hurry”.
    

Petty-bourgeois cowardice, as typified by the
      Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik parties, has resolved: let
      us for
      the time being leave all affairs in the bands of the
      capitalists. Perhaps dislocation will “wait” until
      the
      Constituent Assembly meets!
    

Day by day facts prove that dislocation will probably not wait
      until the Constituent Assembly meets and that the crash will
      come earlier.
    

Take, for example, facts published today. The Economic
      Department of the Executive Committee of the Petrograd Soviet of
      Soldiers’ and Workers’ Deputies has resolved “to inform
      the Provisional Government” that “the metal industry
      of the Moscow area (fifteen gubernias) is in an extremely
      critical state”, that “the Goujon works
      management is clearly disorganising production, deliberately
      trying to bring the works to a standstill”, and that
      for this reason “state power [left by the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks in the hands of the
      party of the Goujons, the party of the counter
      revolutionary capitalists who resort to lock-outs] must take

      over the management of the works ... and provide operating funds”.
    
 

Operating funds to the tune of up to five million rubles are
      required urgently.
    

The meeting (of the Economic Department and a delegation from
      the Department of Supplies, of the Moscow Soviet of
      Workers’ Deputies) “calls the attention of the Provisional
      Government [poor, innocent, childishly-uninformed Provisional
      Government! It knew nothing about it! It is blame less! It will
      learn; the Dans and Cherevanins, the Avksentyevs and Chernovs
      will exhort and persuade it!] to the fact that the Moscow Factory
      Meeting and the Provisional Bureau of the Committee of Supplies
      of the Moscow Region have already had to intervene in order
      to prevent the stoppage of the Kolomna locomotive works, as
      well as the Sormovo works and the Bryansk works in Bezhetsk. All
      the same, the Sormovo works is now at a standstill owing to a
      strike, and the other works may stop at any moment....”
    

Catastrophe will not wait. It is advancing with terrific
      speed. Writing about the Donets area, A. Sandomirsky, who no
      doubt knows the facts very well, says in today’s Novaya
Zhizn:
    


      “The vicious circle—lack of coal, lack of metal, lack
      of engines and rolling stock, suspension of production—is
      growing wider. And while coal is being burned and metal piles up
      at the works, it cannot be obtained where it is needed.”
      


The government, supported by the Socialist-Revolutionaries and
      Mensheviks, simply obstructs the struggle against
      economic dislocation. Sandomirsky reports it as a fact that
      Palchinsky, Deputy Minister of Commerce and virtual colleague
      of the Tseretelis and Chernovs, has responded to the complaint
      of the manufacturers by prohibiting (!!) “self
      appointed” (I!) control commissions from acting on the
      inquiry instituted by the Donets committee to determine the
      quantity of metal available.
    

Just think what a madhouse this is: the country is on the rocks,
      the people are on the verge of famine and disaster, there is a
      shortage of coal and iron although they can be mined, the Donets
      committee is conducting an inquiry through the Soviets
      of Soldiers’ and Workers’ Deputies concerning the quantity of
      metal, i.e., is looking for iron for

      the people. On the other hand, a servant of the manufacturers,
      of the capitalists, Minister Palchinsky, in league with

    

the
      Tseretelis and Chernovs, prohibits the inquiry. Mean while the
      crisis is mounting and catastrophe is drawing even nearer.
    

Where and how does one get the money? It is easy enough to
      “demand” five million for one factory, but surely
      one must realise that much more is needed for all the factories.
    

Isn’t it obvious that no money can be obtained unless
      the measure we have been demanding and advocating since
      early April is adopted, unless all the banks are
      consolidated into one bank and brought under control, and unless
      commercial secrecy is abolished?
    

The Goujons and the other capitalists, with the co-operation of
      the Palchinskys, are “deliberately” (this word was
      used by the Economic Department) trying to bring production to
      a standstill. The government is on their side. The
      Tseretelis and Chernovs are mere ornaments or just pawns.
    

Isn’t it high time you gentlemen realised that the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks as parties
      will have
      to answer to the people for the catastrophe?
    

 
Notes
 
 



[1]

“Moderate and proper”—the philistine virtues of Molchalin,
a character in Griboyedov’s Wit Works Woe.









<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## Just How Is It To Be Done?









Lenin: Just How Is It To Be Done?







V. I.  

      Lenin
Just How Is It To Be Done?




Published:

      First published in Pravda No. 95, July 13 (June 30), 1917.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 145-147.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Rabochaya Gazeta is disturbed about the
      political significance of the offensive. One of its
      contributors even reproaches another, saying that the latter’s
      evasive phrases ultimately amount to an admission that,
      objectively, the Russian revolutionary army is now shedding its
      blood for the annexationist plans of the Allied bourgeoisie
      rather than for peace without annexations (Rabochaya
      Gazeta No. 93, page 2, column 1).
    

Now this “objective” significance of the offensive
      is bound to disturb the workers, some of whom are still
      following the Mensheviks. And this is also reflected in the
      columns of Rabochaya Gazeta. Not wishing to venture upon
      an open break with the workers, the paper is trying to somehow
      link the “offensive” with the revolutionary
      proletarian peace struggle. Unfortunately for the cunning
      editors, the only connection that can be established here is a
      negative one.
    

It would be difficult to imagine more pitiful and confused
      people than these respectable editors frightened by those very
      spirits which they, together with the Socialist-Revolutionaries,
      have conjured up.
    

On the one hand, Rabochaya Gazeta reports that
      “the West now sees the significance of the Russian
      offensive in an entirely false light. The British and French
      bourgeois news papers regard it as a renunciation of the
      Soviet’s ’utopian’ plans. Chauvinist resolutions are being
      passed under the pretext of hailing Kerensky and the advancing
      revolutionary

    

army. And while the war drums thunder for the
      Russian offensive, the persecution of those who hold the same
      views as the Russian democrats and accept the same peace policy
      is growing”.
    

A very valuable admission! All the more so because it comes from
      a ministerial newspaper which only yesterday

      considered our forecasts of these inevitable
      consequences of the offensive to be prompted by Bolshevik
      malice. It turns out that the question is not of our
      “malice” at all, but of the fact that the policy
      adopted by the leaders of the Soviet has its own logic
      and that this logic leads to the strengthening of the
      anti-revolutionary forces in and outside Russia.
    

It is this unpleasant fact that Rabochaya Gazeta would
      like to gloss over somehow. The method suggested by the editors
      is very simple: “It is urgently necessary that the Central
      Executive Committee of the Congress of Soviets of Workers
      and Soldiers’ Deputies, together with the Soviet of Peasants’
      Deputies, should issue an explicit and categorical statement to
      the effect that, as far as Russian democrats are concerned, the
      aims of the war remain the same as before”, and so on, and
      so forth. You see how resolutely the Mensheviks fight against
      the imperialist war: they are willing to make another urgent and
      categorical statement. The number of the most
      “urgent”, most “categorical”, and most
      “impassioned” statements that have already been
      made! How many more times will it be necessary to repeat those
      categorical statements as speedily as possible to moderate with
      words, if only a little, the actions of a government
      which the ministerial Rabochaya Gazeta fully supports!
    

Really, gentlemen, your most “categorical” words,
      declarations and notes cannot alleviate the facts which you
      yourselves report. Those facts can only be countered by
      actions which would actually mark a break
      with the policy of continuing the imperialist
      war. The government of
      Lvov-Tereshchenko-Shingaryov-Kerensky-Tsereteli cannot do
      that. All it can
      do is confirm, by its cowardly and pitiful policy towards
      Finland and the Ukraine, its complete inability to carry out its
      most “categorical” statements about “no
      annexations” and about the “right” to
      self-determination. Under these circumstances, all those
      promised declarations will

    

serve as a means of lulling the
      people. Lulling the people with high-sounding declarations
      instead of waging a “proletarian peace
      struggle"—this is Rabochaya Gazeta’s programme,
      this is its real answer to the growth of the anti-revolutionary
      forces due to the offensive.
    

 
Notes
 
 







<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## How and Why the Peasants Were Deceived









Lenin: How and Why the Peasants Were Deceived







V. I.  

      Lenin
How and Why the Peasants Were Deceived




Published:

      First published in Pravda No. 96, July 14 (1), 1917.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 148-150.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

It is known that when peasant deputies from all over Russia
      arrived in Petrograd for their All-Russia Congress, they were
      promised—by the Socialist-Revolutionaries and by the
      government—that the sale and purchase of land would be
      immediately prohibited.
    

At first, Minister Pereverzev really wanted to carry out that
      promise, and sent a telegram to stop all transactions involving
      the sale or purchase of land. But later some invisible hand
      intervened, and Minister Pereverzev withdrew his telegram to the
      notaries public, i.e., again permitted the sale and purchase of
      land.
    

The peasants began to worry. If I am not mistaken, they even
      sent a delegation to the Ministry.
    

The peasants were reassured. They were soothed as one soothes
      little children. They were assured that a law would be
      issued immediately prohibiting the sale and purchase of land and
      that Pereverzev’s temporary order had been
      “suspended” “only” because such
      a law was
      about to be issued.
    

The Socialist-Revolutionaries reassured the peasants and fed
      them with promises. The peasants believed them. The peasants
      felt reassured. The peasants went home.
    

Weeks passed.
    

On June 24—no earlier—news appeared in the papers
      that Minister Chernov, leader of the Socialist-Revolutionary
      Party, had submitted a Bill to the government (no more than a
      Bill, as yet) to prohibit the sale and purchase of land.
    

On June 29, the papers published reports about a “private
      conference” of the Duma, held on June 28. At the
      conference,

    

      according to Rech (a paper of the majority party in the
      Provisional Government), Mr. Rodzyanko
    


      “in his concluding remarks dwelt on the question of land
      transactions in connection with the new [oh yes, exceedingly
      new, new in the extreme!] government measures. He maintained
      that if land deals were prohibited, land would lose its value
      [for whom? For the landowners, obviously!! But isn’t it from
      them that the peasants want to take the land?], all security for
      loans would depreciate, and the landowners [the former
      landowners, Mr. Rodzyanko!] would be denied all credit. From
      what funds, asked Rodzyanko, will the landowners pay their
      debts to the banks? In most cases the debts are already overdue,
      and this Bill would lead to the immediate and legitimate
      abolition of all landed property without auctions.
      

      “In view of this, Rodzyanko proposed that the conference
      should instruct the Provisional Committee to examine the matter
      in order to endeavour to prevent the enactment of a law
      that would be fatal to the state, not to private ownership of
      land.”
      


Here, then, is the “invisible hand” made visible!
      Here is the “cunning mechanism” of the coalition
      government, with its near-socialist Ministers, given away by
      this gentleman, this former Chairman of the former Duma, this
      former landowner, this former confidant of Stolypin the Hangman,
      this former protector of the agent .provocateur
      Malinovsky—Mr. Rodzyanko!
    

Let us even assume that now that Mr. Rodzyanko has so clumsily
      let the cat out of the bag, the law prohibiting the sale and
      purchase of land will at last be passed. At last!
    

But that is not the whole point. The point is that this striking
      example should make clear to all of us, and help the peasants
      understand, how and why the peasants were deceived. For
      the fact is incontrovertible and indubitable: they have deceived
      the peasants by not fulfilling immediately what they
      had promised to fulfil immediately at the All-Russia Congress of
      Peasants’ Deputies.
    

How did they deceive the peasants? By feeding them with
      promises. That is the “cunning mechanism” of every
      coalition government on earth, i.e., of every bourgeois
      Ministry which includes traitors to socialism. In these
      Ministries, former socialists serve—whether consciously or
      not makes no difference—as tools with which the
      capitalists deceive the people.
    

Why were the peasants deceived? Because the tools of deceit, the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries—we shall make the

    

      most favourable assumption about them—themselves failed
to understand the cunning mechanism of class domination and
      class policy in the present administration of Russia. The
      Socialist-Revolutionaries allowed themselves to be led astray by
      talk. But actually, as the Rodzyanko “incident” shows
      very well, Russia is being ruled by a bloc between two blocs, by
      an alliance between two alliances.
    

One bloc is the bloc of the Cadets and the monarchist
      landowners, among whom Mr. Rodzyanko ranks first. The existence
      of this bloc as a political fact was shown to the whole of
      Russia during the Petrograd elections, when all the
      Black Hundred papers, all the papers to the right of
      the Cadets, supported the Cadets. Thanks to the Socialist-
      Revolutionaries and Mensheviks, this bloc has a
      majority in the government. This bloc delayed the
      prohibition of transactions involving the sale and purchase of
      land. It is supporting the landowners and the capitalists
      responsible for the lock-outs.
    

The second bloc is that of the Socialist-Revolutionaries and the
      Mensheviks, which has deceived the people by empty
      promises. Skobelev and Tsereteli, Peshekhonov and Chernov
      promised an awful lot. It is easy to make promises. The
      “socialist” Ministers’ method of feeding the people
      with promises has been tried in every advanced country
      in the world and has everywhere ended in failure. Russia’s
      specific feature is that owing to the revolutionary situation
      in the country the failure of the Socialist-Revolutionary and
      Menshevik parties will be worse and will come sooner than usual.
    

Let every worker and every soldier use this example, which is
      particularly instructive to the peasants, to fully explain to
      the peasants how and why they were deceived!
    

The peasants can only achieve their ends in alliance with the
      workers, not in a bloc (alliance) with the capitalists.
    

 
Notes
 
 







<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## Who Is Responsible?









Lenin: Who Is Responsible?







V. I.  

      Lenin
Who Is Responsible?




Published:

      First published in Pravda No. 96, July 14 (1), 1917.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 151-152.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Mr. N. Rostov quotes in the ministerial Rabochaya
      Gazeta several excerpts from soldiers’ letters which attest
      to the extreme ignorance of the peasants. The author, according
      to his own words, has at his disposal a bulky batch of letters
      sent to the Agitation Department of the Executive Committee of
      the Soviet of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies from every part of
      the country. He says that all the letters clamour for one and
      the same thing: Papers, send us papers!
    

The Menshevik writer suddenly exclaims in alarm: “If the
      revolution does not get through to them [the peasants] as a
      clear fact of great usefulness, they will rise against the
      revolution....” The peasants are “as ignorant as
      ever”.
    

The Menshevik and ministerial official was a bit late in
      becoming alarmed over his batch of letters. More than seven
      weeks have passed since May 6, when the Mensheviks began to
      serve the capitalists, and in all this time bourgeois
      counter-revolutionary lies and slander against the revolution
      have
      been pouring freely into the countryside through the bourgeois
      papers, which have become dominant, through the direct and
      indirect servants and supporters of the capitalist government
      backed by the Mensheviks.
    

If the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries had not been
      betraying the revolution and supporting the counter
      revolutionary Cadets, power would have been in the hands of the
      Executive Committee since early May. The Executive Committee
      could immediately have established a state monopoly over
      private advertising in the press, and could thus have obtained
      tens of millions of newspaper copies for free
      distribution in the countryside. The large printing

    

 presses and
      stocks of newsprint would have been used by the

      Executive Committee to enlighten the peasants and not to befog
      them through a dozen or so bourgeois, counter-revolutionary
      newspapers which have virtually seized the key role in
      the newspaper business.
    

The Executive Committee could then have disbanded the Duma, and,
      having saved the people’s money on this—not to speak of
      many other things—it could have spent that money on
      sending a thousand agitators, or even thousands of them, to the
      countryside.
    

In times of revolution, procrastination is often equivalent to
      a complete betrayal of the revolution. Responsibility for the
      delay in the transfer of power to the workers, soldiers and
      peasants, for the delay in carrying through revolutionary
      measures to enlighten the ignorant peasants, rests wholly on the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks.
    

They have betrayed the revolution on this
      matter. They bear the blame for the fact that the
      workers and soldiers are forced to limit themselves to primitive
      means in the fight against the counter-revolutionary bourgeois
      press and agitation, whereas they could and should have had
      nation-wide means for the purpose.
    

 
Notes
 
 







<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## What Could the Cadets Have Counted On When They Withdrew from the Cabinet?









Lenin: What Could the Cadets Have Counted On When They Withdrew from the Cabinet?







V. I.  

      Lenin
What Could the Cadets Have Counted On When They Withdrew from the Cabinet?[1]




Written: Written on July 3 (16), 1917 

Published:

      Published in Proletarskoye Dyelo No. 2, July 28 (15), 1917.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 153-154.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The question arises quite naturally. To correctly meet events
      with definite tactics, we must understand them correctly. How,
      then, are we to understand the Cadet withdrawal?
    

Spite? Disagreement in principle over the Ukraine? Of course
      not. It would be ridiculous to suspect the Cadets of loyalty to
      principles, or the bourgeoisie of the ability to do something
      out of spite.
    

The Cadet withdrawal can only be understood as a calculated
      move. What are their calculations?
    

To govern a country which has carried out a major revolution
      and is still in a state of unrest, and to govern it during a
      world-wide imperialist war, you need the initiative and scope of
      a truly revolutionary class—massively courageous,
      historically great, wholeheartedly enthusiastic. Either you
      suppress this class by force, as the Cadets have been preaching
      for some time, since May 6 in fact, or you entrust your self to
      its leadership. Either you are in alliance with imperialist
      capital, then you must take the offensive, you must be an
      obedient servant of capital, you must sell yourself to it, you
      must throw overboard the utopian ideas of abolishing landed
      property without compensation (see Birzhevka for Lvov’s
      speeches against Chernov’s programme); or you are against
      imperialist capital, then you must immediately propose precise
      peace terms to all nations, because they have all been exhausted
      by the war, you must dare to raise, and be able to raise, the
      banner of world proletarian revolution against capital, and to
      do so not in words but in deeds, to
      further the revolution with the greatest determination in Russia
      herself.
    
 

The Cadets are wily businessmen in trade, in finance, in
      safeguarding capital, as well as in politics. They have
      correctly taken into account the fact that the situation is
      objectively a revolutionary one. They agree to reforms
      and
      enjoy sharing power with the reformists, the Tseretelis and
      Chernovs. But reforms will not help. There is no way
      out of
      the crisis, the war and economic disruption, through reforms.
    

From their class point of view, from the imperialist exploiters’
      point of view, the Cadets have calculated correctly. They seem
      to say: “By withdrawing, we present an ultimatum. We know
      that at present the Tseretelis and Chernovs do not trust the
      truly revolutionary class, that at present they do not want to
      conduct a truly revolutionary policy. Let’s frighten them. To be
      without the Cadets means being without the ’aid’ of world-wide
      Anglo-American capital, means raising the banner of revolution
      against the latter as well. The Tseretelis and Chernovs
      wouldn’t do that, they wouldn’t dare! They will give in to us!
    

      “If not, then even if a revolution against capital starts,
      it will fail and we shall come back.”
    

That is how the Cadets calculate. We repeat: from the point of
      view of the exploiting class, their calculations are correct.
    

Were the Tseretelis and Chernovs to take the point of view of
      the exploited class and not that of the vacillating petty
      bourgeoisie, they would reply to the Cadets’ correct
      calculations by correct adherence to the revolutionary
      proletariat’s policy.
    

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
On July 2 (15), hearing of the miscarriage of the Juno offensive,
the Cadet Ministers Shingaryov, Manuilov and Shakhovskoi resigned
from the coalition Provisional Government on the pretext that
they disagreed with the government’s stand on the Ukrainian
question. In a declaration to the Ukrainian Central Rada, the
Provisional Government had promised to appoint by mutual
agreement a General Secretariat to administer the Ukraine, while
   

the Cadets insisted that the Ukrainian question be settled solely
by the Constituent Assembly.

The true reason for the Cadets’ resignation was their desire
to provoke a government crisis with an eye to bringing pressure
to bear on the “socialist” Ministers and securing their consent to
a Cadet counter-revolutionary programme: the disarming of the
Red Guards, withdrawal of the revolutionary troops from
Petrograd, and prohibition of the Bolshevik Party.









<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## All Power to the Soviets!









Lenin: All Power to the Soviets!







V. I.  

      Lenin
All Power to the Soviets!




Published:

      First published in Pravda No. 99, July 18, 1917.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 155-156.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
C. Farrell
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2000

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

      “Drive nature out of the door and she will rush back through the
      window.” It seems that the Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik
      parties have to “learn” this simple truth time and again by
      their own experience. They under took to be "revolutionary
      democrats" and found themselves in the shoes of revolutionary
      democrats—they are now forced to draw the conclusions
      which every revolutionary democrat must draw.

Democracy is the rule of the majority. As long as the will of
      the majority was not clear, as long as it was possible to make
      it out to be unclear, at least with a grain of plausibility, the
      people were offered a counter-revolutionary bourgeois government
      disguised as "democratic." But this delay could not last
      long. During the several months that have passed since February
      27 the will of the majority of the workers and peasants, of the
      overwhelming majority of the country’s population, has become
      clear in more than a general sense. Their will has found
      expression in mass organisations—the Soviet’s of
      Workers’, Soldiers’ and Peasants’ Deputies.

How, then, can anyone oppose the transfer of all power in the
      state to the Soviets? Such opposition means nothing but
      renouncing democracy! It means no more no less than imposing on
      the people a government which admittedly can neither
      come into being nor hold its ground democratically,
      i.e., as a result of truly free, truly popular elections.

It is a face, strange as it may seem at first sight, that the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks have forgotten
      this perfectly simple, perfectly obvious and palpable
      truth.

    

Their position is so false, and they are so badly
      confused and bewildered, that they are unable to “recover” this
      truth they have lost. Following the elections in Petrograd and
      in Moscow, the convocation of the All-Russia Peasant Congress,
      and the Congress of Soviets, the classes and parties throughout
      Russia have shown what they stand for so clearly and
      specifically that people who have not gone mad or deliberately
      got themselves into a mess and simply cannot have any illusions
      on this score.

To tolerate the Cadet Ministers or the Cadet government or Cadet
      policies means challenging democrats and democracy. This is the
      source of the political crises since February 27, and this also
      the source of the shakiness and vacillation of our government
      system. At every turn, daily and even hourly, appeals are being
      made to the people’s revolutionary spirit and to their democracy
      on behalf of the most authoritative government institutions and
      congresses. Yet the government’s policies in particular, are all
      departures from revolutionary principles, and breaches in
      democracy.

This sort of thing will not do.

It is inevitable that a situation like the present should show
      elements of instability now for one reason, now for another. And
      it is not exactly a clever policy of jib. Things are moving by
      fits and starts towards a point where power will be transferred
      to the Soviets, which is what our Party called for long ago.
    

 
Notes
 
 







<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## Where Is State Power and Where Is Counter-Revolution?









Lenin: Where Is State Power and Where Is Counter-Revolution?







V. I.  

      Lenin
Where Is State Power and Where Is Counter-Revolution?




Written: Written on July 5 (18), 1917 

Published:

      Published in Listok “Pravdy”, July 19 (6), 1917.

      Published according to the newspaper text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 157-161.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

This question is usually answered quite simply: there is no
      counter-revolution at all or we do not know where it is. But we
      know full well where power is. It is in the hands of the
      Provisional Government, which is controlled by the Central
      Executive Committee (C.E.C.) of the All-Russia Congress of
      Soviets of Soldiers’ and Workers’ Deputies. This is the usual
      answer.
    

Yesterday’s political
      crisis,[1]
      like most types of
      crises, which tear down everything conventional and shatter all
      illusions, left in its wake the ruins of the illusions expressed
      in the usual answers—cited above—to the basic
      questions of any revolution.
    

There is a former member of the Second Duma, Alexinsky, whom the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks,
      the ruling parties in the Soviets of Workers’,
      Soldiers’ and Peas ants’ Deputies, refused to admit on
      to the Executive Committee of the Soviet of Workers’ and
      Soldiers’ Deputies until he rehabilitated himself,
      i.e., until he redeemed his
      honour.[2]


What was the trouble? Why did the Executive Committee publicly
      and formally deny Alexinsky its confidence, demanding that he
      redeem his honour, i.e., declaring him dishonest?
    

It was because Alexinsky had made himself so notorious by
      libellous statements that he had been branded a slanderer in
      Paris by journalists of the most diverse parties. Alexinsky did
      not bother to redeem his honour before the Executive
      Committee. He preferred to hide himself in Plekhanov’s newspaper
      Yedinstvo, appearing first under initials, and then,
      after he had plucked up courage, under his full name.
    
 

On July 4, yesterday afternoon, a few Bolsheviks were warned by
      friends that Alexinsky had laid before the Petrograd journalists’
      committee some new malicious libel. Most of those who received the
      warning ignored it completely, treating Alexinsky and his
      “work” with disdainful contempt. But one Bolshevik,
      Jugashvili (Stalin), a member of the Central Executive Committee,
      who as a Georgian Social-Democrat had known Comrade Chkheidze for
      a long time, spoke to the latter at a meeting of the C.E.C. about
      Alexinsky’s new infamous slander campaign.
    

This happened late at night, but Chkheidze declared that the
      C.E.C. could not be indifferent to the spreading of libel by
      people who are afraid of open court and an investigation by the
      C.E.C. In his own name, as Chairman of the C.E.C., and in the
      name of Tsereteli, a member of the Provisional Government,
      Chkheidze immediately telephoned all newspaper
      offices, suggesting that they retrain from publishing
      Alexinsky’s libel. Chkheidze told Stalin that most papers
      had expressed readiness to comply with his request, and that
      only Yedinstvo and Rech had “kept
      silent” for a time (we have not seen Yedinstvo,
      but Rech has not printed the libel). As a
      result, the libel appeared only on the pages of a petty, yellow,
      and to most intelligent people completely unknown paper,
      Zhivoye
Slovo[3]
      No. 51 (404), whose editor
      and publisher signs himself A. M. Umansky.
    

The slanderers will now answer before the court. In this respect
      things are quite simple.
    

The absurdity of the libel is striking: a certain ensign of the
      Sixteenth Siberian Rifle Regiment by the name of Yermolenko was
      “dispatched” (?) “on April 25 to us behind the
      front lines of the Sixth Army to agitate for the speediest
      conclusion of a separate peace treaty with
      Germany”. Apparently, he is the escaped prisoner of whom
      the
      “document” published in Zhivoye Slovo says:
      “This commission was accepted by. Yermolenko on the
      insistence of the comrades”!!
    

From this alone you can judge how little faith can be
      put
      in an individual who is dishonourable enough to accept such
      a “commission”!... The witness has no sense of
      honour. This is
      a fact.
    

And what was the witness’s testimony?
    
 

He testified the following: “Officers of the German
      General Staff, Schiditzki and Lübers, had told him that
      propaganda of a similar kind was being carried on in Russia by
      A. Skoropis-Yoltukhovsky, chairman of the Ukrainian section of
      the Union for the Liberation of the
      Ukraine,[4]
      and an
      agent of the German General Staff, and by Lenin. Lenin was
      commissioned to do all he could to undermine the confidence of
      the Russian people in the Provisional Government.”
    

Thus the German officers, in order to induce Yermolenko to
      commit this dishonourable act, shamelessly lied to him about
      Lenin who, as everybody knows and as is officially stated by the
      entire Bolshevik Party, has always rejected
      most emphatically, consistently, and unconditionally a separate
      peace treaty with Germany!! The lie of the German officers is so
      obvious, crude and preposterous that no literate person would
      even for a moment take it for anything but a lie. And a
      politically literate person would be even more certain that to
      associate Lenin with an individual like Yoltukhovsky (?) and
      with the Union for the Liberation of the Ukraine is particularly
      preposterous, for both Lenin and all other internationalists
      have repeatedly dissociated themselves publicly from
      this dubious social-patriotic “Union” during the
      war!
    

The crude lie told by Yermolenko, whom the Germans had bribed,
      or by German officers, would not deserve the slightest
      attention, were it not that the “document” has added
      what it calls “fresh information”—it is not known by
      whom, from whom, how, or when received—according to which
      “money for propaganda is being received” (by whom?
      the “document” is afraid to say plainly
      that the accused or suspected is Lenin!! The document says
      nothing about who “is receiving it”)
      “through trusted people”: the
      “Bolsheviks” Fürstenberg (Hanecki) and
      Kozlovsky. It is alleged that there is information proving the
      transfer of money through banks, and that “the military
      censorship has discovered a continuous (!) exchange of telegrams
      of a political and financial nature between German agents and
      Bolshevik leaders”!!
    

Again such a crude lie that it sticks out like a sore thumb. If
      there were even a word of truth in that, then how could it
      happen (1) that Hanecki had quite recently been allowed
      freely to enter Russia and permitted to leave her just as

    

      freely?
      (2) that neither Hanecki nor Kozlovsky had
      been arrested before the appearance in the press of
      information concerning their crimes? Is it really possible
      that the General Staff, had it actually been in possession
      of even remotely trustworthy information about the sending
      of money, telegrams, etc., would have permitted the
      publication of rumours about this, through the Alexinskys
      and the yellow press, without arresting Hanecki and
      Kozlovsky? Isn’t it clear this is nothing but the cheap work
      of newspaper slanderers of the lowest order?
    

We may add that Hanecki and Kozlovsky are not Bolsheviks, but
      members of the Polish Social-Democratic Party; that we have
      known Hanecki, a member of its Central Committee, since the
      1903 London Congress from which the Polish delegates withdrew,
      and so on. The Bolsheviks never received any
      money from either Hanecki or Kozlovsky. All that is a lie,
      a complete, vulgar lie.
    

What is its political significance? First, it indicates that the
      Bolsheviks’ political opponents are so low and contemptible
      that they cannot get along without lies and libel.
    

Secondly, it provides us with an answer to the title question
      of this article.
    

The report about the “documents” was sent to
      Kerensky as early as May 16. Kerensky is a member of
      the Provisional Government and the Soviet, i.e., of both
      “powers”. May16 to July 5 is a long time. The power,
      if it really were a power, could and should itself have
      investigated those “documents”, interrogated the
      witnesses, and arrested the suspects. The power, both
      “powers”—the Provisional Government and the
      C.E.C.—could and should have done this.
    

Yet both powers are inactive, while the General Staff is found
      to have some sort of relations with Alexinsky, who was not
      admitted to the Soviet’s Executive Committee owing to his
      libellous activities! The General Staff, at the very moment of
      the Cadets’ withdrawal, permits—probably by
      accident—the handing over of its official documents to
      Alexinsky for publication!
    

The power is inactive. Neither Kerensky, nor the Provisional
      Government, nor the C.E.C. so much as think of arresting Lenin,
      Hanecki, or Kozlovsky, if they are under suspicion. Last night,
      July 4, both Chkheidze and Tsereteli

    

      asked the newspapers not to print the obvious libel. But just a
      little later, late at night, Polovtsev sent military cadets and
      Cossacks to wreck Pravda’s offices, stop the paper’s
      publication, arrest its publishers, seize its ledgers (on the
      pretext of investigating whether or not suspicious funds were
      involved). At the same time that yellow, base, filthy little
      rag, Zhivoye Slovo, printed foul libel to arouse
      passions, revile the Bolsheviks, create an atmosphere of mob
      violence, and afford a plausible justification for the behaviour
      of Polovtsev, the military cadets and the Cossacks who had
      wrecked Pravda’s offices.
    

Whoever does not close his eyes to the truth cannot
      remain deluded. When it is necessary to act,
      both powers remain inactive—the C.E.C., because
      it “trusts” the Cadets and is afraid of irritating
      them, and the Cadets, who do not act as a power because they
      prefer to act behind the scenes.
    

Counter-revolution behind the scenes—this is it, as clear
      as day: the Cadets, certain quarters of the General Staff
      ("high-ranking officers”, as our Party’s resolution
      calls them), and the shady, semi-Black Hundred press. These are
      not inactive, these “work” together hand in
      glove; this is the soil in which pogroms, attempted pogroms, the
      shooting of demonstrators, etc., etc., are nurtured.
    

Whoever does not deliberately shut his eyes to the truth cannot
      remain deluded any longer.
    

There is no power, and there will be none until the transfer of
      power to the Soviets lays the foundation for creating
      power. Counter-revolution thrives on the absence of authority
      by uniting the Cadets with certain high-ranking officers and
      with the Black Hundred press. This is a sad reality, but a
      reality nevertheless.
    

Workers and soldiers! You must show firmness, determination and
      vigilance!
    

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Lenin is referring to the massive demonstrations that took place
in Petrograd on July 3 and 4 (16 and 17), 1917. The soldiers, sailors
and workers took to the streets, being angered by the Provisional
Government sending troops into an offensive that ended in defeat,
as might have been expected. The movement began on July 3 (16)
in the Vyborg district with the action of the First Machine-Gun
Regiment. It threatened to develop into an insurrection against
the Provisional Government.

Just then the Bolshevik Party was against all armed action,
for it considered that there was no revolutionary crisis in the
country as yet. The Central Committee meeting held at 4 p.m., on
July 3 (16), resolved to refrain from action. A similar resolution was
adopted by the Bolsheviks’ Second Petrograd City Conference,
which took place at the same time. Conference delegates went to
the city’s factories and districts to restrain the masses from action.
But action had already begun and there was no stopping it.

In view of the mood of the masses, the Central Committee,
meeting in a joint session with the Petrograd Committee and the
Military Organisation, resolved late on the evening of July 3 (16)
to join in the demonstration in order to lend it a peaceful and
organised character. Lenin was not in Petrograd at the time—being
ill as a result of sustained overwork, he had gone to the country
for a few day’s rest. Getting word of the events, he returned to
Petrograd on the morning of July 4 (17) and assumed political
leadership. During the day of July 4 (17) he addressed the
Kronstadt sailors from the balcony of Kshesinskaya’s Palace (see this
volume, p. 213). His speech played an important part; it called
on the sailors to exercise restraint and be staunch and vigilant.

Over 500,000 people took part in the July 4 (17) demonstration.
They carried Bolshevik slogans—“All Power to the Soviets!”, etc.
They insisted that the Central Executive Committee of the Soviets
take power into its hands. But the S.R. and Menshevik leaders
refused to take power.

With the knowledge and consent of (lie Menshevik and S.R.
Central Executive Committee, the Provisional Government sent
military cadets and Cossacks against the peaceful demonstration.
The troops opened fire. In addition to them the Provisional
Government called in counter-revolutionary units from the front line
to smash the demonstration.

A meeting of the Central and Petrograd Committees held on
the night of July 4–5 under Lenin’s leadership resolved to
discontinue the demonstration in an organised fashion. It was a judicious

   

measure by the Party, which knew how to retreat in time and stave
off the defeat of the main revolutionary forces. The Mensheviks
and S.R.s virtually took part in and abetted the counter–
revolutionary butchery. They joined the bourgeoisie in bearing down
on the Bolshevik Party. Pravda, Soldatskaya Pravda and other
Bolshevik papers were closed down by the Provisional
Government, and the printing plant of Trud, acquired with money collected
by the workers, was wrecked. The workers were disarmed, and
arrests, house searches and riots took place. The
revolutionary-minded units in the Petrograd garrison were sent off to the front
line.

After the July events power in the country was fully taken over
by the counter-revolutionary Provisional Government. The Soviets
became a mere appendage to it. Dual power was at an end. So was
the peaceful period of the revolution. The Bolsheviks were faced
with the task of preparing for an armed uprising to overthrow the
Provisional Government.





[2]
Lenin is referring to the following fact: Upon his return from
abroad in April 1917 G. A. Alexinsky, a slanderer and plotter,
began to contribute to the bourgeois Russkaya Volya (all socialist
newspapers having refused to have anything to do with him) and
proffered his services to the Executive Committee of the Petrograd
Soviet of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies. The Executive
Committee adopted the following decision: “In view of the facts regarding
G. A. Alexinsky’s activity that have become known, the Executive
Committee does not see its way to admitting him into its
institutions. Should lie wish to rehabilitate! himself, the Executive
Committee will not be disagreeable to taking part in an investigation.”





[3]
Zhivoye Slovo (The Living Word)—a yellow daily newspaper with
Black Hundred leanings published in Petrograd from 1916. In 1917
it campaigned rabidly against the Bolsheviks. The October
Revolution put an end to its publication.





[4]
The Union for the Liberation of the Ukraine was founded by a group
of Ukrainian bourgeois nationalists in 1914, shortly after the
beginning of the First World War. Expecting tsarist Russia to lose the
war, the Union sought the Ukraine’s secession from Russia and
the establishment of a bourgeois and landowner Ukrainian
monarchy under German protectorate.









<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## Foul Slander by Ultra-Reactionary Newspapers and Alexinsky









Lenin: Foul Slander by Ultra-Reactionary Newspapers and Alexinsky







V. I.  

      Lenin
Foul Slander by Ultra-Reactionary Newspapers and Alexinsky




Written: Written on July 5 (18), 1917 

Published:

      Published in Listok “Pravdy”, July 19 (6), 1917.

      Published according to the newspaper text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      page 162.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Today’s issue of Zhivoye Slovo, an obviously Black
      Hundred type of paper, carries low, foul slander against Lenin.
    

Pravda cannot appear because its premises were wrecked
      by military cadets on the night of July 4-5. This accounts for
      the delay in publishing a detailed refutation of the foul
      slander.
    

For the time being we declare that the Zhivoye Slovo
      report is slander and that on the night of July 4-5
      Chkheidze rang up all the big papers, asking them not
      to publish slanderous, riot-raising articles. The big papers
      complied with Chkheidze’s request, and on July 5 none of them
      published the infamous slander, with the exception of
      the filthy Zhivoye Slovo.
    

Alexinsky is so well known as a slanderer that he has not
      been admitted to the Executive Committee of the Soviet
      until he rehabilitates himself, i. e., until he redeems his
      honour.
    

Citizens! Don’t believe those foul slanderers, Alexinsky and
      Zhivoye Slovo.
    

Zhivoye Slovo’s slander is evident at a glance from the
      following: the paper writes that on May 16 a letter
      (No. 3719) accusing Lenin was sent to Kerensky from the General
      Staff. Obviously, Kerensky would have been duty bound to have
      Lenin arrested Immediately and to order a government
      investigation, had he for a single moment believed those
      accusations or suspicions to he serious.
    

 
Notes
 
 







<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## Slander and Facts









Lenin: Slander and Facts







V. I.  

      Lenin
Slander and Facts




Written: Written on July 5 (18), 1917 

Published:

      Published in Listok “Pravdy”, July 19 (6), 1917.

      Published according to the newspaper text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 163-164.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

An immense torrent of abuse and slander is being poured
      on the Bolsheviks for the demonstration of July 3 and
      4.
    

They go so far as to accuse the Bolsheviks of “trying to
      seize the city”, of wanting to “violate” the
      will of the Soviets, of “encroaching on the authority of
      the Soviets”, and so on, and so forth.
    

The facts, however, show that the Bolsheviks did not
      seize a single building, a single institution, let alone a
      section of the city (although they could have), nor
      tried to do so even though the people were armed.
    

The facts show that the only political act of violence
      against an institution occurred on the night of July
      4-5, when the military cadets and Cossacks wrecked
      Pravda on Polovtsev’s orders, without the knowledge
      and against the will of the Soviet.
    

This is a fact.
    

It was a deliberate, malicious use of force against an entire
      institution, an “encroachment” and
      “violation” not in words, but in deeds. Had this
      encroachment been lawful, either the Provisional Government or
      the Soviet would have sanctioned the measure. Neither
      authority, however, did so. Those who committed violence
      against “Pravda” received no support either
      in the Soviet or in the Provisional Government.
    

The Bolsheviks appealed to the soldiers who had started the
      demonstration to act peaceably and in an organised way.
    

Neither the Provisional Government nor the Soviet
      appealed to the military cadets, the Cossacks or Polovtsev to
      act peaceably and in an organised, lawful way.
    
    

     *     *  * 

But, we are told, there was shooting.
    

Yes, there was. But who did the shooting? Who dares blame it on
      anyone without an investigation?
    

Please listen to a witness from bourgeois quarters.
    

This witness is the paper Birzheviye Vedomosti, evening
      edition of July 4—a witness whom nobody in the world could
      suspect of partiality towards the Bolsheviks! Here is what the
      witness says:
    


“At 2 p.m. sharp, when the armed demonstrators were passing the
Sadovaya and Nevsky corner and a large number of spectators were
watching them quietly, a deafening shot rang out from the right side
of Sadovaya, after which disorderly firing began.”
      


And so, even the witness from the bourgeois paper is compelled
      to admit the truth, namely, that the shooting began from the
      right side of Sadovaya!! Surely this is a clear enough
      indication that the shooting was aimed at the
      demonstrators.
    

Is it really so difficult to appreciate that if the
      demonstrators had planned or wished to use force, they would
      have
      sent people against a definite institution, as Polovtsev
      sent military cadets and Cossacks against Pravda? Since
      sailors were killed, and since the witness from the bourgeois
      paper says that the shooting was started “from the right
      side of Sadovaya” “when the armed demonstrators were
      passing”, isn’t this obvious enough proof that it
      was the Black Hundreds, the opponents of democracy, the
      quarters close to the Cadets, that wanted and were bent on
      violence?
    

 
Notes
 
 







<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## Close to the Truth









Lenin: Close to the Truth







V. I.  

      Lenin
Close to the Truth




Written: Written on July 5 (18), 1917 

Published:

      Published in Listok “Pravdy”, July 19 (6), 1917.

      Published according to the newspaper text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      page 165.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Speaking at the Central Executive Committee meeting on the
      evening of July 4, Citizen Chaikovsky came surprisingly close
      to the truth.
    

He objected to the Soviet taking power and, among other things,
      advanced this what we might call “decisive”
      argument: we must carry on the war but cannot do it with out
      money, and the British and Americans won’t give any money if
      power is in the hands of “socialists”; they will
      only give money if the Cadets participate in the government.
    

That is close to the truth.
    

It is impossible to participate in the imperialist war without
      “participating” in the capitalist business of
      subjugating the people with loans from the capitalist gentlemen.
    

In order to really oppose the imperialist war, we must sever
      all ties that fetter people and bind them to
      capital. The workers and peasants must fearlessly take over the
      supervision of the banks and production and the regulation of
      production.
    

We, too, think that the British and Americans will give no money
      unless they have a guarantee from the Cadets. The alternative
      is: either serve the Cadets, serve capital, pile up imperialist
      loans (and put up with the fitting title of imperialist
      democrats instead of claiming to be “revolutionary”
      democrats); or break with the Cadets, break with the
      capitalists, break with imperialism, and become real
      revolutionaries on war issues as well.
    

Chaikovsky came close to the truth.
    

 
Notes
 
 







<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## A New Dreyfus Case?









Lenin: A New Dreyfus Case?







V. I.  

      Lenin
A New Dreyfus Case?




Published:

      First published in Listok “Pravdy”, July 19 (6), 1917.

      Published according to the text in Listok “Pravdy”.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      page 166.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Are some of the “leaders” of our General Staff
      planning to re-enact the Dreyfus
      case[1]?
    

This idea is suggested by the outrageously insolent and
      monstrous slander published in Zhivoye Slovo and
      analysed by us in detail elsewhere.
    

In the Dreyfus case, the French General Staff made it self sadly
      and disgracefully famous throughout the world by resorting to
      wrong, unfair and downright criminal (base) measures to indict
      Dreyfus.
    

Our General Staff showed their hand in a “case”
      against the Bolsheviks, doing it publicly for the first time, I
      think, through—this is strange and significant and
      incredible—Zhivoye Slovo, a Black Hundred rag,
      which printed an obvious slander about Lenin being a spy. The
      report begins as follows:
    


“The Chief of Staff of the Supreme Command sent the record
      of interrogation [of Yermolenko] to the War Minister, with his
      letter No. 3719 of May 16, 1917.”
      


Is it conceivable—if the case is handled properly at
      all—that records of interrogation belonging to the
      General Staff should be published in the Black Hundred press
      before investigation is instituted and before
      the suspects are arrested?
    

The General Staff is in charge of intelligence. This is beyond
      question. But how can an intelligence service function if a
      document dispatched on May 16 and received by Kerensky long ago
      is put in circulation by a Black Hundred rag instead of
      Kerensky?
    

In what way does this differ, in point of fact, from the methods
      used in the Dreyfus case?
    

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Dreyfus case—the trial of the Jew Dreyfus, a French General Staff
officer, whom the reactionary monarchists among the French
military, bent on provocation, falsely charged in 1894 with
espionage and high treason. The French reactionaries took advantage of
the framed-up indictment of Dreyfus, who was sentenced to life
imprisonment, to foment anti-Semitism and attack the republican
regime and democratic liberties. When, in 1898, the socialists and
progressive spokesmen of bourgeois democracy, including Emile

   

Zola, Jean Jaurès and Anatole Franco, started a campaign for a
re-examination of the Dreyfus case, the latter assumed a markedly
political character. The country split into two camps over it,
with the republicans and democrats on one side and the bloc of
monarchists, clericals, anti-Semites and nationalists on the other.
In 1899, under pressure from public opinion, Dreyfus was pardoned
and released. In 1906, he was acquitted by the Court of Cassation
and was reinstated in the Army.









<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## Appeal of the Executive Commission of the Petrograd Committee of the R.S.D.L.P.(B.)









Lenin: Appeal of the Executive Commission of the Petrograd Committee of the R.S.D.L.P.(B.)







V. I.  

      Lenin
Appeal of the Executive Commission of the Petrograd Committee of the R.S.D.L.P.(B.)




Written: Written on July 6 (19), 1917 

Published:

      First Published in 1928 in Lenin Miscellany VII.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      page 167.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

In pursuance of the decision of the C.C. R.S.D.L.P.
      published yesterday (signed also by the Petrograd Committee), the
      Executive Commission of the Petrograd Committee of the
      R.S.D.L.P. appeals to workers to resume work tomorrow,
      i.e., on the morning of July 7.

    

This decision is supported by a meeting of delegates from the
      factory staffs of Vyborgskaya Storona.
    

Executive Commission, Petrograd Committee of the R.S.D.L.P.


 
Notes
 
 







<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## Dreyfusiad









Lenin: Dreyfusiad







V. I.  

      Lenin
Dreyfusiad




Written: Written on July 6–7 (19–20), 1917 

Published:

      First Published in Lenin Miscellany IV, 1925.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 168-169.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

A combination of the old and the new—this has
      always been the case with methods of exploitation and repression
      used by tsarism. It has not changed in republican Russia. The
      counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie flavour their political
      baiting of the Bolsheviks, the party of the international
      revolutionary proletariat, with the foulest slander and
      “campaigning” in the press that is quite like the
      campaign of the French clerical and monarchist papers in the
      Dreyfus case.
    

The watchword at that time was that Dreyfus must be indicted for
      espionage at all costs! Today the watchword is that some
      Bolshevik or other must be indicted for espionage at all costs!
      The foulest slander, garbling, crude lies and artful tricks to
      confuse the reader—all these devices are being used by the
      yellow press and the bourgeois press generally with great
      zeal. The net result is a wild,, furious uproar in which it is
      sometimes impossible to make out articulate words, let alone
      arguments.
    

Here are some of the methods used in our modern, republican
      Dreyfusiad. First they trotted out three main
      “arguments”: Yermolenko, Kozlovsky’s twenty million,
      and the
      implication of Parvus.
    

Next day Zhivoye Slovo, the chief riot-instigating
      paper, published two “corrections” admitting that
      the “leader” of the Bolsheviks had not been bribed
      but was a fanatic, and changing the twenty million to twenty
      thousand. Mean while another paper declared Yermolenko’s
      testimony to be of secondary importance.
    
 

In Listok
“Pravdy”[3] of July 6, we showed
      the complete
      absurdity of Yermolenko’s
      testimony.[1]

      Obviously, it had become
      inconvenient to refer to it.
    

In the same issue of Listok there is a letter from
      Kozlovsky denying the slander. Following the denial 20,000,000
      is reduced to 20,000—a “round” figure again
      instead of an exact one.
    

They implicate Parvus, trying hard to establish some sort of
      connection between him and the Bolsheviks. In reality it was the
      Bolsheviks who in the Geneva
      
Sotsial-Demokrat”[4]
      called Parvus a
      renegade,[2]

      denounced him ruthlessly as a German
      Plekhanov, and once and for all eliminated all possibility of
      close relations with social- chauvinists like him. It was the
      Bolsheviks who at a meeting held in Stockholm jointly with the
      Swedish Left
      Socialists[5]
      categorically refused to admit Parvus
      in any capacity, even as a guest, let alone speak to him.
    

Hanecki was engaged in business as an employee of the firm in
      which Parvus was a partner. Commercial and financial
      correspondence was censored, of course, and is quite open to
      examination. An effort is being made to mix these commercial
      affairs with politics, although no proof whatsoever is being
      furnished!!
    

They have gone to the ridiculous extreme of blaming
      Pravda for the fact that its dispatches to the
      socialist papers of Sweden and all other countries (dispatches
      which, of course, had to pass the censor and are fully known to
      him) were reprinted by German papers, often with distortions! As
      if reprinting, or malicious distortions, can be blamed on the
      original source!
    

It is a veritable Dreyfusiad, a campaign of lies and slander
      stemming from fierce political hatred. How foul the sources must
      be to substitute slander for the clash of ideas!
    

 
Notes
 

[1]
See pp. 157–61 of this volume.—Ed.


[2]
See present edition, Vol. 21, pp. 421–22.—Ed.

 



[3]
See Note 23.





[4]
Sotsial-Demokrat—illegal Central Organ of the R.S.D.L.P.
published from February 1908 to January 1917. Beginning with issue
No. 2, it was brought out abroad, the issues 2 to 32 (February 1909
to December 1913) being published in Paris and 33 to 58 (
November 1914 to January 1917) in Geneva. Altogether 58 issues appeared,
five of them with supplements. From December 1911 the paper was
edited by Lenin, who contributed over eighty articles and other
items.

During the First World War Sotsial-Demokrat played a
prominent role in the struggle against international opportunism,
nationalism and chauvinism, in the propaganda of Bolshevik
watchwords, and in the matter of arousing the working class and working
people generally to fight against the imperialist war and its
inspirers. It published Lenin’s article “On the Slogan for a United States
of Europe”, which for the first time formulated the conclusion of
the possibility of socialism triumphing first in one country. The
dissemination of the paper in Russia and the reprinting of its more
important items by local Bolshevik papers contributed to the
political enlightenment and internationalist education of Russia’s
proletariat and to the training of the working people for the coming
revolution.

Sotsial-Demokrat did much to unify the internationalist
elements of the world Social-Democratic movement. It made its way
into many countries in the face of war-time obstacles.

Lenin, who had a high opinion of Sotsial-Demokrat’s role during
the First World War, wrote afterwards that “no class-conscious
worker who wishes to understand the development of the ideas of
the international socialist revolution and of its first victory on
October 25, 1917, can manage without” =

studying articles published
in Sotsial-Demokrat (see present edition, Vol. 27, p. 221).





[5]
The Swedish Left Socialists (or the Party of the Young) constituted
the Left trend among the Swedish Social-Democrats. During the
First World War they adhered to an internationalist position and
formed part of the Zimmerwald Left. In May 1917 they founded
the Left Social-Democratic Party of Sweden. The congress which
this party held in 1919 resolved to join the Communist
International. In 1921 the party’s revolutionary wing became the
Communist Party of Sweden.









<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## In Refutation of Sinister Rumours









Lenin: In Refutation of Sinister Rumours







V. I.  

      Lenin
In Refutation of Sinister Rumours




Written: Written on July 7 (20), 1917 

Published:

      First Published in Lenin Miscellany VII, 1928.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      page 170.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Listok “Pravdy” of July 6 carried a
 detailed refutation of the foul slander spread by the Black
 Hundred papers with regard to Lenin and others. A similar
 refutation, in a briefer form, was published as a separate
 leaflet on be half of our Party Central Committee.
 

In addition, we have only to answer the following question put
 to us: are the rumours concerning the arrest of Lenin, Kamenev,
 Zinoviev and others true? No, these rumours are
 untrue. All the Bolsheviks named here who are baited
 with particular zeal by the vile and slanderous press are
 members of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee of the
 Soviets of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies. Once again we
 request all fair-minded citizens not to believe these infamous
 slanders and sinister rumours.
 

 
Notes
 
 







<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## Three Crises









Lenin: Three Crises







V. I.  

      Lenin
Three Crises[1]




Written: Written on July 7 (20), 1917 

Published:

      Published in the magazine Rabotnitsa No. 7, July 19, 1917.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 171-175.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and C. Farrell
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2000

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The more violent the slander and lies against the Bolsheviks
    these days, the more calmly must we, while refuting the lies and
    slander, reflect upon the historical interrelation of events and
    the political, i.e., class, significance of the revolution’s
    present course. 

To refute the lies and slander, we only have to refer again to
    Listok “Pravdy” of July 6, and to call the reader’s
    attention especially to the article printed below which gives
    documentary evidence that on July 2 the Bolsheviks campaigned
    against the demonstration (as admitted by the
    Socialist-Revolutionaries’ paper). The article indicates that on
    July 3 the popular mood exploded into action and the demonstration
    started against our advice. It shows that on July 4, in a leaflet
    (reprinted by the Socialist-Revolutionary paper Dyelo
    Naroda), we called for a peaceful and
    organised demonstration, that on the night of July 4 we
    passed a decision to call off the demonstration. Slanderers,
    continue your slander! You can never refute these facts and their
    decisive significance in every connection! 

Let us turn to the question of the historical interrelation of
    the events. When, as early as the beginning of April, we opposed
    support for the Provisional Government, we were attacked by both
    the S.R.s and the Mensheviks. But what has reality proved? 

What have the three political crises proved — April 20 and
    21, June 10 and 18, July 3 and 4?

They have proved, in the first place, that the masses are
    becoming increasingly dissatisfied with the bourgeois policy of
    the Provisional Government’s bourgeois majority. 
 

It is rather interesting to note that the ruling
    Socialist-Revolutionaries’ newspaper, Dyelo Naroda,
    despite its marked hostility to the Bolsheviks, is compelled to
    admit, in its July 6 issue, the deep economic and political causes
    of the action of July 3 and 4. The stupid, crude, infamous lie
    that this action was artificially created, that the Bolsheviks
    campaigned in favour of action, will daily be more and
    more exposed. 

The common cause, the common origin, the deep common root of
    the three above-mentioned political crises is clear, especially if
    we look at them in their interrelation, as science demands that
    politics be looked at. It is absurd even to think that three such
    crises could be produced artificially. 

In the second place, it is instructive to grasp what each one
    of them had in common with the others, and what was its specific
    features. 

What is common to all three is a mass dissatisfaction
    overflowing all bounds, a mass resentment with the bourgeoisie and
    their government. Whoever forgets, ignores or
    underestimates this essence of the matter, renounces the
    ABC of socialism concerning the class struggle. 

Let those who call themselves socialists, who know something
    about the character of the class struggle in European revolutions,
    think about the class struggle in the Russian revolution. 

These crises are peculiar in the ways they manifested
    themselves. The first (April 20–21) was stormy and spontaneous,
    and completely unorganised. It led to Black Hundreds firing on the
    demonstrators and to unprecedentedly savage and lying accusations
    against the Bolsheviks. After the outburst came a political
    crisis. 

In the second case, the demonstration was called by the
    Bolsheviks, and was canceled after a stern ultimatum and direct
    ban by the Congress of Soviets; then, on June 18, came a general
    demonstration in which the Bolshevik slogans clearly
    predominated. As the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks
    themselves admitted on the evening of June 18, a political crisis
    would certainly have broken out had it not been for the offensive
    at the front. 

The third crisis broke out spontaneously on July 3 despite the
    Bolsheviks’ efforts on July 2 to check it. Reaching its

    

climax on
    July 4, it led to a furious outburst of counter-revolution on July 5 and 6. The vacillation of the S.R.s and Mensheviks expressed
    itself in Spiridonova and a number of other S.R.s declaring for
    the transfer of power to the Soviets, and in the Menshevik
    internationalists, previously opposed to it, voicing the same
    idea. 

The last, and perhaps the most instructive, conclusion to be
    drawn from considering the events in their interconnection is that
    all three crises manifested some form of demonstration that is new
    in the history of our revolution, a demonstration of a more
    complicated type in which the movement proceeds in waves, a sudden
    drop following a rapid rise, revolution and counter-revolution
    becoming more acute, and the middle elements being eliminated for
    a more or less extensive period. 

In all three crises, the movement took the form of a
    demonstration. An anti-government demonstration —
    that would be the most exact, formal description of events. But
    the fact of the matter is that it was not an ordinary
    demonstration; it was something considerably more than a
    demonstration, but less than a revolution. It was an outburst of
    revolution and counter-revolution together, a sharp,
    sometimes almost sudden elimination of the middle elements, while
    the proletarian and bourgeois elements made a stormy
    appearance. 

In this respect it is extremely typical that, for each
    of these movements, the middle elements blame both of the
    specific class forces — the proletariat as well as the
    bourgeoisie. Look at the S.R.s and Mensheviks. They lean over
    backwards to frantically shout that, by their extremes, the
    Bolsheviks are helping the counter-revolution. At the same time,
    however, they admit again and again that the Cadets (with whom
    they form a bloc in the government) are
    counter-revolutionary. "Our urgent task is to draw a line," wrote
    Dyelo Naroda yesterday, "to dig a deep moat between
    ourselves and all the Right elements, including
    Yedinstvo, which has gone militant" (with which, we may
    add, the S.R.s formed a bloc during the elections). 

Compare that with today’s (July 7) issue of Yedinstvo,
    in which Plekhanov’s editorial is compelled to state the
    indisputable fact that the Soviets (i.e., the S.R.s and

    

    Mensheviks) will "think over the matter for a fortnight" and that,
    if power were to pass to the Soviets, "it would be tantamount to
    victory for Lenin’s supporters". "If the Cadets don’t stick to the
    rule—the worse, the better...," says Plekhanov, "they
    themselves will have to admit that they have made a big mistake
    [by withdrawing from the Cabinet], making the work of Lenin’s
    supporters easier.” 

Isn’t that typical? The middle elements blame the Cadets for
    making the Bolsheviks’ work easier, and the Bolsheviks for making
    the Cadets’ work easier! Is it so hard to guess that if we
    substitute class names for political ones we have before us the
    dreams of the petty bourgeoisie about the disappearance of the
    class struggle between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie? Isn’t
    the petty bourgeoisie complaining about the class struggle between
    the proletariat and the bourgeoisie? Is it really so hard to guess
    that no Bolsheviks in the world could have “created” even a single
    "popular movement", let alone three movements, if the deepest
    economic and political causes had not set the proletariat into
    action? Is it so difficult to guess that no Cadets and monarchists
    combined could have called forth any movement "from the Right" if
    it had not been for the equally deep causes that make the
    bourgeoisie as a class counter-revolutionary? 

Both we and the Cadets were blamed for the April 20-21 movement
    — for intransigence, extremes, and for aggravating the
    situation. The Bolsheviks were even accused (absurd as it may be)
    of the firing on Nevsky. When the movement was over, however,
    those same S.R.s and Mensheviks, in their joint, official organ,
    Izvestia, wrote that the "popular movement" had "swept
    away the imperialists, Milyukov, etc.", i.e., they
    praised the movement!! Isn’t that typical? Doesn’t it
    show very clearly that the petty bourgeoisie do not understand the
    workings, the meaning, of the class struggle between the
    proletariat and the bourgeoisie? 

The objective situation is this. The vast majority of the
    country’s population is petty-bourgeois by its living conditions
    and more so by its ideas. But big capital rules the country,
    primarily through banks and syndicates. There is an urban
    proletariat in this country, mature enough to go its own way, but
    not yet able to draw at once the majority of the semi-proletarians
    to its side. From this fundamental,

    

class fact follows the
    inevitability of such crises as the three we are now examining, as
    well as their forms. 

In future the forms of crises may, of course, change, but the
    substance of the issue will remain the same even if, for instance,
    the S.R. Constituent Assembly meets in October. The S.R.s have
    promised the peasants:
(1) to abolish private landownership;
(2)
    to transfer the land to the working people;
(3) to confiscate the
    landed estates and transfer them to the peasants without
    compensation. These great reforms can never be realised without
    the most decisive revolutionary measures against the bourgeoisie,
    measures that can only be taken when the poor peasants
    join the proletariat, only when the banks and the
    syndicates are nationalised. 

The credulous peasants, believing for a time that these
    beautiful things can be achieved by compromising with the
    bourgeoisie, will inevitably be disappointed and
    . . . “dissatisfied” (mildly speaking) with the sharp class
    struggle of the proletariat against the bourgeoisie for the
    implementation of the promises of the S.R.s. So it was, and so it
    will be. 

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
The offices of Pravda having been wrecked on July 5 (18), 1917,
by the Provisional Government, the article “Three Crises” appeared
in Rabotnitsa No. 7 on July 19 (August 1). The editors of the
journal wanted that particular issue to be circulated as widely as
possible and therefore published on the cover an appeal to all workers,
trade unions, factory committees, and R.S.D.L.P.(B.) cells and
district organisations earnestly asking them to take energetic steps
for the widest possible dissemination of the issue.

Rabotnitsa (Woman Worker)—a legal periodical published by the
C.C. R.S.D.L.P.(B.) on Lenin’s initiative in St. Petersburg, with
money collected by women workers. It appeared from February 23
(March 8) to June 1914. Seven issues were brought out, of which
the police confiscated three. Among the members of its editorial
board were I. F. Armand, A. I. Yelizarova, N. K. Krupskaya,
P. F. Kudelli, L. R. Menzhinskaya, Y. F. Rozmirovich, K. N.
Samoilova and L. N. Stal.

The periodical resumed publication on May 10 (23), 1917,
and continued till January 1918.

Rabotnitsa played an important part in the political education
of women workers during the Bolshevik Party s preparations for
the socialist revolution in Russia.









<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## The Question of the Bolshevik Leaders Appearing in Court









Lenin: The Question of the Bolshevik Leaders Appearing in Court







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Question of the Bolshevik Leaders Appearing in Court[1]




Written: Written on July 8 (21), 1917 

Published:

      First Published in the magazine Proletarskaya Revolyutsia No. 1 (36), 1925.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 176-177.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Judging by private conversations, there are two opinions on this
      question.
    

Comrades succumbing to the “Soviet atmosphere” often
      incline towards appearing in court.
    

Those closer to the workers apparently incline towards not
      appearing.
    

In principle, the question chiefly boils down to an estimation
      of what is usually called constitutional illusions.
    

Anyone who thinks that a regular government and a regular court
      exist or can exist in Russia, that a Constituent Assembly is
      likely to be called, may arrive at a conclusion in favour of
      appearing.
    

That idea is completely erroneous, however. It is the latest
      events, after July 4, that have most vividly shown that a
      Constituent Assembly is unlikely to be called (with out a new
      revolution), that neither a regular government nor a regular
      court exists or can exist in Russia (at present).
    

The court is an organ of power. The liberals sometimes forget
      this, but it is a sin for a Marxist to do so.
    

Where, then, is the power? Who constitutes the power?
    

There is no government. it changes daily. It is inactive.
    

The power that is active is the military
      dictatorship. Under these conditions, it is ridiculous even to
      speak of “the courts”. It is not a question of
      “courts”, but of an episode in the civil
      war. This is what those in favour of appearing in court
      unfortunately do not want to understand.
    

Pereverzev and Alexinsky as initiators of the “case"!!
      Isn’t it ridiculous to speak of courts in such circumstances?

    

      Isn’t it naive to think that, in such conditions, any court can
      examine, investigate and establish anything??
    

Power is in the hands of a military dictatorship. Without a new
      revolution, this power can only become stronger for a certain
      time, primarily for the duration of the war.
    

      “I’ve done nothing against the law. The courts are
      just. They will sort things out. The trial will be public. The
      people will understand. I shall appear.”
    

This reasoning is childishly naïve. The authorities
      need not a trial but a persecution campaign against the
      internationalists. What Kerensky and Co. need is to put them in
      gaol and keep them there. So it was (in Britain and France), and
      so it will be (in Russia).
    

Let the internationalists work illegally as much as they can,
      but let them not commit the folly of appearing in court of their
      own free will!
    

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Reference is to the summons for Lenin to appear before the court
of the bourgeois Provisional Government to answer the slanderous
charge of espionage in favour of Germany.

The Bolsheviks, who were fighting to transform the imperialist
war into a civil war and advocating the tsarist government s defeat
in the war, were first charged with high treason in favour of
Germany by the tsar’s secret police in the early days of the war.

After the February bourgeois-democratic revolution of 1917,
when the Party set course for a socialist revolution in Russia, the
bourgeois, Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik press carried
slanderous reports in view of the passage through Germany of
a Bolshevik group led by Lenin. The Seventh (April) Conference
exposed that lie in its resolution “On the War”.









<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## The Political Situation









Lenin: The Political Situation







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Political Situation[1]




Written: Written on July 10 (23), 1917 

Published:

      Published on August 2 (July 20), 1917, in Proletarskoye Dyelo No. 6.

      Signed: W.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 178-180.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The counter-revolution has become organised and consolidated,
      and has actually taken state power into its hands.
    

The complete organisation and consolidation of the
      counter-revolution consists in a combination of its three main
      forces, a combination excellently conceived and already put into
      practice:
      1. The Constitutional-Democratic Party, i. e., the real leader
         of the organised bourgeoisie, has, by withdrawing from the
         Cabinet, confronted it with an ultimatum, thus clearing the
         way for the Cabinet’s overthrow by the counter-revolution;
      2. The General Staff and the military leaders, with the
         deliberate or semi-deliberate assistance of Kerensky, whom
         even the most prominent Socialist-Revolutionaries now call a
         Cavaignac, have seized actual state power and have proceeded
         to shoot down revolutionary units at the front, disarm the
         revolutionary troops and workers in Petrograd and Moscow,
         suppress unrest in Nizhni-Novgorod, arrest Bolsheviks and ban
         their papers, not only without trial, but even without a
         government order. At present, basic state power in Russia is
         virtually a military dictatorship. This fact is still
         obscured by a number of institutions that are revolutionary
         in words but powerless in deeds. Yet it is so obvious and
         fundamental a fact that without under standing it, one cannot
         understand anything about the political situation.
      3. The Black Hundred-monarchist and bourgeois press, which has
         switched from hounding Bolsheviks to hounding the Soviets,
         the “incendiary” Chernov, etc., has indicated
         with the utmost clarity that the true meaning of the policy
         of military dictatorship, which now reigns supreme and is
      supported by the Cadets

    

and monarchists, is preparations for
      disbanding the Soviets. Many of the leaders of the S.R.s and
      Mensheviks, i. e., the present majority in the Soviets, have
      admitted and expressed this during the past few days, but, true
      to their petty-bourgeois nature, they shrug off this formidable
      reality with meaningless high-sounding phrases.
    

      2. The leaders of the Soviets and of the Socialist-Revolutionary
      and Menshevik parties, headed by Tsereteli and Chernov, have
      completely betrayed the cause of the revolution by putting it
      in the hands of the counter-revolutionaries and by turning
      themselves, their parties and the Soviets into mere fig-leaves
      of the counter-revolution.
    

Proof of this is that the Socialist-Revolutionaries and
      Mensheviks have betrayed the Bolsheviks and have tacitly agreed
      to close down their papers without daring to tell the people
      plainly and openly that they are doing so and why. By
      sanctioning the disarming of the workers and the revolutionary
      regiments, they have deprived themselves of all real power. They
      have turned into the most loud-mouthed ranters who help the
      reaction to “divert” the people’s attention until it
      is finally ready to disband the Soviets. It is impossible to
      understand anything at all about the present political situation
      without realising this complete and final bankruptcy of the
      S.R.s and Mensheviks and the present majority in the Soviets and
      without realising that their “Directory” and other
      masquerades are an absolute sham.
    

      3. All hopes for a peaceful development of the Russian revolution
      have vanished for good. This is the objective situation: either
      complete victory for the military dictatorship, or victory for
      the workers’ armed uprising; the latter victory is only possible
      when the insurrection coincides with a deep, mass upheaval
      against the government and the bourgeoisie caused by economic
      disruption and the prolongation of the war.
    

The slogan “All Power to the Soviets!” was a slogan for
      peaceful development of the revolution which was possible in
      April, May, June, and up to July 5-9, i. e., up to the time when
      actual power passed into the hands of the military
      dictatorship. This slogan is no longer correct,
      for it does not take into account that power has changed

    

hands
      and that the revolution has in fact been completely betrayed by
      the S.R.s and Mensheviks. Reckless actions, revolts, partial
      resistance, or hopeless hit-and-run attempts to oppose reaction
      will not help. What will help is a clear understanding of t.he
      situation, endurance and determination of the workers’ vanguard,
      preparation of forces for the armed uprising, for the victory of
      which conditions at present are extremely difficult, but still
      possible if the facts and trends mentioned above coincide. Let
      us have no constitutional or republican illusions of any kind,
      no more illusions about a peaceful path, no sporadic actions, no
      yielding now to provocation from the Black Hundreds and
      Cossacks. Let us gather forces, reorganise them, and resolutely
      prepare for the armed uprising, if the course of the crisis
      permits it on a really mass, country-wide scale. The transfer of
      land to the peasants is impossible at present without armed
      uprising, since the counter-revolutionaries, having taken power,
      have completely united with the landowners as a class.
    

The aim of the insurrection can only be to transfer power to the
      proletariat, supported by the poor peasants, with a view to
      putting our Party programme into effect.
    

      4. The party of the working class, without abandoning legal
      activity, but never for a moment overrating it, must
      combine legal with illegal work, as it did in 1912-14.
    

Don’t let slip a single hour of legal work. But don’t cherish
      any constitutional or “peaceful” illusions. Form
      illegal organisations or cells everywhere and at once for the
      publication of leaflets, etc. Reorganise immediately,
      consistently, resolutely, all along the line.
    

Act as we did in 1912–14, when we could speak about overthrowing
      tsarism by a revolution and an armed uprising, without at the
      same time losing our legal base in the Duma, the insurance
      societies, the trade unions, etc.
    

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
The article “The Political Situation” was first published in the
Kronstadt Bolshevik paper Proletarskoye Dyelo No. 6 on August 2
(July 20), 1917, under the heading “Political Mood”.

To safeguard the newspaper against suppression by the
Provisional Government, the editors substituted “a resolute fight” for
“an armed uprising”. In this volume, the article appears according
to the manuscript.









<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## Letter to the Editors of Novaya Zhizn









Lenin: Letter to the Editors of Novaya Zhizn







V. I.  

      Lenin
Letter to the Editors of Novaya Zhizn




Published:

      First published in Novaya Zhizn No. 71, July 11 (24), 1917.

      Published according to the text in Novaya Zhizn.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 181-182.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Permit us, comrades, to turn to your hospitality on account of
      the forced suspension of our Party paper. Certain papers have
      begun a furious baiting campaign against us, accusing us of
      espionage or of communicating with an enemy government.
    

The extraordinary thoughtlessness (an inappropriate and much too
      weak a word) with which this baiting is con ducted may be seen
      from the following plain facts. Zhivoye Slovo first
      published a statement that Lenin was a spy. Then, in a
      “correction” which is supposed not to change any
      thing, it declared that he was not accused of spying! First the
      paper came out with Yermolenko’s testimony, then it was
      compelled to admit that it is downright awkward and shameful to
      see such a person’s testimony as evidence.
    

The name of Parvus is dragged in, without mentioning, however,
      that no one denounced Parvus as sharply and mercilessly, as far
      back as 1915, as the Geneva Sotsial-Demokrat, which we
      edited and which, in an article entitled “The Uttermost,
      Limit”, branded Parvus as “a renegade’.’
      “licking Hindenburg’s
      boots”,[1]

      etc. Every literate
      person knows, or can easily find out, that all political or
      other relations between ourselves and Parvus are completely out
      of the question.
    

The name of one Sumenson is trotted out, a woman with whom we
      have never even met, let alone had anything to do. Business
      enterprises of Hanecki and Kozlovsky are also dragged in, but
      not a single fact is mentioned as to where, how and when the
      business was a screen for espionage.

    

      Not only have we never participated directly or indirectly in
      business enterprises, but we have never received from any of the
      above comrades a single kopek either for our selves personally or
      for the Party.
    

They go so far as to blame us for Pravda dispatches
      being reprinted in a distorted fashion by German newspapers, but
      they “forget” to mention that Pravda issues
      German and French bulletins abroad and that the reprinting of
      material from these bulletins is entirely
      free.[2]


And all this is done with the participation and even on the
      initiative of Alexinsky, who has not been admitted to the
      Soviet, who, in other words, has been recognised as an obvious
      slanderer!! Is it really impossible to under stand that
      such methods against us are tantamount to legal
      assassination? The Central Executive Committee’s discussion
      of the conditions on which the Committee’s members could be
      brought to court undoubtedly introduces an element of
      orderliness.[3]
      Will the Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik
      parties want to participate in an attempt at legal
      assassination? Will they.want to take part in an attempt to put
      us on trial without even indicating whether we are accused of
      espionage or mutiny, in an attempt to put us on trial without
      any precise indictment at all? Will they want to take part in an
      attempt to stage’ an obviously unfair trial which may handicap
      their own candidates in the Constituent Assembly elections?
      Will those parties want to make the eve of the convocation of a
      Constituent Assembly in Russia the beginning of a Dreyfusiad on
      Russian soil?
    

The near future will give an answer to these questions which we
      deem it the duty of the free press to raise openly.
    

We are not talking about the bourgeois press. Of course,
      Milyukov believes in our espionage or in our acceptance of
      German money about as much as Markov and Zamyslovsky believed
      that Jews drink children’s blood.
    

But Milyukov and Co. know what they are doing.
    

N. Lenin


 
Notes
 

[1]
See present edition, Vol. 21, pp. 421–22.—Ed.

 



[2]
Byulleten “Pravdy” (The “Pravda” Bulletin) was published in
German in Stockholm from June to November 1917 under the title
of Russische Korrespondenz “Prawda”. Its publisher was a C.C.
R.S.D.L.P.(B.) group abroad, and it carried articles on major
issues of the Russian revolution, documents, reviews, and news
items on the life of the Party and the country. There was also
a French edition.





[3]
After the reactionary Zhivoye Slovo had published the infamous
calumny against Lenin, the Menshevik and S.R. Central Executive
Committee of the Soviets of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies on
July 5 (18), 1917, appointed a commission of inquiry at the instance
of the Bolshevik group to investigate the slanderous charges against
Lenin and other Bolsheviks. But as soon as the Provisional
Government had decided to refer the case “of the organised armed action
in the city of Petrograd on July 3–5, 1917, against state power”
to the Petrograd Court, the C.E.C. commission of inquiry resigned
and on July 9 (22) published in Izvestia the statement that it was
“discontinuing its activity and putting the evidence collected by
it at the disposal of a government committee”. At a joint meeting
held by the C.E.C. of the Soviets of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies
and the Executive Committee of the All-Russia Congress of
Peasants’ Deputies on July 13 (26), the Mensheviks and
Socialist-Revolutionaries put through a resolution stating that they
considered Lenin’s refusal to appear in court absolutely impermissible.
The resolution said that all persons against whom charges had been
preferred by the judicial authorities were removed from work in
the Soviets.









<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## Letter to the Editors of Proletarskoye Dyelo









Lenin: Letter to the Editors of Proletarskoye Dyelo







V. I.  

      Lenin
Letter to the Editors of Proletarskoye Dyelo




Published:

      First published in Proletarskoye Dyelo No. 2, July 28 (15), 1917.

      Published according to the text in Proletarskoye Dyelo.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 183-184.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Comrades,


We have changed our minds about submitting to the Provisional
      Government’s decree ordering our arrests, for the following
      reasons.
    

From the letter of Pereverzev, the former Minister of Justice,
      published on Sunday in Novoye Vremya, it became
      perfectly clear that the “espionage”
      “case” of Lenin and others was quite deliberately
      framed by the party of the counter-revolution.
    

Pereverzev has openly admitted that he took advantage of
      unconfirmed accusations to work up (his actual expression) the
      soldiers against our Party. This is admitted by the former
      Minister of Justice, a man who only yesterday called himself a
      socialist! Pereverzev is gone, but whether the new Minister of
      Justice will hesitate to adopt Pereverzev’s and Alexinsky’s
      methods, nobody can venture to say.
    

The counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie are trying to create a new
      Dreyfus case. They believe in our “espionage” as
      much as the leaders of Russian reaction, who framed the Beilis
      case,[1]
      believed that Jews drink children’s
      blood. There are no guarantees of justice in Russia at present.
    

The Central Executive Committee, which considers it self the
      plenipotentiary organ of the Russian democrats, appointed a
      commission to investigate the espionage charges, but under
      pressure from the counter-revolutionary forces dismissed it. The
      Central Executive Committee refused to either directly confirm
      or to revoke the warrant for our arrest. It washed its hands of
      the case, virtually delivering us to the counter-revolution.
    
 

The charges of “conspiracy” and “moral
      incitement” to revolt preferred against us are of a very
      definite nature, but no precise indictment of our alleged crime
      is brought either by the Provisional Government or by the
      Soviet, both of which know full well that it is sheer nonsense
      to speak of “conspiracy” in referring to a movement
      like that of July 3–5. The Menshevik and S.R. leaders
      are simply trying to appease the counter-revolution
      that is already bearing down on them too, by delivering a number
      of our Party members to the counter-revolutionaries in
      compliance with their demand. At present there can be no legal
      basis in Russia, not even such constitutional guarantees as
      exist in the orderly bourgeois countries. To give ourselves up
      at present to the authorities would mean putting ourselves into
      the hands of the Milyukovs, Alexinskys, Pereverzevs, of rampant
      counter-revolutionaries who look upon all the charges against us
      as a simple civil war episode.
    

After what happened on July 6–8, not a single Russian
      revolutionary can harbour constitutional illusions any
      longer. Revolution and counter-revolution are coming to grips in
      a decisive fashion. We shall continue to fight on the side of
      the former.
    

We shall continue to aid the proletariat’s revolutionary
      struggle as far as we can. The Constituent Assembly alone, if it
      meets, and if its convocation is not the handiwork of the
      bourgeoisie, will have full authority to pass judgement upon
      the Provisional Government’s decree ordering our arrest.
    

N. Lenin


 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Beilis case—the trial of the Jew Beilis, staged for provocative
purposes by the tsar’s government in 1913 in Kiev. Beilis was falsely
accused of the ritual murder of Yushchinsky, a Christian boy (the
murder was actually committed by the Black Hundreds). The
government’s aim was to stir up anti-Semitism and take advantage
of anti-Jewish pogroms to divert the people’s attention from the
revolutionary movement growing throughout the country. The
trial aroused public indignation. In a number of towns, workers
held protest demonstrations. Beilis was acquitted.









<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## On Slogans









Lenin: On Slogans







V. I.  

      Lenin
On Slogans




Written: Written in mid-July 1917 

Published:

      Published in pamphlet form in 1917 by the Kronstadt Committee of the R.S.D.L.P.(B.).

      Published according to the pamphlet text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 185-192.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Too often has it happened that, when history has taken a sharp
      turn, even progressive parties have for some time been unable to
      adapt themselves to the new situation and have repeated slogans
      which had formerly been correct hut had now lost all
      meaning—lost it as “suddenly” as the sharp
      turn in history was “sudden”.
    

Something of the sort seems likely to recur in connection with
      the slogan calling for the transfer of all state power to the
      Soviets. That slogan was correct during a period of our
      revolution—say, from February 27 to July 4—that has
      now passed irrevocably. It has patently ceased to be correct
      now. Unless this is understood, it is impossible to understand
      anything of the urgent questions of the day. Every particular
      slogan must be deduced from the totality of specific features of
      a definite political situation. And the political situation in
      Russia now, after July 4, differs radically from the situation
      between February 27 and July 4.
    

During that period of the revolution now past, the so-called
      “dual power” existed in the country, which both
      materially and formally expressed the indefinite and
      transitional
      condition of state power. Let us not forget that the issue of
      power is the fundamental issue of every revolution.
    

At that time state power was unstable. It was shared, by
      voluntary agreement, between the Provisional Government and the
      Soviets. The Soviets were delegations from the mass of
      free—i.e., not subject to external coercion—and
      armed workers and soldiers. What really mattered was
      that arms were in the hands of the people and that there was
      no coercion of the people from without. That is what opened

 

up
      and ensured a peaceful path for the progress of the
      revolution. The slogan “All Power Must Be Transferred to
      the
      Soviets” was a slogan for the next step, the immediately
      feasible step, on that peaceful path of development. It was a
      slogan for the peaceful development of the revolution, which was
      possible and, of course, most desirable between February 27 and
      July 4 but which is now absolutely impossible.
    

Apparently, not all the supporters of the slogan “All
      Power Must Be Transferred to the Soviets” have given
      adequate thought to the fact that it was a slogan for peaceful
      progress of the revolution—peaceful not only in the sense
      that nobody, no class, no force of any importance, would then
      (between February 27 and July 4) have been able to resist and
      prevent the transfer of power to the Soviets. That is not
      all. Peaceful development would then have been possible, even in
      the sense that the struggle of classes and parties
      within the Soviets could have assumed a most peaceful
      and painless form, provided full state power had passed to the
      Soviets in good time.
    

The latter aspect of the matter has similarly not yet received
      adequate attention. In their class composition, the Soviets were
      organs of the movement of the workers and peasants, a ready-made
      form of their dictatorship. Had they possessed full state power,
      the main shortcoming of the petty-bourgeois groups, their chief
      sin, that of trusting the capitalists, really would have been
      overcome, would have been criticised by the experience of their
      own measures. The change of classes and parties in power could
      have proceeded peacefully within the Soviets, provided the
      latter wielded exclusive and undivided power. The contact
      between all the Soviet parties and the people could have
      remained stable and unimpaired. One must not forget for a single
      moment that only such a close contact between the Soviet parties
      and the people, freely growing in extent and depth, could have
      helped peacefully to get rid of the illusion of petty-bourgeois
      compromise with the bourgeoisie. The transfer of power to the
      Soviets would not, and could not, in itself have changed the
      correlation of classes; it would in no way have changed the
      petty-bourgeois nature of the peasants. But it would have taken
      a big and timely step towards

 

separating the peasants from the
      bourgeoisie, towards
      bringing them closer to, and then uniting them with, the
      workers.
    

This is what might have happened had power passed to the Soviets
      at the proper time. That would have been the easiest and the
      most advantageous course for the people. This course would have
      been the least painful, and it was therefore necessary to fight
      for it most energetically. Now, however, this struggle, the
      struggle for the timely transfer of power to the Soviets, has
      ended. A peaceful course of development has be come
      impossible. A non-peaceful and most painful course has begun.
    

The turning-point of July 4 was precisely a drastic change in
      the objective situation. The unstable condition of state power
      has come to an end. At the decisive point, power has passed into
      the hands of the counter-revolution. The development of the
      parties on the basis of the collaboration of the petty-bourgeois
      Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik parties and the
      counter-revolutionary Cadets has brought about a situation in
      which both these petty-bourgeois parties have virtually become
      participants in and abettors of counter revolutionary
      butchery. As the struggle between parties developed, the
      unreasoning trust which the petty bourgeoisie put in the
      capitalists led to their deliberate support of the
      counter-revolutionaries. The development of party relations has
      completed its cycle. On February 27, all classes found
      themselves united against the monarchy. After July 4, the
      counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie, working hand in glove with
      the monarchists and the Black Hundreds, secured the support of
      the petty-bourgeois Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks,
      partly by intimidating them, and handed over real state power to
      the Cavaignacs, the military gang, who are shooting
      insubordinate soldiers at the front and smashing the Bolsheviks
      in Petrograd.
    

The slogan calling for the transfer of state power to the
      Soviets would now sound quixotic or mocking. Objectively it
      would be deceiving the people; it would be fostering in them the
      delusion that even now it is enough for the Soviets to
      want to take power, or to pass such a decision, for power to be
      theirs, that there are still parties in the Soviets which have
      not been tainted by abetting the butchers, that it is possible
      to undo what has been done.
    
 

It would be a profound error to think that the revolutionary
      proletariat is capable of “refusing” to support the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks against the
      counter-revolution by way of “revenge”, so to speak,
      for
      the support they gave in smashing the Bolsheviks, in shooting
      down soldiers at the front and in disarming the workers. First,
      this would be applying philistine conceptions of morality to the
      proletariat (since, for the good of the cause, the
      proletariat will always support not only the vacillating petty
      bourgeoisie but even the big bourgeoisie); secondly—and
      that is the important thing—it would be a philistine
      attempt to obscure the political substance of the situation by
      “moralising”.
    

And the political substance is that power can no longer be taken
      peacefully. It can be obtained only by winning a decisive
      struggle against those actually in power at the moment, namely,
      the military gang, the Cavaignacs, who are relying for support
      on the reactionary troops brought to Petrograd and on the Cadets
      and monarchists.
    

The substance of the situation is that these new holders of
      state power can be defeated only by the revolutionary masses,
      who, to be brought into motion, must not only be led by the
      proletariat, but must also turn their backs on the
      Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik parties, which have
      betrayed the cause of the revolution.
    

Those who introduce philistine morals into politics reason as
      follows: let us assume that the Socialist-Revolutionaries and
      Mensheviks did commit an “error” in supporting the
      Cavaignacs, who are disarming the proletariat and the
      revolutionary regiments; still, they must be given a chance to
      “rectify” their “error”; the
      rectification of the “error” “should not be
      made difficult” for them; the swing of the petty
      bourgeoisie towards the workers should be facilitated. Such
      reasoning would be childishly naive or simply stupid, if not a
      new
      deception of the workers. For the swing of the petty-bourgeois
      masses towards the workers would mean, and could only mean, that
      these masses had turned their backs upon the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks. The
      Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik parties could now rectify
      their “error” only by denouncing Tsereteli, Chernov,
      Dan and Rakitnikov as the butchers’ aides. We are wholly

 

      and unconditionally in favour of their “error” being
      “rectified” in this way....
    

We said that the fundamental issue of revolution is the issue of
      power. We must add that it is revolutions that show us at every
      step how the question of where actual power lies is
      obscured, and reveal the divergence between formal and real
      power. .That is one of the chief characteristics of every
      revolutionary period. It was not clear in March and April 1917
      whether real power was in the hands of the government or the
      Soviet.
    

Now, however, it is particularly important for class-conscious
      workers to soberly face the fundamental issue of revolution,
      namely, who holds state power at the moment? Consider its
      material manifestations, do not mistake words for deeds, and you
      will have no difficulty in finding the answer.
    

Frederick Engels once wrote the state is primarily contingents
      of armed men with material adjuncts, such as
      prisons.[1]
      Now it is the military cadets and the
      reactionary Cossacks, who have been specially brought to
      Petrograd, those who are keeping Kamenev and the others in
      prison, who closed down Pravda, who disarmed the
      workers and a certain section of the soldiers, who are shooting
      down an equally certain section of the soldiers, who are
      shooting down an equally certain section of troops in the
      army. These butchers are the real power. The Tseretelis and
      Chernovs are ministers without power, puppet Ministers, leaders
      of parties that support the butchery. That is a fact. And the
      fact is no less true because Tsereteli and Chernov themselves
      probably “do not approve” of the butchery, or
      because their papers timidly dissociate themselves from it. Such
      changes of political garb change nothing in substance.
    

The newspaper of 150,000 Petrograd voters has been closed
      down. The military cadets on July 6 killed the worker Voinov for
      carrying Listok “Pravdy” out of the
      printers’. Isn’t that butchery? Isn’t that the handiwork of
      Cavaignacs? But neither the government nor the Soviets are to
      “blame” for this, they may tell us.
    

So much the worse for the government and the Soviets, we reply;
      for that means that they are mere figureheads, puppets, and that
      real power is not in their hands.
    
 

Primarily, and above all, the people must know the
      truth—they must know who actually wields state
      power. The people must be told the whole truth, namely, that
      power is in the hands of a military clique of Cavaignacs
      (Kerensky, certain generals, officers, etc.), who are supported
      by the bourgeois class headed by the Cadet Party, and by all the
      monarchists, acting through the Black Hundred papers, Novoye
      Vremya, Zhivoye Slovo, etc., etc.
    

That power must be overthrown. Unless this is done, all talk of
      fighting the counter-revolution is so much phrase-mongering,
      “self-deception and deception of the people”.
    

That power now has the support both of the Tseretelis and
      Chernovs in the Cabinet and of their parties. We must explain to
      the people the butcher’s role they are playing and the fact that
      such a “finale” for these parties was inevitable
      after their “errors” of April 21, May 5, June 9 and
      July 4 and after their approval of the policy of an offensive, a
      policy which went nine-tenths of the way to predetermining the
      victory of the Cavaignacs in July.
    

All agitational work among the people must be reorganised to
      ensure that it takes account of the specific experience of the
      present revolution, and particularly of the July days, i. e.,
      that it clearly points to the real enemy of the people, the
      military clique, the Cadets and the Black Hundreds, and that it
      definitely unmasks the petty-bourgeois parties, the
      Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik parties, which played and
      are playing the part of butcher’s aides.
    

All agitational work among the people must be reorganised so as
      to make clear that it is absolutely hopeless to expect the
      peasants to obtain land as long as the power of the military
      clique has not been overthrown, and as long as the
      Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik parties have not been
      exposed and deprived of the people’s trust. That would be a very
      long and arduous process under the “normal”
      conditions of capitalist development, but both the war and
      economic
      disruption will tremendously accelerate it. These are
      “accelerators” that may make a month or even a week
      equal to a year.
    

Two objections may perhaps be advanced against what has been
      said above: first, that to speak now of a decisive struggle is
      to encourage sporadic action, which would only benefit

 

      the counter-revolutionaries; second, that their overthrow would
      still mean transferring power to the Soviets.
    

In answer to the first objection, we say: the workers of Russia
      are already class-conscious enough not to yield to provocation
      at a moment which is obviously unfavourable to them. It is
      indisputable that for them to take action and offer resistance
      at the moment would mean aiding the counter-revolutionaries. It
      is also indisputable that a decisive struggle will be possible
      only in the event of a new revolutionary upsurge in the very
      depths of the masses. But it is not enough to speak in general
      terms of a revolutionary upsurge, of the rising tide of
      revolution, of aid by the West-European workers, and so forth;
      we must draw a definite conclusion from our past, from the
      lessons we have been given. And that will lead us to the slogan
      of a decisive struggle against the counter-revolutionaries, who
      have seized power.
    

The second objection also amounts to a substitution of
      arguments of too general a character for concrete realities. No
      one, no force, can overthrow the bourgeois counter
      revolutionaries except the revolutionary proletariat. Now, after
      the experience of July 1917, it is the revolutionary proletariat
      that must independently take over state power. Without that the
      victory of the revolution is impossible. The only
      solution is for power to be in the hands of the proletariat,
      and for the latter to be supported by the poor peasants or
      semi-proletarians. And we have already indicated the factors
      that can enormously accelerate this solution.
    

Soviets may appear in this new revolution, and indeed are bound
      to, but not the present Soviets, not organs
      collaborating with the bourgeoisie, but organs of revolutionary
      struggle against the bourgeoisie. It is true that even then we
      shall be in favour of building the whole state on the model of
      the Soviets. It is not a question of Soviets in general, but of
      combating the present counter-revolution and the
      treachery of the present Soviets.
    

The substitution of the abstract for the concrete is one of the
      greatest and most dangerous sins in a revolution. The present
      Soviets have failed, have suffered complete defeat, because they
      are dominated by the Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik
      parties. At the moment these Soviets are

 

      like sheep brought to the slaughterhouse and bleating pitifully
      under the knife. The Soviets at present are powerless and
      helpless against the triumphant and triumphing
      counter-revolution. The slogan calling for the transfer of power
      to
      the Soviets might be construed as a “simple” appeal
      for the transfer of power to the present Soviets, and to say that,
      to appeal for it, would now mean deceiving the people. Nothing is
      more dangerous than deceit.
    

The cycle of development of the class and party struggle in
      Russia from February 27 to July 4 is complete. A new cycle is
      beginning, one that involves not the old classes, not the old
      parties, not the old Soviets, but classes, parties and Soviets
      rejuvenated in the fire of struggle, tempered, schooled and
      refashioned by the process of the struggle. We must look
      forward, not backward. We must operate not with the old, but
      with the new, post-July, class and party categories. We must, at
      the beginning of the new cycle, proceed from the triumphant
      bourgeois counter-revolution,which triumphed because the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks compromised with it,
      and which can be defeated only by the revolutionary
      proletariat. Of course, in this new cycle there will be many
      and various stages, both before the complete victory of the
      counter-revolution and the complete defeat (without a struggle)
      of the Socialist- Revolutionaries and Mensheviks, and before a
      new upsurge of a new revolution. But it will only be possible to
      speak of this later, as each of these stages is reached.
    

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
See Frederick Engels, The Origin of the Family, Private Property
and the State (Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Selected Works,
in three volumes, Vol. 3, Moscow, 1973, p. 327).









<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## Our Thanks to Prince G. Y. Lvov









Lenin: Our Thanks to Prince G. Y. Lvov







V. I.  

      Lenin
Our Thanks to Prince G. Y. Lvov




Published:

      First published in Proletarskoye Dyelo No. 5, August 1 (July 19), 1917.

      Published according to the text in Proletarskoye Dyelo.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 193-195.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

In a farewell talk to members of the Committee of Journalists
      under the Provisional Government, Prince G. Y. Lvov, former head
      of the Provisional Government, made some valuable admissions for
      which the workers will certainly be grateful.
    


      “What strengthens my optimism above all else,” Lvov
      said. “are the events of the past few days inside the
      country. I am convinced that our ’deep breach’ in the Lenin
      front is incomparably more significant for Russia than the
      German breach in our South-Western Front.”
    


How can the workers not be grateful to the prince for this sober
      appraisal of the class struggle? They will be more than
      grateful, they will take a lesson from Lvov.
    

What an endless flow of fine words and infinite hypocrisy all
      the bourgeois people and landowners, as well as the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks trailing after them,
      pour out while orating against “civil war”! But
      look at Prince Lvov’s valuable admission and you will see that
      he very calmly appraises Russia’s internal situation from the
      point of view of civil war. What the paltry truth of the
      prince’s admissions amounts to is that the bourgeoisie, which
      head the counter-revolution, have made a deep breach in the
      revolutionary workers’ front. Two enemies, two hostile camps,
      and one has made a breach in the front of the other—this
      is how Prince Lvov sums up Russia’s internal situation. Let us,
      then, give Prince Lvov our heartfelt thanks for his frankness!
      After all, he is a thousand times more correct than those
      sentimental Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik philistines
      who imagine that the class struggle between the bourgeoisie and
      the proletariat, which

    

inevitably becomes exceedingly aggravated
      during a revolution, is
      likely to disappear because of their curses and magic spells!
    

Two enemies, two hostile camps, and one has made a breach in the
      front of the other—this is Prince Lvov’s correct
      philosophy of history. He is right in practically discounting
      the third camp, the petty bourgeoisie, the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks. This third camp
      appears to be big, but, in fact, it cannot decide anything
      independently. That is clear to the sober-minded prince, just as
      it is clear to every Marxist who understands the economic
      position of the petty bourgeoisie, and as it is clear, lastly,
      to anyone who thinks about the lessons of the revolution’s
      history, which have always revealed the impotence of the
      petty-bourgeois parties whenever the struggle between the
      bourgeoisie and the proletariat became acute.
    

Even in war-time, the internal class struggle is far more
      Important than the struggle against the foreign enemy. What
      savage abuse the big and petty bourgeoisie have hurled at the
      Bolsheviks for recognising this truth! What efforts to deny it
      have been made by the numerous lovers of alluring words about
      “unity”, “revolutionary democracy”, and
      so on, and so forth!
    

But when a serious and decisive moment came, Prince Lvov at once
      fully admitted this truth, openly declaring that a
      “victory” over the class enemy at home was more
      important than the position in the struggle against the foreign
      enemy. An incontestable truth. A useful truth. The workers will
      be very grateful to Prince Lvov for admitting it, for reminding
      them of it, for spreading it around. And to express their
      gratitude to the prince, the workers will use their Party to see
      that the greatest number of working and exploited people
      understand and assimilate this truth as well as
      possible. Nothing is more useful to the working class in the
      struggle for emancipation than this truth.
    

What is this “breach” in the civil war front which
      Prince Lvov is so triumphant about? This question must be dealt
      with very carefully if the workers are to learn well from Lvov.
    
 

The “breach in the front” of the internal war on
      this occasion came, firstly, from the fact that the bourgeoisie
      had poured oceans of filth and slander on their class enemies,
      the Bolsheviks, and had shown exceptional tenacity in this
      really infamous and vile business of slandering their political
      opponents. It was the “ideological preparation”, if
      we may call it that, for the “breach in the front of the
      class struggle”.
    

Secondly, the material and really essential “breach”
      came from the arrest and outlawing of people of hostile
      political trends, from the murder of some of them in the street
      without trial (Voinov was murdered on July 6 for carrying
      publications out of the Pravda printers’), from the
      closing down of their newspapers and the disarming of the
      workers and revolutionary soldiers.
    

This is what the “breach in the front of the war against
      the class enemy” means. Let the workers think this over
      well so as to be able to apply it to the bourgeoisie when the
      time is ripe.
    

The proletariat will never resort to slander. They will close
      down the bourgeoisie’s newspapers after openly declaring by law,
      by government decree, that the capitalists and their defenders
      are enemies of the people. The bourgeoisie, in the shape of our
      enemy, the government, and the petty bourgeoisie, in the shape
      of the Soviets, are afraid to say a single open and frank word
      about the ban on Pravda, about the reason for closing
      it down. The proletariat will tell the truth instead of
      resorting to slander. They will tell the peasants and everyone
      else the truth about the bourgeois newspapers and why they must
      be closed down.
    

Unlike the petty-bourgeois—Socialist-Revolutionary and
      Menshevik—windbags, the proletariat will know very well
      what is actually meant by a “breach in the front” of
      the class struggle and by making the enemy, the exploiters,
      harmless. Prince Lvov has helped the workers realise this
      truth. Thank you, Prince Lvov.
    

 
Notes
 
 







<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## Constitutional Illusions









Lenin: Constitutional Illusions







V. I.  

      Lenin
Constitutional Illusions[2]




Written: Written on July 26 (August 8), 1917 

Published:

      Published in Rabochy i Soldat Nos. 11 and 12, August 4 (August 5), 1917.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 196-210.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Constitutional illusions are what we call a political error when
      people believe in the existence of a normal, juridical, orderly
      and legalised—in short,
      “constitutional”—system, although it does not
      really exist. At first

      glance it may appear that in Russia today, July 1917, when no
      constitution has yet been drafted, there can be no question of
      constitutional illusions arising. But it would be very wrong to
      think so. In reality, the essential characteristic of the
      present political situation in Russia is that an extremely large
      number of people entertain constitutional illusions. It is
      impossible to understand anything about the political situation
      in Russia today without appreciating this. Positively no step
      can be taken towards a correct formulation of our tactical
      tasks in Russia today unless we above all concentrate on
      systematically and ruthlessly exposing constitutional
      illusions, revealing all their roots and re-establishing a
      proper political perspective.
    

Let us take three ideas which are most typical of the current
      constitutional illusions, and look into them carefully.
    

Idea No. 1 is that our country is about to have a Constituent
      Assembly; therefore, everything going on now is temporary,
      transitory, inessential and non-decisive, and every thing will
      soon be revised and firmly regulated by the Constituent
      Assembly. Idea No. 2 is that certain parties, such as the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries or the Mensheviks, or their alliance,
      command an obvious and undisputed

    

majority among the people or
      in “the most influential” institutions, such as the
      Soviets; therefore, the will of these parties and institutions,
      like the will of the majority of the people

      in general, cannot be ignored, and even less violated, in
      republican, democratic and revolutionary Russia. Idea No. 3 is
      that a certain measure, such as closing down
      Pravda, was not legalised either by the Provisional
      Government or by the Soviets; therefore, it was only a passing
      phase, a chance occurrence, which cannot at all be regarded as
      something decisive.
    

Let us look into each of these ideas.
    
I

The first Provisional Government promised to convene a
      Constituent Assembly. It considered that its main job was to
      prepare the country for a Constituent Assembly. The second
      Provisional Government fixed September 30 for convening a
      Constituent Assembly. The third Provisional Government, after
      July 4, solemnly reaffirmed that date.
    

Nevertheless, the chances are a hundred to one against the
      Constituent Assembly being convened on that date. And even if it
      is, the chances are again a hundred to one that it will be as
      impotent and useless as was the First Duma—until a
      second revolution triumphs in Russia. To appreciate this, you
      only have to detach yourself for a moment from the present
      hubbub of empty phrases, promises and petty doings which fuddles
      your thinking, and take a look at the main thing, at what
      determines everything in public life—the class struggle.
    

It is clear that the bourgeoisie in Russia have become very
      closely tied up with the landowners. This is shown by the whole
      press, the elections, the entire policy of the Cadet Party and
      the parties to the right of it, and by speeches made at
      “congresses” of “interested”
      persons. The bourgeoisie understand perfectly what the
      petty-bourgeois Socialist-Revolutionary and “Left”
      Menshevik windbags can not understand, namely, that private
      landownership in Russia cannot be abolished, and this
      without compensation, except by carrying through a gigantic
      economic revolution, by bringing the banks under popular
      control, by

    

nationalising the syndicates and adopting the most
      ruthless revolutionary measures against capital. The
      bourgeoisie under stand that perfectly. At the same time,
      however, they must

      know, see and feel that the vast majority of peasants in Russia
      will now be much more to the left than Chernov as well as
      declaring for confiscation of the landed estates. For the
      bourgeoisie know better than we do, both as to how many partial
      concessions were made them by Chernov, say, from May 6 to July 2,
      over delaying and curtailing the various peasant demands, and as
      to how much effort it took the Right
      Socialist-Revolutionaries (Chernov, believe it or not, is regarded
      as a “centre” man by the Socialist-Revolutionaries!)
      at the Peasant Congress and on the Executive Committee of the
      All-Russia Congress of Peasants’ Deputies to
      “reassure” the peasants and feed them on promises.
    

The big bourgeoisie differ from the petty bourgeoisie in that
      they have learned, from their economic and political experience,
      the conditions under which “order” (i. e., keeping
      down the people) can be preserved under capitalism. The
      bourgeoisie are businessmen, people who make big commercial
      transactions and are accustomed to getting down even to
      political matters in a strictly business-like manner. They take
      the bull by the horns rather than putting their trust in words.
    

The Constituent Assembly in Russia today will yield a majority
      to peasants who are more to the left than the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries. The bourgeoisie know this and
      therefore are bound to put up a tremendous resistance to an
      early convocation. With a Constituent Assembly
      convened, it will be impossible, or exceedingly difficult, to
      carry on the imperialist war in the spirit of the secret
      treaties concluded by Nicholas II, or to defend the landed
      estates or the payment of compensation for them. The war will
      not wait. The class struggle will not wait. This was evident
      enough even in the brief span from February 28 to April 21.
    

From the very beginning of the revolution there have been two
      views on the Constituent Assembly. The Socialist-Revolutionaries
      and Mensheviks, completely swayed by
      constitutional illusions, viewed the matter with the

    

credulity
      of the petty bourgeoisie who will not hear of the class
      struggle: the Constituent Assembly has been proclaimed, there
      will be a Constituent Assembly and that’s all there is to it!
      Everything else is of the devil’s making. Meanwhile the
      Bolsheviks said: only the growing strength

      and authority of the Soviets can guarantee the convocation and
      success of the Constituent Assembly. The Mensheviks and
      Socialist-Revolutionaries laid emphasis on the act of law: the
      proclamation, the promise, the declaration to call a Constituent
      Assembly. The Bolsheviks laid emphasis on the class struggle: if
      the Soviets were to win, the Constituent Assembly would be
      certain to meet; if not, there would be no such certainty.
    

That is exactly what happened. The bourgeoisie have all along
      been waging both in the open and under cover a continuous and
      relentless struggle against calling a Constituent
      Assembly. This struggle was prompted by a desire to delay its
      convocation until after the war. It expressed itself in the fact
      that several times they postponed the date of convocation. When,
      after June 18, or more than a month after the formation
      of the coalition Cabinet, the convocation date was at last set,
      a Moscow bourgeois paper declared this had been done under the
      pressure of Bolshevik propaganda. Pravda has published
      an exact quotation from that paper.
    

After July 4, when the servility and timidity of the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks had led to the
      “victory” of the counter-revolution, a brief but
      highly significant phrase—the “impossibly
      early” convocation of a Constituent
      Assembly!!—slipped into Rech. And on July
      16, an item appeared in Volya Naroda and
      Russkaya Volya, saying that the Cadets insisted on
      postponing the convocation of the Constituent Assembly under
      the pretext that it was “impossible” to convene it
      at such “short” notice, and adding that the
      Menshevik Tsereteli, a lackey of the counter-revolution, had
      consented to its postponement until November 20!
    

Undoubtedly, this item slipped in against the will of the
      bourgeoisie who cannot benefit from such
      “revelations”. But murder will out. The
      counter-revolutionaries, letting themselves go after July 4,
      blurted out the truth. The

    

very first seizure of power by the
      counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie after July 4 was immediately
      followed by a measure (a very serious measure) against
      calling a Constituent Assembly.
    

That is a fact. And that fact reveals the utter futility of
      constitutional illusions. Unless a new revolution takes

      place in Russia, unless the power of the counter-revolutionary
      bourgeoisie (primarily the Cadets) is overthrown, and unless the
      people withdraw their trust from the Socialist-Revolutionary
      and Menshevik parties, parties compromising with the
      bourgeoisie, the Constituent Assembly will either never meet, or
      else will be just a “Frankfurt talking
      shop”, [3]
      an impotent and worthless assembly of petty bourgeois
      people frightened to death by the war and the prospect of the
      bourgeoisie “boycotting the government”, and helplessly
      torn between frantic efforts to rule without the bourgeoisie
      and the fear of getting along without them.
    

The Constituent Assembly issue is subordinate to that
      of the course and outcome of the class struggle between the
      bourgeoisie and the proletariat. Some time ago, Rabochaya
      Gazeta blurted out the remark that the Constituent Assembly
      would be a Convention. This is an example of the empty, wretched
      and contemptible bragging of our Menshevik lackeys of the
      counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie. If it is not to be a
      “Frankfurt talking shop” or a First Duma, if it is
      to be a Convention, it must have the courage, the capacity and
      the strength to strike merciless blows at the counter
      revolutionaries instead of compromising with them. For this
      purpose power must be in the hands of the most advanced, most
      determined and most revolutionary class of today. For this
      purpose that class must be supported by the whole mass of the
      urban and rural poor (the semi-proletarians). For this purpose
      the counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie, i.e., primarily the
      Cadets and the high-ranking army officers, must. be dealt with
      mercilessly. These are the real, the class, the material
      conditions necessary for a Convention. You have only to list
      these conditions in a precise and clear way to understand the
      stupidity of Rabochaya Gazeta’s bragging and the utter
      foolishness of the constitutional illusions of the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks regarding a Constituent
      Assembly in Russia today.
    
    

II

When lashing the petty-bourgeois “Social-Democrats” of
      1848, Marx was particularly severe in his condemnation of their
      unrestrained use of empty phrases about “the people”
      and the majority of the people in
      general.[4]
      It is
      well to
      recall this in examining the second idea, in analysing
      constitutional illusions about a “majority”.
    

For the majority in the state to really decide, definite
      conditions are required, one of which is the firm establishment
      of a political system, a form of state power, making it possible
      to decide matters by a majority and guaranteeing the translation
      of this possibility into reality. That is one thing. Another is
      that the class composition of this majority and the
      interrelation of classes inside (and outside) it should
      enable it to draw the chariot of state concertedly and
      effectively. Every Marxist knows that these two concrete
      conditions play a decisive part in the question of a popular
      majority and of the direction of state affairs in line with the
      will
      of the majority. And yet the political literature of the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks, and their political
      conduct even more so, betray a complete lack of understanding
      of these conditions.
    

If political power in the state is in the hands of a class whose
      interests coincide with those of the majority, that state can be
      governed truly in line with the will of the majority. But if
      political power is in the hands of a class whose interests
      diverge from those of the majority, any form of majority rule is
      bound to become deception or suppression of the majority. Every
      bourgeois republic provides hundreds and thousands of examples
      of this kind. In Russia, the bourgeoisie rule both the economic
      and political life. Their interests, particularly during the
      imperialist war, violently conflict with the interests of the
      majority. Hence, from a materialist and Marxist, and not from a
      formally juridical point of view, we must expose this conflict,
      and combat bourgeois deception of the people.
    

Our Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks, on the contrary,
      have fully demonstrated and proved that their true role is to be
      an instrument of the bourgeoisie for deceiving the people (the
      “majority”), to be the vehicle of

    

that deception and
      contribute to it. However sincere individual
      Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks may be, their
      fundamental political ideas—that it is possible to break
      free of the imperialist war and gain “peace without
      annexations and indemnities” without the dictatorship of
      the proletariat and the triumph of socialism, and that it

      is possible to secure the transfer of land to the people without
      compensation and establish “control” over production
      in the people’s interests without the same condition—these
      fundamental political (and, of course, economic) ideas of the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks are, in practice,
      nothing but petty-bourgeois self-deception, or deception of the
      masses (the “majority”) by the bourgeoisie, which is the
      same thing.
    

That is our first and main “amendment” to the
      majority issue as understood by the petty-bourgeois democrats,
      socialists of the Louis Blanc type, Socialist-Revolutionaries
      and Mensheviks. What, in fact, is the value of a
      “majority” when a majority is in itself only a
      formal thing and when materially, in actual fact, that majority
      is a majority of the parties through which the bourgeoisie
      deceive the majority?
    

And, of course—and this leads us to our second
      “amendment”, to the second of the above-mentioned
      fundamental conditions—this deception can only be properly
      understood by ascertaining its class roots and class
      meaning. This is not self-deception, not (to put it bluntly) a
      “swindle”, but an illusory idea arising out of the
      economic situation in which a class finds itself. The
      petty-bourgeois is in such an economic position, the conditions
      of his life are such that he cannot help deceiving himself, he
      involuntarily and inevitably gravitates one minute towards the
      bourgeoisie, the next towards the proletariat. It is
      economically impossible for him to pursue an
      independent
      “line”.
    

His past draws him towards the bourgeoisie, his future towards
      the proletariat. His better judgement gravitates towards the
      latter, his
      prejudice [5]
      (to use a familiar
      expression of Marx’s) towards the former. For the
majority of
      the people to become an actual majority in state administration,
      the actual servant of the interests of the

    

majority,
      and the actual protector of its rights, and so on, a certain
      class condition is required, namely, that the majority of the
      petty bourgeoisie should join forces with the revolutionary
      proletariat, at least at the decisive moment and in the decisive
      place.
    

Without this, a majority is mere fiction which may prevail for a
      while, may glitter and shine, make a noise and

      reap laurels, but is absolutely and inevitably doomed to failure
      nonetheless. This, incidentally, was where the majority of the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks came to grief, as the
      Russian revolution showed in July 1917.
    

Further, a revolution differs from a “normal”
      situation in the state precisely because controversial issues of
      state life are decided by the direct class and popular struggle
      to the point of armed struggle. It cannot be otherwise when the
      masses are free and armed. This fundamental fact implies that in
      time of revolution it is not enough to ascertain the “will
      of the majority”—you must prove to be stronger at
      the decisive moment and in the decisive place; you must
      win. Beginning with the Peasant War in the Middle Ages
      in Germany, and throughout all the big revolutionary movements
      and epochs, including 1848, 1871 and 1905, we have seen
      innumerable examples of the better organised, more
      politically-conscious and better armed minority forcing its
      will upon the majority and defeating it.
    

Frederick Engels particularly stressed the lesson to be drawn
      from experience, a lesson which to some degree is common to the
      peasant revolt of the sixteenth century and to the Revolution of
      1848 in Germany, namely, disunity of action and lack of
      centralisation on the part of the oppressed owing to their
      petty-bourgeois status in
      life.[6]
      Examining the
      matter from this point of view, we come to the same conclusion,
      namely, that a simple majority of the petty-bourgeois masses
      does not and cannot decide anything, for the disunited millions
      of rural petty proprietors can only acquire
      organisation, political consciousness in action and
      centralisation of action (which is indispensable for victory)
      when they are led either by the bourgeoisie or by the
      proletariat.
    

In the long run we know that the problems of social life are
      resolved by the class struggle in its bitterest and

    

fiercest
      form—civil war. In this war, as in any other war—a
      fact also well known and in principle not disputed by
      anyone—it is economics that decide. It is quite typical
      and
      significant that the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks,
      while not denying this “in principle” and while
      realising perfectly the capitalist character of Russia today,
      dare not face the truth soberly. They are afraid to admit the
      truth

      that every capitalist country, including Russia, is basically
      divided into three main forces: the bourgeoisie, the petty
      bourgeoisie and the proletariat. The first and third are spoken
      of and recognised by all. Yet the second—which really is
      the numerical majority!—nobody cares to appraise
      soberly, neither from the economic, political nor military point
      of view.
    

Truth does not flatter. That is why the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks shrink from recognising
      themselves.
    
III

When I was just beginning this article, the closing down of
      Pravda was merely an “incident”, one that
      had not yet been legalised by the government. But now, after
      July 16, the government has formally closed Pravda
      down.
    

If viewed historically and as a whole, throughout the process of
      its preparation and realisation, this measure casts a remarkably
      bright light on the “nature of the constitution” in
      Russia and on the danger of constitutional illusions.
    

It is known that the Cadet Party, headed by Milyukov and the
      newspaper Rech, has been demanding repressive measures
      against the Bolsheviks ever since April. This demand for
      repression, presented in various forms—from
      “statesman-like” articles in Rech to
      Milyukov’s repeated cries “Arrest them” (Lenin and
      other Bolsheviks)—has been one of the major components, if
      not the major component, of the Cadet political programme in
      the revolution.
    

The Cadet Party had been systematically, relentlessly and
      continuously demanding repressive measures against the
      Bolsheviks long before Alexinsky and Co. in June and July
      invented and fabricated the foully slanderous charge that the
      Bolsheviks were German spies or were receiving German money, and
      long before the equally slanderous

    

charge—running counter
      to generally known facts and published
      documents—of “armed uprising” or of
      “rebellion”. Since this demand has now been met,
      what are we to think of the honesty or intelligence of those who
      forget, or pretend to forget, the true class and party origin of
      this demand? How on earth can we help describing as crude
      falsification or incredible political stupidity the futile
      efforts of the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks to make
      out they

      believe the “occasion” which presented itself on
      July 4 for the repressive measures against the Bolsheviks
      was an “accident” or an
      “isolated” incident? There must surely be a limit to
      the distortion of indisputable historical facts!
    

You have only to compare the movement of April 20–21 with that
      of July 3–4 to realise immediately that they are alike in
      character: both contained such objective facts as the
      spontaneous popular outburst of discontent, impatience and
      indignation, the provocative shots from the right, the killings
      on Nevsky, the slanderous outcries from the bourgeoisie,
      particularly the Cadets, to the effect that “it was the
      Lenin people who fired the shots on Nevsky”, the extreme
      aggravation and exacerbation of the struggle between the workers
      and the bourgeoisie, the utter confusion of the petty-bourgeois
      parties, the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks, and the
      tremendous range of vacillation in their policy and in their
      approach to the issue of state power generally. June 9-10 and
      June 18 give us just the same class picture in a different form.
    

The course of events is as clear as can be: it shows growing
      popular discontent, impatience and indignation and an increasing
      aggravation of the struggle between the proletariat and the
      bourgeoisie, particularly for influence over the petty-bourgeois
      masses. Linked with this are two very important historical
      developments which have made the Socialist-Revolutionaries and
      Mensheviks dependent on the counter-revolutionary Cadets. These
      developments are, first, the formation on May 6 of a coalition
      Cabinet in which the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks
      turned out to be the hangers-on of the bourgeoisie, getting them
      selves more and more into a tangle by making deals and
      agreements with the latter, rendering them thousands of

    

      “services”, delaying the most essential
      revolutionary measures time and again; and secondly, the
      offensive at the front. The offensive inevitably implied the
      resumption of the imperialist war, a vast increase in the
      influence, weight and role of the imperialist bourgeoisie, the
      most widespread chauvinism among the people, and, last but not
least[1]

,

      the transfer of power—first military power and
      then
      state power generally—to the counter-revolutionary
      high-ranking army officers.
    

This was the course of historical events which between April
      20–21 and July 3–4 deepened and sharpened class antagonisms, and
      which after July 4 enabled the counter revolutionary bourgeoisie
      to accomplish what on April 20–21 had stood out very clearly as
      their programme and tactics, their immediate aim and their
      “clean” methods, which were to lead to the
      achievement of that aim.
    

Nothing could be more pointless historically, more pitiful
      theoretically or more ridiculous practically than the philistine
      whining (echoed, incidentally, by L. Martov as well) over July 4, to the effect that the Bolsheviks “contrived” to
      defeat themselves, that this defeat came from their own
      “adventurism”, and so on, and so forth. All this
      whining, all these arguments to the effect that we “should
      not have” participated (in the attempt to lend a
      “peaceable and organised” character to the perfectly
      legitimate popular discontent and indignation!!), are either
      sheer apostasy, if coming from Bolsheviks, or the usual
      expression of the usual cowed and confused state of the petty
      bourgeoisie. In actual fact, the movement of July 3–4 grew out
      of the movement of April 20–21 and after as inevitably as summer
      follows spring. It was the imperative duty of the proletarian
      party to remain with the masses and try to lend as peaceable and
      organised a character as possible to their justified action
      rather than stand aside and wash its hands like Pontius Pilate,
      on the pedantic plea that the masses were not organised down to
      the last man and that their movement some times went to
      excesses—as though there had been no excesses on April
      20–21, as though there had ever in history been a serious
      popular movement free of excesses!
    
 

The defeat of the Bolsheviks after July 4 followed with
      historical inevitability from the whole preceding course of
      events because on April 20–21 the petty-bourgeois masses and
      their leaders, the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks,
      were not yet tied by the offensive and had not yet got
      themselves into a tangle by their deals with the bourgeoisie in
      the “coalition Cabinet”, whereas by July 4 they had
      become so tied and entangled they could not but stoop to
      co-operation (in repressive measures, in slander, in butchery)
      with the counter-revolutionary Cadets. On July 4 the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks slid for good into the
      cesspool of counter-revolution; they had been steadily sliding
      towards it throughout May and June due to their role in the
      coalition Cabinet and their approval of the policy of offensive.
    

We may appear to have digressed from our subject, the closing
      down of Pravda, to a historical estimation of the
      events of July 4. But this only appears so, for the one can not
      be understood without the other. We have seen that, if we look
      into the matter and the interconnection of events, the closing
      down of Pravda, and the arrests and the other forms of
      persecution of the Bolsheviks are nothing but the realisation of
      the long-standing programme of the counter-revolutionaries, the
      Cadets in particular.
    

It would now be highly instructive to see who
      specifically carried out this programme, and by what means.
    

Let us have a look at the facts. On July 2–3 the movement was
      growing; the people were seething with indignation at government
      inaction, the high cost of living, economic dislocation and the
      offensive. The Cadets withdrew, playing a give-away game and
      presenting an ultimatum to the Socialist-Revolutionaries and
      Mensheviks, leaving them, tied to power but lacking power, to
      pay for the people’s defeat and indignation.
    

On July 2–3 the Bolsheviks were trying to restrain the masses
      from action. This has been acknowledged even by an
      eyewitness from Dyelo Naroda, who reported on what took
      place in the Grenadier Regiment on July 2. On the evening of
      July 3, the movement overflowed its banks and the Bolsheviks
      drew up an appeal stressing that the movement must be
      “peaceable and organised”. On July 4, provocative

    

      shots from the right increased the number of victims of the
      firing on both sides. It should be pointed out that the
      Executive Committee’s promise to investigate the incidents, to
      issue bulletins twice a day, etc., etc., has remained an empty
      promise! The Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks did
      nothing whatsoever, they didn’t even publish a complete list of
      the dead on both sides!!
    

On the night of July 4 the Bolsheviks drew up an appeal to stop
      the action and Pravda printed it that same night.

      But that same night, firstly, counter-revolutionary troops began
      to arrive in Petrograd (apparently upon the summons or with the
      consent of the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks, of
      their Soviets—a “delicate” point regarding
      which, of course, the strictest silence is maintained even now
      when every bit of need for secrecy is past!). Secondly, that
      same night military cadets and suchlike, clearly acting upon
      instructions from Polovtsev, commanding, and from the General
      Staff, began raids on the Bolsheviks. On the night of July 4–5,
      Pravda’s office was raided. On July 5 and 6, its
      printers’, “Trud”, was wrecked; a worker named
      Voinov was murdered in broad daylight for carrying Listok
      “Pravdy” from the printers’; house searches
      and arrests were made among the Bolsheviks and the revolutionary
      regiments were disarmed.
    

Who started it all? Not the government or the Soviet, but the
      counter-revolutionary military gang grouped around the General
      Staff and acting in the name of the “counter intelligence
      service”, circulating the lies of Pereverzev and Alexinsky
      in order to stir up the army, and so on.
    

The government is absent. So are the Soviets; they are trembling
      for their own fate as they receive message after message that
      the Cossacks may come and smash them up. The Black Hundred and
      Cadet press, which led the hounding of the Bolsheviks, is
      beginning to hound the Soviets.
    

The Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks have bound
      themselves hand and foot by their entire policy. Being bound,
      they called (or tolerated the calling of) counter revolutionary
      troops to Petrograd. And that bound them even more. They have
      sunk to the very bottom of the foul counter-revolutionary
      cesspool. They cravenly dismissed their own commission,
      appointed to investigate the “case”

    

of the
      Bolsheviks. They basely betrayed the Bolsheviks to the
      counter-revolutionaries. They abjectly participated in the
      funeral procession of the Cossacks who were killed, and so
      kissed the hand of the counter-revolutionaries.
    

They are completely bound. They are at the bottom of the
      cesspool.
    

They try this, that and the other; they hand Kerensky the
      Cabinet, they go to Canossa to the Cadets, they organise a
      “Zemsky Sobor” or a “coronation” of the
      counter-revolutionary government in
      Moscow.[7]
      Kerensky dismisses Polovtsev.
    

But nothing comes of all those efforts. They in no way change
      the actual state of affairs. Kerensky dismisses
      Polovtstev, but at the same time gives shape and legality to
      Polovtsev’s measures and to his policy; he closes down
      Pravda, he introduces capital punishment for the
      soldiers, he bans meetings at the front, he continues to arrest
      Bolsheviks (even Kollontai!) in accordance with Alexinsky’s
      programme.
    

The “nature of the constitution” in Russia is
      coming out with striking clarity: the offensive at the front and
      the coalition with the Cadets in the rear have cast the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks into the cesspool of
      counter-revolution. In reality, state power is passing
      into the hands of the counter-revolutionaries, the military
      gang. Kerensky and the government of Tsereteli and Chernov are
      only a screen for it; they are compelled to legalise
      its measures, actions and policies post factum.
    

The haggling going on between the Cadets and Kerensky, Tsereteli
      and Chernov is of secondary importance, if not entirely
      unimportant. Whether the Cadets win in this haggling, or whether
      Tsereteli and Chernov hold out “alone”, will have no
      effect on the actual state of affairs. The fundamental, the
      main and decisive fact is that the Socialist-Revolutionaries
      and Mensheviks have swung over to the counter-revolutionaries (a
      swing forced by the policy they have been pursuing since May 6).
    

The cycle of party development is complete. The
      Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks have slid steadily
      downwards—from their expression of
      “confidence” in
      Kerensky on February 28 to May 6, which bound them to the

    

      counter revolutionaries, and then to July 5, when they touched
      rock bottom.
    

A new period Is coming in. The victory of the counter
      revolutionaries is making the people disappointed with the
      Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik parties and is paving the
      way for the masses to adopt a policy of support for the
      revolutionary proletariat.
    

 
Notes
 

[1]
These four words are given in English by Lenin.–Ed.
—Lenin
 



[2]
The article “Constitutional Illusions” was first published in 
Rabochy i Soldat in 1917 and then appeared in pamphlet form under
the title of “The Current Situation”. To prevent the suppression
of the newspaper and ensure the secrecy of the Bolshevik Party’s
preparations for an armed uprising, the editors substituted “
including its drastic forms” for “including armed struggle”.





[3]
Lenin is referring to the Frankfurt Parliament, a national assembly
convened in Germany in May 1848, after the March revolution.
The majority in it was held by the liberal bourgeoisie, which
engaged in fruitless talk on a draft constitution, while leaving
power in the king’s hands.





[4]
Reference is to Karl Marx, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis
Bonaparte (Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Selected Works, Vol. 1,
Moscow, 1973, pp. 394–487).



__PRINTERS_P_521_COMMENT__
17—874




[5]
See Karl Marx, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte (Karl
Marx and Frederick Engels, Selected Works, Vol. 1, Moscow, 1973,
p. 480).





[6]
See Frederick Engels, The Peasant War in Germany, Moscow, 1965.





[7]
Reference is to the State Conference planned by the Provisional
Government. It was called in Moscow on August 12 (25), 1917.
Most of the delegates were landowners, members of the bourgeoisie,
generals, officers and Cossack leaders. The Soviet delegation was
composed of Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries. The
conference was expected to rally the counter-revolutionary forces of
the bourgeoisie and landowners to defeat the revolution. Kornilov,
Alexeyev, Kaledin and others put forward a programme for
crushing the revolution. Kerensky threatened in his speech to put down
the revolutionary movement and prevent seizures of the landed
estates by the peasants. The Central Committee of the Bolshevik
Party called on the working class to join in a protest action against
the conference. On the opening day of the conference the Bolsheviks
organised a one-day general strike in Moscow involving over
400,000 people. Protest meetings and strikes took place in several
other cities.









<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## An Answer









Lenin: An Answer







V. I.  

      Lenin
An Answer




Written: Written between July 22 and 26 (August 4 and 8), 1917 

Published:

      Published in Rabochy i Soldat Nos 3 and 4, July 26 and 27, 1917.

      Signed: N. Lenin.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 211-222.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

I

On July 22 the newspapers printed a report “from the     Public Prosecutor of the Petrograd City Court” about the inquiry into     the events of July 3-5, and about the prosecution of a group of Bolsheviks,     including myself, who are charged with treason and the organisation of an     armed uprising.

The government bad to publish the report because this dirty business had     already created too much of a scandal, having clearly been rigged, as every     intelligent person realises, with the aid of the slanderer Alexinsky to     meet a long-standing wish and demand of the counter-revolutionary Cadet     Party.

But by publishing the report, the government of Tsereteli and Co. will     disgrace itself even more, for now the crudeness of the fabrication just     hits one in the eye.

I left Petrograd on Thursday, June 29, on account of illness and did not     return until Tuesday morning, July 4. But of course I assume full and     unqualified responsibility for every single move or measure of our Party     Central Committee, as well as of our Party as a whole. I call attention to     my absence to account for my ignorance of certain details and for my     allusion mainly to documents that have appeared in the press.

Obviously, it is documents of this nature, particularly if published in     the anti-Bolshevik press, that the Public Prosecutor should have carefully     collected, set in order and examined before anything else. But the     “republican” Prosecutor, who is carrying out the policies of     the

    

“socialist” Minister Tsereteli, failed to perform his     principal duty!

Shortly after July 4, the ministerial newspaper Dyelo Naroda     admitted that it was a fact that on July 2 the Bolsheviks had taken action     in the Grenadier Regiment by campaigning against a     demonstration.

Had the Prosecutor a right to keep quiet about this document? Had he any     grounds for discounting the testimony of such a witness?

As it so happens, this testimony establishes the highly important fact     that the movement developed spontaneously and that the Bolsheviks tried to     put off rather than hasten the demonstration.

Furthermore, the same paper printed a still more important document,     namely, the text of an appeal signed by our Party Central Committee and     written on the night of July 3–4. The appeal was written and sent to print     alter the movement, despite our efforts to check or rather control     it, had “spilled over”, after the demonstration bad become a     fact.

The utter baseness and unscrupulousness of the Tseretelian Prosecutor,     and his boundless treachery, show in his evasion of the question     of exactly when, on what day and hour, whether before the Bolshevik appeal     or after it, the demonstration began.

As a matter of fact, the appeal stressed the need to give the movement a     peaceable and organised character!

Can you imagine a charge more laughable than that of “organising     an armed uprising”, made against an organisation which on the night     of July 3–4, i.e., the night before the fateful day, issued an appeal for a     “peaceful and organised demonstration”? Or take another     question: what difference is there between the Prosecutor of Dreyfus or     Beilis and the “republican” Prosecutor of the     “socialist” Minister Tsereteli, a Prosecutor who keeps     completely quiet about the appeal?

Further, the Prosecutor does not say that on the night of July 3–4 our     Party Central Committee wrote an appeal to stop the demonstration and     printed it in Pravda, whose offices were wrecked by     counter-revolutionary troops that very night.
 

Further, the Prosecutor does not say that on July 4 Trotsky and     Zinoviev, in several speeches delivered before the workers and     soldiers marching towards the Taurida Palace, called on them to     disperse once they had made known their will.

Those speeches were heard by hundreds and thousands of people. Then, let     every fair-minded citizen who does not want his country to be disgraced by     another rigged “Beilis case” see to it that irrespective of     party affiliation, those who heard the speeches make written declarations     to the Prosecutor (keeping copies for themselves), stating whether     Trotsky’s and Zinoviev’s speeches contained an appeal to disperse. A decent     Prosecutor would himself have made such an appeal to the population. But     how on earth can there be decent Prosecutors in the Cabinet of Kerensky,     Yefremov, Tsereteli and Co.? And isn’t it high time Russian citizens     themselves took care to make “Beilis cases” impossible in their     country?

By the way, owing to illness, I personally made only one speech on July
4, from the balcony of Kshesinskaya’s Palace. The Prosecutor mentions it,
and tries to set out what I said, but far from naming any witnesses, he is
again reticent about eyewitness reports given in the press. I have by no
means been able to secure a complete set of the papers, but still I have
seen two testimonies:
(1) in the Bolshevik Proletarskoye Dyelo
(Kronstadt) and
(2) in the Menshevik ministerial Rabochaya Gazeta.     Why not verify the contents of my speech by these documents and by a public     appeal?

The speech contained the following points:
(1) an apology for confining
myself to just a few words on account of illness;
(2) greetings to the
revolutionary people of Kronstadt on behalf of the Petrograd workers;
(3)
an expression of confidence that our slogan “All Power to the
Soviets” must and will win despite all the zigzags of history;
(4) an     appeal for “firmness, steadfastness and vigilance”.

I bring out these particulars in order not to pass by the scant but     truly factual evidence which the Prosecutor touched upon—barely     touched upon—in such a cursory, indifferent and careless fashion.

However, the important thing is not the particulars, of course, but the
overall picture, the overall significance

    

of July 4. The Prosecutor proved     completely incapable of so much as even thinking about this.

On this question, we first of all have the highly valuable testimony     given in the press by a rabid anti-Bolshevik, who turns upon us a veritable     spate of invective and spiteful phrases. I refer to the ministerial     Rabochaya Gazeta correspondent. He contributed his personal     observations shortly after July 4. The facts fully established by him show     that his observations and experiences fall into two sharply differentiated     parts. He contrasts the second with the first, saying that things had taken     a “favourable turn” for him.

The first part of the author’s experiences is the attempt he made to     defend the ministers amid a raging crowd. He was insulted, pummelled, and     eventually detained. He heard extremely violent outcries and slogans, of     which he recalls in particular “Death to Kerensky” (because he     ordered an offensive, “sent forty thousand men to death”,     etc.).

The second part of the author’s experiences, the one that brought a     “favourable” turn for him, as he puts it, began when the raging     crowd led him “before the tribunal” at the Kshesinskaya Palace.     There he was released at once.

Those are the facts which prompted the author to turn a torrent of abuse     upon the Bolsheviks. Abuse coming from a political opponent is natural,     particularly if the opponent is a Menshevik who senses that the people,     crushed by capital and the imperialist war, are against instead of for him.     Yet abuse cannot alter the facts, which even as stated by a most rabid     anti-Bolshevik testify that the aroused crowd went as far as to shout     “Death to Kerensky”, that by and large the Bolshevik     organisation gave the movement the slogan “All Power to the     Soviets”, and that this organisation was the only one that carried     any moral weight with the people and urged them to forgo violence.

Those are the facts. Let the willing and unwilling lackeys of the     bourgeoisie shout and curse about the facts, accusing the Bolsheviks of     “conniving with the mob”, etc., etc. We of the party of the     revolutionary proletariat reply that our Party has always been and will     always be with the oppressed

    

whenever they voice their absolutely justified     and legitimate indignation at the high cost of living, at the inaction and     treachery of the “socialist” Ministers, at the imperialist war     and its prolongation. Our Party did its bounden duty by marching together     with the justly indignant people on July 4 and by trying to make their     movement, their demonstration, as peaceful and organised as possible. For     on July 4 a peaceful transfer of power to the Soviets, a peaceful     development of the Russian revolution, was still possible.

The crass stupidity of the Prosecutor’s fairy-tale about the     “organisation of an armed uprising” can be seen from the     following: no one will deny that the vast majority of the armed soldiers     and sailors who crowded the Petrograd streets on July 4 were on our Party’s     side. Our Party had every opportunity to set about removing and arresting     hundreds of high officials, taking over dozens of public and government     buildings and institutions, and so on. We did nothing of the kind. Only     people so mixed up that they repeat all sorts of tall stories spread by the     counter-revolutionary Cadets do not see the laughable absurdity of the     assertion that on July 3 or 4 an “armed uprising” was     “organised”.

The first question the investigation should have put, if it had at all     been worthy of that name, was “who started the shooting?” The     next question should have been, “How many killed and wounded were     there on each side? In what circumstances did each killing and wounding     take place?” Had the investigation been anything like a real     investigation (and not like a trouble-making article in the papers of the     Dans, the Alexinskys, etc.), it would have been the investigators’ duty to     hold an open, public cross-examination of the witnesses and then     immediately publish the record of the interrogation.

That is what courts of inquiry always did in Britain when Britain was a     free country. That, or roughly that, is what the Executive Committee of the     Soviet felt it had to do at first, when fear of the Cadets had not yet     completely numbed its conscience. We know the Executive Committee then     promised in the press to issue two bulletins daily on the work of its     investigating commission. We also know

    

the Executive Committee (i.e., the     Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks) deceived the people by     not keeping its promise. But the text of that promise has gone     down in history as an admission from our enemies, an admission of what any     fair investigator should have done.

It is instructive, at any rate, to note that one of the first     bourgeois, rabidly anti-Bolshevik papers to carry a report about     the shooting on July 4 was the evening Birzhevka of the same date.     And it is this report that suggests that the shooting was not     started by the demonstrators, and that the first shots were fired     against them!! Of course, the “republican” Prosecutor     of the “socialist” Cabinet preferred to say nothing about this     testimony from Birzhevka!! And yet this testimony of the utterly     anti-Bolshevik Birzhevka fully accords with the general picture of     what happened as our Party sees it. Had it been an armed uprising, then, of     course, the insurgents would not have fired on the counter-demonstrators     but would have surrounded certain barracks and certain buildings; they     would have wiped out certain army units, etc. On the other hand, if it was     a demonstration against the government, with a counter-demonstration by     government defenders, it was perfectly natural that the     counter-revolutionaries should be the first to shoot, partly because they     were enraged by the enormous number of demonstrators, and partly with     provocative in tent. And it was just as natural the demonstrators should     counter shots with shots.

Lists of the dead, though probably incomplete, were published,     nevertheless, in a few papers (I think in Rech and Dyelo     Naroda). The prime and immediate duty of the investigation was to     verify, complete, and officially publish these lists. To evade this means     concealing proof that the counter-revolutionaries started the     shooting.

Indeed, even a cursory examination of the published lists shows that the     two main and prominent groups, the Cossacks and the sailors, had each about     the same number killed. Could this have been so if the ten thousand armed     sailors who arrived in Petrograd on July 4 to join the workers and     soldiers, particularly the machine-gunners who had many machine-guns, had     been intent on an armed up rising?
 

Obviously, the number of dead among the Cossacks and other opponents of     the insurrection would in that case have been ten times greater, for no one     will deny that the predominance of the Bolsheviks among the armed people in     the Petrograd streets on July 4 was enormous. There is a long list of     relevant testimonies in the press from our Party opponents, and any fair     investigating body would undoubtedly have collected and published all this     evidence.

If the number of dead is approximately the same on both sides, this     proves that the shooting was started by the counter-revolutionaries and     that the demonstrators merely returned the fire. Otherwise there could not     have been an equal number of dead.

Finally, the following piece of press information is exceedingly     important: Cossacks are known to have been killed on July 4 during an open     skirmish between the demonstrators and counter-demonstrators. Such     skirmishes take place even in non-revolutionary times, if the population is     at all aroused; for instance, they are not infrequent in the Latin     countries, particularly in the South. Bolsheviks are also known to have     been killed after July 4, when there was no clash between excited     demonstrators and counter-demonstrators, and hence when the murder of an     unarmed by an armed person was really an act of butchery. Such was the     murder of the Bolshevik Voinov in Shpalernaya Street on July 6.

What kind of an investigating commission is it that does not fully     collect even the evidence which has appeared in the press concerning the     number of dead on both sides, and the time and circumstances of each     killing? This is just a mockery of an investigation.

It is clearly futile to expect as much as an attempt at a historical     evaluation of July 4 from such an “investigating” commission.     Yet this evaluation is indispensable to anyone wanting to maintain an     intelligent attitude towards politics.

Whoever attempts a historical estimate of July 3 and 4 cannot shut his     eyes to the exact identity of this movement and that of April 20 and     21.

In both cases there was a spontaneous outburst of popular     indignation.
 

In both cases armed people came on to the streets.

In both cases there was a skirmish between the demonstrators and     counter-demonstrators, resulting in a certain (approximately equal) number     of victims on both sides.

In both cases there was an extremely sharp outburst in the struggle     between the revolutionary masses and the counter-revolutionaries, the     bourgeoisie, while the neutral, intermediate elements which inclined     towards compromise were temporarily inactive.

In both cases the special kind of anti-government demonstration (its     special features have been listed above) was due to a deep and protracted     crisis of power.

The difference between the two movements is that the latter was much     more intense than the former and that the Socialist-Revolutionary and     Menshevik parties, neutral on April 20 and 21, have since got themselves     into a tangle by their dependence on the counter-revolutionary Cadets     (through the coalition Cabinet and the policy of taking offensive action),     and so, on July 3 and 4, found themselves on the side of the     counter-revolution.

The counter-revolutionary Cadet Party brazenly lied even after the     events of April 20 and 21, shouting, “The shooting on Nevsky was done     by Lenin’s men”, and, clown-like, they demanded an investigation. The     Cadets and their friends then constituted the majority in the government     and so the investigation was wholly in their hands. It was begun and     abandoned, and nothing was published.

Why? Evidently because the facts in no way confirmed what the Cadets     wanted. In other words, the investigation concerning April 20 and 21 was     “smothered” because the facts proved t.hat the firing had been     started by the counter revolutionaries, the Cadets and their friends. This     is clear.

The same thing apparently happened on July 3 and 4 and that explains the     crude and glaring falsification used by the Prosecutor, who affronts all     standards of reasonably conscientious investigation to please Tsereteli and     Co.

The movement on July 3 and 4 was the last attempt by means of a     demonstration to induce the Soviets to take power. That was when the     Soviets, i.e., the

    

Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks controlling     them, virtually handed over power to the counter-revolution by summoning     counter-revolutionary troops to Petrograd, disarming and disbanding     revolutionary regiments and the workers, approving and tolerating acts of     tyranny and violence against the Bolsheviks, the introduction of the death     penalty at the front, etc.

Military, and consequently political, power has now virtually passed     into the hands of the counter-revolution represented by the Cadets and     backed by the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks. Now, a peaceful     development of the Russian revolution is no longer possible and the     historical alternative is either complete victory for the     counter-revolution, or a new revolution.
II

The charge of espionage and relations with Germany is purely a Beilis     case deserving only a brief comment. On this point, the     “investigation” merely repeats the slander of the notorious     slanderer Alexinsky, distorting the facts in a particularly crude way.

It is not true that in 1914 Zinoviev and I were arrested in Austria.     Only I was arrested.

It is not true that I was arrested as a Russian subject. I was arrested     on suspicion of spying, the local gendarme having mistaken the graphs of     agrarian statistics in my notebooks for “plans"! Obviously, that     Austrian gendarme was quite on a par with Alexinsky and the     Yedinstvo group. But it appears that I have been persecuted for     internationalism more than anyone else, for I have been persecuted by     both belligerent coalitions as a spy—by the gendarme in     Austria and by the Cadets, Alexinsky and Co. in Russia.

It is not true that Hanecki played a part in my release from the     Austrian prison. Victor Adler helped put the Austrian authorities to shame.     Poles helped, being ashamed that such an infamous arrest of a Russian     revolutionary could take place on Polish soil.

It is an infamous lie that I was in contact with Parvus, that I visited     military camps, etc. Nothing of the kind happened, or could have happened.     Upon the appearance of the

    

very first issues of Parvus’s journal The
Bell[2], our newspaper, Sotsial-Demokrat,     described
Parvus as a renegade and a German
Plekhanov.[1]

Parvus     is as much a social-chauvinist on the side of Germany as
Plekhanov is on     the side of Russia. Being revolutionary
internationalists, we had and could     have nothing in common with German,
Russian, or Ukrainian (Union for the     Liberation of the Ukraine)
social-chauvinists.

Steinberg is a member of an exile committee in Stockholm, where I first     met him. About April 20 or a little later, Steinberg came to Petrograd,     where I remember him soliciting a subsidy for the exile society. The     Prosecutor could have verified this quite easily if he had wanted to.

The Prosecutor’s argument is that Parvus is connected with Hanecki, and     that Hanecki is connected with Lenin! But this is just a big swindle, for     everyone knows that Hanecki had financial dealings with Parvus, but none     with me.

Hanecki, being a tradesman, worked for Parvus or did business with him.     But then a great many Russian exiles associated with the press have worked     in establishments and institutions belonging to Parvus.

The Prosecutor’s argument is that business correspondence may have     served as a screen for relations in the nature of espionage. One wonders     how many members of the Cadet, Menshevik and Socialist-Revolutionary     parties could be indicted for business correspondence according to this     wonderful formula!

But since the Prosecutor is in possession of several telegrams from     Hanecki to Sumenson (which have already been published) and since the     Prosecutor knows in which bank, when, and how much money Sumenson had (for     the Prosecutor has published a few figures of this nature), why shouldn’t     he invite two or three office or business employees to take part in the     investigation? It would surely take them no more than a couple of days to     make a complete extract from all the business and bank records for     him.

Hardly anything reveals the true nature of this “Beilis     case” as well
as the fragmentary figures cited by the

    

Prosecutor:     within six months Sumenson drew 750,000 rubles; she has 180,000 rubles left     on her account!! If you are going to publish figures, why not publish them     all? When exactly, from whom exactly did Sumenson receive money     “within six months”, and to whom did she pay it out? When     exactly, and exactly what consignments of goods were received?

What could be easier than to collect these complete data? This could and     should have been done in a matter of two or three days! It would have     disclosed the whole round of business dealings between Hanecki and     Sumenson! It would have left no room for the obscure insinuations the     Prosecutor is making!

How low the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks have fallen is     shown by Alexinsky’s foulest and most infamous slander, paraphrased to read     like a “state” document by the officials of the Cabinet of     Tsereteli and Co.!
III

Of course, it would be extremely naïve to regard the     “judicial cases” instituted by the Cabinet of Tsereteli,     Kerensky and Co. against the Bolsheviks as actual judicial cases. That     would be an absolutely unpardonable constitutional illusion.

Having entered into a coalition with the counter-revolutionary Cadets on     May 6 and having adopted the policy of an offensive, i.e., resumption and     prolongation of the imperialist war, the Socialist-Revolutionaries and     Mensheviks inevitably found themselves under the thumb of the Cadets.

Being captives, they are forced to participate in the filthiest Cadet     deals, in the Cadets’ lowest and most slanderous intrigues.

The “case” of Chernov is rapidly beginning to enlighten even     the backward, that is, to corroborate our view. After Chernov,     Rech is now denouncing Tsereteli as well, calling him a     “hypocrite” and a “Zimmerwaldist”.

Now the blind will see and the stones will speak.

The counter-revolutionaries are closing their ranks. The Cadets form
their basis. The General Staff, the military leaders and Kerensky are in
their hands and the Black

    

Hundred press is at their service. These are the     allies of the bourgeois counter-revolution.

Foul slander against political opponents will help the workers to     realise all the sooner where the counter-revolution is, and to sweep it     away in the name of freedom, peace, bread for the hungry and land for
    the peasants.

 
Notes
 

[1]
See Vol. 21 of present edition,
      At the Uttermost
    Limit—Ed.
 



[2]
The Bell (Die Glocke)—a periodical published in Munich and then
in Berlin from 1915 to 1925 by the social-chauvinist Parvus (
Helfand), member of the German Social-Democratic Party and an
agent of German imperialism.









<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## The Beginning of Bonapartism









Lenin: The Beginning of Bonapartism







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Beginning of Bonapartism




Published:

      First published in Rabochy i Soldat No. 6, July 29, 1917.

      Published according to the text in Rabochy i Soldat.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 223-226.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Now that the Cabinet of Kerensky, Nekrasov, Avksentyev and
      Co.[1]
      has been formed, the gravest and most
      disastrous error Marxists could make would be to mistake words
      for deeds, deceptive appearances for reality or generally for
      something serious.
    

Let’s leave this pastime to the Mensheviks and
      Socialist-Revolutionaries who have already gone as far as to
      play the part
      of clowns around the Bonapartist Kerensky. Indeed, it certainly
      is buffoonery on the part of the Chernovs, Avksentyevs and
      Tseretelis to start striking postures and uttering fancy words
      at a time when Kerensky, clearly at the Cadets’ bidding, forms
      something of a secret Directory composed of himself, Nekrasov,
      Tereshchenko and Savinkov, keeps quiet about both the
      Constituent Assembly and the declaration of
July 8,[2]
      proclaims
      the sacred union of classes in his address to the people,
      concludes an agreement on terms unknown to anyone with Kornilov,
      who has presented a most brazen ultimatum, and continues the
      policy of scandalously outrageous arrests.
    

At a time like this, it certainly is buffoonery on the part of
      Chernov to challenge Milyukov to appear before a court of
      arbitration, of Avksentyev to shout about the futility of a
      narrow class point of view, or of Tsereteli and Dan to push
      through the Central Executive Committee of the Soviets the
      emptiest resolutions stuffed with utterly meaningless phrases,
      resolutions that call to mind the Cadet First Duma during its
      worst period of impotence in the face of tsarism.
    

Just as the Cadets in 1906 prostituted the first assembly of
      popular representatives in Russia by reducing it to a miserable
      talking shop in face of the growing tsarist

    

counter-revolution,
      so the S.R.s and Mensheviks in 1917 have prostituted
      the Soviets by reducing them to a miserable talking-shop in face
      of the growing Bonapartist counter-revolution.
    

Kerensky’s Cabinet is undoubtedly a cabinet taking the first
      steps towards Bonapartism.
    

We see the chief historical symptom of Bonapartism: the
      manoeuvring of state power, which leans on the military clique
      (on the worst elements of the army) for support, between two
      hostile classes and forces which more or less balance each other
      out.
    

The class struggle between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat
      has reached the limit and on April 20 and 21, as well as on July
      3–5, the country was within a hair’s breadth of civil war. This
      socio-economic condition certainly forms the classical basis for
      Bonapartism. And then, this condition is combined with others
      that are quite akin to it; the bourgeoisie are ranting and
      raving against the Soviets, but are as yet powerless to
      disperse them, while the Soviets, prostituted by Tsereteli,
      Chernov and Co., are now powerless to put up serious
      resistance to the bourgeoisie.
    

The landowners and peasants, too, live as on the eve of civil
      war: the peasants demand land and freedom, they can be kept in
      check, if at all, only by a Bonapartist government capable of
      making the most unscrupulous promises to all classes without
      keeping any of them.
    

Add to this the situation created by a foolhardy offensive and
      military reverses, in which fancy phrases about saving the
      country are particularly fashionable (concealing the desire to
      save the imperialist programme of the bourgeoisie), and you
      have a perfect picture of the socio-political setting for
      Bonapartism.
    

Don’t let us be deluded by phrases. Don’t let. us be misled by
      the idea that all we have is the first steps of Bonapartism. It
      is the first steps we must be able to discern unless we want to
      find ourselves in the ridiculous predicament of the stupid
      philistine who laments the second step although he himself
      helped to take the first.
    

It would now be nothing short of stupid philistinism to
      entertain constitutional illusions, such as, for instance, that
      the present Cabinet is probably more Left than all the preceding
      ones (see Izvestia), that well-meaning criticism

    

      by the Soviets could rectify the errors of the government, that
      the arbitrary arrests and suppression of newspapers were
      isolated incidents which, it is to be hoped, will never recur,
      or that Zarudny is an honest man and that in republican and
      democratic Russia a fair trial is possible and everyone should
      appear at it, and so on, and so forth.
    

The stupidity of these constitutional philistine illusions is
      too obvious to require special refutation.
    

The struggle against the bourgeois counter-revolution demands
      soberness and the ability to see and speak of things as they
      are.
    

Bonapartism in Russia is no accident but a natural product of
      the evolution of the class struggle in a petty-bourgeois
      country with a considerably developed capitalism and a
      revolutionary proletariat. Historical stages like April 20 and
      21, May 6, June 9 and 10, June 18 and 19, and July 3-5 are
      landmarks which show clearly how preparations for Bonapartism
      proceeded. It would be a very big mistake to think that a
      democratic situation rules out Bonapartism. On the contrary, it
      is exactly in a situation like this (the history of France has
      confirmed it twice) that Bonapartism emerges, given a certain
      relationship between classes and their struggle.
    

However, to recognise the inevitability of Bonapartism does not
      at all mean forgetting the inevitability of its down fall.
    

If we only said the counter-revolution had temporarily
      gained the upper hand here in Russia we should be dodging the
      issue.
    

If we analysed the origin of Bonapartism and, fearlessly facing
      the truth, told the working class and the whole people that the
      beginning of Bonapartism is a fact, we should there by start a
      real and stubborn struggle to overthrow Bonapartism, a struggle
      waged on a large political scale and based on far-reaching class
      interests.
    

The Russian Bonapartism of 1917 differs from the beginnings of
      French Bonapartism in 1799 and 1849 in several respects, such as
      the fact that not a single important task of the revolution has
      been accomplished here. The struggle to settle the agrarian and
      the national questions is only just gathering momentum.
    
 

Kerensky and the counter-revolutionary Cadets who use him as a
      pawn can neither convoke the Constituent Assembly on the appointed
      date, nor postpone it, without in both cases promoting the
      revolution. And the catastrophe engendered by the prolongation of
      the imperialist war keeps on approaching with even greater force
      and speed than ever.
    

The advance contingents of the Russian proletariat succeeded in
      emerging from our June and July days without losing too much
      blood. The proletarian party has every opportunity to choose the
      tactics and form, or forms, of organisation that will in any
      circumstances prevent unexpected (seemingly unexpected)
      Bonapartist persecutions from cutting short its existence and
      its regular messages to the people.
    

Let the Party loudly and clearly tell the people the whole truth
      that Bonapartism is beginning; that the “new”
      government of Kerensky, Avksentyev and Co. is merely a screen
      for the counter-revolutionary Cadets and the military clique
      which is in power at present; that the people
      can get no peace, the peasants no land, the workers no
      eight-hour day, and the hungry no bread unless the
      counter-revolution is completely stamped out. Let the Party say
      so, and
      every step in the march of events will bear it out.
    

With remarkable speed Russia has gone through a whole epoch in
      which the majority of the people put their faith in the
      petty-bourgeois Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik
      parties. And now the majority of the working people are
      beginning to pay heavily for their credulity.
    

All indications are that the march of events is continuing at a
      very fast pace and that the country is approaching the next
      epoch, when the majority of the working people will have to
      entrust their fate to the revolutionary proletariat. The
      revolutionary proletariat will take power and begin a socialist
      revolution; despite all the difficulties and possible zigzags of
      development, it will draw the workers of all the advanced
      countries into the revolution, and will defeat both war and
      capitalism.
    

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Lenin means the coalition Provisional Government formed on
July 24 (August 6), 1917. It included A. F. Kerensky, Premier and
War and Naval Minister (S.R.), N. V. Nekrasov, Deputy Premier
and Minister of Finance (Cadet), and N. D. Avksentyev, Minister
of the Interior (S.R.). The cabinet was composed of Cadets,
Socialist-Revolutionaries, Mensheviks, Popular Socialists, and
non-party people who were close to the Cadets. In this composition,
it found itself in Cadet hands. At a joint meeting of the Central
Executive Committee of Soviets of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies
and the Executive Committee of the Congress of Peasants’ Deputies,
held on July 25 (August 7), the Mensheviks and S.R.s adopted
a resolution urging the most active support for the new coalition
government.





[2]
That is, the declaration issued by the Provisional Government
on July 8 (21), 1917. It contained a number of demagogic promises
which the Provisional Government hoped would reassure the people
after the July events. The government promised to hold elections
to the Constituent Assembly on the appointed date, September 17
(30), guarantee the early introduction of local—urban and Zemstvo
(rural)—self-government, abolish the social estates, take steps
to remedy economic dislocation, and draft legislation on an eight–

   

hour day, labour safety and social insurance, as well as a land
reform, to be considered by the Constituent Assembly. Not one
of these promises was kept.









<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## Lessons of the Revolution









Lenin: Lessons of the Revolution







V. I.  

      Lenin
Lessons of the Revolution




Written: The article was written at the end of July, the Afterword on September 6 (19), 1917 

Published:

      The article was published on September 12 and 13 (August 30 and 31), 1917, in the newspaper Rabochy Nos. 8 and 9.

      The Afterword was published in 1917 in the pamphlet: N. Lenin, Lessons of the Revolution, Priboi Publishers.

      Signed: N–kov in No. 8 and N. Lenin in No. 9.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 227-243.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and C. Farrell
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2000

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

 

Every revolution means a sharp turn in the lives of a vast
    number of people. Unless the time is ripe for such a turn, no real
    revolution can take place. And just as any turn in the life of an
      individual teaches him a great deal and brings rich experience and
      great emotional stress, so a revolution teaches an entire people
      very rich and valuable lessons in a short space of time.
    

During a revolution, millions and tens of millions of people
    learn in a week more than they do in a year of ordinary, somnolent
    life. For at the time of a sharp turn in the life of an entire
      people it becomes particularly clear what aims the various classes
      of the people are pursuing, what strength they possess, and what
      methods they use.
    

Every class-conscious worker, soldier and peasant should ponder
      thoroughly over the lessons of the Russian revolution, especially
      now, at the end of July, when it is clear that the first phase of
      our revolution has failed.
    
I

Let us see, in fact, what the workers and peasants were
      striving for when they made the revolution. What did they expect
      of the revolution? As we know, they expected liberty, peace, bread
      and land.
    

But what do we see now?
    

Instead of liberty, the old tyranny is coming back. The death
    penalty is being introduced for the soldiers at the
      front.[2]
Peasants are
    prosecuted for the unauthorised seizure of landed
    estates. Printing presses of workers’ newspapers are
      wrecked. Workers’ newspapers are closed down without
      trial. Bolsheviks are arrested, often without any charge or upon
      blatantly trumped-up charges.
    
 

It may be argued that the persecution of Bolsheviks does not
    constitute a violation of freedom, for only certain individuals
    are being prosecuted and on certain charges. Such an argument,
    however, would be a deliberate and obvious lie; for how can anyone
    wreck printing presses and close down newspapers for the crimes of
    individuals, even if these charges were proved and established by
    a court of law? It would be a different thing if the government
    had legally declared the whole party of the Bolsheviks, their very
      trend and views, to be criminal. But everybody knows that the
      government of free Russia could not, and did not, do anything of
      the kind.
    

What chiefly exposes the libelous character of the charges
    against the Bolsheviks is that the newspapers of the landowners
    and capitalists furiously abused the Bolsheviks for their struggle
    against the war and against the landowners and capitalists, and
      openly demanded the arrest and prosecution of the Bolsheviks even
      when not a single charge against a single Bolshevik had been
      trumped up.
    

The people want peace. Yet the revolutionary government of free
    Russia has resumed the war of conquest on the basis of those very
    same secret treaties which ex-Tsar Nicholas II concluded with the
    British and French capitalists so that the Russian capitalists
    might plunder other nations. Those secret treaties remain
      unpublished. The government of free Russia resorted to
      subterfuges, and to this day has not proposed a just peace to all
      nations.
    

There is no bread. Famine is again drawing near. Everybody sees
    that the capitalists and the rich are unscrupulously cheating the
    treasury on war deliveries (the war is now costing the nation
    fifty million rubles daily), that they are raking in fabulous
    profits through high prices, while nothing whatsoever has been
    done to establish effective control by the workers over the
    production and distribution of goods. The capitalists are becoming
      more brazen every day; they are throwing workers out into the
      street, and this at a time when the people are suffering from
      shortages.
    

A vast majority of the peasants, at congress after congress,
    have loudly and clearly declared that landed proprietorship is an
    injustice and robbery. Meanwhile, a

    

government which calls itself
    revolutionary and democratic has been leading peasants by the nose
    for months and deceiving them by promises and delays. For months
    the capitalists did not allow Minister Chernov to issue a law
    prohibiting the purchase and sale of land. And when this law was
    finally passed, the capitalists started a foul slander campaign
    against Chernov, which they are still continuing. The government
      has become so brazen in its defense of the landowners that it is
      beginning to bring peasants to trial for “unauthorised” seizures
      of land.
    

They are leading the peasants by the nose, telling them to wait
    for the Constituent Assembly. The convocation of the Assembly,
    however, is being steadily postponed by the capitalists. Now that
    owing to Bolshevik pressure it has been set for September 30, the
    capitalists are openly clamouring about this being “impossibly”
    short notice, and are demanding the Constituent Assembly’s
    postponement. The most influential members of the capitalist and
      landowner party, the “Cadet”, or "people’s freedom", Party, such
      as Panina, are openly urging that the convocation of the
      Constituent Assembly be delayed until after the war.
    

As to land, wait until the Constituent Assembly. As to the
    Constituent Assembly, wait until the end of the war. As to the end
      of the war, wait until complete victory. That is what it comes
      to. The capitalists and landowners, having a majority in the
      government, are plainly mocking at the peasants.
    
II

But how could this happen in a free country, after the
      overthrow of the tsarist regime?
    

In a non-free country, the people are ruled by a tsar and a
      handful of landowners, capitalists and bureaucrats who are not
      elected by anybody.
    

In a free country, the people are ruled only by those who have
    been elected for that purpose by the people themselves. At the
    elections the people divide themselves into parties, and as a rule
    each class of the population forms its own party; for instance,
    the landowners, the capitalists, the peasants and the workers all
      form separate parties. In free countries, therefore, the people
      are ruled through an

    

open struggle between parties and by free
      agreement between these parties.
    

For about four months after the overthrow of the tsarist regime
    on February 27, 1917, Russia was ruled as a free country, i.e.,
    through an open struggle between freely formed parties and by free
    agreement between them. To understand the development of the
      Russian revolution, therefore, it is above all necessary to study
      the chief parties, the class interests they defended, and the
      relations among them all.
    
III

After the overthrow of the tsarist regime state power passed
      into the hands of the first Provisional Government, consisting
      of representatives of the bourgeoisie, i.e., the capitalists,
      who were joined by the landowners. The “Cadet” Party, the chief
      capitalist party, held pride of place as the ruling and
      government party of the bourgeoisie.
    

It was no accident this party secured power, although it was not
      the capitalists, of course, but the workers and peasants, the
      soldiers and sailors, who fought the tsarist troops and shed
      their blood for liberty. Power was secured by the capitalist
      party because the capitalist class possessed the power of
      wealth, organisation and knowledge. Since 1905, and particularly
      during the war, the class of the capitalists, and the landowners
      associated with them, have made in Russia the greatest progress
      in organising.
    

The Cadet Party has always been monarchist, both in 1905 and
      from 1905 to 1917. After the people’s victory over tsarist
      tyranny it proclaimed itself a republican party. The experience
      of history shows that whenever the people triumphed over a
      monarchy, capitalist parties were willing to become republican
      as long as they could uphold the privileges of the capitalists
      and their unlimited power over the people.
    

The Cadet Party pays lip-service to "people’s freedom". But
      actually it stands for the capitalists, and it was immediately
      backed by all the landowners, monarchists and Black
      Hundreds. The press and the elections are proof of this. After
      the revolution, all the bourgeois papers and the whole Black
      Hundred press began to sing in unison with the

    

Cadets. Not
      daring to come out openly, all the monarchist parties supported
      the Cadet Party at the elections, as, for example, in
      Petrograd.
    

Having obtained state power, the Cadets made every effort to
      continue the predatory war of conquest begun by Tsar Nicholas
      II, who had concluded secret predatory treaties with the British
      and French capitalists. Under these treaties, the Russian
      capitalists were promised, in the event of victory, the seizure
      of Constantinople, Galicia, Armenia, etc. As to the people, the
      government of the Cadets put them off with empty subterfuges and
      promises, deferring the decision of all matters of vital and
      essential importance to the workers and peasants until the
      Constituent Assembly met, without appointing the date of its
      convocation.
    

Making use of liberty, the people began to organise
      independently. The chief organisation of the workers and
      peasants, who form the overwhelming majority of the population
      of Russia, was the Soviets of Workers’, Soldiers’ and Peasants’
      Deputies. These Soviets already began to be formed during the
      February Revolution, and within a few weeks all class-conscious
      and advanced workers and peasants were united in Soviets in most
      of the larger cities of Russia and in many rural districts.
    

The Soviets were elected in an absolutely free way. They were
      genuine organisations of the people, of the workers and
      peasants. They were genuine organisations of the vast majority
      of the people. The workers and peasants in soldiers’ uniforms
      were armed.
    

It goes without saying that the Soviets could and should have
      taken over state power in full. Pending the convocation of the
      Constituent Assembly there should have been no other power in
      the state but the Soviets. Only then would our revolution have
      become a truly popular and truly democratic revolution. Only
      then could the working people, who are really striving for
      peace, and who really have no interest in a war of conquest,
      have begun firmly and resolutely to carry out a policy which
      would have ended the war of conquest and led to peace. Only then
      could the workers and peasants have curbed the capitalists, who
      are making fabulous profits “from the war" and who have reduced
      the

    

country to a state of ruin and starvation. But in the
      Soviets only a minority of the deputies were on the side of the
      revolutionary workers’ party, the Bolshevik Social Democrats,
      who demanded that all state power should be transferred to the
      Soviets. The majority of the deputies to the Soviets were on the
      side of the parties of the Menshevik Social-Democrats and the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries, who were opposed to the transfer of
      power to the Soviets. Instead of removing the bourgeois
      government and replacing it by a government of the Soviets,
      these parties insisted on supporting the bourgeois government,
      compromising with it and forming a coalition government with
      it. This policy of compromise with the bourgeoisie pursued by
      the Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik parties, who enjoyed
      the confidence of the majority of the people, is the main
      content of the entire course of development of the revolution
      during the five months since it began.
    
IV

Let us first see how this compromising of the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks with the bourgeoisie
      proceeded, and then let us try to explain why the majority of
      the people trusted them.
    
V

The Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries have compromised
      with the capitalists in one way or another at every stage of the
      Russian revolution.
    

At the very close of February 1917, as soon as the people had
      triumphed and the tsarist regime had been overthrown, the
      capitalist Provisional Government admitted Kerensky as a
      “socialist”. As a matter of fact, Kerensky has never been a
      socialist; he was only a

      Trudovik,[3]
      and he enlisted himself with the “Socialist-Revolutionaries”
      only in March 1917, when it was already safe and quite
      profitable to do so. Through Kerensky, as Deputy Chairman of the
      Petrograd Soviet, the capitalist Provisional Government
      immediately set about gaining control of and taming the
      Soviet. The Soviet, i.e., the Socialist-Revolutionaries and
      Mensheviks who predominated in it, allowed itself to be

    

tamed,
      agreeing immediately after the formation of the capitalist
      Provisional Government to "support it" – "to the extent" that
      it carried out its promises.
    

The Soviet regarded itself as a body verifying and exercising
      control over the activities of the Provisional Government. The
      leaders of the Soviet established what was known as a Contact
      Commission to keep in touch with the
      government.[4] Within that
      Contact Commission, the Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik
      leaders of the Soviet held continuous negotiations with the
      capitalist government, holding, properly speaking, the status of
      Ministers without portfolio or unofficial Ministers.
    

This state of affairs lasted throughout March and almost the
      whole of April. Seeking to gain time, the capitalists resorted
      to delays and subterfuges. Not a single step of any importance
      to further the revolution was taken by the capitalist government
      during this period. It did absolutely nothing even to further
      its direct and immediate task, the convocation of the
      Constituent Assembly; it did not submit the question to the
      localities or even set up a central commission to handle the
      preparations. The government was concerned with only one thing,
      namely, surreptitiously renewing the predatory international
      treaties concluded by the tsar with the capitalists of Britain
      and France, thwarting the revolution as cautiously and quietly
      as possible, and promising everything without fulfilling any of
      its promises. The Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks in
      the Contact Commission acted like simpletons who were fed on
      fancy phrases, promises, and more promises. Like the crow in the
      fable, the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks succumbed to
      flattery and listened with pleasure to the assurances of the
      capitalists that they valued the Soviets highly and did not take
      a single step without them.
    

But time passed and the capitalist government did absolutely
      nothing for the revolution. On the contrary, during this period
      it managed, to the detriment of the revolution, to renew the
      secret predatory treaties, or, rather, to reaffirm them and
      “vitalise” them by supplementary and no less secret negotiations
      with Anglo-French imperialist diplomats. During this period it
      managed, to the detriment of the revolution, to lay the
      foundations of a counter-revolutionary

    

organisation of (or at
      least of a rapprochement among) the generals and officers in the
      army in the field. To the detriment of the revolution it managed
      to start the organisation of industrialists, of factory-owners,
      who, under the onslaught of the workers, were compelled to make
      concession after concession, but who at the same time began to
      sabotage (damage) production and prepare to bring it to a
      standstill when the opportunity came.
    

However, the organisation of the advanced workers and peasants
      in the Soviets made steady progress. The foremost
      representatives of the oppressed classes felt that, in spite of
      the agreement between the government and the Petrograd Soviet,
      in spite of Kerensky’s pompous talk, in spite of the "Contact
      Commission", the government remained an enemy of the people, an
      enemy of the revolution. The people felt that unless the
      resistance of the capitalists was broken, the cause of peace,
      liberty and the revolution, would inevitably be lost. The
      impatience and bitterness of the people kept on growing.
    
VI

It burst out on April 20–21. The movement flared up
      spontaneously; nobody had cleared the ground for it. The
      movement was so markedly directed against the government that
      one regiment even appeared fully armed at the Marinsky Palace to
      arrest the ministers. It became perfectly obvious to everybody
      that the government could not retain power. The Soviets could
      (and should) have taken over power with out meeting the least
      resistance from any quarter. Instead, the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks supported the
      collapsing capitalist government, entangled themselves even
      further in compromises with it and took steps that were even
      more fatal to the revolution, that tended to lead to its
      doom.
    

Revolution enlightens all classes with a rapidity and
      thoroughness unknown in normal, peaceful times. The capitalists,
      better organised and more experienced than anybody else in
      matters of class struggle and politics, learnt their lesson
      quicker than the others. Realising that the government’s
      position was hopeless, they resorted to a method which for many
      decades, ever since 1848, has been practised

    

by the capitalists
      of other countries in order to fool, divide and weaken the
      workers. This method is known as a “coalition” government, i.e.,
      a joint cabinet formed of members of the bourgeoisie and
      turncoats from socialism.
    

In countries where freedom and democracy have long existed side
      by side with a revolutionary labour movement, in Britain and
      France, the capitalists have repeatedly and very successfully
      resorted to this method. When the “socialist” leaders entered a
      bourgeois cabinet, they invariably proved to be figureheads,
      puppets, screens for the capitalists, instruments for deceiving
      the workers. The "democratic and republican" capitalists of
      Russia resorted to this very method. The
      Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks let themselves be
      fooled at once, and the “coalition” cabinet, joined by Chernov,
      Tsereteli and Co., became a fact on May 6.
    

The simpletons of the Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik
      parties were jubilant and fatuously bathed in the rays of the
      ministerial glory of their leaders. The capitalists gleefully
      rubbed their hands at having found helpers against the people in
      the persons of the "leaders of the Soviets" and at having
      secured their promise to support "offensive operations at the
      front", i.e., a resumption of the imperialist predatory war,
      which had come to a standstill for a while. The capitalists were
      well aware of the puffed-up impotence of these leaders, they
      knew that the promises of the bourgeoisie – regarding control
      over production, and even the organisation of production,
      regarding a peace policy, and so forth – would never be
      fulfilled.
    

And so it turned out. The second phase in the development of the
      revolution, May 6 to June 9, or June 18, fully corroborated the
      expectations of the capitalists as to the ease with which the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks could be fooled.
    

While Peshekhonov and Skobelev were deceiving themselves and the
      people with florid speeches to the effect that one hundred per
      cent of the profits of the capitalists would be taken away from
      them, that their "resistance was broken", and so forth, the
      capitalists continued to consolidate their position. Nothing,
      absolutely nothing, was undertaken during this period to curb
      the capitalists. The ministerial turncoats from socialism proved
      to be mere talking machines

    

for distracting the attention of the
      oppressed classes, while the entire apparatus of state
      administration actually remained in the hands of the bureaucracy
      (the officialdom) and the bourgeoisie. The notorious Palchinsky,
      Deputy Minister for Industry, was a typical representative of
      that apparatus, blocking every measure against the
      capitalists. While the ministers prated everything remained as
      of old.
    

The bourgeoisie used Minister Tsereteli in particular to fight
      the revolution. He was sent to “pacify” Kronstadt when the local
      revolutionaries had the audacity to remove an appointed
      commissar.[5]
      The bourgeoisie launched in their newspapers an
      incredibly vociferous, violent and vicious campaign of lies,
      slander and vituperation against Kronstadt, accusing it of the
      desire "to secede from Russia", and repeating this and similar
      absurdities in a thousand ways to intimidate the petty
      bourgeoisie and the philistines. A most typically stupid and
      frightened philistine, Tsereteli, was the most “conscientious”
      of all in swallowing the bait of bourgeois slander; he was the
      most zealous of all in "smashing up and subduing" Kronstadt,
      without realising that he was playing the role of a lackey of
      the counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie. He turned out to be the
      instrument of the “compromise” arrived at with revolutionary
      Kronstadt, whereby the commissar for Kronstadt was not simply
      appointed by
      the government, but was elected locally and was
      confirmed by the government. It was on such miserable
      compromises that the ministers who had deserted socialism for
      the bourgeoisie wasted their time.
    

Wherever a bourgeois minister could not appear in defence of the
      government, before the revolutionary workers or in the Soviets,
      Skobelev, Tsereteli, Chernov or some other “socialist” Minister
      appeared (or, to be precise, was sent by the bourgeoisie) and
      faithfully performed their assignment; he would do his level
      best to defend the Cabinet, whitewash the capitalists and fool
      the people by making promise after promise and by advising
      people to wait, wait and wait.
    

Minister Chernov particularly was engaged in bargaining with his
      bourgeois colleagues; down to July, to the new "crisis of power"
      which began after the movement of July 3-4, to the resignation
      of the Cadets from the Cabinet, Minister Chernov was
      continuously engaged in the useful and

    

interesting work, so
      beneficial to the people, of “persuading” his bourgeois
      colleagues, exhorting them to agree at least to prohibition of
      the purchase and sale of land. This prohibition had been most
      solemnly promised to the peasants at the All-Russia Congress of
      Peasant Deputies in Petrograd. But the promise remained only a
      promise. Chernov proved unable to fulfil it either in May or in
      June, until the revolutionary tide, the spontaneous outbreak of
      July 3-4, which coincided with the resignation of the Cadets
      from the Cabinet, made it possible to enact this measure. Even
      then, however, it proved to be an isolated measure, incapable of
      promoting to any palpable extent the struggle of the peasants
      against the landowners for land.
    

Meanwhile, at the front, the counter-revolutionary, imperialist
      task of resuming the imperialist, predatory war, a task which
      Guchkov, so hated by the people, had been unable to accomplish,
      was being accomplished successfully and brilliantly by the
      "revolutionary democrat" Kerensky, that new-baked member of the
      Socialist-Revolutionary Party. He revelled in his own eloquence,
      incense was burned to him by the imperialists, who were using
      him as a pawn, he was flattered and worshipped – all because he
      served the capitalists faithfully, trying to talk the
      "revolutionary troops" into agreeing to resume the war being
      waged in pursuance of the treaties concluded by Tsar Nicholas II
      with the capitalists of Britain and France, a war waged so that
      Russian capitalists might secure Constantinople and Lvov,
      Erzurum and Trebizond.
    

So passed the second phase of the Russian revolution – May 6 to
      June 9. Shielded and defended by the “socialist” Ministers, the
      counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie grew in strength, consolidated
      their position and prepared an offensive both against the
      external enemy and against the internal enemy, i.e., the
      revolutionary workers.
    
VII

On June 9, the revolutionary workers’ party, the Bolsheviks, was
      preparing for a demonstration in Petrograd to give organised
      expression to the irresistibly growing popular discontent and
      indignation. The Socialist-Revolutionary and

    

Menshevik leaders,
      entangled in compromises with the bourgeoisie and bound by the
      imperialist policy of an offensive, were horrified, feeling that
      they were losing their influence among the masses. A general
      howl went up against the demonstration, and the
      counter-revolutionary Cadets joined in this howl, this time
      together with the Socialist-Revolutionaries and
      Mensheviks. Under their direction, and as a result of their
      policy of compromise with the capitalists, the swing of the
      petty-bourgeois masses to an alliance with the
      counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie became quite definite and
      strikingly obvious. This is the historical significance and
      class meaning of the crisis of June 9.
    

The Bolsheviks called off the demonstration, having no wish to
      lead the workers at that moment into a losing fight against the
      united Cadets, Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks. The
      latter, however, so as to retain at least a vestige of the
      people’s confidence, were compelled to call a general
      demonstration for June 48. The bourgeoisie were beside
      themselves with rage, rightly discerning in this a swing of the
      petty-bourgeois democrats towards the proletariat, and they
      decided to paralyse the action of the democrats by an offensive
      at the front.
    

In fact, June 18 was marked by an impressive victory for the
      slogans of the revolutionary proletariat, the slogans of
      Bolshevism, among the people of Petrograd. And on June 19 the
      bourgeoisie and the
      Bonapartist[1]

      Kerensky solemnly announced that the
      offensive at the front had begun on June 18.
    

The offensive meant in effect the resumption of the predatory
      war in the interests of the capitalists and against the will of
      the vast majority of the working people. That is why the
      offensive was inevitably accompanied, on the one hand, by a
      gigantic growth of chauvinism and the transfer of military power
      (and consequently of state power) to the military gang of
      Bonapartists, and, on the other, by the use

    

of violence against
      the masses, the persecution of the inter nationalists, the
      abolition of freedom of agitation, and the arrest and 9hooting
      of those who were against the war.
    

Whereas May 6 bound the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks to the triumphal
      chariot of the bourgeoisie with a rope, June 19 shackled them,
      as servants of the capitalists, with a chain.
    
VIII

Owing to the resumption of the predatory war, the bitterness of
      the people naturally grew even more rapidly and intensely. July
      3–4 witnessed an outburst of their anger which the Bolsheviks
      attempted to restrain and which, of course, they had to
      endeavour to make as organised as possible.
    

The Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks, being slaves of
      the bourgeoisie, shackled by their master, agreed to everything:
      dispatching reactionary troops to Petrograd, bringing back the
      death penalty, disarming the workers and revolutionary troops,
      arresting and hounding, and closing down newspapers without
      trial. The power which the bourgeoisie in the government were
      unable to take entirely, and which the Soviets did not want to
      take, fell into the hands of the military clique, the
      Bonapartists, who, of course, were wholly backed by the Cadets
      and the Black Hundreds, by the landowners and capitalists.
    

Down the ladder, step by step. Having once set foot on the
      ladder of compromise with the bourgeoisie, the Socialist
      Revolutionaries and Mensheviks slid irresistibly downwards, to
      rock bottom. On February 28, in the Petrograd Soviet, they
      promised conditional support to the bourgeois government. On May
      6 they saved it from collapse and allowed themselves to be made
      its servants and defenders by agreeing to an offensive. On June
      9 they united with the counter revolutionary bourgeoisie in a
      campaign of furious rage, lies and slander against the
      revolutionary proletariat. On June 19 they approved the
      resumption of the predatory war. On July 3 they consented to the
      summoning of reactionary troops, which was the beginning of
      their complete surrender of power to the Bonapartists. Down the
      ladder, step by step.
    
 

This shameful finale of the
      Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik parties was not fortuitous
      but a consequence of the economic status of the small owners,
      the petty bourgeoisie, as has been repeatedly borne out by
      experience in Europe.
    
IX

Everybody, of course, has seen the small owner bend every effort
      and strain every nerve to "get on in the world", to become a
      real master, to rise to the position of a “strong” employer, to
      the position of a bourgeois. As long as capitalism rules the
      roost, there is no alternative for the small owner other than
      becoming a capitalist (and that is possible at best in the case
      of one small owner out of a hundred), or becoming a ruined man,
      a semi-proletarian, and ultimately a proletarian. The same is
      true in politics: the petty-bourgeois democrats, especially
      their leaders, tend to trail after the bourgeoisie. The leaders
      of the petty-bourgeois democrats console their people with
      promises and assurances about the possibility of reaching
      agreement with the big capitalists; at best, and for a very
      brief period, they obtain certain minor concessions from the
      capitalists for a small upper section of the working people; but
      on every decisive issue, on every important matter, the
      petty-bourgeois democrats have always tailed after the
      bourgeoisie as a feeble appendage to them, as an obedient tool
      in the hands of he financial mangates. The experience of Britain
      and France has proved this over and over again.
    

The experience of the Russian revolution from February to July
      1917, when events developed with unusual rapidity, particularly
      under the influence of the imperialist war and the deep-going
      crisis brought about by it, has most strikingly and palpably
      confirmed the old Marxist truth that the position of the petty
      bourgeoisie is unstable.
    

The lesson of the Russian revolution is that there can be no
      escape for the working people from the iron grip of war, famine,
      and enslavement by the landowners and capitalists unless they
      completely break with the Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik
      parties and clearly understand the latter’s treacherous role,
      unless they renounce all compromises with the bourgeoisie and
      resolutely side with the revolutionary

    

workers. Only the
      revolutionary workers, if supported by the peasant poor, are
      capable of smashing the resistance of the capitalists and
      leading the people in gaining land with out compensation,
      complete liberty, victory over famine and the war, and a just
      and lasting peace.
    
Afterword

This article was written at the end of July, as is apparent from
      the text.
    

The history of the revolution during August has fully
      corroborated what is said in this article. Then, at the end of
      August, the Kornilov
      revolt[6]
      caused a new turn in the revolution by clearly
      demonstrating to the whole people that the Cadets, in alliance
      with the counter-revolutionary generals, were striving to
      disband the Soviets and restore the monarchy. The near future
      will show how strong this new turn of the revolution is, and
      whether it will succeed in putting an end to the fatal policy of
      compromise with the bourgeoisie.
    

N. Lenin


      September 6, 1917
    

 
Notes
 

[1]
Bonapartism (from Bonaparte, the name of the two French
      emperors) is a name applied to a government which endeavours to
      appear non-partisan by taking advantage of a highly acute
      struggle between the parties of the capitalists and the
      workers. Actually serving the capitalists, such a government
      dupes the workers most of all by promises and petty concessions.
    —Lenin
 



[2]
On July 12 (25) the Provisional Government introduced capital
punishment at the front. The divisional “military revolutionary
tribunals” that were set up passed sentences which became effective
immediately and were executed without delay.





[3]
The Trudoviks (Trudovik group) were a Duma group of
petty-bourgeois democrats—peasants and intellectuals with Narodnik
leanings. The group was formed by the peasant Deputies to the
First Duma in April 1906. In the Duma it wavered between the
Cadets and the revolutionary Social-Democrats. During the First
World War most of the Trudoviks adhered to a social-chauvinist
position.

After the February revolution the Trudoviks, expressing the
interests of the kulaks, actively supported the Provisional
Government. Their reaction to the October Revolution was hostile and
they took part in the counter-revolutionary activities of the
bourgeoisie.





[4]
The Contact Commission was formed by decision of the compromising
Executive Committee of the Petrograd Soviet on March 8 (21) to
“influence” and “exercise control over” the activity of the
Provisional Government. Its members were M. I. Skobelev, Y. M.
Steklov, N. N. Sukhanov, V. N. Filippovsky and N. S. Chkheidze
(subsequently V. M. Chernov and I. G. Tsereteli were included).
The Commission helped the Provisional Government take
advantage of the prestige of the Petrograd Soviet to disguise its
counter-revolutionary policies. The Mensheviks and Socialist–
Revolutionaries hoped with its aid to keep the people from revolutionary action
aimed at effecting the transfer of power to the Soviets. The
Commission was abolished in the middle of April 1917, its functions
being handed over to the Executive Committee’s Bureau.





[5]
On May 17 (30), 1917, in view of a conflict between the Kronstadt
Soviet and Pepelayev, the Provisional Government Commissar,
the non-affiliated section of the Soviet passed a resolution
abolishing the office of government commissar and investing the Kronstadt
Soviet with full powers. The resolution, supported by the
Bolsheviks, said that the only authority in Kronstadt was the Soviet of
Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies, which should enter into direct
contact with the Petrograd Soviet of Workers’ and Soldiers’
Deputies on all matters affecting the state.

The bourgeois, S.R. and Menshevik press launched a slander
campaign against the people of Kronstadt and the Bolsheviks,
alleging that Russia had begun to disintegrate, that a state of
anarchy was in, that Kronstadt had seceded, and so on.

First the Petrograd Soviet and then the Provisional
Government sent delegations (Chkheidze, Gotz and others in the former

   

case and the Ministers Skobelev and Tsereteli in the latter) to deal
with the Kronstadt incident. In the Kronstadt Soviet the two
Ministers succeeded in putting through a compromise decision
stipulating that the commissar be elected by the Soviet and his
election confirmed by the Provisional Government. A political
resolution was also passed, saying that the Kronstadt Soviet
recognised the authority of the Provisional Government but adding
that this “recognition certainly does not rule out criticism and the
desire that the revolutionary democrats should form a new central
authority and transfer all power to the Soviet of Workers’ and
Soldiers’ Deputies”. =

The resolution expressed the hope that the
Bolsheviks would achieve this by exerting ideological influence.
It ended with an emphatic protest against attempts to attribute to
the Kronstadt Bolsheviks “the intention of severing Kronstadt
from the rest of Russia”.





[6]
The Kornilov revolt against the revolution was organised by the
bourgeoisie and landowners in August 1917. It was led by the tsarist
general Kornilov, then Supreme Commander-in-Chief of the Army.
The conspirators aimed at capturing Petrograd, smashing the
Bolshevik Party, disbanding the Soviets, establishing a military
dictatorship, and paving the way for the restoration of the
monarchy. A. F. Kerensky, head of the Provisional Government, joined
in the conspiracy. However, when the revolt began, ho dissociated
himself from Kornilov, fearing that he might be swept away with
Kornilov, and declared Kornilov to be a rebel against the
Provisional Government.

The revolt began on August 25 (September 7). Kornilov marched
the Third Cavalry Corps against Petrograd. In Petrograd itself,
the counter-revolutionary organisations of Kornilov’s backers were
getting ready for action.

The Bolshevik Party led the people against Kornilov as it
continued, in accordance with Lenin’s recommendation, to expose
the Provisional Government and its S.R. and Menshevik
hangers-on. In response to the call of the Bolshevik Party’s Central
Committee, the workers of Petrograd and the revolutionary soldiers
and sailors rose to fight the rebels. The Petrograd workers promptly
formed Red Guard units. Revolutionary committees were set up
in several localities. The advance of the Kornilov troops was
checked and Bolshevik propaganda began to demoralise them.

The Kornilov revolt was put down by the workers and peasants
under the leadership of the Bolshevik Party. Under pressure from
the people, the Provisional Government had to order the arrest
and trial of Kornilov and his accomplices.









<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## Kamenev’s Speech in the C.E.C. on the Stockholm Conference









Lenin: Kamenev’s Speech in the C.E.C. on the Stockholm Conference







V. I.  

      Lenin
Kamenev’s Speech in the C.E.C. on the Stockholm Conference[2]




Published:

      First published in Proletary No. 3, August 29 (16), 1917.

      Signed: N. Lenin.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 244-246.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The speech made by Comrade Kamenev on August 6 in the Central
      Executive Committee on the Stockholm Conference cannot but meet
      with reproof from all Bolsheviks who are faithful to their Party
      and principles.

In the very first sentence of his speech, Comrade Kamenev made
    a formal statement which gave his whole speech a monstrous
    ring. He made the reservation that lie was speaking on his own
    behalf, and that “our group has not discussed this
    issue”.

First of all, since when, in an organised party, do individual
    members speak about important issues “on their own behalf”?
    Since the group had not discussed the issue, Comrade Kamenev had
    no right to speak. This is the first conclusion to be drawn from
    his words.

Secondly, what right had Comrade Kamenev to ignore the decision
    of the Party Central Committee against participating in the
    Stockholm Conference? As long as this decision has not been
    rescinded by a congress or by a new decision of the Central
    Committee, it remains law for the Party. Had it been rescinded,
    Comrade Kamenev could not have kept quiet, could not have spoken
    in the present perfect: “We Bolsheviks have so far adopted a
    negative attitude to the Stockholm Conference.”

Again the conclusion is that Kamenev had no right to speak and,
      moreover, directly violated a Party decision, directly spoke
      against the Party, and thwarted its will by not saying a word
      about the Central Committee decision, which is binding on him. Yet
      the decision Was published in Pravda, even with the additional
      remark that the Party

    

representative would withdraw from the
      Zimmerwald Conference should it favour participation in the
      Stockholm
Conference.[1]


Kamenev gave an incorrect account of the reasons for the
    “former” negative attitude of the Bolsheviks towards
    participation in the Stockholm Conference. He did not say that
    social-imperialists were going to attend the conference and that
    it would be a disgrace for a revolutionary Social-Democrat to have
    any truck with them.

Sad to admit, Starostin, who has often been very much in the
    wrong in the past, put the revolutionary Social-Democratic point of
    view a thousand times better, more correctly and more fittingly
    than Kamenev. To confer with social-imperialists, ministers,
    butcher’s aides in Russia would he shameful treachery. There could
    then be no talk of internationalism.

Kamenev’s arguments, which actually favour a “change” in
    our view on the Stockholm Conference, are ludicrously feeble.


“It became clear to us,” Kamenev said, “that from that
[??] moment the Stockholm Conference ceased [??] to be a blind
instrument of the imperialist countries.”
      


That is not true. There is not a single fact to support it, and
    Kamenev could advance no serious argument in its favour. If the
    Anglo-French social-imperialists refuse to attend, while the
    German do attend, can that be regarded as a change in principle??
    Is it a change at all from an internationalist point of view? Can
    Kamenev really have “forgotten” the decision of our Party
    conference (April 29) on the perfectly analogous case of the
    Danish social-imperialist?


According to newspaper reports, Kamenev further said, “The
broad revolutionary banner under which the forces of the world
proletariat are mustering is beginning to wave over
Stockholm.”
      


This is a meaningless declamation in the spirit of Chernov and
    Tsereteli. It is a blatant untruth. In actual fact, it is not the
    revolutionary banner that is beginning to wave over Stockholm, but
    the banner of deals, agreements, amnesty for the
    social-imperialists, and negotiations among bankers for dividing
    up annexed territory.
 

We cannot tolerate a situation where the party of the
    internationalists, which is responsible to the whole world for
    revolutionary internationalism, compromises itself by winking at
    the dirty tricks of the Russian and German social-imperialists, of
    the ministers of the bourgeois imperialist government of the
    Chernovs, Skobelevs and Co.

We have decided to build a Third International, and we must do
    so in face of all difficulties. Not a single step backward to
    deals with the social-imperialists and deserters from
    socialism!

 
Notes
 

[1]
See present edition, Vol. 24, p. 388.—Ed.

 



[2]
The question of convening an international socialist conference
in Stockholm arose in April 1917. Borgbjerg, a Danish
social-chauvinist, arrived in Petrograd and, on behalf of the joint
committee of the workers’ parties of Denmark, Norway and Sweden,
invited the socialist parties of Russia to attend the “Stockholm socialist
peace conference”. The matter was discussed at a meeting of the

   

Petrograd Soviet. The Mensheviks and S.R.s accepted the invitation and
decided to take the initiative in calling the conference. On a motion
by Lenin, the Seventh (April) All-Russia Conference of the
Bolshevik Party declared itself emphatically against participation in
the Stockholm conference, a social-chauvinist affair. It exposed
the imperialist nature of the conference and branded Borgbjerg
as an agent of the German imperialists.

On August 6 (19), 1917, at a meeting of the Central Executive
Committee discussing preparations for the Stockholm conference,
Kamenev insisted on participation in the conference. He said the
Bolshevik resolution on the matter should be revised. The
Bolshevik group of the C.E.C. dissociated itself from his
statement.

Simultaneously with the letter “Kamenev’s Speech in the
C.E.C. on the Stockholm Conference”, which he sent to Proletary for
publication, Lenin on August 17 (30) wrote another letter, addressed
to the Bureau of the Central Committee Abroad. With reference
to Kamenev’s statement, Lenin wrote: “I consider Kamenev’s
statement ... the height of stupidity, if not of baseness, and have
already written about this to the Central Committee and for the
press” =

(see present edition, Vol. 35, p. 320). On August 16 (29),
the Bolshevik Party’s Central Committee, upon discussing the
issue of the Stockholm conference, reaffirmed the decision not
to attend.

The conference never met.









<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## Rumours of a Conspiracy









Lenin: Rumours of a Conspiracy







V. I.  

      Lenin
Rumours of a Conspiracy




Written: Written on August 18–19 (August 31–September 1), 1917 

Published:

      First Published in Lenin Miscellany VII, 1928.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 247-254.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The item published under the above title in
Novaya Zhizn No. 103 on August 17 deserves very serious attention. We must dwell on it (again and again), even though what it makes out to be something serious is not serious at all.

It says roughly that on August 14 the rumour was put about in Moscow that some Cossack units were moving towards Moscow from the front and that, moreover, “certain military groups enjoying the sympathy of certain circles in Moscow” were organising “decisive counter-revolutionary actions”. It also alleges that the military authorities had notified the Moscow Soviet of Soldiers’ and Workers’ Deputies, and “with the participation of Central Executive Committee members” (i.e., Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries) had taken steps to inform the soldiers of the need to guard the city, etc. “Moscow Bolsheviks,” the item says in conclusion, “were likewise invited to participate in these preparations since they are influential among many army units and were given access to these for the occasion.”

This last sentence is deliberately vague and ambiguous, for if the Bolsheviks are influential among many army units (which is indisputable and generally recognised), then who and how
could give them “access” to those units? This is obviously absurd. If, however, the Bolsheviks were really “given access” “for the occasion” (By whom? Evidently by the Mensheviks and S.R.s!) to
any army units, that means there was a certain
bloc, alliance or agreement between the Bolsheviks and the defencists on “defence against the counter-revolution”.
 

It is this circumstance that makes an unserious item serious, and requires a very careful approach to what is reported on the part of all class-conscious workers.

The rumour put about by the defencists, i. e., by the Mensheviks and S.R.s., is clearly absurd, and the foul and infamous political calculations which have prompted it are quite evident. It is the Provisional Government which is really counter-revolutionary and which the defencists allegedly want to defend. Cossack troops
were recalled from the front to the capitals, specifically to Petrograd on July 3, by none other than the Provisional Government and the “socialist” Ministers, as was formally confirmed by the Cossack General Kaledin at the Moscow counter-revolutionary imperialist meeting. This is a fact.

This particular fact, which exposes the Mensheviks and S.R.s, and proves their betrayal of the revolution,
their alliance with the counter-revolutionaries,
their alliance with the Kaledins—this fact the Mensheviks and S.R.s would like to cover up, to hush up, to make people forget, through “rumours” alleging that the Cossacks are marching on Moscow against the will of Kerensky, Tsereteli, Skobelev and Avksentyev, that the Mensheviks and the S.R.s are “defending the revolution”, and so on. The political scheme of the Menshevik and defencist traitors is as clear as can be: they want to fool the workers, to make themselves out to be revolutionaries, to learn something about the Bolsheviks (so as to pass it on to the counter-intelligence service, of course), to patch up their reputation! A scheme as vile as it is crude! At small expense, having made up a stupid little “rumour”, they hope to gain “access” to the Bolshevik army units and, in general, to strengthen confidence in the Provisional Government by assuring naive people that it is this government the Cossacks want to overthrow, that it is
not in collusion with the Cossacks and is “defending the revolution”, and so on, and so forth.

The little scheme is obvious. The rumour, of course, is absurd and clearly fabricated. But confidence in the Provisional Government they hope to get in cold cash, and, further, they hope to draw the Bolsheviks into a “bloc” with them!
    

    
      <1mg $rc="../../../../../admin/janitor/table.jpg"
alt="First page of the manuscript Rumours of a Conspiracy." />

 

It is hard to believe that there can be such fools and scoundrels among the
Bolsheviks willing to enter into a bloc with the defencists at present. It
is hard to believe, first, because there is an explicit resolution of the
Sixth Congress of the
R.S.D.L.P.[1]
which says (see

Proletary[2]
No. 4) that “the Mensheviks have deserted for good to the camp of the proletariat’s enemies”. You do not conclude agreements or make blocs with people who have deserted for good to the enemy camp. “The prime task of revolutionary Social-Democrats,” the resolution goes on to say, “is to isolate them [the Menshevik defencists] completely from all the more or less revolutionary elements of the working class.” It is obviously against this isolation that the Mensheviks and S.R.s are fighting by spreading absurd rumours. And it is obvious that in Moscow as in Petrograd, the workers are turning away more and more from the Mensheviks and S.R.s, realising more and more clearly the treacherous, counter-revolutionary nature of their policies. And so, to “remedy the situation”, the defencists are compelled to resort to every trick in the book.

The Congress resolution being what it is, any Bolshevik who came to terms with the defencists for the purpose of “giving access”, or indirectly expressing confidence in the Provisional Government (which is allegedly being defended against the Cossacks), would, of course, be immediately and deservedly expelled from the Party.

There are, however, other reasons why it is hard to believe there can be Bolsheviks, in Moscow or elsewhere, capable of forming a bloc with the defencists, of forming anything like common, even temporary, bodies, of making any kind of deal, etc., with them. Let us imagine a situation most favourable to such rather unlikely Bolsheviks; let us assume that in their
naïveté they actually believed in the rumours they hear from
the Mensheviks and S.R.s; let us even assume that, to inspire them with
confidence, they were given certain, likewise invented, “facts”. It is
obvious that even in these circumstances, not a single honest Bolshevik who
has not completely lost his head would agree to any bloc with the
defencists, would make any deals on “giving access”, etc. Even in these
circumstances, a Bolshevik would say: “Our workers and soldiers will fight
the counter-revolutionary

    

troops if they start an offensive now against the
Provisional Government; they will do so
not to defend this
government, which called Kaledin and Co. on July 3, but to
independently defend the revolution as they pursue their own
aim, the aim of securing victory for the workers, for the poor,
for the cause of peace, and not for the imperialists, for
Kerensky, Avksentyev, Tsereteli, Skobelev and Co.” Even in
the exceedingly unlikely situation we have assumed, a Bolshevik
would tell the Mensheviks: “We shall fight, of course, but we
refuse to enter into any political alliance whatever with you,
refuse to express the least confidence in you. We shall fight in
the very same way as the Social-Democrats fought tsarism in
February 1917, together with the Cadets, without entering into
any alliance with the Cadets or trusting them for one
second. The slightest confidence in the Mensheviks would be as
much of a betrayal of the revolution now as confidence in the
Cadets would have been between 1905 and 1917.” 

A Bolshevik would tell the workers and soldiers: “Let us fight, but not one iota of trust in the Mensheviks if you don’t want to rob yourselves of the fruits of victory.”

It is all too advantageous for the Mensheviks to put about false rumours and allegations to the effect that the government they support is saving the revolution, while in reality it has
already formed a bloc with the Kaledins, is
already counter-revolutionary, has
already taken a great many steps, and is daily taking further steps, to meet the terms of this bloc with the Kaledins.

To believe these rumours, to support them directly or indirectly, would mean, on the part of the Bolsheviks, betraying the cause of the revolution. The chief guarantee of its success today is for the people to clearly realise the treachery of the Mensheviks and S.R.s and completely break with them, and for every revolutionary worker to boycott them as completely as they boycotted the Cadets after the experience of 1905.


(I request that several copies be made of this article, so that it may be
sent to several Party papers and magazines simultaneously for publication,
and at the same time be

    

put before the Central Committee on my behalf with the following postscript:

I request that this article be considered as my report to the Central Committee, with the added proposal that the Central Committee order an official investigation, with Moscow comrades who are not members of the C. C. participating, to establish whether the Bolsheviks had any common institutions with the defencists on this basis, whether there were any blocs or agreements, what they consisted in, etc. The facts and particulars must be investigated officially, and all details ascertained. If the existence of a bloc is confirmed, members of the Central Committee or the Moscow Committee must be relieved of their duties and the question of their formal removal must be submitted, even before the next Congress meets, to the next plenary meeting of the Central Committee. For
now, after the Moscow meeting, after the strike, after July 3–5, it is Moscow that is acquiring, or may acquire, the significance of a
centre. It may well be that a movement similar to that of July 3–5 will develop in this vast proletarian centre, which is larger than Petrograd. At that time the task in Petrograd was to give the movement a peaceful and organised character. That
was a correct slogan. The task facing us in Moscow
now is entirely different; the former slogan would be absolutely incorrect. Our task now would be to
take power and to proclaim ourselves the government in the name of peace, land for the peasants, and the convocation of the Constituent Assembly at the appointed time by agreement with the peasants in the various localities, etc. It is quite possible that such a movement will break out in Moscow due to unemployment, famine, a railway strike, economic dislocation, and so on. It is highly important to have people “at the helm” in Moscow who will not swerve to the right, who will not form blocs with the Mensheviks, and who in the event of a movement will understand the
new tasks, the new slogan of seizing power, the
new ways and means of winning it. This is why an “investigation” of the bloc case and censure of the Bolsheviks in the bloc, if any, and their removal are necessary not only for discipline, not only for remedying the blunder already made, but for the vital interests of the
future movement. The Moscow strike on August 12 proved that the active
    

workers support the Bolsheviks, even though the Duma elections yielded a majority to the S.R.s. This is very similar to the situation in Petrograd before July 3–5, 1917. But there is a vast difference between the situation then and now, for at that time Petrograd could not even have taken power physically, and had it done so, it could not have retained power politically, for Tsereteli and Co. had not yet sunk as low as to support butchery. This is why
at that time, on July 3–5, 1917, in Petrograd, the slogan of taking power would have been
incorrect. At that time, even the Bolsheviks were not, and could not have been, consciously determined to treat Tsereteli and Co. as counter-revolutionaries. At that time, neither the soldiers nor the workers could have had the experience brought by the month of July. 

The situation now is entirely different. Should a spontaneous movement break out in Moscow today, the slogan should be precisely to seize power. It is of the utmost importance, therefore, that the movement in Moscow be led by people fit for the task, who have
fully grasped and considered this slogan. This is why we must insist again, and again on an investigation and the removal of the guilty.)

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Lenin is referring to the resolution “Unification of the Party”,
passed by the Sixth Congress of the R.S.D.L.P.(B.). (See The
C.P.S.U. in Resolutions and Decisions of Congresses, Conferences and
Plenary Meetings of the C.C., Part I, 1954, p. 388 [in Russian].)

The Sixth Congress of the R.S.D.L.P.(B.) sat in Petrograd from
July 26 to August 3 (August 8–16), 1917, in semi-legal conditions.
It was attended by 157 delegates voting and 110 delegates with
voice but no vote, from 240,000 Party members. Lenin guided the
congress from underground. He kept in touch with Petrograd through
Bolsheviks assigned by the Central Committee who visited him
at Razliv. Lenin’s theses “The Political Situation”, the article
“On Slogans” and other items formed the basis for congress
resolutions. While at Razliv, Lenin took part in drafting the most
important resolutions of the congress. The congress unanimously
elected Lenin its honorary chairman.

The items on the congress agenda were: (1) Report by the
Organising Bureau; (2) Report by the C.C. R.S.D.L.P.(B.); (3) Reports
from Local Organisations; (4) The Current Situation: (a) The War
and the International Situation; (b) The Political and Economic
Situation; (5) Revision of the Programme; (6) The Organisational
Question; (7) Elections to the Constituent Assembly; (8) The
International; (9) Unification of the Party; (10) The Trade Union
Movement; (11) Elections; (12) Miscellaneous.

The congress also discussed the question whether Lenin should
appear in court.


The congress heard the political report of the Central Committee
and the report on the political situation, both of which were
presented by Stalin on behalf of the Central Committee. The
resolution on the political situation was based on Lenin’s guiding
recommendations. It appraised the political situation in the
country following the July events, and set out the Party’s political
line at the new stage of the revolution. The congress declared that
the peaceful development of the revolution was over and that
power in the country had virtually passed into the hands of the
counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie. In keeping with Lenin’s
recommendations, it temporarily withdrew the slogan “All Power to
the Soviets”, because just then the Soviets, led by the Mensheviks
and S.R.s, were an appendage to the counter-revolutionary
Provisional Government. This withdrawal did not imply renunciation
of the Soviets as the political form of proletarian dictatorship.
The congress advanced the slogan of fighting for the complete
abolition of the dictatorship of the counter-revolutionary
bourgeoisie and for the proletariat winning power in alliance with the
peasant poor, through an armed uprising.

The congress rejected the anti-Lenin proposals put forward by
Preobrazhensky, who contended that the socialist revolution
could not win in Russia and that Russia could not take the socialist
road unless a proletarian revolution was accomplished in the West.
The congress also rebuffed Bukharin, who opposed the Party’s
course for the socialist revolution, saying that the peasants formed
a bloc with the bourgeoisie and would refuse to follow the working
class.

The congress decisions laid special emphasis on Lenin’s thesis
of the alliance of the proletariat and the peasant poor as the
paramount condition for the victory of the socialist revolution. “It is
only the revolutionary proletariat,” said the resolution  “The
Political Situation”, “that can accomplish this task—a task set by
the new upswing—provided it is supported by the peasant poor”
(The C.P.S.U. in Resolutions, etc., =

Part I, 1954, p. 376 [in Russian]).

The question whether Lenin should appear in court was one of
the first items discussed by the congress. Stalin, who touched on it
in replying to the debate on the Central Committee’s political
activity, declared in favour of Lenin appearing in court, on the
understanding that Lenin’s personal safety would be guaranteed
and the trial conducted on democratic lines. He moved a resolution
to that effect. “It is not clear at the moment,” he said, “who is in
power. There is no guarantee that if they =

[Lenin and Zinoviev.—Ed.] =

are arrested they will not be subjected to brute force. Things
will be different if the trial is held on democratic lines and it is
guaranteed that they will not be torn to pieces. When we asked
the Central Executive Committee about this, they replied: ‘We
don’t know what may happen.’ So long as the situation is not clear
and a covert struggle is going on between the nominal and the real
authority, there is no point in the comrades appearing before the
authorities. If, however, power is wielded by an authority which
can safeguard our comrades against violence and is fair-dealing

   

at least to some extent ... they shall appear.” =

(Minutes of the Sixth
Congress of the R.S.D.L.P.(B.), August 1917, 1958, pp. 27 and 28
[in Russian].) This approach was prompted by an incorrect
estimation of the political power in the country at the time, and by the
idea that a bourgeois court could be “fair”.

The question whether Lenin should appear in court was dealt
with in a report by G. K. Orjonikidze. He stressed that Lenin
must under no circumstances be delivered into the hands of the
investigators. F. E. Dzerzhinsky, N. A. Skrypnik and others spoke
against Lenin appearing in court. We must say clearly and
explicitly, said Dzerzhinsky, that those comrades who advised Lenin
not to allow himself to be arrested did well. We must make clear
to all comrades that we don’t trust the Provisional Government
and the bourgeoisie and will not deliver Lenin until justice
triumphs, that is, until that disgraceful trial is called
off.

V. Volodarsky, I. Bezrabotny (D. Z. Manuilsky) and M. 
Lashevich spoke in favour of Lenin appearing in court (provided his
safety was guaranteed, the trial was public and representatives
of the Central Executive Committee of the Soviets attended it),
and moved a resolution in that sense.

As a result of the debate, the Sixth Party Congress unanimously
passed a resolution against Lenin appearing in court, expressed its
“emphatic protest against the outrageous persecution of
revolutionary proletarian leaders by the public prosecutor, spies and
police”, =

and sent Lenin a message of greeting.

Y. M. Sverdlov reported on the Central Committee’s organising
activity. He pointed out that in the three months that had passed
since the Seventh (April) All-Russia Conference the Party
membership had trebled, increasing from 80,000 to 240,000, and the
number of Party organisations had grown from 78 to 162. The
congress heard nineteen reports from local organisations. The
speakers stressed the vast amount of work being carried on by local
organisations and the steadily growing influence of the Bolsheviks
among the working people.

The congress discussed and approved the Party’s economic
platform, which envisaged nationalisation and centralisation of
the banks, nationalisation of large-scale industry, confiscation
of the landed estates and nationalisation of all the lands in the
country, establishment of workers’ control over production and
distribution, organisation of proper exchange between town and
country, and other revolutionary measures.

The congress adopted the new Party Rules. The first clause of
the Rules, dealing with membership, was supplemented with the
stipulation that Party members should submit to all Party
decisions. The new provision was introduced that persons seeking
admission should present recommendations from two Party
members and that their admission should be subject to approval by
the general meeting of the organisation concerned. The Rules
stressed that all Party organisations should be based on the
principles of democratic centralism. Party congresses were to be

   

convened once a year and plenary meetings of the Central Committee,
not less than once in two months.

The congress reaffirmed the decision of the Seventh Conference
of the R.S.D.L.P.(B.) on the need to revise the Party Programme
in the sense indicated by the conference. It found it necessary
to call a congress before long for the express purpose of adopting
a new Programme, and instructed the Central Committee and all
Party organisations to begin discussing a revision of the Party
Programme, preparatory to the congress.

The congress resolution “Youth Leagues” said it was a pressing
task to contribute to the formation of socialist class organisations
of young workers, and obliged Party organisations to devote the
greatest attention to this task. In discussing the item “The Trade
Union Movement”, the congress criticised the theory of trade union
neutrality and pointed out that the trade unions had a vital interest
in carrying the revolution through to a victorious end and that
they could accomplish the tasks facing Russia’s working class
provided they remained militant class organisations recognising
the political leadership of the Bolshevik Party.

The congress made all its decisions subordinate to the chief
objective, which was to train the working class and the peasant
poor for an armed uprising to bring about the victory of the
socialist revolution. In a manifesto addressed to all working people, all
workers, soldiers and peasants of Russia, it called on them to gather
strength and prepare, under the banners of the Bolshevik Party,
for the decisive battle with the bourgeoisie.

Among those the congress elected to the Central Committee were
V. I. Lenin, Y. A. Berzin, A. S. Bubnov, F. E. Dzerzhinsky,
A. M. Kollontai, V. P. Milyutin, M. K. Muranov, V. P. Nogin,
F. A. Sergeyev (Artyom), S. G. Shahumyan, J. V. Stalin,
Y. M. Sverdlov and M. S. Uritsky.





[2]
Proletary (The Proletarian)—Central Organ of the Bolshevik
Party, was published daily from August 13 (26) to August 24
(September 6), 1917, instead of Pravda, closed down by the
Provisional Government. Altogether ten issues were brought out.









<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## They Do Not See the Wood for the Trees









Lenin: They Do Not See the Wood for the Trees







V. I.  

      Lenin
They Do Not See the Wood for the Trees




Published:

      First published in Proletary No. 6, September 1 (August 19), 1917.

      Signed: N. Karpov.

      Published according to the Proletary text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 255-260.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2005

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Speaking at the session of the Central Executive Committee of
    the Soviets on August 4, L. Martov said (we quote from the
      Novaya Zhizn report) that “Tsereteli’s criticism is
    too mild”, that
    “the government does not repel counter-revolutionary attempts by
    army officers”, and that “it is not our aim to overthrow the
    present government or undermine confidence in it....” “The
    actual balance of forces,” Martov continued, “does not at
    present warrant the demand for power to be transferred to the
    Soviets. This could come only in the course of a civil war, which
    at the moment is impermissible.” “It is not our intention to
    overthrow the government,” Martov concluded, “but we must
    call its attention to the fact that there are other forces in the
    country besides the Cadets and army officers. They are the
    revolutionary democratic forces, and on them the Provisional
    Government must rely for support.”

These are remarkable arguments from Martov, and they deserve
    very careful examination. They are remarkable in that they bring
    out very clearly the most widespread, the most harmful and most
    dangerous political errors of the petty-bourgeois masses and their
    most typical prejudices. Of all spokesmen for these masses,
    Martov, a publicist, is certainly one of the most
    “Left-wing”, most revolutionary, most politically conscious
    and most skilful. It is therefore more useful to analyse his
    arguments than those of a Chernov flaunting an array of empty
    words or of a stupid Tsereteli and their like. In analysing
    Martov’s arguments, we shall analyse what is at present most
    reasonable in the ideas of the petty bourgeoisie.

First of all, Martov’s vacillation over the transfer of power
    to the Soviets is quite typical. Prior to July 4 Martov was
      against this slogan. After July 4, he was
      for it. Early in
      August, he was once more against it, and note his

    

monstrously
      illogical and amusing, from a Marxist point of view,
      argumentation. He is against it because, he says, “the actual
      balance of forces does not at present warrant the demand for
      power to be transferred to the Soviets. This could come only in
      the course of a civil war, which at the moment is
      impermissible”.
    

What a muddle. It implies, first, that before July 4
    the. transfer of power was possible
      without civil war (true
    enough!), but it was just then that Martov was against the
    transfer. It implies, secondly, that after July 4, when Martov was
    for the transfer of power to the Soviets, it was possible without
    civil war—an obvious, glaring distortion of the facts, for it
    was on the night of July 4–5 that the Bonapartists, supported by
    the Cadets and attended on by lackeys like Chernov and Tsereteli,
    brought -the counter-revolutionary troops to Petrograd. To take
    power peacefully under these circumstances would have been
    absolutely impossible.

Thirdly and lastly, Martov implies that a Marxist or even just
    a revolutionary democrat had the right to reject a slogan
    correctly expressing the interests of the people and those of the
    revolution on the grounds that the slogan could be realised
    “only in the course of a civil war”. But this is an obvious
    absurdity, an obvious renunciation of the whole class struggle,
    the whole revolution. For everyone knows that the history of all
    revolutions the world over reveals an Inevitable rather than an
    accidental transformation of the class struggle into civil
    war. Everyone knows that it was
      after July 4 that we in Russia saw
    the counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie starting civil war, the
    disarming of regiments, executions at the front, and assassination
    of Bolsheviks. Civil war is “impermissible” for
    revolutionary democrats, if you please, just when the course of
    events has inexorably brought about a situation in which the
    counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie have started civil war.

Martov has entangled himself in the most unbelievable, amusing,
    and helpless fashion..

In disentangling the confusion created by him, we must say:

It was before July 4 that to transfer full power to the then
    existing Soviets was the only correct slogan, At that time, it
    could have been done peacefully, without civil war, because there
    had been no systematic acts of violence against

    

the masses,
    against the people, such as began after July 4. At that time, the
    transfer of power guaranteed the peaceful progress of the whole
    revolution and, in particular, made it possible to peacefully
    eliminate the struggle between classes and parties
      within the
    Soviets.

After July 4, the transfer of power to the Soviets became
    impossible without civil war, since, on July 4 and 5, power had
    passed to a military Bonapartist clique backed by the Cadets and
    the Black Hundreds. Hence, all Marxists, all those on the side of
    the revolutionary proletariat, all honest revolutionary democrats,
      must now explain to the workers and peasants the radical change in
    the situation which necessitates a new path for the transfer of
    power to the proletarians and semi-proletarians.

Martov has advanced no arguments in defence of his “idea”
    that civil war is impermissible “at the moment”, in defence
    of his statement that it is not his intention “to overthrow the
    present government”. Because his opinion is unsubstantiated,
    and particularly because he voiced it at a meeting of defencists,
    it inevitably smacks of the defencist argument that civil war is
    impermissible while the enemy threatens from without.

We wonder whether Martov could have brought himself to advance
    such an argument openly. Among the mass of the petty bourgeoisie,
    this argument is very popular. And, of course, it is one of the
    most commonplace. The bourgeoisie were unafraid of revolution and
    civil war at times when the enemy threatened from
    without—either in September 1870 in France or in February 1917
    in Russia. The bourgeoisie were unafraid of seizing power at the
    price of civil war at times when the enemy threatened from
    without. The revolutionary proletariat will reckon just as little
    with this “argument” from liars and lackeys of the
    bourgeoisie.
 *     *  * 

One of the most glaring theoretical mistakes which Martov makes
    and which is also very typical of the whole range of political
    ideas of the petty bourgeoisie, is to confound tsarist
    counter-revolution, and monarchist counter-revolution in

      general, with bourgeois counter-revolution. It is due to the

    

      particular narrow-mindedness, or particular stupidity, of the
      petty-bourgeois democrat who cannot break free from economic,
      political and ideological dependence on the bourgeoisie, who
      cedes them priority, sees them as an “ideal”, and believes
      their cries about the danger of “counter-revolution from the
      right”.
    

Martov expressed this range of ideas, or rather this
    petty-bourgeois stupidity, by saying in his speech: “To
    counterbalance the pressure exerted upon it [the government I from
    the right, we must create a counter-pressure.”

Here is a sample of the philistine credulity-and disregard of
    the class struggle. It implies that the government is something
    above classes and above parties, the only trouble being that it is
    under too strong pressure from the right, so that there is need
    of stronger pressure from the left. What wisdom worthy of Louis
    Blanc, Chernov, Tsereteli, and all that despicable crew! How
    infinitely useful this philistine wisdom is for the Bonapartists!
    How they long to make “the foolish yokels” believe that the
    present government is fighting both the Right and the Left, the
    extremes only, as it builds up true statehood and exercises true
    democracy! Yet, in practice, it is this Bonapartist government
    that constitutes a government of the counter-revolutionary
    bourgeoisie.

It is to the advantage of the bourgeoisie (and necessary for
    the perpetuation of their domination) to deceive the people by
    making believe that they represent “the revolution in general,
    while counter-revolution threatens from the right, from the
    tsar.” It is only through the infinite stupidity of the Dans
    and Tseretelis, through the infinite conceit of the Chernovs and
    Avksentyevs, that this idea, nurtured by the conditions of Life of
    the petty bourgeoisie, still survives among “revolutionary
    democrats” in general.

Anyone who has learned anything from history or from Marxism
    will have to admit that a political analysis must focus on the
      class issue: what class represents the revolution and
    what class
    the counter-revolution?

French history shows us that the Bonapartist counterrevolution
    developed at the end of the eighteenth century (and then, for a
    second time, from 1848 to 1852) on the basis of the
    counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie, and in turn paved

    

the way for
    the restoration of a legitimate monarchy. Bonapartism is a
    form of government which grows out of the counter-revolutionary
    nature of the bourgeoisie, in the conditions of democratic changes
    and a democratic revolution.

You have to purposely shut your eyes not to see how, before
    your very eyes, Bonapartism is growing in Russia under very
    similar conditions. The tsarist counter-revolution is at present
    negligible; it has no political importance and plays no political
    role. The bogey of a tsarist counterrevolution is being purposely
    played up and made a fuss over by charlatans to frighten fools, to
    treat philistines to a political sensation, to distract the
    people’s attention from the real and serious
    counter-revolution. You just cannot help laughing at the arguments
    of a Zarudny, who endeavours to assess the counter-revolutionary
    role of a little backyard union called “Holy Russia” but who
    does “not see” the counter-revolutionary role of the union
    of the entire bourgeoisie of Russia called the Cadet Party.

The Cadet Party is the major political force of the bourgeois
    counter-revolution in Russia. This force has splendidly rallied
    around it all Black Hundred elements, both at the elections and
    (more important still) in the apparatus of military and civil
    administration and in the press campaign of Lies, slander and
    baiting directed primarily at the Bolsheviks, i.e., the party of
    the revolutionary proletariat, and then against the Soviets.

Gradually but relentlessly, the present government is pursuing
    the very policy which the Cadet Party has been systematically
    advocating and preparing for ever since March 1917. It has resumed
    and is prolonging the imperialist war; it has stopped chattering
    about peace; it first gave ministers the right to close down
    newspapers, then to disperse conferences, then to arrest and exile
    people; it has restored capital punishment and executions at the
    front; it is disarming the workers and the revolutionary
    regiments; it has flooded the capital with counter-revolutionary
    troops; it has begun to arrest and persecute the peasants for
    unauthorised “seizures”; it is shutting down factories and
    organising lock-outs. This is a far from complete list of measures
    which present an excellent picture of the bourgeois
    counterrevolution of Bonapartism.
    
 

And what about the postponed convocation of the Constituent
    Assembly and the crowning of a Bonapartist policy with a Zemsky
    Sobor in Moscow—a step leading to the postponement of the
    Constituent Assembly until after the war? Isn’t this a gem of
    Bonapartist politics? Yet Martov does not see where the general
    headquarters of the bourgeois counterrevolution is. Really some do
    not see the wood for the trees.
 *     *  * 

What really dirty lackey’s role the Central Executive Committee
    of the Soviets, i.e., the S.R.s and Mensheviks who dominate it,
    played in the matter of postponing the Constituent Assembly! The
    Cadets set the tone by launching the idea of postponement,
    starting a press campaign and using the
      Cossack congress as a
    pretext to demand postponement. (A Cossack congress! How could the
    Liebers, Avksentyevs, Chernovs and Tseretelis help behaving like
    lackeys!) The Mensheviks and S.R.s hopped along after the Cadets,
    they crawled at their master’s call like dogs threatened with
    their master’s whip.

Instead of giving the people a plain statement of the facts
    showing how brazenly, how shamelessly the Cadets had been delaying
    and blocking the convocation of the Constituent Assembly since
    March, and instead of exposing the false evasions and the
    assertion that it was impossible to convoke the Constituent
    Assembly at the appointed time, the Bureau of the Central
    Executive Committee promptly brushed aside all “doubts”
    expressed even by Dan (even by Dan!) and sent Bramson and Bronzov,
    two lackeys of that bureau of lackeys, to the Provisional
    Government with a report “on the need to postpone elections to
    the Constituent Assembly until October 28-29”. A splendid
    prelude to the coronation of the Bonapartists by a Zemsky Sobor in
    Moscow. Whoever has not stooped to complete infamy must rally to
    the party of the revolutionary proletariat. Without the victory of
    the revolutionary proletariat there
      can be no peace for the
    people, land for the peasants nor bread for the workers and all
    working people.

 
Notes
 
 







<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## Political Blackmail









Lenin: Political Blackmail







V. I.  

      Lenin
Political Blackmail




Published:

      First published in Proletary No. 10, September 6 (August 24), 1917.

      Published according to the Proletary text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 261-264.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Blackmail is the extortion of money under threat of exposing
    certain facts or invented “stories” which may be
    disagreeable to the person concerned, or under threat of causing
    him some other unpleasantness.

Political blackmail is the threat of exposing, or the actual
    exposure, of true, but more often invented, “stories” with
    the aim of causing an opponent political damage, of slandering
    him, of depriving him of the possibility of engaging in political
    activity, or of making it difficult for him.

Our republican and—please excuse the term—even democratic
    bourgeois and petty-bourgeois people proved themselves to be
    heroes of political blackmail by starting a “campaign” of
    defamation, lies and slander against the parties and political
    leaders that do not suit them. Tsarism persecuted crudely,
    savagely, brutally. The republican bourgeoisie persecute in a
      dirty way, striving to besmirch the reputation of the hated
    proletarian revolutionary and internationalist by slander, lies,
    insinuations, defamation, rumours, etc., etc.

The Bolsheviks in particular have had the honour of
    experiencing these methods of persecution used by the republican
    imperialists. In general, the Bolshevik might apply to himself the
    well-known words of the poet:


He hears the voice of approbation 
Not in the dulcet sounds of praise, 
But in the savage cries of
indignation![1]



Savage cries of indignation at the Bolsheviks rang out from
    all bourgeois and nearly all petty-bourgeois papers almost
      immediately after the beginning of the Russian
      revolution. And the Bolshevik, the internationalist, the

    

      supporter of the proletarian revolution, may justly hear the
      voice of approbation in these savage cries of indignation, for
      the fierce hatred of the bourgeoisie is often the best proof of
      faithful and honest service to the cause of the proletariat by
      the slandered, baited and persecuted.
    

The blackmailing nature of the slanderous methods of the
    bourgeoisie may be illustrated best of all by an example which
    does
      not concern our Party, namely, the “affair” of the
    Socialist-Revolutionary Chernov. Some members of the Cadet Party,
    notorious slanderers headed by Milyukov and Hessen, trying to
    intimidate or expel Chernov, started a campaign, baiting him for
    his allegedly “defeatist” articles abroad, and for his
    association with persons supposed to have received money from
    German imperialist agents. The campaign gathered strength. It was
    taken up by all bourgeois papers.

Afterwards the Cadets and S.R.s “came to terms” on a
    certain composition of the Cabinet. And lo and behold! The Chernov
    “affair” is dropped! It was dropped in a few days, without
    trial or examination, without publishing documents, without
    questioning witnesses, without presenting the decision of
    experts. When the Cadets were dissatisfied with Chernov, they
    began a slanderous “affair”. When the Cadets had come to
    terms politically with Chernov, at least for a while, the
    “affair” was dropped.

This is a graphic example of political blackmail. Baiting in
    the newspapers, slander, and insinuations serve as a weapon of
    political struggle and political revenge in the hands of the
    bourgeoisie and such scoundrels as the Milyukovs, Hessens,
    Zaslavskys, Dans, etc. Once the political aim is attained, the
    “case” against X or Y is dropped, showing the dirty
    character, base dishonesty, and blackmailing nature of those who
    started it.

For it is obvious that one who does
      not practise blackmail
    would not discontinue his revelations—if he were prompted by
    honest motives—no matter what political changes took place; he
    would in any circumstances bring his revelations to a conclusion,
    to a court sentence, to a point where the public was fully
    informed, where
      all documents were collected and published, or he
    would openly and explicitly admit that he had made a mistake or
    had misinterpreted the facts.
 

The case of Chernov, who is not a Bolshevik, clearly
    demonstrates the true nature of the blackmailing crusade against
    the Bolsheviks by the bourgeois and petty-bourgeois papers. When
    the political aim of those knights and hangers-on of capital
    seemed to them to have been reached, when the Bolsheviks had
    been arrested and their newspapers closed down, the blackmailers
      fell silent! Having at their disposal every means of revealing the
    truth—the press, money, aid from the foreign bourgeoisie, the
    co-operation of “public opinion” of the whole bourgeoisie of
    Russia, and the friendly support of the state power of one of the
    largest countries of the world—having all this at their
    disposal, the heroes of the anti-Bolshevik crusade, the Milyukovs
    and Hessens, the Zaslavskys and Dans,
      fell silent!

It is becoming clear to every fair-minded person, as it at once
    became clear to class-conscious workers, whose entire life
    prepares them for a quick understanding of the methods of the
    bourgeoisie, that the Milyukovs and Hessens, the Zaslavskys and
    Dans, etc., etc., are
      political blackmailers. We must make it
    perfectly clear, must explain it, to the masses, write about it in
    the papers every day, collect documents about it for a pamphlet,
    boycott the blackmailers, and so on, and so forth. These are the
    methods of struggle worthy of the proletariat in combating slander
    and blackmail!

One of the latest to suffer from blackmail was our comrade,
    Kamenev. He has “withdrawn from public activity” until his
    case is examined. We think that a mistake. It is exactly what the
    blackmailers wanted. They do not want to examine his case. Kamenev
    should merely have countered the scoundrels with the trust of his
    own party, and let the dogs of
      Rech,
      Birzhevka,
      Dyen,
      Rabochaya Gazeta and other filthy rags bark.

If our Party were to consent to the suspension of public
    activities by its leaders because they had been slandered by the
    bourgeoisie, the Party would suffer terribly; it would cause harm
    to the proletariat and make its enemies happy. For the bourgeoisie
    have many papers; they have even more blackmailing, venal pens
    (like those of Zaslavsky and

      Co.), and it would be only too easy for them to “suspend”
      our Party workers! The bourgeoisie are not interested in
      examining the case, in getting to the root of the matter.
    
 

That won’t do, comrades! We must not give in to the clamour of
    the bourgeois press! We must not please those blackmailing
    scoundrels, the Milyukovs, Hessens and Zaslavskys. We must rely on
    the proletarians’ verdict, the verdict of the class-conscious
    workers in our Party, which numbers 240,000 internationalists. We
    mustn’t forget that internationalists are persecuted throughout
    the world by the bourgeoisie allied with the defencists, through
    lies, slander and blackmail.

We must stand firm in branding the blackmailers. We must firmly
    submit our slightest doubts for the class-conscious workers, for
    our Party, to judge. We trust our Party. We see in it the
    intelligence, honour and conscience of our times. We see the only
    guarantee of success for the emancipation movement of the working
    class in a world alliance of revolutionary internationalists.

No yielding to the “public opinion” of those who sit in
    one Cabinet with the Cadets, who shake the hands of the
    Milyukovs, Dans and Zaslavskys!

Down with the political blackmailers! Scorn and boycott them!
    Always expose their infamous names to the workers! We must
    unswervingly follow our own path, keep our Party in working order,
    and even protect its leaders from wasting their time on
    mud-slingers and their filthy slander.

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
The lines are from Nekrasov’s poem “Blessed Is the Unmalicious
Poet”.









<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## Paper Resolutions









Lenin: Paper Resolutions







V. I.  

      Lenin
Paper Resolutions




Published:

      First published in Rabochy No. 2, September 8 (August 26), 1917.

      Published according to the Rabochy text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 265-268.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

      Mr. Tsereteli is one of the most garrulous of the
    “socialist” Ministers and petty-bourgeois leaders. You have
    to force yourself to read his countless speeches right
    through. These absolutely meaningless, absolutely non-committal,
    absolutely insignificant, truly “ministerial” speeches are
    so empty and banal. What makes these eloquent “utterances”
    (whose very emptiness was bound to make Tsereteli a favourite of
    the bourgeoisie) so intolerable is the infinite self-conceit of
    the speaker. It is sometimes hard to decide whether those sleek,
    smooth and honeyed phrases conceal unusual stupidity or cynical
    political trickery.

The more meaningless Tsereteli’s speeches, the more
    emphatically we must stress the perfectly incredible and
    extraordinary thing that happened to him at the plenary session of
    the Petrograd Soviet on August 18. It is incredible but a fact
    that Tsereteli accidentally uttered a couple of simple, clear,
    sensible and true sentences. He uttered two sentences which
    correctly express a profound and serious political truth, a truth
    of no fleeting importance, but one that sums up the whole
    present-day political situation, its essential, radical features
    and its fundamental characteristics.

According to the account published in
      Rech, Tsereteli (the
    reader, of course, will remember that Tsereteli was up in arms
    against the resolution demanding the abolition of the death
    penalty) said:


      “None of your resolutions will help. What we need is real
      action and not paper resolutions....
      


There is no denying it. Sensible speeches are pleasant to
    hear.
    
 

Of course, this truth hits first and hardest of all at
    Tsereteli himself. For it was he, one of the most prominent
    leaders of the Soviet, who helped prostitute this institution,
    reduce its role to that of a wretched liberal assembly, which is
    bequeathing an archive of exemplarily impotent and pious wishes to
    the world. Tsereteli—who got the Soviet, emasculated by the
    Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks, to pass hundreds of
    “paper resolutions”—least of all had the right, when it
    came to adopting a resolution which struck a painful blow at
    himself, to cry out against “paper resolutions” He has put
    himself in -the particularly ridiculous position of a
    parliamentarian who has worked on more “parliamentary”
    resolutions than anyone else, has extolled their worth to the
    skies more than anyone else, and has fussed over them more than
    anyone else, yet, when a resolution is passed
      against him, cries
    “sour grapes!” at the top of his voice, saying that the
    resolution, after all, is only a paper one.

Nevertheless, the truth is the truth, even if uttered by a
    false man in a false tone.

The resolution is a paper one not for the reason given by
    ex-Minister Tsereteli, who holds that defence of the revolution
    (don’t laugh!) requires the death penalty. The resolution is a
    paper one because it repeats the stereotyped formula which has
    been learnt by heart and meaninglessly reiterated ever since March
    1917—”The Soviet demands of the Provisional Government.”
    They are accustomed to “demand”, and they go on doing so by
    force of habit, not seeing that the situation has changed, that
    power has left them, and that a “demand” not backed by power
    is ridiculous.

Moreover, this stereotyped “demand” fosters among the
    people the illusion that the situation has not changed, that the
    Soviet is a power, that by announcing its “demand” the
    Soviet has done its business and can sleep the sleep of one who
    has done his duty as a “revolutionary (if you please)
    democrat”.

A reader may ask: “Do you mean to say that the Bolsheviks,
    who advocate political clearheadedness and taking account of the
    forces, and who are opposed to phrasemongering, should not have
    voted for the resolution?”

No. They should have voted for it, if only because one clause
    of the resolution (the third) contains the excellent

    

and true idea
    (the fundamental, main and decisive idea) that the death penalty
    is a weapon against the
      masses (the situation would be different
    if it were a weapon against the landowners and capitalists). They
    should have voted for the resolution, even though the philistine
    Socialist-Revolutionaries fouled Martov’s text and instead of the
    reference to “imperialist aims which are alien to the interests
    of the people” inserted an absolutely false phrase intended to
    deceive the people and whitewash a predatory war, namely,
    “defence of the country and the revolution”.

They should have voted for the resolution, at the same time
    recording their disagreement with certain passages and declaring:
    “Workers, don’t think the Soviet is now in a position to demand
    anything of the Provisional Government. Don’t have any
    illusions. Understand that the Soviet is
      already unable to demand,
    and that the
      present government is under the complete sway of the
    counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie. Think seriously about this
    bitter truth.” Nobody could have prevented the Soviet members
    from voting in
      favour after they had made such reservations in one
    form or another.

Then the resolution would have ceased to be a “paper”
    one.

And then we could have got round the treacherous question of
    Tsereteli who asked the Soviet members whether they wanted to
    “overthrow” the Provisional Government—in quite the same
    way, in exactly the same way, as Katkov asked the liberals under
    Alexander III whether they wanted to “overthrow” the
    autocracy. We would have answered the ex-Minister: “Dear
    citizen, you have just passed a criminal law against those who
    ‘attempt’, or who only intend, to overthrow’ the government
    (which was formed by agreement between the landowners and
    capitalists, on the one hand, and the petty-bourgeois traitors to
    democracy, on the other). We are well aware that all the
    bourgeoisie would have praised you even more heartily had you
    ‘brought’ several Bolsheviks under that pleasant (for you)
    law. But don’t be surprised if we don’t go out of our way to help
    you find pretexts to apply that ‘pleasant’ law.”
 *     *  * 
 

The whole political system of Russia was reflected in the
    incident of August 18 like the sun in a pool of water: the
    Bonapartist government, the death penalty, the criminal law, the
    coating of these “pleasant” (for the provocateurs) pills by
    just the kind of phrases that Louis Napoleon used to give out
    about equality, fraternity, liberty, the honour and prestige of
    the country, the traditions of the Great Revolution, the
    suppression of anarchy.

Petty-bourgeois ministers and ex-ministers, cloyingly
    sweet-tongued, protesting that they have souls, that they are
    damning their souls by introducing the death penalty and applying
    it to the people, and that they weep when they do so—an
    improved edition of the “schoolmaster” of the sixties who
    followed Pirogov’s advice and thrashed not simply, not in the
    ordinary old way, but while shedding tears of commiseration over
    the good citizen’s son who was undergoing a “legitimate” and
    “just” caning.

Peasants, deceived by their petty-bourgeois leaders, continuing
    to believe that the marriage of the bloc of
    Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks with the bourgeoisie can
    bring about the abolition of private ownership of land without
    compensation.

Workers—but we shall say nothing about what the workers
    think until the “humane” Tsereteli abolishes the new
    criminal law.

 
Notes
 
 







<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## The Stockholm Conference









Lenin: The Stockholm Conference







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Stockholm Conference




Published:

      First published in Rabochy No. 2, September 8 (August 26), 1917.

      Published according to the Rabochy text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 269-277.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Many people are taking an interest again in the Stockholm
    Conference. The question of its significance has been discussed at
    length in the newspapers. It is inseparable from an appraisal of
    the very principles of the whole of present-day socialism,
    particularly concerning the attitude to the imperialist war. This
    is why the Stockholm Conference should be dealt with in some
    detail.

From the outset the revolutionary Social-Democrats, i.e., the
    Bolsheviks, were against participating in the conference, as a
    matter of principle. Everyone knows that on the attitude to the
    war socialists in all countries, belligerent and neutral alike,
    are split into two large, main divisions. Some took the side of
    their governments, of their bourgeoisie. These we call
    social-chauvinists, i.e., socialists in words and chauvinists in
    action. A chauvinist is one who conceals defence of the predatory
    interests of “his own” ruling classes with the concept
    “defence of the fatherland”. In the present war, the
    bourgeoisie of both belligerent coalitions are pursuing predatory
    aims: the German bourgeoisie are fighting to plunder Belgium,
    Serbia, etc., the British and French bourgeoisie are fighting to
    plunder the German colonies, etc., and the Russian bourgeoisie are
    fighting to plunder Austria (Lvov) and Turkey (Armenia,
    Constantinople).

Hence, those socialists who have come down on the side of their
    bourgeoisie in the war have ceased to be socialists, have betrayed
    the working class and have, in effect, deserted to the camp of the
    bourgeoisie. They have become class enemies of the
    proletariat. The history of European and American socialism,
    particularly during the time of the Second international, i.e.,
    from 1889 to 1914, shows us that

    

this desertion of certain
    socialists, particularly most leaders and members of parliament,
    to the bourgeoisie is no accident. In all countries, the
    opportunist wing of socialism provided the main recruits for
    social-chauvinism. Regarded scientifically, which means not
    singling out individuals but taking the whole international trend
    in its process of development, the sum total of its social ties,
    social-chauvinism is opportunism carried to its logical
    conclusion.

Everywhere the workers are showing, in a more or less clear and
    sharp form, that they realise the social-chauvinists are betraying
    socialism, that they hate and despise the more prominent
    social-chauvinists such as Plekhanov in Russia, Scheidemann in
    Germany, Guesde, Renaudel and Co. in France, Hyndman and others in
    Britain, etc.,etc.

A revolutionary internationalist trend has arisen in all
    countries during the war, despite the gagging and ruthless
    persecution by the bourgeoisie. This trend has remained loyal to
    socialism. It has not yielded to chauvinism, has not allowed
    chauvinism to be covered up by lying phrases about defence of the
    fatherland. It has exposed the utterly fraudulent nature of these
    phrases and the absolutely criminal nature of the war, which the
    bourgeoisie of both coalitions pursue for purposes of
    plunder. This trend includes, for example, MacLean in Britain, who
    has been sentenced to eighteen months’ hard labour for opposing
    the predatory British bourgeoisie, and Karl Liebknecht in Germany,
    who has been sentenced to penal servitude by the German
    imperialist robbers for the “crime” of calling for a
    revolution in Germany and exposing the predatory character of the
    war waged by Germany. The Bolsheviks in Russia also belong to
    this trend and are persecuted by the agents of Russian
    republican-democratic imperialism for a “crime” similar to
    the one for which MacLean and Karl Liebknecht are being
    persecuted.

This is the only trend loyal to socialism. It is the only trend
    that has not failed the solemn declaration of convictions, the
    solemn pledge made in November 1912 in the Basle Manifesto which
    was unanimously signed by the socialists of the world, of every
    country without exception. The Manifesto speaks not of war in
    general—there are wars and wars—but of the war which
    everyone in 1912 clearly saw was being prepared, and which broke
    out in 1914, the war between

    

Germany and Britain and their allies
    for world domination. With this war in the offing, the Basle
    Manifesto does not say a word about the duty or right of
    socialists to “defend their fatherland” (i.e., to justify
    their participation in the war). What it does say, very
    explicitly, is that this war must lead to the “proletarian
    revolution”. The betrayal of socialism by the
    social-chauvinists of all countries is perfectly evident from the
    cowardly manner in which all of them now avoid, like thieves
    avoiding the scene of their crime, the passage in the Basle
    Manifesto which speaks of the connection between this particular
    war and the proletarian revolution.

The impassable gulf that separates the socialists, who remained
    loyal to the Basle Manifesto and “responded” to the war by
    advocating and preparing for the proletarian revolution, from the
    social-chauvinists, who responded to the war by supporting
    “their” national bourgeoisie, is obvious. It is also obvious
    how helpless, naive and hypocritical are the attempts to
    “reconcile” or “unite” the two trends.

It is this kind of attempt that is evident in all its
      wretchedness on the part of the third trend in world socialism,
      the so-called “Centre” or “Kautskian” trend (named
      after the most prominent “Centrist”, Karl
      Kautsky). Throughout the three years of the war this trend has
      shown its complete lack of principle and its helplessness in all
      countries. In Germany, for example, events compelled the
      Kautskyites to break away from the German Plekhanovs and form a
      separate, so-called Independent Social-Democratic
      Party[1].
      All
    the same, this party is afraid of drawing the necessary
    conclusions, it preaches “unity” with the social-chauvinists
    on an international scale, continues to deceive the mass of
    workers with the hope of restoring this unity in Germany, and
    hinders the only correct proletarian tactics of revolutionary
    struggle against “one’s own” government, a struggle to be
    waged in war-time as well, a struggle which may and must vary in
    form but which cannot be put off.

This is the state of affairs in international
    socialism. Without making a clear appraisal of this situation,
    without having a principled opinion about all the trends in
    international socialism, it is impossible so much as to approach
    practical questions like that of the Stockholm Conference. Yet the
    Bolshevik Party was the
      only party that gave a

    

principled
    appraisal of
      all trends in international socialism in the detailed
    resolution which it adopted at its conference held between April
    24 and 29, 1917, and which was endorsed by our Sixth Party
    Congress in August. To ignore this principled appraisal and
    discuss Stockholm without reference to it means taking an entirely
    unprincipled stand.

As an example of the lack of principle prevailing among the
    petty-bourgeois democrats, the Socialist-Revolutionaries and
    Mensheviks, we may quote an article from
      Novaya Zhizn of August
    10. The article is worthy of attention because it brings together,
    in a newspaper belonging to the extreme Left wing of the
    petty-bourgeois democrats, the most widespread errors, prejudices
    and lack of principle over Stockholm.


      “One is free,” we read in the leader of
      Novaya Zhizn,
      “to take a dim view of the Stockholm Conference, for one reason
      or another. One is free, as a matter of principle, to condemn
      attempts to bring about agreement among the ‘defencist
      majorities’. But why deny what is strikingly obvious? After all,
      following the well-known decision of the British workers, which
      sparked off a political crisis in the country and caused the first
      deep crack in British ‘national unity’, the conference acquired
      a new significance.”
      


This argument is a perfect example of lack of
    principle. Indeed, how is it possible to draw the conclusion, from
    the indisputable fact that owing to the Stockholm Conference a
    deep crack has occurred in British “national unity”, that it
    is our duty to patch up this crack rather than widen it? The
    fundamental alternative is to break with the defencists
    (social-chauvinists) or to agree with them. There can be no other
    choice. The Stockholm Conference was just one of numerous attempts
    to reach agreement. It failed. Its failure was due to the
    unwillingness of the Anglo-French imperialists to hold peace
    negotiations
      now, while the German imperialists are willing. The
    British workers have become more aware of being deceived by the
    British imperialist bourgeoisie.

Then what use should be made of this? We revolutionary
    internationalists say that it should be used for widening the
    breach between the workers and their social-chauvinists, for
    making this breach complete, for removing every hindrance to the
    development of the revolutionary struggle of the masses against
    their governments, against their bourgeoisie. Acting

    

in this way,
    we, and we alone, can widen the crack and force a complete
    break.

What is actually achieved by those going to Stockholm, or
    rather, by those preaching to the people that it is necessary to
    go there, now that reality has “squashed” the idea? All they
    manage is to patch up the crack, for the Stockholm Conference is
    admittedly being convened and supported by people who are
    supporting
      their own governments, by the ministerialist Chernovs
    and Tseretelis, the Staunings, Brantings and Troelstras, not to
    speak of the Scheidemauns.

This is what is “strikingly obvious”, this is what the
    opportunists of
      Novaya Zhizn forget, or gloss over, when they
    argue absolutely without any regard for principles, without a
    general appreciation of social-chauvinism as a trend. The
    Stockholm Conference is a colloquy of ministers of imperialist
    governments.
      Novaya Zhizn cannot evade this fact however hard it
    tries. To call upon the workers to go to Stockholm, to tell them
    to wait for Stockholm, to call upon them to place any hopes
    whatever in Stockholm means saying to them: “You can, you must,
    expect good to come from an agreement between the petty-bourgeois
    parties and imperialist government ministers, those who support
    imperialist governments.”

It is this unprincipled and most harmful propaganda that
      Novaya Zhizn is unwittingly carrying on.

Owing to the conflict between the Anglo-French
    social-chauvinists and their governments, the paper forgets that
    the Chernovs, Skobelevs, Tseretelis, Avksentyevs, Brantings,
    Staunings and Scheidemanns are also social-chauvinists supporting
    their governments. Isn’t this lack of principle?

Instead of saying to the workers: see, the Anglo-French
    imperialists have not even allowed their social-chauvinists to go
    and talk with the German social-chauvinists; that shows that
    Britain and France are
      also waging a predatory war and that there
    is no salvation except through a complete rupture with all the
    governments, with
      all the social-chauvinists,
      Novaya Zhizn
    consoles the workers with illusions.


      “In Stockholm,” it writes, “they are going to reach an
      agreement on peace and to jointly draw up a general plan of
      struggle: refusal to vote

      credits, renunciation of ‘national unity’, recall of ministers
      from the governments, etc.”
      

 

The only thing which is supposed to make this thoroughly
    fraudulent sentence sound convincing is that the word
    “struggle” is printed in bold type. A wonderful device, I
    must say!

After three years of war, efforts are still being made to feed
    the workers with the emptiest promises: “In Stockholm they are
    going” to renounce national unity.

Who plans that? The Scheidemanns, Chernovs, Skobelevs,
    Avksentyevs, Tseretelis, Staunings and Brantings, i.e., the very
    people (and parties) who for several years and for several months
    have been pursuing a national unity policy. No matter how sincere
      Novaya Zhizn’s faith in such a miracle may be, no matter how
    conscientiously it may hold the conviction that it is possible, we
    must say, nevertheless, that it is spreading the greatest piece of
    deception among the workers.

Novaya Zhizn is deceiving the workers by inspiring them with
    confidence in the social-chauvinists. It implies, that, although
    so far the social-chauvinists have been Cabinet members and have
    pursued a national unity policy, they will soon reach agreement
    among themselves in Stockholm, they will come to an understanding
    and cease to act in that way. They will begin to fight for peace,
    they will refuse to vote credits, etc., etc.

All that is nothing but deception, the greatest deception. It
    is reactionary talk designed to console and reassure the workers,
    to inspire them with confidence in the social-chauvinists. But the
    socialists who “fight for peace”—not in words, not to
    deceive themselves or the workers—started their fight long ago,
    without waiting for any international conferences. They started
    their fight by renouncing national unity, precisely in the way it
    was done by MacLean in Britain, Karl Liebknecht in Germany and the
    Bolsheviks in Russia.

“We quite understand the legitimate and healthy scepticism
    of the Bolsheviks towards the Renaudels and Scheidemanns,”
    writes
      Novaya Zhizn, “but the publicists of
      Rabochy i Soldat,
    like doctrinaires, just cannot see the wood for the trees; they do
    not take into account the changes in the

      mood of the masses on which Renaudel and Scheidemann have relied.”
    

It is not a matter of scepticism, gentlemen; it is in your
    midst that intellectual scepticism, which conceals and expresses

    

    lack of principle, is the dominant mood. We are not sceptical of
    the Renaudels and the Scheidemanns, we are their enemies. There is
    a world of difference between these two things. We have broken
    with them, and we call upon the masses to break with them. It is
    we, and we alone, who “take into account” the change in the
    mood of the masses, as well as something besides, something far
    more important and more profound than moods and changes in moods,
    namely, the fundamental interests of the masses, the fact that
    these interests cannot be reconciled with the social-chauvinist
    policy represented by the Renaudels and Scheidemanns. In
    Stockholm, the
      Novaya Zhizn people and the ministers of the
    Russian imperialist government, will meet none other than the
    Scheidemanns and Renaudels (for there is no real difference
    between Stauning and Troelstra, let alone between Avksentyev and
    Skobelev, on the one hand, and Renaudel, on the other). But we
    turn our backs on the Stockholm comedy played between the
    social-chauvinists, among the social-chauvinists, in order to open
    the eyes of the
      masses, so as to express their interests, call
    them to revolution, and use their change of mood not to pander to
    a given mood in an unprincipled manner, but to wage a struggle on
    principle for a complete rupture with social-chauvinism.


      “The Bolsheviks,” writes
      Novaya Zhizn, “like to taunt the
      internationalists going to Stockholm with having compromised with
      the Scheidemauns and Hendersons, ‘without noticing’ that their
      attitude to the conference puts them in the same category as the
      Plekhanovs, Guesdes and Hyndmans—for profoundly different
      reasons, of course.”
      

 It is not true to say that our attitude to the conference puts
    us in the same category as the Plekhanovs! That is obviously
    absurd. Our position coincides with that of the Plekhanovs in
    refusing to go to a milk-and-water conference with a group of
    social-chauvinists. But both in principle and in practice, our
    attitude towards the conference differs from that of the
    Plekhanovs. Meanwhile, you who call yourselves internationalists
    are really going to the conference together

    with the Scheidemanns, Staunings and Brantings; you are really
    compromising with them. Isn’t that a fact? You describe as “the
    great cause of uniting the international proletariat” what is
    the petty, miserable business—largely an

    

intrigue which is
    dependent upon the imperialists of one of the
      coalitions—of uniting the social-chauvinists. That is a fact.
    

You would-be internationalists cannot urge the masses to take
    part in the Stockholm Conference (it is very probable that things
    will go no further than urging, for the conference will not take
    place; but the ideological significance of the urging remains);
    you cannot urge the masses to participate in the Stockholm
    Conference without uttering a pile of lies, without sowing
    illusions, without whitewashing the social-chauvinists, without
    rousing hopes among the masses that the Staunings and Brantings,
    the Skobelevs and Avksentyevs are capable of renouncing
    “national unity” in earnest.

Meanwhile, in our propaganda against Stockholm, we Bolsheviks
    tell the masses the whole truth. We continue to expose the
    social-chauvinists and the policy of compromise with them, and
    lead the masses towards a complete rupture with them. Since
    matters have reached a point where the German imperialists
    consider the situation appropriate for participation in the
    Stockholm Conference and are sending their Scheidemann agents to
    it, while the British imperialists consider the situation
    inappropriate and do not even want to talk about peace, we expose
    the British imperialists and take advantage of the conflict
    between them and the British workers to promote the latter’s
    class-consciousness, to carry on vigorous propaganda for
    internationalism, and explain the need for a complete rupture with
    social-chauvinism.

The would-be internationalists of
      Novaya Zhizn are behaving
    like intellectual impressionists, i.e., like people who
    spinelessly yield to the moods of the moment and forget the
    fundamental principles of internationalism. The
      Novaya Zhizn
    people reason as follows: since British imperialism is
      opposed to
    the Stockholm Conference, we must be
      for it; it shows that the
    conference has acquired a significance it has not had so far.

To reason like that actually means abandoning principles, for
      German imperialism is at present
      in favour of the Stockholm
    Conference because of its own selfish and predatory imperialist
    interests. What is the value of the “internationalism” of
    “internationalists” who are afraid of openly admitting this
    indisputable and obvious fact, who have to hide from it? What
    guarantee have you, gentlemen, that by

    

taking part in the
    Stockholm Conference together with the Scheidemanns, Staunings and
    Co. you will not virtually become a plaything, a tool in the hands
    of the secret diplomats of German imperialism? You cannot have
    any such guarantee. There is none. Even if it does take place,
    which is very improbable, the Stockholm Conference will be an
    attempt by the German imperialists to explore the possibilities of
    such and such an exchange of annexations. That will be the true,
    the actual significance of the eloquent speeches of the
    Scheidemanns, Skobelevs and Co. And if the conference does not
    take place, your preaching to the masses, rousing false hopes in
    them in regard to the social-chauvinists, hopes for their speedy,
    possible and probable “reformation”, will acquire real
    significance.

In either case, you may wish to be internationalists but you
    will actually turn out to be accomplices of the social-chauvinists,
    now of one coalition, now of both coalitions.

We, however, take into account all the ups and downs and all
    the particulars of politics and remain consistent
    internationalists advocating the fraternal alliance of the
    workers, rupture with the social-chauvinists and work for the
    proletarian revolution.

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
The Independent Social-Democratic Party of Germany was a Centrist
party founded in April 1917 by the congress in Gotha, in an
atmosphere of revolutionary upswing, which was greatly stimulated
by the February revolution in Russia. The opportunist leadership
of the German Social-Democratic Party was losing ground among
the rank and file and the party was threatened with a break-away
of Left-wing elements. To avert a split and the formation of a
revolutionary party of the working class, the Centrist leaders set up the
so-called Independent Party which, they hoped, would help them
retain their influence. The Independents disguised themselves with
Centrist talk in advocating unity with the social-chauvinists, and

   

tended to renounce the class struggle. The Labour Community,
a Kautskyite organisation active in the Reichstag, formed the
bulk of the Independent Party.

In October 1920 a split occurred in the Independent
Social-Democratic Party at the Halle Congress. In December 1920
a sizable number of Independents joined the Communist Party of
Germany. The Right-wing elements founded a separate party and
took the party’s former name, Independent Social-Democratic Party
of Germany. This party existed till 1922.









<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## From a Publicist’s Diary (Peasants and Workers)









Lenin: From a Publicist’s Diary (Peasants and Workers)







V. I.  

      Lenin
From a Publicist’s Diary (Peasants and Workers)
PEASANTS AND WORKERS




Published:

      First published in Rabochy No. 6, September 11 (August 29), 1917.

      Signed: N. Lenin.

      Published according to the Rabochy text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 278-286.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Izvestia of the All-Russia Congress of Peasants’
Deputies[1]
      No. 88, of August 19, carries an exceedingly interesting article
      which should be regarded as basic material for every Party
      propaganda and agitation worker who has anything to do with the
      peasants and for every class-conscious worker who is going to the
      countryside or comes in contact with peasants.
    

The article is entitled “Model Mandate Compiled on the
      Basis of 242 Mandates Submitted by Local Deputies to the
      First All-Russia Congress of Peasants’ Deputies Held in
      Petrograd, 1917”
    

The best thing would be for the Congress of Peasants’ Deputies
    to publish as much detailed information as possible about all
    those mandates. (if it is absolutely impossible to print them all
    in full, which, of course, would be preferable). It is
    particularly necessary, for instance, to have a full list of the
    gubernias, uyezds and volosts, showing how many mandates have been
    received from each locality, when they were compiled or delivered,
    and to analyse at least the basic demands, so that we can tell
    whether the various points differ according to areas, whether such
    questions as abolition of private property rights to all
      peasant
    lands, periodic redistribution of land, prohibition of
    wage-labour, confiscation of the landowners’ implements and
    livestock, etc., etc., are put differently in, say, areas with
    homestead and communal land ownership, areas with Russian and
    non-Russian populations, central and outlying areas, areas that
    never had serfdom, and so on. No thorough-going study of the
    extraordinarily valuable material contained in the peasant
    mandates is possible without such details. And we Marxists

    

must
    exert every effort to make a thorough-going study of the facts
    underlying our policy.

In the absence of better material, and as long as it has not
    been proved factually incorrect in one respect or another, the
      summary of the mandates (as we shall call the “Model
    Mandate”) remains the only material of its kind which, we
    repeat, is an absolute must for every Party member.

The first part of the summary is devoted to general political
    principles, to demands of political democracy; the second, to the
    land question. (It is to be hoped that the All-Russia Congress of
    Peasants’ Deputies or some other body will summarise the peasants’
    mandates and resolutions concerning the war.) Without going into
    detail in the first part, we shall note only two points from it,
      § 6,
      demanding the election of all office-holders, and
      § 11,
      calling
    for the abolition of the standing army once the war is over. These
    points bring the peasants’ political programme
      closest of all to
    the Bolshevik Party programme. Basing ourselves on these points,
    we must stress and prove through all our propaganda and agitation
    that the Menshevik and Socialist-Revolutionary leaders are
    traitors not only to socialism, but also to democracy. In
    Kronstadt, for instance, contrary to the will of the population
    and to democratic principles, and to please the capitalists, they
    upheld the office of a commissar subject to
      approval by the
    government, that is, an office not purely elective. In the
    Petrograd district councils and in other local self-government
    bodies, the Socialist-B evolutionary and Menshevik leaders,
    contrary to democratic principles, are fighting the Bolshevik
    demand for the immediate institution of a workers’ militia, to be
    succeeded by a popular militia.

According to the summary, the peasant land demands are primarily
    abolition of private ownership of all types of land, including the
    peasants’ lands, without compensation; transfer of lands on which
    high-standard scientific farming is practised to the state or the
    communes; confiscation of all livestock and implements on the
    confiscated lands (peasants with little land are excluded) and
    their transfer to the state or the communes; a ban on wage-labour;
    equalised

    distribution of land among the working people, with periodical
    redistributions, and so on. In the transition period, pending the
    convocation of the Constituent Assembly, the

    

peasants demand the
      immediate enactment of laws prohibiting the purchase and sale of
    land, abolition of laws concerning separation from the commune,
    farmsteads, etc., laws protecting forests, fisheries, etc.,
    abolishing long-term and revising short-term leases, and so on.
    

You do not have to give these demands a lot of thought to see
    that it is absolutely impossible to realise them
      in alliance with
    the capitalists, without breaking completely with them, without
    waging the most determined and ruthless struggle against the
    capitalist class, without overthrowing its rule.

The Socialist-Revolutionaries are deceiving themselves and the
    peasants precisely by assuming and spreading the idea that these
    reforms, or
      similar reforms, are possible without overthrowing
    capitalist rule, without all state power being transferred to the
    proletariat, without the peasant poor supporting the most
    resolute, revolutionary measures of a proletarian state power
    against the capitalists. The significance of the appearance of a
    Left wing among the “Socialist-Revolutionaries” is that it
    proves there is a growing awareness of this deception within their
    party.

Indeed, confiscation of all private land means the confiscation
    of hundreds of millions in capital belonging to the banks to which
    the greater part of this land is mortgaged. How can any measure
    like this be taken without the revolutionary class overcoming the
    capitalists’ resistance by revolutionary methods? Moreover, it is
    here a question of the most highly centralised capital of all,
    bank capital, which is connected through billions of threads with
    all the nerve centres of the capitalist economy of a huge country
    and which can be defeated only by the no less centralised might of
    the urban proletariat.

Further, take the transfer of highly efficient farms to the
    state. Obviously, the “state” capable of taking them over
    and running them really and truly in the interests of the working
    people, and not in the interests of the officials and the
    capitalists themselves, must be a proletarian revolutionary
    state.

The confiscation of stud farms, etc., and then of all livestock
    and implements, is something more than striking one staggering
    blow after another at private ownership of

    

the means of
    production. It means taking steps towards socialism, for the
    transfer of
      livestock and implements “to the exclusive use of
    the state or a commune’ implies large-scale, socialist agriculture
    or at least socialist control over integrated small farms,
    socialist regulation of their economy.

And what about a “ban” on wage-labour? This is a
    meaningless phrase, helpless, unwittingly naive wishful thinking
    on the part of downtrodden petty proprietors, who do not see that
    capitalist industry as a whole would come to a standstill if there
    were no reserve army of wage-labour in the countryside, that it is
    impossible to “ban” wage-labour in the villages while
    permitting it in the towns, and lastly, that to “ban”
    wage-labour means nothing but a step towards socialism.

Here we come to the fundamental question of the workers’
    attitude to the peasants.

A mass Social-Democratic workers’ movement has existed in
    Russia for more than twenty years (if we begin with the great
    strikes of 1896). Throughout this long span of time, through two
    great revolutions, through the entire political history of Russia,
    runs the issue of whether the working class is to lead the
    peasants forward, to socialism, or whether the liberal bourgeoisie
    are to drag them back, to conciliation with capitalism.

The opportunist wing of the Social-Democrats has always
    reasoned by the worldly-wise formula:
      since the
    Socialist-Revolutionaries are petty bourgeois, “we” reject
    their philistine utopian views on socialism
      in the name of
    bourgeois rejection of socialism. Struvism neatly replaces
    Marxism, and Menshevism slithers down to the role of a Cadet
    flunkey seeking to “reconcile” the peasants to bourgeois
    rule. The latest and most striking evidence of that role is that
    Tsereteli and Skobelev, hand in hand with Chernov and Avksentyev,
    were busy signing the Cadets’ reactionary landowner decrees in the
    name of “revolutionary democrats”.

The revolutionary Social-Democrats, who have never renounced
      criticism of the petty-bourgeois illusions of the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries, and never entered into any
      bloc

      with them except against the Cadets, work unremittingly
      to wrest
      the peasants away from Cadet influence, and in opposition to the
      philistine’s utopian view of socialism,

    

put forward the
      revolutionary proletarian road to socialism instead of liberal
      conciliation with capitalism.
    

Now that the war has speeded up developments fantastically,
    aggravated the crisis of capitalism to the utmost, and confronted
    the peoples with making an immediate choice between destruction
    and immediate determined strides towards socialism, the full depth
    of the gulf between semi-liberal Menshevism and revolutionary
    proletarian Bolshevism is clearly revealed over the practical
    issue of what action the tens of millions of peasants should
    take.

Accept the rule of capital
      because “we” are not yet ripe
    for socialism, the Mensheviks tell the peasants, substituting,
    incidentally, the abstract question of “socialism” in
    general for the concrete question of whether it is possible to
    heal the wounds inflicted by the war without decisive strides
    towards socialism.

Accept capitalism
      because the Socialist-Revolutionaries are
    petty-bourgeois utopians, the Mensheviks tell the peasants and
    rally together with the Socialist-Revolutionaries to support the
    Cadet government.

And the Socialist-Revolutionaries, beating their breast, assure
    the peasants that they are against any peace with the capitalists,
    that they have never regarded the Russian revolution as a
    bourgeois revolution—and
      therefore enter into a bloc with the
      opportunist Social-Democrats and rally to support a bourgeois
    government. The Socialist-Revolutionaries sign all peasant
    programmes. however revolutionary, except that they do so not to
    carry them out, but to pigeon-hole them and deceive the peasants
    with the most noncommittal promises, while actually pursuing for
    months a policy of compromise with the Cadets in the coalition
    government.

This crying, practical, direct, palpable betrayal of the
    peasants’ interests by the Socialist-Revolutionaries radically
    alters the situation. We must take this change into account. It is
    not enough to conduct agitation against the
    Socialist-Revolutionaries in the old way, the way we did between
    1902 and 1903, and 1905 and 1907. It is not enough to expose
    theoretically the petty-bourgeois illusions of “socialisation
    of land”, “equalised land tenure”, “a ban on
    wage-labour”, etc.
 

That was on the eve of the bourgeois revolution, or before the
    bourgeois revolution’s completion, and the task was primarily to
    carry it through to overthrow the monarchy.

Now the monarchy has been overthrown. The bourgeois revolution
    has been completed in so far as Russia has become a democratic
    republic with a government of Cadets, Mensheviks and
    Socialist-Revolutionaries. And the war in the past three years has
    pushed us a good thirty years ahead. It has forced on Europe
    universal labour service and the compulsory syndication of
    undertakings, caused hunger and unprecedented ravages in the
    leading countries, and imposed steps towards socialism.

The fundamental premise of our class policy at that time was
    that only the workers and peasants can overthrow the monarchy. And
    this premise was correct. February and March 1917 reaffirmed
    this.

The premise of our class policy today is that only the
    proletariat, leading the poorest peasants (the semi-proletarians,
    as our programme puts it), can end the war with a democratic
    peace, heal the war wounds, and initiate steps towards socialism
    which have become absolutely necessary and
      urgent.

It follows that the emphasis in our propaganda and agitation
    against the Socialist-Revolutionaries must be shifted to the fact
    that they have betrayed the peasants. They represent a minority of
    well-to-do farmers rather than the mass of the peasant poor. They
    are leading the peasants to an alliance with the capitalists,
    i.e., to subordination to them, rather than to an alliance with
    the workers. They have bartered the interests of the working and
    exploited people for ministerial posts and a bloc with the
    Mensheviks and Cadets.

History, accelerated by the war, has forged so far ahead that the
    old formulas have acquired a new meaning. “A ban on
    wage-labour” was formerly only an empty phrase bandied
    about by the petty-bourgeois intellectual. In the light of today,
    it means something different: the millions of peasant poor say in
    their 242 mandates that they want hired labour abolished but do
    not know how to do it. We know how. We
    know that this can be done only in alliance with the workers,
    under their leadership, against the capitalists, not through a
    compromise with them.
    
 

These are the changes that the basic line of our propaganda and
    agitation against the Socialist-Revolutionaries, the basic line we
    pursue in addressing the peasants, must now undergo.

The Socialist-Revolutionary Party has betrayed you, comrade
    peasants. It has betrayed the hovels and deserted to the palaces,
    if not the royal palaces, then those where the Cadets, those
    bitter enemies of the revolution, and particularly the peasant
    revolution, sit in the same government as the Chernovs,
    Peshekhonovs, and Avksentyevs.

Only the revolutionary proletariat, only the vanguard that
    unites it, the Bolshevik Party, can
      actually carry out the
    programme of the peasant poor which is put forward in the 242
    mandates. For the revolutionary proletariat is
      really advancing to
    the abolition of wage-labour along the only correct path, through
    the overthrow of capital and not by prohibiting the hiring of
    labourers, not through a “ban” on wage-labour. The
    revolutionary proletariat is really advancing to confiscation of
    land, implements, and agricultural technical establishments, to
    what the peasants want and what the Socialist-Revolutionaries
      cannot give them.

This is how the basic line pursued by the worker in addressing
    the peasant must now change. We workers can and will give you what
    the peasant poor want and are searching for without always knowing
    where and how to find it. We workers are upholding our own
    interests and at the same time the interests of the vast majority
    of the peasants
      against the capitalists, while the
    Socialist-Revolutionaries, allying themselves with the
    capitalists, are betraying these interests.
 *     *  * 

Let us recall what Engels said on the peasant question shortly
    before his death. He stressed that socialists have no intention
    whatever of expropriating the small peasants, and that the
    advantages of mechanised socialist
      agriculture[2]
      will be made
    clear to them only
      by force of example.

The war has now confronted Russia in practice with a problem of
    exactly this order. There is a shortage of implements. They must
    be confiscated, and the highly efficient farms must not be
    “divided up”.
 

The peasants have begun to realise this. Need has compelled
    them to do so. The war has compelled them, for there are 110
    implements to be had anywhere. What there is must be thriftily
    husbanded. And large-scale farming means saving labour through the
    use of implements as well as many other things.

The peasants want to keep their small farms, to set equal
    standards for all, and to make readjustments on an equalitarian
    basis from time to time. Fine. No sensible socialist will differ
    with the peasant poor over this. If the land is confiscated, that
      means the domination of the banks has been undermined, if the
    implements are confiscated, that
      means the domination of capital
    has been undermined—and in that case,
      provided the proletariat rules centrally, provided political
    power is taken over by the
    proletariat, the rest will come
      by itself, as a result of
    “force of example”, prompted by experience.

The crux of the matter lies in political power passing into the
    hands of the proletariat. When this has taken place, everything
    that is essential, basic, fundamental in the programme set out in
    the 242 mandates
      will become feasible. Life will show what
    modifications it will undergo as it is carried out. This is an
    issue of secondary importance. We are not doctrinaires. Our theory
    is a guide to action, not a dogma.

We do not claim that Marx knew or Marxists know the road to
    socialism down to the last detail. It would be nonsense to claim
    anything of the kind. What we know is the direction of this road,
    and the class forces that follow it; the specific, practical
    details will come to light only through the
      experience of the millions when they take things into their own
    hands.

Trust the workers, comrade peasants, and break with the
      capitalists! Only in close alliance with the workers
      can you begin
      to carry out the programme set out in the 2/i2 man dates. Allied
      with the capitalists and led by the Socialist-Revolutionaries, you
      will never live to see a single

      determined, radical step in the spirit of this programme.
    

But when in alliance with the urban workers, waging a ruthless
    struggle against capital, you
      begin to realise the programme of
    the 242 mandates, the whole world will come

    

to our and your
    assistance, and then the success of that programme—not as it
    stands now, but in its essence—will be assured. When that
    happens, the domination of capital and wage slavery xviii come to
    an end. That will be the beginning of the reign of socialism, the
    reign of peace, the reign of the working people.

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Izvestia of the All-Russia Congress of Peasants’ Deputies (Izvestia
Vserossiiskogo Soveta Krestyanskikh Deputatov)—the official daily
newspaper of that Soviet published in Petrograd from May 9 (22)
to December 1917. It expressed the views of the Right wing of the
Socialist-Revolutionary Party. Its attitude to the October
Revolution was hostile. It was closed down for its counter-revolutionary
propaganda.





[2]
Lenin is referring to Frederick Engels, The Peasant Question in
France and Germany (Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Selected
Works, Vol. 3, Moscow, 1973, pp. 469–72).









<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## Slanderers









Lenin: Slanderers







V. I.  

      Lenin
Slanderers




Published:

      First published in Rabochy No. 8, September 12 (August 30), 1917.

      Signed: N. Lenin.

      Published according to the Rabochy text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 287-288.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The August 20 issue of
      Rech, and Russkaya Volya, a newspaper
    founded with notoriously questionable money and recommending
    “socialist-minded” voters to vote for
      Yedinstvo and for the
    Popular Socialists, have again published slanderous statements
    against me.

The information comes, according to both papers, from the
      “War Ministry”, and “Rech”
      even asserts that it is
    backed by “documentary evidence and numerous testimonies by
    individuals”.

The law on libel in the press has virtually been suspended in
    Russia. Slanderers, especially those contributing to the bourgeois
    papers, have been granted complete freedom. They can come out in
    the papers anonymously, lie and slander as much as they please,
    and hide behind allegedly official reports not signed by any
    official—they can get away with anything! Those infamous
    slanderers, headed by Mr. Milyukov and his like, enjoy the
    privilege of immunity.

The slanderers assert that I had certain relations with the
    Union for the Liberation of the Ukraine. Milyukov’s newspaper
    writes: “The German Government instructed Lenin to advocate
    peace.” “In Berlin,” it says, “there were two
    socialist meetings in which Lenin and Yoltukhovsky took part.”
      Rasskaya Volya adds to the latter phrase: “Lenin stopped at
    Yoltukhovsky’s.”

Since Mr. Milyukov and other scoundrels like him—knights of
    the foul slander—are allowed to slander with impunity, all I
    can do is repeat that it is slander and again confront the knights
    of blackmail, who refer to witnesses, with a reference to a
    witness known to the masses.
 

I have known Basok, one of those active in the Union for the
    Liberation of the Ukraine, since 1906, when he was a Menshevik and
    attended the Stockholm Congress together with me. In the autumn of
    1914, or early 1915, when I was living in Berne, I received a
    visit at my home from the well-known Caucasian Menshevik Tria, who
    had come from Constantinople. He told me about Basok’s activity in
    the Union for the Liberation of the Ukraine, and of the connection
    between that Union and the German government. He handed me a
    letter from Basok, who expressed sympathy with me and said he
    hoped our views would become closer. I was so angry that I wrote
    an answer to Basok there and then, in the presence of Tria, and
    gave the letter to Tria asking him to pass it on since he was
    about to make another trip to Constantinople.

In my letter to Basok, I declared that since he was entering
    into relations with one of the imperialists, our ways parted for
    good and we had nothing in common.

That is all the “relations” I have ever had with the
    Union for the Liberation of the Ukraine.

 
Notes
 
 







<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## To the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P.









Lenin: To the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P.







V. I.  

      Lenin
To the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P.




Written: Written on August 30 (September 12), 1917 

Published:

      First published in Pravda No. 250, November 7, 1920.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 289-293.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

It is possible that these lines will come too late, for
    events are developing with a rapidity that sometimes makes one’s head
    spin. I am writing this on Wednesday, August 30, and the recipients will
    read it no earlier than Friday, September 2. Still, on chance, I consider
    it my duty to write the following.

The Kornilov revolt is a most unexpected (unexpected at such a moment
    and in such a form) and downright unbelievably sharp turn in events.

Like every sharp turn, it calls for a revision and change of tactics.
    And as with every revision, we must be extra-cautious not to become
    unprincipled.

It is my conviction that those who become unprincipled are people who
    (like Volodarsky) slide into defencism or (like other Bolsheviks) into a
    bloc with the S.R.s, into supporting the Provisional
    Government. Their attitude is absolutely wrong and unprincipled. We shall
    become defencists only after the transfer of power to the
    proletariat, after a peace offer, after the secret
    treaties and ties with the banks have been broken—only
    afterwards. Neither the capture of Riga nor the capture of
    Petrograd will make us defencists. (I should very much like Volodarsky
    to read this.) Until then we stand for a proletarian revolution, we are
    against the war, and we are no defencists.

Even now we must not support Kerensky’s government. This
    is unprincipled. We may be asked: aren’t we going to fight against
    Kornilov? Of course we must! But this is not the same thing; there is a
    dividing Line here, which is being stepped over by some Bolsheviks who fall
    into

    

compromise and allow themselves to be carried away by the
    course of events.

We shall fight, we are fighting against Kornilov, just as
    Kerensky’s troops do, but we do not support Kerensky. On
    the contrary, we expose his weakness. There is the difference. It is
    rather a subtle difference, but it is highly essential.and must not be
    forgotten.

What, then, constitutes our change of tactics after the Kornilov
    revolt?

We are changing the form of our struggle against Kerensky.
    Without in the least relaxing our hostility towards him, without taking
    back a single word said against him, without renouncing the task of
    overthrowing him, we say that we must take into account the
    present situation. We shall not overthrow Kerensky right now. We shall
    approach the task of fighting against him in a different way,
    namely, we shall point out to the people (who are fighting against
    Kornilov) Kerensky’s weakness and vacillation. That
    has been done in the past as well. Now, however, it has become the
    all-important thing and this constitutes the change.

The change, further, is that the all-important thing now has
    become the intensification of our campaign for some kind of “partial
    demands” to be presented to Kerensky: arrest Milyukov, arm the
    Petrograd workers, summon the Kronstadt, Vyborg and Helsingfors troops to
    Petrograd, dissolve the Duma, arrest Rodzyanko, legalise the transfer of
    the landed estates to the peasants, introduce workers’ control over
    grain and factories, etc., etc. We must present these demands not only to
    Kerensky, and not so much to Kerensky, as to the workers, soldiers
    and peasants who have been carried away by the course of the
    struggle against Kornilov. We must keep up their enthusiasm,
    encourage them to deal with the generals and officers who have declared for
    Kornilov, urge them to demand the immediate transfer of land to
    the peasants, suggest to them that it is necessary to arrest
    Rodzyanko and Milyukov, dissolve the Duma, close down Rech and
    other bourgeois papers, and institute investigations against them. The
    “Left” S.R.s must be especially urged on in this direction.





It would be wrong to think that we have moved farther away from the task
    of the proletariat winning power. No.

    

We have come very close to it,
    not directly, but from the side. At the moment we must
    campaign not so much directly against Kerensky, as indirectly
    against him, namely, by demanding a more and more active, truly
    revolutionary war against Kornilov. The development of this war alone can
    lead us to power, but we must speak of this its little as
    possible in our propaganda (remembering very well that even tomorrow events
    may put power into our hands, and then we shall not relinquish it). It
    seems to me that this should be passed on in a letter (not in the papers)
    to the propagandists, to groups of agitators and propagandists, and to
    Party members in general. We must relentlessly fight against phrases about
    the defence of the country, about a united front of revolutionary
    democrats, about supporting the provisional Government, etc., etc., since
    they are just empty phrases. We must say: now is the time for
    action; you S.R. and Menshevik gentlemen have long since worn
    those phrases threadbare. Now is the time for action; the war
    against Kornilov must be conducted in a revolutionary way, by drawing the
    masses in, by arousing them, by inflaming them (Kerensky is afraid
    of the masses, afraid of the people). In the war against the
    Germans, action is required right now; immediate and
    unconditional peace must be offered on precise terms. If this
    is done, either a speedy peace can be attained or the war can be
    turned into a revolutionary war; if not, all the Mensheviks and
    Socialist-Revolutionaries remain lackeys of imperialism.


P.S. Having read six issues of 
Rabochy,[1] after this was
    written, I must say that our views fully coincide. I heartily welcome the
    splendid editorials, press review and articles by V. M—n and
    Vol—y. As to Volodarsky’s speech, I have read his letter to the
    editors, which likewise “eliminates” my reproaches. Once more,
    best wishes and greetings!

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Rabochy (The Worker)—Central Organ of the Bolshevik Party
published daily from August 25 (September 7) to September 2 (15),
1917, instead of Pravda, closed down by the Provisional
Government. Twelve issues were published in all (including extras).









<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## From a Publicist’s Diary









Lenin: From a Publicist’s Diary







V. I.  

      Lenin
From a Publicist’s Diary




Published:

      First published in Rabochy No. 10  September 14 (1), 1917.

      Signed: N. Lenin.

      Published according to the Rabochy text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 294-304.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

     1. THE ROOT OF THE EVIL

Everyone will probably agree that the writer N. Sukhanov of
      Novaya Zhizn is one of the best rather than worst representatives
    of petty-bourgeois democracy. He sincerely leans towards
    internationalism, which he has proved in the hardest times, at the
    height of tsarist reaction and chauvinism. He has knowledge and a
    desire to work out serious problems independently, which he has
    proved by his long evolution from Socialist-Revolutionism towards
    revolutionary Marxism.

It is all the more characteristic that even such people are
    apt, when dealing with the fundamental issues of the revolution in
    its crucial periods, to treat their readers to arguments as
    thoughtless as the following:


“No matter how many revolutionary gains we have lost in the
    past few weeks, one, and perhaps the most important of all, is
    still there: the government and its policies can only he
    maintained by the grace of the Soviet majority. The revolutionary
    democrats have of their own accord given up all the influence they
    commanded; the democratic organs can still regain it very easily
    and, given proper understanding of the requirements of the moment,
    can without difficulty direct the policies of the Provisional
    Government into the proper channel”
      (Novaya Zhizn No. 106,
    August 20).


These words contain the most thoughtless, the most monstrous
    untruth concerning the most important Issue of the revolution, an
    untruth, moreover, which has most often been put about, in vastly
    differing countries, among the petty-bourgeois democrats and has
    ruined the greatest number of revolutions.

When you think over the sum total of petty-bourgeois illusions
    contained in the argument quoted above, you cannot help thinking
    that it is no accident the
      Novaya Zhizn people sit at the
    “unity”
      congress[1]
      together with

    

Ministers, with socialists
    eligible for the cabinet, with the Tseretelis and Skobelevs, with
    cabinet members who are comrades of Kerensky, Kornilov and Co. No
    accident at all. They actually have a common ideological
    foundation,namely, unreasoning philistine gullibility,
    uncritically borrowed from the petty-bourgeois environment, in
    good intentions. For this gullibility pervades all of Sukhanov’s
    argument, as well as all the activities of those defencist
    Mensheviks who act in good faith. This petty-bourgeois gullibility
    is the root of the evil in our revolution.

Sukhanov would probably hasten to subscribe to what Marxism
    demands of all serious policy, namely, that it be based on and
    grounded in
      facts capable of exact and objective verification. Let
    us try to approach the assertion which Sukhanov makes in the
    passage above from the point of view of this demand.

What are the facts underlying this assertion? How could
    Sukhanov prove that the government “can only be maintained by
    the grace” of the Soviets, that they could “very easily”
    “regain their influence”, or that they could “without
    difficulty” change the policies of the Provisional
    Government?

Sukhanov could have referred, first, to his general impression,
    to the “obvious” strength of the Soviets, to the fact that
    Kerensky came to the Soviet, to the amiable words of this or that
    minister, etc. This would certainly have been very poor
    proof—rather an admission of the complete lack of proof and
    objective facts.

Sukhanov could have referred, secondly, to the objective fact
    that by far most of the resolutions passed 1y workers, soldiers
    and peasants declare emphatically for the Soviets and in favour of
    supporting them. These resolutions, he might have said,
    demonstrate the will of the majority of the people.

This kind of reasoning is as common among philistines as the
    first kind. But it is absolutely untenable.

In all revolutions, the will of the majority of the workers and
    peasants, i.e., undoubtedly, the will of the majority of the
    population, has been for democracy. Nevertheless, the great
    majority of revolutions have ended with the defeat of
    democracy.
 

In view of the experience of the majority of revolutions,
    particularly that of 1848 (which resembles our present revolution
    most), Marx mercilessly ridiculed the petty-bourgeois democrats who
    wished to win through resolutions and references to the will of
    the majority of the people.

Our own experience proves this even better. In the spring of
    1906 most of the resolutions passed by workers and peasants were
    undoubtedly in favour of the First Duma. The majority of the
    people undoubtedly stood for it. Nevertheless, the tsar succeeded
    in dissolving it because the upswing of the revolutionary classes
    (workers’ strikes and peasant unrest in the spring of 1906) proved
    too weak for a new revolution.

Think over the,experience of the present revolution. Both from
    March to April and from July to August 1917, most resolutions were
    for the Soviets, the majority of the people were for the
    Soviets. Yet everyone sees, knows and feels that from March to
    April the revolution was moving forward, whereas from July to
    August it was moving backwards. Consequently, reference to the
    majority of the people decides nothing as far as the specific
    issues of a revolution are concerned.

This reference, made by way of proof, is in itself a specimen
    of petty-bourgeois illusion. It shows unwillingness to admit that
    in a revolution the enemy classes must be
      defeated, the state
    power that defends them must be
      overthrown and that the “will
    of the majority of the people” is insufficient to bring this
    about. What is needed is the
      strength of the revolutionary classes
    that will and can fight, a strength which at the decisive moment
    and place will
      crush the enemy’s strength.

How often has it happened during revolutions that the small but
    well-organised, armed and centralised power of the ruling classes,
    the landowners and the bourgeoisie, has crushed piecemeal the
    power of the “majority of the people”, who were poorly
    organised, poorly armed and lacked unity.

To make “general” references to the “will of the
    people” instead of considering specific issues of the class
    struggle at a time when it has been particularly sharpened by the
    revolution is worthy only of the most stupid petty bourgeois.

Thirdly, in the comment quoted above, Sukhanov advances another
    “argument” that is likewise fairly common among

    

    philistines. He says “the revolutionary democrats have of their
    own accord given up all the influence they commanded”. From
    this he infers that what was given up “of their own accord”
    can be taken back easily.

An utterly worthless argument. First of all, the return of what
    was voluntarily ceded presupposes the “voluntary consent” of
    the beneficiary of the concession. It follows that this voluntary
    consent is there. Who has received the
      “concession”? Who
    has profited from the “influence” given up by the
    “revolutionary democrats”?

It is quite typical that this question, fundamental to all but
    a headless politician, is completely ignored by Sukhanov. For the
    crux of the matter is precisely in whose hands is,
      in practice,
    that which the “revolutionary [pardon the expression I
    democrats” have “given up of their own accord”.

Sukhanov ignores the crux of the matter, as do all Mensheviks
    and Socialist-Revolutionaries, all petty-bourgeois democrats in
    general.

Moreover, it may be that in a child’s “give-and-take”
    game it is easy to take something back: if Katya freely lets Masha
    have her ball, it may be “very easy” to take it back. But
    there are not many, apart from Russian intellectuals, who would
    venture to extend such conceptions to politics, to the class
    struggle.

In politics, ceding “influence” of one’s own free will
    proves such impotence on the part of the one who does the ceding,
    such flabbiness, such lack of character, such meekness, that,
    generally speaking, the only thing one can infer is that whoever
    gives up his influence of his own accord “deserves” to be
    deprived of his right to exist as well as his influence. In other
    words, the fact of voluntarily giving up one’s influence
    “proves” in itself only this, that the beneficiary of the
    voluntarily ceded influence will inevitably deprive the one who
    has ceded it even of his rights.

If the “revolutionary democrats” have voluntarily ceded
    their influence, they are therefore not revolutionary but vile,
    philistine, cowardly democrats still bound by servility, democrats
    whom (after such a surrender) their enemies can either disperse or
    simply reduce to naught, allowing them to die as much “of their
    own accord” as they ceded their influence.
 

To regard the actions of political parties as
      whims means
    renouncing all
      study of politics. There must by an
      explanation for
    an action like the “giving up of their influence of their own
    accord” by two huge parties which, according to all available
    information and reports and to objective election figures, sway
    the majority of the people. It cannot be accidental. It must be
    due to a definite economic position of some large class of the
    people. It must be linked up with the history of the development
    of those parties.

Sukhanov’s argument is highly typical of thousands upon
    thousands of similar philistine arguments because it is in effect
    based on the conception of good will (“their own accord”)
    and ignores the
      history of the parties under
    consideration. Sukhanov has simply left their history out of his
    examination, forgetting that voluntary surrender of influence
    began, strictly speaking, on February 28, when the Soviet
    expressed confidence in Kerensky and approved the
    “agreement” with the Provisional Government. And May 6 was a
    surrender of influence on a truly gigantic scale. Taken as a
    whole, it is all as clear as can be: the S.R. and Menshevik
    parties placed themselves on an inclined plane from the very
    first, and rolled down faster and faster. After July 3-5, they
    reached rock bottom.

Isn’t it perfectly thoughtless to say now that the surrender
    was voluntary, that it is “very easy” to make great
    political parties face about, that they can “without
    difficulty” be induced to take the opposite direction to the
    one they have been following for years (and for months during the
    revolution), and that it is “very easy” to scramble out of
    the pit and climb up the inclined plane to the top?

Fourthly and lastly, Sukhanov could in defence of his opinion
    have referred to the fact that the workers and soldiers, who
    express confidence in the Soviet, are armed and therefore could
    “very easily” regain their influence. But it is on this,
    perhaps the most important, point that the philistine comment of
    the writer of
      Novaya Zhizn is particularly lame.

To be as specific as possible, let us compare April 20–21 with
    July 3–5.

On April 20 popular indignation against the government burst
    out. An armed regiment came on to the streets of Petrograd
    intending to arrest the government. There was

    

no arrest. The
    government, however, saw clearly that it had nobody to rely on. No
    troops were for it.
      Such a government was indeed “very easy”
    to overthrow, and the government confronted the Soviet with an
    ultimatum: either you back me, or I go.

On July 4, a similar outburst of popular indignation, an
    outburst which all parties tried to restrain but which broke out
    in spite of
      all the restraining. As before, there was an armed
    anti-government demonstration. But the enormous difference was
    that the S.R. and Menshevik leaders, who had isolated themselves
    from the people and were confused, agreed with the bourgeoisie
      as
early as July 3 to call
      Kaledin’s troops to Petrograd. There is
    the crux of the matter!

With a soldier’s frankness, Kaledin said so at the Moscow
    meeting: “After all, it was you socialist Ministers who called
    us to your aid on July 3!” Nobody dared refute Kaledin at the
    Moscow meeting because he spoke the truth. Kaledin mocked the
    Mensheviks and S.R.s, who were compelled to keep silent. The
    Cossack general spat in their faces, but they merely wiped it off
    and said: “Divine dew!”

The bourgeois papers reported Kaledin’s words but the Menshevik
      Rabochaya Gazeta and the S.R.
      “Dyelo Naroda”
      concealed that
    political statement from their readers, the most important
    statement made at the Moscow meeting.

What happened was that for the first time the government
    resorted expressly to Kaledin’s troops, while the determined,
    truly revolutionary troops and the workers were disarmed. This is
    the fundamental fact which Sukhanov has “very easily” evaded
    and forgotten. It remains a fact nevertheless. It is a decisive
    fact as far as the present period of the revolution, the first
    revolution, is concerned.

Power in a decisive place at the front, and then in the army,
    has passed into the hands of the
      Kaledins. This is a fact. The
    most active of the troops hostile to them have been disarmed. The
    fact that the Kaledins do not use their power immediately to
    establish their complete dictatorship does not at all disprove
    that they hold power. Wasn’t the tsar in power after December
    1905? And didn’t circumstances compel him to use it so prudently
    that he had two Dumas convened before he took
      all power, i.e.,
    before he made a coup
      d’état[2]?
    
 

Power should be judged by actions instead of words. The actions
    of the government since July 5 have shown that power is in the
    hands of the Kaledins, who are making slow but
      steady headway,
    daily securing “concessions”, large and small. Today it is
    the impunity with which military cadets raid the
      Pravda offices
    and kill its staff members, and make arbitrary arrests; then comes
    a law closing down newspapers, and laws banning meetings and
    conferences, throwing citizens out of the country without trial,
    imposing prison sentences for insulting “the ambassadors of
    friendly countries”, meting out penal servitude for assailing
    the government, introducing capital punishment at the front, and
      so on, and so forth.

The Kaledins are no fools. Why should they go right through,
    forcing their way and risking defeat, when they receive the things
    they need bit by bit,
      every day? Meanwhile, the foolish Skobelevs
    and Tseretelis, Chernovs and (Avksentyevs, Dans and Liebers shout
    “Triumph for democracy! Victory!” at every step of the
    Kaledins forward, seeing as “victory” the fact that the
    Kaledins, Kornilovs and Kerenskys do not swallow them at
    once!!

The root of the evil is that their very economic position makes
    the petty-bourgeois masses amazingly credulous and ignorant, and
    that they are still half asleep and mumble drowsily, “It is
    ‘very easy’ to take back what we have given up of our own free
    will!” Try and get the Kaledins and Kornilovs to give back
    anything of their own free will!

The root of the evil is that “democratic” journalism
    maintains this drowsy, philistine, stupid, slavish illusion,
    instead of fighting it.

If we look at things the way a political historian in general
    and a Marxist in particular should, i. e., if we consider them as
    a whole, it is perfectly clear that a decisive turn at present,
    far from being “easy”, is, on the contrary, absolutely
    impossible
      without a new revolution.

I do not at all touch here on the question of whether this
    revolution is desirable. I do not at all examine the question of
    whether it can take place peacefully and legally (generally
    speaking, there have been examples of peaceful and legal
    revolutions in history). I merely state that it is historically
    impossible to bring about a decisive turn without

    

a new
    revolution. For power is
      already in other hands. It is no longer
    held by the “revolutionary democrats”. It has
      already been
    seized and consolidated. The conduct of the S. B. and Menshevik
    parties is no accident; it is a product of the economic status of
    the petty bourgeoisie, and the result of a long series of
    political events—from February 28 to May 6, from May 6 to June 9, from June 9 to June 18 and 19 (the offensive), etc. There is a
    need for changes in the situation of power, in its composition, in
    the conditions of activity of the major parties, in the
    “aspirations” of the class which sustains them. These
    changes are historically unthinkable
      without a new revolution.

Instead of explaining to the people all the main historical
    conditions of the new revolution, its economic and political
    prerequisites, its political aims, the interrelation of classes
    that corresponds to it, etc., Sukhanov and a host of
    petty-bourgeois democrats
      are lulling the people
      to sleep by
    trifling away their time, by asserting self-complacently that
    “we shall regain everything without difficulty”, “very
    easily”, that our “most important” revolutionary gain
    “is still there”, and similar thoughtless, ignorant,
    downright criminal nonsense.

There are signs of a radical social change. They clearly
    indicate the direction of the work to be done. The influence of
    the S.R.s and Mensheviks is plainly dwindling among the
    proletariat, while the influence of the Bolsheviks is plainly
    growing. Incidentally, even tile elections of August 20, compared
    with the June elections to the district
      councils[3]
      of Petrograd,
    showed an
      increase in favour of the Bolsheviks, and this despite
    the bringing of “Kaledin’s troops to Petrograd!”

Among the petty-bourgeois democrats, who cannot help wavering
    between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat, the turn is
    objectively evident from the strengthening, consolidation and
    development of revolutionary internationalist trends: Martov and
    others among the Mensheviks, Spiridonova, Kamkov and others among
    the S.R.s. Needless to say, the approaching famine, economic
    dislocation and military reverses may very greatly hasten this
    turn towards the transfer of vower to the proletariat supported by
    the peasant poor.

    

    2. CORVÉE AND SOCIALISM

The bitterest enemies of socialism sometimes do it a service by
    the excessive zeal of their “exposures”. They bear down on
    the very things that deserve sympathy and emulation. They open the
    people’s eyes to the infamy of the bourgeoisie by the very nature
    of their attacks.

That is what happened to one of the most infamous bourgeois
    newspapers,
      Russkaya Volya, which on August 20 published a report
    from Yekaterinburg entitled “Corvée”. Here is what it had to
    say:


“The Soviet of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies has
introduced in our city a service in kind by horse-owners, who
must take it in turns to put their horses at the disposal of
the Soviet for the daily business trips of its members.
      

“A special schedule has been drawn up and every ‘citizen
with a horse’ is punctually notified in writing when and
where, and at what precise hour, be must arrive for duty with
his horse.
      

“To make things clearer, the ‘order’ adds: ‘In the
event of noncompliance with this demand, the Soviet will hire
cabmen at your expense to the amount of 25 rubles’.”
      


The defender of the capitalists is indignant, of course. The
    capitalists watch with perfect equanimity how the vast majority of
    the people suffer want all their lives—not only those doing
    “corvée”, but also those doing back-breaking work in a
    factory, mine, or some other job, often starving because they have
    no work at all. And the capitalists look on with equanimity.

But now that the workers and soldiers have introduced just one
    little public duty for the capitalists, the exploiters are
    howling, “Corvée!”

Ask any worker or peasant whether it would be bad if the
    Soviets of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies were the only power in
    the state and introduced everywhere some public duty for the rich,
    such as a compulsory duty with horses, motor vehicles or bicycles,
    compulsory daily clerical work to keep a record of products or of
    the needy, and so on, and so forth.

Any worker, any peasant, except perhaps the kulaks, will say it
    would be a good thing.

And this is true. It is not socialism as yet—only one of the
    first steps towards socialism, but it is just what the poor

    

need
    urgently and immediately. Without such measures, the people cannot
    be saved from famine and ruin.

Why, then, does the Yekaterinburg Soviet remain a rare
    exception? Why have similar measures not been taken all over
    Russia long ago? Why are they not being developed into a whole
    system of measures of precisely this kind?

Why, after the introduction of a public duty for the rich to
    lend their horses, is a similar public duty for the rich not
    introduced to present full accounts of their financial operations,
    especially by the terms of government contracts, under a similar
    control of the Soviets, with “punctual notification in
    writing” as to when and where the accounts should be presented,
    when and where taxes should be paid, and to what amount?

Because by far most of the Soviets are controlled by
    S. R. (“Socialist-Revolutionary”) and Menshevik leaders who
    have in fact deserted to the bourgeoisie, have entered the
    bourgeois cabinet and pledged themselves to support it, betraying
    not only socialism but democracy as well. Those leaders are making
    agreements with the bourgeoisie, who, far from allowing the
    imposition of a public duty on the rich—as in Petrograd, for
    example—have for months been holding up much more moderate
    reforms.

Those leaders deceive themselves and the people by saying that
    “Russia is not yet ripe for the introduction of
    socialism”.

Why must we treat such assertions as deception?

Because, through such assertions, the situation is
    misrepresented to make believe that it is a question of
    unprecedentedly complicated and difficult changes, such as are
    bound to break up the normal way of life of millions of
    people. The situation is misrepresented to make believe that some
    want to “introduce” socialism in Russia by decree, without
    considering the existing technical level, the great number of
    small undertakings, or the habits and wishes of the majority of
    the population.

That is a lie from beginning to end. Nobody has ever proposed
    anything of the kind. No party or individual has had any intention
    of “introducing socialism” by decree. It is, and has been, a
    question solely of measures which, like the public duty imposed on
    the rich in Yekaterinburg, have

    

the full approval of the mass of
    the poor, i.e., the majority of the population, measures which are
    perfectly ripe, technically and culturally, will bring immediate
    relief to the poor and make it possible to ease the hardships of
    the war and distribute them more evenly.

Almost six months of revolution have passed, but the S. R. and
    Menshevik leaders still obstruct all these measures, betraying the
    interests of the people in favour of compromise with the
    bourgeoisie.

Until the workers and peasants realise that those leaders are
    traitors who must be driven out, must be removed from their posts,
    they will inevitably remain under the thumb of the
    bourgeoisie.

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
The Mensheviks’ unity congress in Petrograd from August 19–26
(September 1–8), 1917. Its aim was to unite the isolated Menshevik
groups in a single party. The congress was attended by defencists
(those supporting Plekhanov and Potresov), internationalists
(Martov’s followers) and representatives of Novaya Zhizn, which
had taken an active part in convening the congress. The congress
passed a resolution in favour of continuing the war “to a victorious
conclusion”. Another resolution approved of the fact that socialists
were members of the Provisional Government, and expressed
confidence in the government. The Central Committee elected at
the congress included P. B. Axelrod, F. I. Dan, L. Martov,
I. G. Tsereteli and N. S. Chkheidze. While the congress was in session,
however, the delegates turned out to differ strongly among
themselves, with the result that the attempt to unify the Mensheviks
virtually failed.





[2]
Reference is to the June 3 coup d’état, which ushered in the period
of the Stolypin reaction.

On June 3 (16), 1907, the tsar issued a manifesto dissolving
the Second Duma and revising the Duma election law. The new
law greatly increased the Duma representation of the landowners
and the commercial and industrial bourgeoisie, and drastically
reduced the already small proportion of peasants’ and workers’
deputies. It was a gross violation of the Manifesto of October 17,

   

1905, and the Fundamental Law of 1906, both of which made
legislation subject to approval by the Duma. The Third Duma,
elected under the new law, convened on November 1 (14), 1907.
It was made up mostly of Black Hundreds and Octobrists.





[3]
In the elections to the district councils in Petrograd, held late
in May and early in June 1917, the Bolsheviks polled 20 per cent
of the votes. The elections to the Petrograd City Council on
August 20 (September 2) brought the Bolsheviks 33 per cent of the
votes.









<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## Concerning the Party Programme









Lenin: Concerning the Party Programme







V. I.  

      Lenin
Concerning the Party Programme




Written: Written not later than September 3 (16), 1917 

Published:

      First published in Lenin Miscellany VII, 1928.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 305-306.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Comrade Bukharin’s report in
      
Spartak[1]
      about the
      “narrow” congress that is to be called to adopt a programme
      shows how pressing this matter is.

It really is an urgent matter.

Our Party is ahead of the other internationalist parties; this
    is a fact now.

And it is in duty bound to take the initiative, to come forward
    with a programme
      answering questions about imperialism.

It will be a scandal and a shame if we do not do this.

I propose that the Central Committee resolve that:

“Every Party organisation immediately appoint one or several
    committees to draft the programme; they, along with all
    theoreticians or writers, etc.,
      should give precedence to this
    matter, and present either drafts of their own, or changes and
    amendments to other drafts, not later than within
      three to seven
    days.”

This is perfectly feasible, given perseverance.

It will take a couple of weeks to collect and print the drafts
    or circulate them to the main organisations in typewritten
    form.

Then we must immediately announce the calling of a
      narrow
    congress (one delegate to 4,000 or 5,000 members)
      in a month from
    now—for the purpose of adopting the programme.

Our Party must come forward with a programme—that
    is the
    only way we can promote the cause of the Third International in
    deeds instead of words.
 

Everything else is empty phrases, empty promises, and
    postponement to the Greek calends. Once we take the initiative,
    we shall speed up work on all sides, and only then shall we
    prepare the programme of the Third International.

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Spartak (Spartacus)—theoretical journal of the Moscow Regional
Bureau, Moscow Committee and (beginning with issue No. 2)
Moscow District Committee of the R.S.D.L.P.(B.), published in
Moscow from May 20 (June 2) to October 29 (November 11), 1917.









<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## On Zimmerwald









Lenin: On Zimmerwald







V. I.  

      Lenin
On Zimmerwald[1]




Written: Written not later than September 3 (16), 1917 

Published:

      First published in Lenin Miscellany VII, 1928.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      page 307.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

It is now quite clear that we made a mistake by
      not withdrawing
    from it.

Everybody is being bamboozled by hopes from
    Stockholm. Meanwhile t.he Stockholm Conference is being
    “postponed” from month to month.

And Zimmerwald is “waiting” for Stockholm! The Kautsky
    men plus the Italians; i.e., the Zimmerwald majority, are
    “waiting” for Stockholm.

And we are joining in this comedy, bearing
      responsibility for
    it before the workers.

It is a disgrace.

We must withdraw from Zimmerwald immediately.
    

By staying there
    for information only, we lose nothing, but we are not going to be
      held responsible for the comedy of “waiting” for
    Stockholm.

In leaving rotten Zimmerwald we must decide immediately, at the
    plenary meeting on September 3, 1917,
      to call a conference of the
    Left-wingers, and entrust this to the Stockholm
    representatives.

What has happened is that, after we made a. blunder by staying
    in Zimmerwald, our Party, the world’s only internationalist party
    with seventeen newspapers, etc., is
      playing at compromise with the
    German and Italian Martovs and Tseretelis, just as Martov is
    compromising with Tsereteli, just as Tsereteli is compromising
    with the Socialist-Revolutionaries and as the
    Socialist-Revolutionaries are compromising with the
    bourgeoisie.

And this is called “standing for” the Third
    International!!!

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
The document “On Zimmerwald” was written by Lenin in connection
with the plenary meeting of the Party’s Central Committee, fixed
for September 3 (16).

Lenin considered that membership in the Zimmerwald
association, most of whose members adhered to a Centrist position,
hampered and delayed the founding of a third, Communist
International.









<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## Violations of Democracy in Mass Organisations









Lenin: Violations of Democracy in Mass Organisations







V. I.  

      Lenin
Violations of Democracy in Mass Organisations




Written: Written not later than September 3 (16), 1917 

Published:

      First published in Lenin Miscellany VII, 1928.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      page 308.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

We must pass a resolution branding as a
      
fraud[1]

      worthy of
      Nicholas II such practices as those of the Soviet of
      Soldiers’
      Deputies (the soldiers have one representative to every 500
      people, while the workers have
      1 : 1,000)[2]
      or the Trade Union
      Bureau (1 representative to
      a members in the small unions and I to
      a-b members in the large ones).

What sort of democrats are we if we tacitly put up with this
      fraud?

What is wrong with Nicholas II, for that matter, who also
      “allowed” unequal representation from the peasants and from
    the landowners??

By tolerating such things, we are prostituting democracy.

We must pass a resolution demanding
      equal suffrage (both in the
    Soviets and at trade union congresses), branding the
      slightest
    departure from equality as a
      fraud—using exactly this
      word—as a Nicholas II method. This resolution of the plenary
    meeting of the Central Committee must be written in a language
    everybody can understand and spread in leaflet form among the mass
    of the workers.

We cannot tolerate a fraud of democracy if we call ourselves
    “democrats”. We are not democrats but unprincipled people if
    we tolerate this!!

 
Notes
 

[1]

      “One representative, everywhere, to an equal number
      of electors” is the ABC of democracy. Anything else is a
      fraud.
    —Lenin
 



[2]
In view of the elections to the Petrograd Soviet of Workers’ and
Soldiers’ Deputies, the workers’ section of the Soviet on August 23
(September 5), 1917, raised the question of revising the system of
election to the Soviet under which workers elected one delegate
from 1,000 persons while soldiers elected one delegate from each
unit. As a result, the soldiers had a considerably greater number of
deputies to the Soviet than the workers. The workers’ section
adopted a resolution saying that the system of election to the Soviet
should be revised and organised on the principle of proportional
representation, that is, one delegate from every thousand voters.
The soldiers’ section, however, which met on August 25 (
September 7), voted down the proposal. The S.R.s succeeded in putting
through their own resolution, which left the electoral system
intact.









<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## On Compromises









Lenin: On Compromises







V. I.  

      Lenin
On Compromises




Written: Written on September 1–3 (14–16), 1917 

Published:

      Published in Rabochy Put No. 3, September 19 (6), 1917.

      Signed: N. Lenin.

      Published according to the newspaper text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 309-314.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The term compromise in politics implies the surrender of
    certain demands, the renunciation of part of one’s demands, by
    agreement with another party.

The usual idea the man in the.street has about the Bolsheviks,
    an idea encouraged by a press which slanders them, is that the
    Bolsheviks will never agree to a compromise with anybody.

The idea is flattering to us as the party of the revolutionary
    proletariat, for it proves that even our enemies are compelled to
    admit our loyalty to the fundamental principles of socialism and
    revolution. Nevertheless, we must say that this idea is
    wrong. Engels was right when, in his criticism of the Manifesto of
    the Blanquist
      Communists[1]
      (1873), he ridiculed their
    declaration: “No
      compromises!”[2]
      This, he said, was an
    empty phrase, for compromises are often unavoidably forced upon a
    fighting party by circumstances, and it is absurd to refuse once
    and for all to accept “payments on
      account”[3]
      The task of
    a truly revolutionary party is not to declare that it is
    impossible to renounce all compromises, but to be able,
      through all compromises, when they are unavoidable, to
    remain true to its
    principles, to its class, to its revolutionary purpose, to its
    task of paving the way for revolution and educating the mass of
    the people for victory in the revolution.

To agree, for instance, to participate in the Third and Fourth
    Dumas was a compromise, a temporary renunciation of revolutionary
    demands. But this was a compromise absolutely forced upon us, for
    the balance of forces made it impossible for us for the time being
    to conduct a mass revolutionary struggle, and in order to prepare
    this struggle over a long period we had to be able to
    work even from
      inside such a “pigsty”. History has proved
    that this approach

    

to the question by the Bolsheviks as a party
    was perfectly correct.

Now the question is not of a forced, but of a voluntary
    compromise.

Our Party, like any other political party, is striving after
    political domination
      for itself. Our aim is the dictatorship of
    the revolutionary proletariat. Six months o.f revolution have
    proved very clearly, forcefully and convincingly that this demand
    is correct and inevitable in the interests of
      this
      particular
    revolution, for otherwise the people will never obtain a
    democratic peace, land for the peasants, or complete freedom (a
    fully democratic republic). This has been shown and proved by the
    course of events during the six months of our revolution, by the
    struggle of the classes and parties and by the development of the
    crises of April 20–21, June 9–10 and 18–19, July 3–5 and August
    27–31.

The Russian revolution is experiencing so abrupt and original a
    turn that we, as a party, may offer a voluntary
    compromise—true, not to our direct and main class enemy, the
    bourgeoisie, but to our nearest adversaries, the “ruling”
    petty-bourgeois-democratic parties, the Socialist-Revolutionaries
    and Mensheviks.

We may offer a compromise to these parties only by way of
    exception, and only by virtue of the particular situation, which
    will obviously last only a very short time. And I think we should
    do so.

The compromise on our part is our return to the pre-July demand
    of all power to the Soviets and a government of S.R.s and
    Mensheviks responsible to the Soviets.

Now, and only now, perhaps
      during only a few days or a week
    or two, such a government could be set up and consolidated in a
    perfectly peaceful way. In all probability it could secure the
      peaceful advance of the whole Russian revolution, and provide
    exceptionally good chances for great strides in the world movement
    towards peace and the victory of socialism.

In my opinion, the Bolsheviks, who are partisans of world
    revolution and revolutionary methods, may and should consent to
    this compromise only for the sake of the revolution’s peaceful
    development—an opportunity that is

    

      extremely rare in history
      and extremely valuable, an opportunity that only occurs once in a
    while.

The compromise would amount to the following: the Bolsheviks,
    without making any claim to participate in the government (which
    is impossible for the internationalists unless a dictatorship of
    the proletariat and the poor peasants has been realised), would
    refrain from demanding the immediate transfer of power to the
    proletariat and the poor peasants and from employing revolutionary
    methods of fighting for this demand. A condition that is
    self-evident and not new to the S.R.s and Mensheviks would be
    complete freedom of propaganda and the convocation of the
    Constituent Assembly without further delays or even at an earlier
    date.

The Mensheviks and S.R.s, being the government bloc, would then
    agree (assuming that the compromise had been reached) to form a
    government wholly and exclusively responsible to the Soviets, the
    latter taking over all power locally as well. This would
    constitute the “new” condition. I think the Bolsheviks would
    advance no other conditions, trusting that the revolution would
    proceed peacefully and party strife in the Soviets would be
      peacefully overcome thanks to really complete freedom of
    propaganda and to the immediate establishment of a new democracy
    in the composition of the Soviets (new elections) and in their
    functioning.

Perhaps this is already impossible? Perhaps. But if there is
    even one chance in a hundred, the attempt at realising this
    opportunity is still worth while.

What would both “contracting” parties gain by this
    “compromise”, i.e., the Bolsheviks, on the one hand, and the
    S.R. and Menshevik bloc, on the other?
      If neither side gains
    anything, then the compromise must be recognised as impossible,
    and nothing more is to be said. No matter how difficult this
    compromise may be at present (after July and August, two months
    equivalent to two decades in “peaceful”, somnolent times),
    I think it stands a small chance of being realised. This chance
    has been created by the decision of the S.R.s and Mensheviks not
    to participate in a government together with the Cadets.

The Bolsheviks would gain the opportunity of quite freely
    advocating their views and of trying to win influence

    

in the
    Soviets under a really complete democracy. In words,
    “everybody” now concedes the Bolsheviks this freedom. In
      reality, this freedom is impossible under a bourgeois government
    or a government in which the bourgeoisie participate, or under any
    government, in fact, other than the Soviets. Under a Soviet
      government, such freedom would be possible (we do not say it would
    be a certainty, but still it would be possible). For the sake of
    such a possibility at such a difficult time, it would be worth
      compromising with the present majority in the Soviets. We have
    nothing to fear from real democracy, for reality is on our side,
    and even the course of development of trends within the S.R. and
    Menshevik parties, which are hostile to us, proves us right.

The Mensheviks and S.R.s would gain in that they would at once
      obtain every opportunity to carry out their bloc’s programme with
    the support of the obviously overwhelming majority of the people
    and in that they would secure for themselves the “peaceful”
    use of their majority in the Soviets.

Of course, there would probably be two voices heard from this
    bloc, which is heterogeneous both because it is a bloc add because
      petty-bourgeois democracy is always less homogeneous than the
    bourgeoisie and the proletariat.

One voice would say: we cannot follow the same road as the
    Bolsheviks and the revolutionary proletariat. It will demand too
    much anyway and will entice the peasant poor by demagogy. It will
    demand peace and a break with the Allies. That is impossible. We
    are better off and safer with the bourgeoisie; after all, we have
      not parted ways with them but only had a temporary quarrel, and
    only over the Kornilov incident. We have quarrelled, but we shall
    make it up. Moreover, the Bolsheviks are not “ceding” us
    anything, for their attempts at insurrection are as doomed to
    defeat as was the Commune of 1871.

The other voice would say: the allusion to the Commune is very
    superficial and even foolish. For, in the first place, the
    Bolsheviks have learnt something since 1871; they would not fail
    to seize the banks, and would not refuse to advance on
    Versailles. Under such conditions even the Commune might have been
    victorious. Furthermore, the Commune could not immediately offer
    the people what the

    

Bolsheviks will be able to offer if they come
    to power, namely, land to the peasants, an immediate offer of
    peace, real control over production, an honest peace with the
    Ukrainians, Finns, etc. The Bolsheviks, to put it bluntly, hold
    ten times more “trumps” than the Commune did. In the second
    place, the Commune, after all, means a strenuous civil war, a
    set-back to peaceful cultural development for a long time to come,
    an opportunity for all sorts of MacMahons and Kornilovs to operate
    and plot with greater ease—and such operations are a menace to
    our whole bourgeois society. Is it wise to risk a Commune?

Now a Commune is inevitable in Russia if we do not take power
    into our own hands, if things remain in as grave a state as they
    were between May 6 and August 31. Every revolutionary worker and
    soldier will inevitably think about the Commune and believe in it;
    he will inevitably attempt to bring it about, for he will argue:
    “The people are perishing; war, famine and ruin are
    spreading. Only the Commune can save us. So let us all perish, let
    us die, but let us set up the Commune.” Such thoughts are
    inevitable with the workers, and it will not be as easy to crush
    the Commune now as it was in 1871. The Russian Commune will have
    allies throughout the world, allies a hundred times stronger than
    those the Commune had in 1871.... Is it wise for us to risk a
    Commune? I cannot agree, either, that the Bolsheviks virtually
    cede us nothing by their compromise. For, in all civilised
    countries, civilised ministers value highly every agreement with
    the proletariat in war-time, however small. They value it very,
    very highly. And these are men of action, real ministers. The
    Bolsheviks are rapidly becoming stronger, in spite of repression,
    and the weakness of their press.... Is it wise for us to risk a
    Commune?

We have a safe majority; the peasant poor will not wake up for
    some time to come; we are safe for our lifetime. I do not believe
    that in a peasant country the majority will follow the
    extremists. And against an obvious majority, no insurrection is
    possible in a really democratic republic. This is what the second
    voice would say.

There may also be a third voice coming from among the
    supporters of Martov or Spiridonova, which would say:

    

I am
    indignant, “comrades”, that both of you, speaking about the
    Commune and its likelihood, unhesitatingly side with its
    opponents. In one form or another, both of you side with those who
    suppressed the Commune. I will not undertake to campaign for the
    Commune and I cannot promise beforehand to fight in its ranks as
      every Bolshevik will do, but I must say that if the Commune does
      start in spite of my efforts, I shall rather help its defenders
    than its opponents.

The medley of voices in the “bloc” is great and
    inevitable, for a host of shades is represented among the
    petty-bourgeois democrats—from the complete bourgeois,
    perfectly eligible for a post in the government, down to the
    semi-pauper who is not yet capable of taking up the proletarian
    position. Nobody knows what will be the result of this medley of
    voices at any given moment.
 *     *  * 

The above lines were written on Friday, September 1, but due to
    unforeseen circumstances (under Kerensky, as history will tell,
    not all Bolsheviks were free to choose their domicile) they did
    not reach the editorial office that day. After reading Saturday’s
    and today’s (Sunday’s) papers, I say to myself: perhaps it is
    already too late to offer a compromise. Perhaps the few days in
      which a peaceful development was still possible have passed
      too. Yes, to all appearances, they have already
      passed.[4]
      In one
    way or another, Kerensky will abandon both the S .R. Party and the
    S.R.s themselves, and will consolidate his position with the aid
      of the bourgeoisie without the S.R.s, and thanks to their
    inaction.... Yes, to all appearances, the days when by chance the
      path of peaceful development became possible have already
    passed. All that remains is to send these notes to the editor with
    the request to have them entitled: “Belated
    Thoughts”. Perhaps even belated thoughts are sometimes not
    without interest.

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Blanquists—supporters of a trend in the French socialist
movement, headed by Louis-Auguste Blanqui (1805–1881), the French
revolutionary and Utopian communist. The Blanquists expected
that “mankind will be emancipated from wage slavery not by the
proletarian class struggle, but through a conspiracy of a small
minority of intellectuals” =

(see present edition, Vol. 10, p. 392).
Substituting the actions of a small group of conspirators for those
of a revolutionary party, they ignored the actual situation
necessary for a victorious insurrection, and spurned contact with the
masses.





[2]
See Frederick Engels, Flüchtlingsliteratur. II. Programm der
blanquistischen Kommuneflüchtlinge, Marx/Engels, Werke, Bd. 18
Berlin, 1962, S. 528–35.





[3]
See Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Selected Correspondence,
Moscow, 1965, p. 470.





[4]
After the suppression of the Kornilov revolt the question of forming
a new provisional cabinet came up for discussion. The new cabinet
was expected to include Cadets in addition to Mensheviks and
S.R.s. The Mensheviks and S.R.s, fearing that they might
completely forfeit popular confidence, announced their refusal to join
a cabinet which included Cadets. On September 1 (14), 1917, the
Provisional Government decided to form a Directory of five:
A. F. Kerensky, A. I. Verkhovsky, D. N. Verderevsky, A. M.
Nikitin and M. I. Tereshchenko. Officially no Cadets were included
in this cabinet, but its formation was a result of a behind-the-scenes
compromise with them. At a joint plenary session of the C.E.C.
of Soviets of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies and the Executive
Committee of the Congress of Peasants’ Deputies on
September 2 (15), the Mensheviks and S.R.s passed a resolution in
support of the new cabinet. This meant that although they had
declared they would have nothing to do with the Cadets, the
Mensheviks and S.R.s again helped the landowners and capitalists
to retain power.









<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## Draft Resolution on the Present Political Situation









Lenin: Draft Resolution on the Present Political Situation







V. I.  

      Lenin
Draft Resolution on the Present Political Situation[1]




Written: Written not later than September 3 (16), 1917 

Published:

      First published in 1925 Lenin Miscellany IV.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 315-322.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P., on the basis of the
    resolution on the political situation adopted by the Sixth
    Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. (Bolsheviks), and applying that
    resolution to the present situation, at its plenary meeting
    states:

1. In the two months from July 3 to September 3, due to
    the unparalleled speed of the revolution, the course of the class
    struggle and the development of political events have carried the
    whole country as far forward as it would have been impossible for
    the country to advance over many years in peace-time, without
    revolution and war.

2. It becomes more and more apparent that the events of
    July 3-5 were the turning-point of the whole revolution. Without a
    correct estimate of these events, it is impossible to correctly
    estimate either the proletariat’s tasks, or the speed of
    development of revolutionary events, which is beyond our
    control.

3. The slander against the Bolsheviks, which the
    bourgeoisie spread with tremendous zeal and which they put about
    very widely among the people with the aid of the millions invested
    in capitalist papers and publishing houses, is being exposed more
    and more rapidly and widely. First it was the workers in the
    capital and in the large cities, and then the peasants, who
    realised more and more that the slander against the Bolsheviks is
    one of the main weapons used by the landowners and capitalists in
    the struggle against the defenders of the interests of the workers
    and poor peasants, i.e., against the Bolsheviks.
 

4. An outright attempt was made to camouflage the Kornilov
    revolt, i.e., a revolt of generals and officers behind whom stand
    the landowners and the capitalists headed by the Cadet Party (the
    “people’s freedom” party), by bringing up again the old
    slander against the Bolsheviks. It was this that helped finally to
    open the eyes of the broadest sections of the people to the true
    meaning of the bourgeois slander against the Bolshevik workers’
    party, the party of the true defenders of the poor.

5. Had our Party refused to support the July 3–4 mass movement,
    which burst out spontaneously despite our attempts to prevent it,
    we should have actually and completely betrayed the proletariat,
    since the people were moved to action by their well-founded and
    just anger at the protraction of the imperialist war, which is a
    predatory war conducted in the interests of the capitalists, and
    at the inaction of the government and the Soviets in regard to the
    bourgeoisie, who are intensifying and aggravating economic
    disruption and famine.

6. In spite of all the efforts of the bourgeoisie and the
    government, in spite of the arrest of hundreds of Bolsheviks, the
    seizure of their papers and documents, the search of their
    editorial offices, etc.—in spite of all this nobody has
    succeeded, and nobody will ever succeed, in proving the slander
    that our Party’s aim in the July 3-4 movement was anything other
    than a “peaceful and organised” demonstration with the
    slogan of transfer of all state power to the Soviets of Workers’,
    Soldiers’ and Peasants’ Deputies.

7. It would have been wrong if the Bolsheviks had aimed to seize
    power on July 3-4, since neither the majority of the people nor
    even the majority of the workers at that time had yet actually
    experienced the counter-revolutionary policies of generals in the
    army, of the landowners in the countryside, and of the capitalists
    in the town. These policies were only revealed to the masses after
    July 5, and stemmed from a compromise between the
    Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks, on the one hand, and the
    bourgeoisie, on the other. None of our Party organisations, either
    central or local, advocated, either in writing or by word of
    mouth, the slogan of seizing power on July 3-4; none of them even
    discussed this question.
 

8. The real mistake of our Party on July 3-4, as events now
    reveal, was merely that the Party considered the general situation
      in the country less revolutionary than it proved to be, that the
      Party still considered a peaceful development of political changes
    possible through an alteration in the Soviets’ policies, whereas
    in reality the Mensheviks and S.R.s had become so much entangled
    and bound by compromising with the bourgeoisie, and the
    bourgeoisie had become so counter-revolutionary, that peaceful
    development was no longer possible. This erroneous view, however,
    which was sustained only by the hope that events would not develop
    too fast, our Party could not have got over other than by
    participating in the popular movement of July 3-4 with the slogan
    “All power to the Soviets” and with the aim of making the
    movement peaceful and organised.

9. The historic significance of the Kornilov revolt is that
    with extraordinary force, it opened the people’s eyes to a fact
    which the S.R.s and Mensheviks had concealed and still are
    concealing under conciliatory phrases. The fact is that the
    landowners and the bourgeoisie, headed by the Cadet Party, and the
    generals and officers who are on their side, have organised
    themselves; they are ready to commit, or are committing, the most
    outrageous crimes, such as surrendering Riga (followed by
    Petrograd) to the Germans, laying the war front open, putting the
    Bolshevik regiments under fire, starting a mutiny, leading troops
    against the capital with the “Savage
      Division”[2]
      at
    their head, etc. The purpose of all this is to seize power
    completely and put it in the hands of the bourgeoisie, to
    consolidate the power of the landowners in the countryside, and to
    drench the country in the blood of workers and peasants.

The Kornilov revolt has proved for Russia what has been proved
    throughout history for all countries, namely, that the bourgeoisie
    will betray their country and commit any crime to retain both
    their power over the people and their profits.

10. The workers and peasants of Russia have no other
      alternative than the most determined struggle against, and victory
      over, the landowners and the bourgeoisie, over the Cadet Party and
      the generals and officers sympathising with it. Only the urban
      working class can lead the people, i.e., all working people, into
      such a struggle and to such a

    

victory, provided all state power
      passes into its hands and provided it is supported by the peasant
      poor.

11. Events in the Russian revolution, particularly since
    May 6, and even more so since July 3, have been developing with
    such incredible, storm- or hurricane-like velocity, that it can by
    no means be the task of the Party to speed them up. All efforts,
    in fact, must be directed towards keeping up with events and doing
    on time our work of explaining to the workers, and to the working
    people in general, as much as we can, the changes in the situation
    and in the course of the class struggle. This is still the main
    task of our Party; we must explain to the people that the
    situation is extremely critical, that every action may end in an
    explosion, and that therefore a premature uprising may cause the
    greatest harm. At the same time, the critical situation is
    inevitably leading the working class—perhaps with catastrophic
    speed—to a situation in which, due to a change in events beyond
    its control, it will find itself compelled to wage a determined
    battle with the counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie and to gain
    power.

12. The Kornilov revolt fully revealed that the entire
      army
      hates the General Staff.
      This had to be admitted even by
    those Mensheviks and S.R.s who through months of effort had proved
    their hatred for the Bolsheviks and their defence of the policy of
    agreement between the workers and peasants, on the one hand, and
    the landowners and the bourgeoisie, on the other. The hatred of
    the army for the General Staff will not die down but will become
    stronger now that Kerensky’s government has confined itself to
    substituting Alexeyev for Kornilov, leaving Klembovsky and other
    Kornilov generals, and has done absolutely nothing substantial to
    democratise the armed forces and remove the counter-revolutionary
    commanders. Soviets, which tolerate and support this weak,
    wavering, unprincipled policy of Kerensky and missed another
    opportunity to take all power peacefully when the Kornilov revolt
    was being liquidated, become guilty not only of conciliation but
    even of criminal conciliation.

The army, which hates the General Staff and does not want to
    fight a war it now knows to be a war of conquest, is inevitably
    doomed to new catastrophes.
 

13. Only the working class, when it has gained power, will
    be able to pursue a peace policy, not merely in words, like the
    Mensheviks and S.R.s, who in practice support the bourgeoisie and
    their secret treaties, but in deeds. Specifically, the working
    class will immediately offer all peoples open, precise, clear and
      just peace terms. This will be done irrespective of the military
      situation, even if Kornilov’s generals follow up the surrender of
      Riga by that of Petrograd. The working class can do this in the
      name of the entire people, since the overwhelming majority of
      Russia’s workers and peasants oppose the present war of annexation
      and support a peace on just terms, without annexations and
      indemnities.

The S.R.s and Mensheviks are deceiving themselves and the
    people when they spend months talking about this peace. The
    working class, on gaining power, will offer this peace to all
    without losing a single day.

The capitalists of all countries have so much difficulty in
    stemming the workers’ revolution against war—a revolution which
    is growing everywhere—that if the Russian revolution were to
    pass from impotent and pitiful yearning for peace to a forthright
    peace offer coupled with the publication and annulment of secret
    treaties, etc., there are ninety-nine chances in a hundred that
    peace would quickly follow, that the capitalists would be unable
    to stand in the way of peace.

If, however, the highly improbable were to happen and the
    capitalists were to reject the peace terms of the Russian workers’
    government, against the will of their peoples, a revolution in
    Europe would come a hundred times nearer, and our workers’ and
    peasants’ army would elect for itself not hated but respected
    commanders and military leaders. The army would see the justice of
    the war once peace had been offered, the secret treaties torn up,
    the alliance with the landowners and the bourgeoisie severed, and
    all land given to the peasants. Only then would the war become a
    just war for Russia, only this war would the workers and peasants
    fight of their own free will, without being bludgeoned into
    fighting; and this war would bring even nearer the inevitable
    workers’ revolution in the advanced countries.
 

14. Only the working class, when it has gained power, will be
    able to guarantee the immediate transfer of all landed estates to
    the peasants without compensation. This must not be put off. The
    Constituent Assembly will legalise the transfer, but it is not the
    peasants’ fault that the Constituent Assembly is being
    delayed. The peasants daily become more convinced that it is
    impossible to get the land by agreement with the landowners and
    the capitalists. The land can only be obtained through a very
    close, brotherly alliance of the poor peasants and the
    workers.

Chernov’s resignation from the government after he had for
    months tried to uphold the interests of the peasants through
    concessions, big and small, to the Cadet landowners, and after all
    these attempts had failed, revealed with particular clarity the
    hopelessness of the policy of conciliation. The peasants see, know
    and feel that since July 5 the landowners have become arrogant in
    the villages and that it is necessary to curb them and render them
    harmless..

15. Only the working class, when it has gained power, will be
    able to put an end to economic disruption and the impending
    famine. Since May 6 the government has kept on promising control,
    but it has done and could do nothing because the capitalists and
    landowners obstructed all work. Unemployment is growing, famine is
    approaching, currency is losing value. Peshekhonov’s resignation
    after the fixed prices have doubled will aggravate the crisis, and
    it again shows the utter feebleness and impotence of the
    government. Only workers’ control over production and distribution
    can save the situation. Only a workers’ government will curb the
    capitalists, will bring heroic support from all working people for
    the efforts of
      state power, and will establish order and a fair
    exchange of grain for manufactured goods.

16. The confidence of the peasant poor in the urban working
    class, temporarily undermined by the slander of the bourgeoisie
    and by hopes put in the policy of conciliation, has been
    returning, particularly after the arrests in the countryside and
    the various kinds of persecution of working people after July 5
    and then the Kornilov revolt opened the people’s eyes. One of the
    signs that the people are losing faith in conciliation with the
    capitalists is that among the S.R.s and Mensheviks, the two main
    parties responsible for

    

introducing this policy of conciliation
    and bringing it to a culmination, there have been growing,
    especially since July 5, a discontent within these parties and a
    struggle against conciliation. This opposition at the last
    Socialist-Revolutionary “Council” and at the Menshevik
    congress involved about two-fifths (40 per cent) of the
    members.

17. The whole course of events, all economic and political
    conditions, everything that is happening in the armed forces, are
    increasingly paving the way for the successful winning of power by
    the working class, which will bring peace, bread and freedom and
    will hasten the victory of the proletarian revolution in other
    countries.

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
The “Draft Resolution on the Present Political Situation” was
written by Lenin for the plenary meeting of the Party’s Central
Committee set for September 3 (16). What took place on that date was
not a plenum but a regular meeting of the C.C., which did not
discuss the political situation. In the available records of the C.C.
R.S.D.L.P.(B.) for 1917 there is no indication of the draft having
been discussed by the Central Committee.





[2]
Savage Division—nickname of a division recruited during the
First World War from volunteers among the mountain tribes of
the North Caucasus. General Kornilov used it as a striking force
of the troops he led against revolutionary Petrograd.









<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## The Impending Catastrophe and How to Combat It









Lenin: The Impending Catastrophe and How to Combat It








V. I.  

      Lenin
The Impending Catastrophe and How to Combat It




Published:

      Published at the end of October 1917 in pamphlet form by by Priboi Publishers.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 323-369.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and C. Farrell
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2000

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

      
• README



Contents






Famine Is Approaching
  327



Complete Government Inactivity
  329



Control Measures Are Known To All and Easy To Take
  331



Nationalisation of the Banks
  333



Nationalisation of the Syndicates
  339



Abolition of Commercial Secrecy
  342



Compulsory Association
  346



Regulation of Consumption
  350



Government Disruption of the Work of the Democratic Organisations
  353



Financial Collapse and Measures To Combat It
  357



Can We Go Forward If We Fear To Advance Towards Socialism?
  360



The Struggle Against Economic Chaos—and the War
  364



The Revolutionary Democrats and the Revolutionary Proletariat
  367

 
 
 

Notes
 
 







<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## One of the Fundamental Questions of the Revolution









Lenin: One of the Fundamental Questions of the Revolution







V. I.  

      Lenin
One of the Fundamental Questions of the Revolution




Published:

      First published in Rabochy Put No. 10, September 27 (14), 1917.

      Signed: N. Lenin.

      Published according to the text in Rabochy Put.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 370-377.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The key question of every revolution is undoubtedly the
      question of state power. Which class holds power decides
      everything. When
      Dyelo Naroda, the paper of the chief governing
      party in Russia, recently complained (No. 147) that, owing to
      the controversies over power, both the question of the
      Constituent Assembly and that of bread are being forgotten, the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries should have been answered, “Blame
      yourselves. For it is the wavering and indecision of
      your party
      that are mostly to blame for ‘ministerial leapfrog’, the
      interminable postponements of the Constituent Assembly, and the
      undermining by the capitalists of the planned and agreed
      measures of a grain monopoly and of providing the country with
      bread.”

The question of power cannot be evaded or brushed aside,
    because it is the key question determining
      everything in a
    revolution’s development, and in its foreign and domestic
    policies. It is an undisputed fact that our revolution has
    “wasted” six months in wavering over the system of power; it
    is a fact resulting from the wavering policy of the
    Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks. In the long run, these
    parties’ wavering policy was determined by the class position of
    the petty bourgeoisie, by their economic instability in the
    struggle between capital and labour.

The whole issue at present is whether the petty-bourgeois
    democrats have learned anything during these great, exceptionally
    eventful six months. If not, then the revolution is lost, and only
    a victorious uprising of the proletariat can save it. If they have
    learned something, the establishment of a stable, unwavering power
    must be begun immediately.

    

Only if power is based, obviously and
    unconditionally,
      on a majority of the population can it be stable
    during a popular revolution, i.e., a revolution which rouses the
    people, the majority of the workers and peasants, to action. Up to
      now state power in Russia has
      virtually remained in the hands of
    the
      bourgeoisie, who are compelled to make only particular
    concessions (only to begin withdrawing them the following day), to
    hand out promises (only to fail to carry them out), to search for
    all sorts of excuses to cover their domination (only to fool the
    people by a show of “honest coalition”), etc., etc. In
    words it claims to be a popular, democratic, revolutionary
    government, but in deeds it is an anti-popular, undemocratic,
    counter-revolutionary, bourgeois government. This is the
    contradiction which has existed so far and which has been a source
    of the complete instability and inconsistency of power, of that
    “ministerial leapfrog” in which the S.R.s and Mensheviks
    have been engaged with such unfortunate (for the people)
    enthusiasm.

In early June 1917 1 told the All-Russia Congress of
Soviets[1]

    that either the Soviets would be dispersed and die an inglorious
    death, or all power must be transferred to them. The events of
    July and August very convincingly bore out these words. No matter
    what lies the lackeys of the bourgeoisie—Potresov, Plekhanov
    and others, who designate as “broadening the base” of power
    its virtual transfer to a tiny minority of the people, to the
    bourgeoisie, the exploiters—may resort to, only the power of
    the Soviets can be stable, obviously based on a majority of the
    people.

Only Soviet power could be stable and not be overthrown even in
    the stormiest moments of the stormiest revolution. Only this power
    could assure a continuous and broad development of the revolution,
    a peaceful struggle of parties within the Soviets. Until this
    power is created, there will inevitably be indecision,
    instability, vacillation, endless “crises of power”, a
    constant farce of ministerial leapfrog, outbreaks on the Right and
    on the Left.

The slogan, “Power to the Soviets”, however, is very
    often, if not in most cases, taken quite incorrectly to mean

    

a
    “Cabinet of the parties of the Soviet majority”. We would
    like to go into more detail on this very false notion.

A “Cabinet of the parties of the Soviet majority” means a
    change of individual ministers, with the entire old government
    apparatus left intact—a thoroughly bureaucratic and thoroughly
    undemocratic apparatus incapable of carrying out serious reforms,
    such as are contained even in the S.R. and Menshevik
    programmes.

“Power to the Soviets” means radically reshaping the
    entire old state apparatus, that bureaucratic apparatus which
    hampers everything democratic. It means removing this apparatus
    and substituting for it a new, popular one, i.e., a truly
    democratic apparatus of Soviets, i.e., the organised and armed
    majority of the people—the workers, soldiers and peasants. It
    means allowing the majority of the people initiative and
    independence not only in the election of deputies, but also in
    state administration, in effecting reforms and various other
    changes.

To make this difference clearer and more comprehensible, it is
    worth recalling a valuable admission made some time ago by the
    paper of the governing party of the S.R.s,
      Dyelo Naroda. It wrote
    that
      even in those ministries which were in the hands of socialist
    Ministers (this was written during the notorious coalition with
    the Cadets, when some Mensheviks and S.R.s were ministers), the
    entire administrative apparatus had remained unchanged, and
    hampered work.

This is quite understandable. The entire history of the
    bourgeois-parliamentary, and also, to a considerable extent, of
    the bourgeois-constitutional, countries shows that a change of
    ministers means very little, for the real work of administration
    is in the hands of an enormous army of officials. This army,
    however, is undemocratic through and through, it is connected by
    thousands and millions of threads with the landowners and the
    bourgeoisie and is completely dependent on them. This army is
    surrounded by an atmosphere of bourgeois relations, and breathes
    nothing but this atmosphere. It is set in its ways, petrified,
    stagnant, and is powerless to break free of this atmosphere. It
    can only think, feel, or act in the old way. This army is bound by
    servility to rank, by certain privileges of “Civil”

    

Service;
    the upper ranks of this army are, through the medium of shares and
    banks, entirely enslaved by finance capital, being to a certain
    extent its agent and a vehicle of its interests and influence.

It is the greatest delusion, the greatest self-deception, and a
    deception of the people, to attempt, by means of
      this state
    apparatus, to carry out such reforms as the abolition of landed
    estates without compensation, or the grain monopoly, etc. This
    apparatus
      can serve a republican bourgeoisie, creating a republic
    in the shape of a “monarchy without a monarch”, like the
    French Third Republic, but it is absolutely incapable of carrying
    out reforms which would even seriously curtail or limit the rights
    of capital, the rights of “sacred private property”, much
    less abolish those rights. That is why it always happens, under
    all sorts of “coalition” Cabinets that include
    “socialists”, that these socialists, even when individuals
    among them are perfectly honest, in reality turn out to be either
    a useless ornament of or a screen for the bourgeois government, a
    sort of lightning conductor to divert the people’s indignation
    from the government, a tool for the government to deceive the
    people. This was the case with Louis Blanc in 1848, and dozens of
    times in Britain and France, when socialists participated in
    Cabinets. This is also the case with the Chernovs and Tseretelis in
    1917. So it has been and so it will be as long as the bourgeois
    system exists and as long as the old bourgeois, bureaucratic state
    apparatus remains intact.

The Soviets of Workers’, Soldiers’ and Peasants’ Deputies are
    particularly valuable because they represent a new
      type of state
    apparatus, which is immeasurably higher, incomparably more
    democratic. The S.R.s and Mensheviks have done everything, the
    possible and the impossible, to turn the Soviets (particularly the
    Petrograd Soviet and the All-Russia Soviet, i.e., the Central
    Executive Committee) into useless talking shops which, under the
    guise of “control”, merely adopted useless resolutions and
    suggestions which the government shelved with the most polite and
    kindly smile. The “fresh breeze” of the Kornilov affair,
    however, which promised a real storm, was enough for all that was
    musty in the Soviet to blow away for a while, and for the
    initiative of the revolutionary people to begin

    

expressing itself
    as something majestic, powerful and invincible.

Let all sceptics learn from this example from history. Let
    those who say: “We have no apparatus to replace the old one,
    which inevitably gravitates towards the defence of the
    bourgeoisie,” be ashamed of themselves. For this apparatus
      exists. It is the Soviets. Don’t be afraid of the people’s
    initiative and independence. Put your faith in their revolutionary
    organisations, and you will see
      in all realms of state affairs the
    same strength, majesty and invincibility of the workers and
    peasants as were displayed in their unity and their fury against
    Kornilov.

Lack of faith in the people, fear of their initiative and
    independence, trepidation before their revolutionary energy
    instead of all-round and unqualified support for it—this is
    where the S.R. and Menshevik leaders have sinned most of all. This
    is where we find one of the deepest roots of their indecision,
    their vacillation, their infinite and infinitely fruitless
    attempts to pour new wine into the old bottles of the old,
    bureaucratic state apparatus.

Take the history of the democratisation of the army in the 1917
    Russian revolution, the history of the Chernov Ministry, of
    Palchinsky’s “reign”, and of Peshekhonov’s
    resignation—you will find what we have said above strikingly
    borne out at every step. Because there was no full confidence in
    the elected, soldiers’ organisations and no absolute observance of
    the principle of soldiers electing their commanding officers, the
    Kornilovs, Kaledins and counter-revolutionary officers came to be
    at the head of the army. This is a fact. Without deliberately
    closing one’s eyes, one cannot fail to see that
      after the Kornilov
    affair Kerensky’s government is
      leaving everything as before, that
      in fact it is bringing back the Kornilov affair. The appointment
    of Alexeyev, the “peace” with the Klembovskys, Gagarins,
    Bagrations and other Kornilov men, and leniency in the treatment
    of Kornilov and Kaledin all very clearly prove that Kerensky is in
    fact bringing back the Kornilov affair.

There is no middle course. This has been shown by
    experience. Either all power goes to the Soviets and the army is
    made fully democratic, or another Kornilov affair occurs.
 

And what about the history of the Chernov Ministry? Didn’t it
    prove that every more or less serious step towards actually
    satisfying the peasants’ needs, every step showing confidence in
    the peasants and in their mass organisations and actions, evoked
    very great enthusiasm among them? Chernov, however, had to spend
    almost four months “haggling” with the Cadets and
    bureaucrats, who by endless delays and intrigues finally forced
    him to resign without having accomplished anything. For and during
    these four months the landowners and capitalists “won the
    game”—they saved the landed estates, delayed the convocation
    of the Constituent Assembly, and even started a number of
    repressions against the land committees.

There is no middle course. This has been shown by
    experience. Either all power goes to the Soviets both centrally
    and locally, and all land is given to the peasants
      immediately,
    pending the Constituent Assembly’s decision, or the landowners and
    capitalists obstruct every step, restore the landowners’ power,
    drive the peasants into a rage and carry things to an exceedingly
    violent peasant revolt.

The same thing happened when the capitalists (with the aid of
    Palchinsky) crushed every more or less serious attempt to
    supervise production, when the merchants thwarted the grain
    monopoly and broke up the regulated democratic distribution of
    grain and other foodstuffs just
      begun by Peshekhonov.

What is now necessary in Russia is not to invent
      “new
      reforms”,
      not to make “plans”
      for “comprehensive”
      changes.
      Nothing of the kind.
      This is how the situation is
    depicted—deliberately depicted in a false light—by the
    capitalists, the Potresovs, the Plekhanovs, who shout against
      “introducing socialism”
      and against the “dictatorship of
    the proletariat”. The situation in Russia in fact is such that
    the unprecedented burdens and hardships of the war, the
    unparalleled and very real danger of economic dislocation and
    famine have of themselves suggested the way out, have of
    themselves not only pointed out, but advanced reforms and other
    changes as absolutely necessary. These changes must be the grain
    monopoly, control over production and distribution, restriction of
    the issue of paper money, a fair exchange of grain for
    manufactured goods, etc.
 

Everyone recognises measures of this kind and in this direction
    as inevitable, and in many places they have already been launched
    from the most diverse sides.
      They have already been launched, but
    they have been and are being obstructed everywhere by the
    resistance of the landowners and the capitalists, which is being
    put up through the Kerensky government (an utterly bourgeois
    and Bonapartist government
      in reality), through the old
    bureaucratic state apparatus, and through the direct and indirect
    pressure of Russian and “Allied” finance capital.

Not so long ago I. Prilezhayev, lamenting the resignation of
    Peshekhonov and the collapse of the fixed prices and the grain
    monopoly, wrote in
      Dyelo Naroda (No. 147):


“Courage and resolve are what our governments of all
compositions have lacked. . . . The revolutionary democrats must
not wait; they must themselves show initiative, and intervene in
the economic chaos in a planned way. . . . If anywhere, it is here
that a firm course and a determined government are
necessary.”


That goes without saying. Words of gold. The only trouble is
    that the author forgot that the question of the firm course to
    take, of courage and resolve, is not a personal matter, but a
    question of which
      class is capable of manifesting courage and
    resolve. The only class capable of this is the proletariat. A
    courageous and resolute government ..steering a firm course is
    nothing but the dictatorship of the proletariat and the poor
    peasants. I. Prilezhayev unwittingly longs for
      this
    dictatorship.

What would such a dictatorship mean in practice? It would mean
    nothing but the fact that the resistance of the Kornilov men would
    be broken and the democratisation of the army restored and
    completed. Two days after its creation ninety-mine per cent of the
    army would be enthusiastic supporters of this dictatorship. This
    dictatorship would give land to the peasants and ‘full power to
    the local peasant committees. How can anyone in his right senses
    doubt that the peasants would support this dictatorship? What
    Peshekhonov only
      promised (“the resistance of the capitalists
    has been. broken” was what Peshekhonov actually said in his
    famous speech before the Congress of Soviets), this dictatorship
    would put into effect, would translate into reality. At the same
    time the democratic organisations of

    

food supply, control, etc.,
    that have already begun to form would in no way be
    eliminated. They would, on the contrary, be supported and
    developed, and all obstacles in the way of their work would be
    removed.

Only the dictatorship of the proletariat and the poor peasants
    is capable of smashing the resistance of the capitalists, of
    displaying truly supreme courage and determination in the exercise
    of power, and of securing the enthusiastic, selfless and truly
    heroic support of the masses both ‘in the army and among the
    peasants.

Power to the Soviets—this is the only way to make further
    progress gradual, peaceful and smooth, keeping perfect pace with
    the political awareness and resolve of the majority of the people
    and with their own experience. Power to the Soviets means the
    complete transfer of the country’s administration and economic
    control into the hands of the workers and peasants, to whom
      nobody
    would dare offer resistance and who, through practice, through
      their own experience, would soon learn how to distribute the land,
    products and grain properly.

 
Notes
 

[1]
See pp. 17–19 of this volume.—Ed.

 







<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## How to Guarantee the Success of the Constituent Assembly









Lenin: How to Guarantee the Success of the Constituent Assembly







V. I.  

      Lenin
How to Guarantee the Success of the Constituent Assembly




Published:

      First published in Rabochy Put No. 11, September 28 (15), 1917.

      Signed: N. Lenin.

      Published according to the text in Rabochy Put.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 25,

      pages 378-383.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.  

      2002

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work, as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

ON FREEDOM OF THE PRESS

In early April, setting out the Bolsheviks’ attitude to the
    question of whether the Constituent Assembly should be convened, I
    wrote:

“Yes, and as soon as possible. But there is only one way to
    assure its convocation and success, and that is by increasing the
    number and strength of the Soviets and organising and
      arming the
    working-class masses. This is the only guarantee”
      (Political
    Parties in Russia and the Tasks of the Proletariat, Cheap Library
    of
      Zhizn i Znaniye, Book III, pp. 9 and
29).[1]


Five months have passed since then and these words have been
    proved correct by several delays in and postponements of the
    convocation through the fault of the Cadets. And they have been
    well borne out by the Kornilov affair.

Now, in connection with the calling of the Democratic
    Conference on September 12, I should like to dwell on another
    aspect of the matter.

Both the Menshevik
      Rabochaya Gazeta and
      Dyelo Naroda have
    deplored the fact that very little is being done for campaigning
    among the peasants to enlighten this real
      mass of the Russian
    people, their real majority. Everyone realises and admits that the
    success of the Constituent Assembly depends on the enlightenment
    of the peasants, but ridiculously little is being done about
    it. The peasants are being deceived, fooled and intimidated by the
    utterly deceitful

    

and counter-revolutionary bourgeois and
    “yellow” press, in comparison with which the press of the
    Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries (not to speak of the
    Bolsheviks) is very, very weak.
    

Why is that so?

Because the ruling S.R. and Menshevik parties are weak,
    hesitant and inactive, because, disagreeing that all power should
    be taken over by the Soviets, they leave the peasants in ignorance
    and solitude, a prey to the capitalists, to
      their press and
      their
    propaganda.

While boastfully calling our revolution great and shouting to
    the right and left high-sounding, bombastic phrases about
    “revolutionary democracy”, the Mensheviks and S.R.s in
      effect
    leave Russia in.the conditions of a most ordinary, most
    petty-bourgeois revolution which, having overthrown the tsar,
    leaves everything else unchanged and does nothing, absolutely
    nothing, effective to enlighten the peasants politically and to
    end the peasants’ ignorance, that last (and strongest) bulwark,
    the
      bulwark of the exploiters and oppressors of the people.

This is the time to recall that. It is now, with the Democratic
    Conference before us, two months ahead of the “appointed”
    convocation of the Constituent Assembly (to be further postponed),
    that we must show how easily matters could be put right, how much
    could be done for the political education of the peasants, if
    only—if only our “revolutionary democrats” in inverted
    commas were really revolutionary, i.e., capable of acting in a
    revolutionary way, and really democratic, i.e., reckoning with the
    will and interests of the majority of the people, and not of the
    capitalist minority, which continues to hold power (the Kerensky
    government) and with which, either directly or indirectly, in a
    new or old form, the S.R.s and Mensheviks are still eager to
    compromise.

The capitalists (followed, either from stupidity or from
    inertia, by many S.R.s and Mensheviks) call “freedom of the
    press” a situation in which censorship has been abolished and
    all parties freely publish all kinds of papers.

In reality it is not freedom of the press, but freedom for the
    rich, for the bourgeoisie, to deceive the oppressed and exploited
    mass of the people.
 

Indeed, take, say, the Petrograd and Moscow newspapers. You
    will see at once that it is the bourgeois
      papers—Rech,
      Birzherka,
      Novoye Vrernya,
      Russkoye
Slovo[2],
      and so on, and so
    forth (for there are a great many papers of this sort)—that
    have by far the largest circulation. What makes for this
    prevalence? Not at all the will of the majority, for the elections
    have shown that in both capitals the majority (a gigantic
    majority, too) favours the democrats, i.e., the S.R.s, Mensheviks
    and Bolsheviks. These three parties command from three-quarters to
    four-fifths of the votes, while the circulation of the newspapers
    they publish is certainly less than a quarter, or even less than
    one-fifth, that of the whole bourgeois press (which, as we know
    and see now, supported the Kornilov affair directly and
    indirectly).

Why is that so?

Everyone knows very well why. Because the publication of a
    newspaper is a big and profitable capitalist undertaking in which
    the rich invest millions upon millions of rubles. “Freedom of
    the press” in bourgeois society means freedom for the
      rich
    systematically, unremittingly, daily, in millions of copies, to
    deceive, corrupt and fool the exploited and oppressed mass of the
    people, the poor.

This is the simple, generally known, obvious truth which
    everyone sees and realises but which “almost everyone”
    “bashfully” passes over in silence, timidly evades.

The question is whether and how this crying evil can be
    fought.

First of all, there is a very simple, good and lawful means
    which I pointed out in
      Pravda long ago, which it is particularly
    opportune to recall now, before September 12, and which workers
    should always bear in mind, for they will hardly be able to do
    without it when they have won political power.

That means is a state monopoly on private press
    advertising.

Look at
      Russkoye Slovo,
      Novoye Vremya,
      Birzhevka,
      Rech,
    etc.—you will see a multitude of private advertisements, which
    yield a tremendous income, in fact the

    

principal income, to their
    capitalist publishers. This is how bourgeois papers hold sway, how
    they get rich, and
      how they deal in poison for the people all over
    the world.
    

In Europe there are newspapers which have a circulation as
    large as one-third the number of inhabitants of the town (for
    instance, 12,000 copies in a town with a population of 40,000) and
    are delivered
      free to every home, and yet yield their owners a
    sizable income. These papers live by advertisements paid by
    private people, while the free delivery of the paper to every home
    ensures the best circulation of the advertisements.

Then why cannot democrats who call themselves revolutionary
    carry out a measure like declaring private press advertising a
    state monopoly, or banning advertisements anywhere
      outside the
    newspapers published by the Soviets in the provincial towns and
    cities and by the
      central Soviet in Petrograd for the whole of
    Russia? Why must “revolutionary” democrats tolerate such a
    thing as the enrichment, through private advertising, of rich men,
    Kornilov backers, and spreaders of lies and slander against the
    Soviets?

Such a measure would be absolutely just. It would greatly
    benefit both those who published private advertisements and the
    whole people, particularly the most oppressed and ignorant class,
    the peasants, who would be able to have
      Soviet papers, with
    supplements for the peasants, at a very low price or even free of
    charge.

Why not do that? Only because private property and hereditary
    rights (to profits from advertising) are sacred to the capitalist
    gentlemen. But how can anyone calling himself a revolutionary
    democrat in the twentieth century, in the second Russian
    revolution, recognise such rights as “sacred”?!

Some may say it would mean infringing freedom of the press.

That is not true. It would mean extending and restoring freedom
    of the press, for freedom of the press means that all opinions of
      all citizens may be freely published.

What do we have now? Now, the rich alone have this monopoly,
    and also the big parties. Yet if large
      Soviet newspapers were to
    be published, with all advertisements,

    

it would be perfectly
    feasible to guarantee the expression of their opinion to a much
    greater number of citizens—say to every group having collected
    a certain number of signatures. Freedom of the press would
      in practice become much more democratic, would become incomparably
    more complete as a result.

But some may ask: where would we get printing presses and
    newsprint?

There we have it!!! The issue is not “freedom of the press’
    but the exploiters’ sacrosanct ownership of the printing presses
    and stocks of newsprint they have seized!

Just why should we workers and peasants recognise that sacred
    right? How is that “right” to publish false information
    better than the “right” to own serfs?

Why is it that in war-time all sorts of requisitioning—of
    houses, flats, vehicles, horses, grain and metals—are allowed
    and practised everywhere, while the requisitioning of printing
    presses and newsprint is impermissible?

The workers and peasants may in fact be deceived for a while if
    such measures are made out to be unjust or hard to realise, but
    the truth will win through in the end.

State power in the shape of the Soviets takes
      all the printing
    presses and
      all the newsprint and distributes them
      equitably: the
    state should come first—in the interests of the majority of the
    people, the majority of the poor, particularly the majority of the
    peasants, who for centuries have been tormented, crushed and
    stultified by the landowners and capitalists.

The big parties should come second—say, those that have
    polled one or two hundred thousand votes in both capitals.

The smaller parties should come third, and then any group of
    citizens which has a certain number of members or has collected a
    certain number of signatures.

This is the distribution of newsprint and printing presses that
    would be just and, with the Soviets in power, could be effected
    easily enough.

Then, two months before the Constituent Assembly, we could
    really help the peasants by ensuring the delivery to
      every village
    of half a dozen pamphlets (or newspaper issues, or special
      supplements) in
      millions of copies from
      every big party.
 

That would truly he a
      "revolutionary democratic" preparation for
    the elections to the Constituent Assembly; it would be aid to the
    countryside on the part of the advanced workers and soldiers. it
    would be state aid to the people’s enlightenment, and not to
    their stultification and deception; it would be real freedom of
    the press
      for all, and not for the rich. It would be a break with
    that accursed, slavish past which compels us to suffer the
    usurpation by the rich of the great cause of informing and
    teaching the peasants.

 
Notes
 

[1]
See present edition, Vol. 24, p. 99.—Ed.

 



[2]
Russkoye Slovo (The Russian Word)—a daily newspaper published
in Moscow from 1895 (the first, trial, issue appeared in 1894) by
I. D. Sytin. Nominally non-partisan, it upheld the interests of
the Russian bourgeoisie from a moderately liberal point of view.

   

In 1917 it fully supported the bourgeois Provisional Government
and campaigned against Lenin and the Bolshevik Party.

The paper was closed down in November 1917 for carrying
slanderous anti-Soviet reports. From January 1918 on, it was
published for a period under the titles of Novoye Slovo and Nashe
Slovo. It was suppressed altogether in July 1918.









<
  backward

 

forward
  >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 25

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## The State and Revolution









The State and Revolution




MIA: Writers: Lenin: The State and Revolution








Written: August - September, 1917

      
Source: Collected Works, Volume 25, p. 381-492

      
First Published: 1918

      
Transcription\Markup: Zodiac and Brian Baggins

      
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive (marxists.org) 1993, 1999
    





Preface


Chapter I: Class Society and the
State


The State: A Product of the
      Irreconcilability of Class Antagonisms
Special Bodies of Armed Men,
      Prisons, etc.
The State: An Instrument for the
      Exploitation of the Oppressed Class
The "Withering Away" of the State,
      and Violent Revolution



Chapter II: The Experience of
1848-51


The Eve of Revolution
The Revolution Summed Up
The Presentation of the Question by
      Marx in 1852



Chapter III: Experience of the Paris
Commune of 1871. Marx's Analysis


What Made the Communards' Attempt Heroic?
What is to Replace the Smashed
State Machine?
Abolition of Parliamentarism
Organisation of National Unity
Abolition of the Parasite State



Chapter IV: Supplementary
Explanations by Engels



The Housing Question
Controversy with the Anarchists
Letter to Bebel
Criticism of the Draft of the Erfurt
Programme
The 1891 Preface to Marx's "The
      Civil War in France"
Engels on the Overcoming of
      Democracy



Chapter V: The Economic Basis of the
Withering Away of the State


Presentation of the Question by Marx
The Transition from Captialism to Communism
The First Phase of Communist Society
The Higher Phase of Communist Society



Chapter VI: The Vulgarisation of
Marxism by Opportunists


Plekhanov's Controversy with the Anarchists
Kautsky's Controversy with the Opportunists
Kautsky's Controversy with Pannekoek



Postscript


 
Download
Macintosh html/sit | 
Windows html/zip |
mobi eBook | 
epub eBook | 
PDF

Endnotes

      Lenin wrote The State and Revolution in August and
      September 1917, when he was in hiding from persecution of the Provisional
      Government. The need for such a theoretical work as this was
      mentioned by Lenin in the second half of 1916. It was then that
      he wrote his note on "The Youth International", in which he
      criticised Bukharin's position on the question of the state and
      promised to write a detailed article on what he thought to be
      the Marxist attitude to the state. In a letter to
      A. M. Kollontai on February 17 (N.S.), 1917, he said that he had
      almost got ready material on that question  . This material was written in a small
      blue-covered notebook headed "Marxism on the State". In it Lenin
      had collected quotations from the works of Marx and Engels, and
      extracts from the books by Kautsky, Pannekoek and Bernstein with
      his own critical notes, conclusions and generalisations.
    

      When Lenin left Switzerland for Russia in April 1917, he feared
      arrest by the Provisional Government and left the manuscript of
      "Marxism on the State" behind — as it would have been
      destroyed had he been caught. When in hiding after the July
      events, Lenin wrote in a note:
    

      "Entre nous, if I am knocked off, I ask you to publish my
      notebook 'Marxism on the State' (it got held up in
      Stockholm). It is bound in a blue cover. All the quotations from
      Marx and Engels are collected there, also those from Kautsky
      against Pannekoek. There are a number of remarks, notes and
      formulas. I think a week's work would be enough to publish it. I
      consider it important because not only Plekhanov, but Kautsky,
      too, is confused...." When Lenin received his notebook
      from Stockholm, he used the material he had collected as a basis
      for his book The State and Revolution.
    

      According to Lenin's plan, The State and Revolution was
      to have consisted of seven chapters, but he did not write the
      seventh, "The Experience of the Russian Revolutions of 1905 and
      1917", and only a detailed plan has remained. In a note to the
      publisher Lenin wrote that if he "was too slow in competing
      this, the seventh chapter, or should it turn out to be too
      bulky, the first six chapters should be published separately as
      Book One."
    

      Originally, the name F.F. Ivanovsky is shown on the first page
      of the notebook manuscript as that of the author. Lenin intended
      to publish the book under that pseudonym, otherwise the
      Provisional Government would have confiscated it for his name
      alone. The book, however, was not printed until 1918, when there
      was no longer any need for the pseudonym. The second edition
      appeared in 1919; in this revision Lenin added to Chapter II a new section "The Presentation of the Question by Marx in
      1852".
    
 


NEXT
Collected Works Volume 25
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive



Last updated on 30 July 2023


