# Volume 38

==========

## Table of contents











Lenin Collected Works: Volume 38: Philosophical Notebooks



MIA: V. I. Lenin Library:
Collected Works: Volume 38



 
 
Lenin Collected Works:


    Volume 38
(Philosophical Notebooks) 
    1895 — 1916


Preface



1895




    Conspectus of the book The Holy
      Family by Marx and Engels
pp. 19-51


1903




    Fr.  Überweg. Outline of the
      History of Philosophy
  (Revised by Max Heinze) 3
  volumes. 1876-1880. Leipzig
52




    Fr. Paulsen. Introduction to
      Philosophy 1899
53-55


1904




    Note on a Review of The Wonders of
      Life and The Riddle of the
      Universe by E. Haeckel
56


1909




    Remarks on Books on the Natural
    Sciences and Philosophy in the Sorbonne
    Library
57-60




      Conspectus of Feuerbach’s Book
      Lectures on the Essence of
Religion
61-84


1914-16




      Conspectus of Hegel’s Book The
Science of Logic

Preface to the First Edition
Preface to the Second Edition
Introduction: General Concept of Logic


Book One: The Doctrine of Being

With What Should One Begin Science?
Section One: Determinateness (Quality)
Section Two: Magnitude (Quantity)
Section Three: Measure




Book Two: Essence

Section One: Essence as Reflection in
  Itself
Section Two: Appearance
Section Three: Actuality




Book Three: Subjective Logic or the Doctrine of the
      Notion

On the Notion in General
Section One: Subjectivity
Section Two: Objectivity
Section Three: The Idea

Summary of Dialectics






85-237



Notes on Reviews of Hegel’s Logic

238-242



Conspectus of Hegel’s Book
  Lectures on the History of Philosophy

Introduction to the History of Philosophy


Volume XIII. Volume I of The History of
Philosophy. History of Greek Philosophy

Ionic Philosophy
Pythagoras and Pythagoreans
The Eleatic School
The Philosophy of Heraclitus
Leucippus
Democritus
The Philosophy of Anaxagoras




Volume XIV. Volume II of The History of
Philosophy

The Philosophy of the Sophists
The Philosophy of Socrates
The Socratics
The Philosophy of Plato
The Philosophy of Aristotle
The Philosophy of the Stoics
The Philosophy of Epicurus
The Philosophy of the Sceptics




Volume XV. Volume III of The History of
Philosophy.  (The End of Greek Philosophy,
Medieval and Modern Philosophy up to Schelling,
pp. 1-692)

The Neo-Platonists
Hegel on Plato’s Dialogues




243-302



Conspectus of Hegel’s Book Lectures on the
    Philosophy Of History

Hegel on World History


303-314



Plan of Hegel’s
  Dialectics (Logic). (Contents of
  the Small Logic (Encyclopaedia))
[a.k.a. “Conspectus of the Shorter Logic”]

315-318



Georges Noël: Hegel’s 
  Logic. Paris, 1897

319-324



J. Perrin. Treatise on Physical
    Chemistry. Principles. Paris, 1903

325



Peter Genov. Feuerbachs Erkenntnistheorie Und 
  Metaphysik. Zürich, 1911 (Berner Dissertation)
  (S. 89)

326-327



Paul Volkmann. Epistemological Foundations of the
  Natural Sciences (“Sciences and Hypothesis,”
  IX). Second Edition. Leipzig, 1910

328



Max Verworn. The Hypothesis of
    Biogenesis. Jena, 1903

329-330



Fr. Dannemann. How Did Our Picture of the World
    Arise? (Kosmos). Stuttgart, 1912

331-332



Ludwig Darmstaedter. Handbook on the History of
  the Natural Sciences and Technique. Berlin, 1908,
  2nd edition

333



Napoleon. Pensées. Paris,
  1913. Bibliothèque Miniature No. 14

334



Artur Erich Haas. The Spirit of Hellenism in
  Modern Physics. Leipzig, 1914 (32 pp.) (Veit
  & Co.)

335



Theodor Lipps. Natural Science and World
  Outlook. (Speech at the 78th Congress of German
  Natural Scientists in Stuttgart). Heidelberg, 1906

336



Conspectus of Lassalle’s Book 
  The Philosophy of Heraclitus the Obscure of Ephesus

337-352



On the Question of Dialectics

353-362



Conspectus of Aristotle’s Book Metaphysics

363-372



Note on The Collected Works of Feuerbach and
    Hegel

373-374



Conspectus of Feuerbach’s Book Exposition,
  Analysis and Critique of the Philosophy of
    Leibnitz

375-387



Remarks On Dr. Johann Plenge’s Marx and
    Hegel. Tübingen, 1911

388-391


1912-1916



Notes on Books

[Section I.]
From books on philosophy in the Zürich Cantonal Library

(Cantonal Library in Zürich) (Signatur: K. b i.)


Section III. (“Works of informative and scientific content”)
[Section IV.]
Note on the Review of Joh. Plenge’s Book Marx and Hegel
Remarks on the Review of R. B. Perry’s Book Present Philosophical Tendencies
Remarks on the Review of A. Aliotta’s Book The Idealist Reaction Against Science
Remarks on Hilferding’s Views on Mach (In Finance Capital)


392-400


1908-11



Remarks In Books

G. V. Plekhanov. Fundamental Questions of
Marxism. St. Ptsbrg, 1908
Abel Rey. Modern Philosophy. Paris,
      1908 — Part One (pp. 407-440) — Part Two (pp. 440-474)
A. Deborin. Dialectical
Materialism
V. Shulyatikov. The Justification of
    Capitalism in West-European Philosophy. (From
      Descartes to E. Mach). Moscow, 1908
G. V.
    Plekhanov. N. G. Chernyshevsky. Shipovnik
      Publishing House. St. Petersburg, 1910 — Part One (pp. 501-528) — Part Two (pp. 529-557)


401-558


 


Volume 38 Transcription:
R. Cymbala,
Marc Szewczyk, & Andy Blunden

    (“Conspectus”,   

    “Paulsen”, 

    “Note”, 
    
    “Remarks”, 
    
    “Conspectus”, 
    
    “Conspectus” 
    and 
    
    “Plan”) 2000-2003.
Transcription/Mark-up of Remainder, Proofreading, & Re-Markup:
K. Goins 
  (Aug, 2007—July, 2008)





 
Previous

 | 
 Next 

 
Lenin
Collected Works 
 | 
Lenin
Internet Archive

 




 


 




==========

## Collected Works:










Lenin Collected Works



MIA:
V.I. Lenin Library:
      Collected Works




 

    Lenin Collected Works
  

By Date
   |   
By Title


A Note on the PDFs Listed Below
 Readers will note that each volume of this PDF editions presented and linked below contains a copyright notice by David J. Romagnolo, the editor and publisher of the Marx2Mao website (www.marx2mao.com), who scanned and created this superb series of facsimiles. [Web viewing versions in HTML are presented and linked on the right]
David claimed a copyright on the presentation (not the content) of these digital incarnations of Lenin's works, but admitted himself that he isn't sure whether such a claim has legal standing.  In fact, he is right to express doubt about this.  The law and court precedent is quite unambiguously clear here:  "slavish reproductions" of public domain works (such as the collected works of Lenin)... whether they be photographic bit map scans, or the meticulously re-type-set digital files David produced...  CAN NOT be claimed to be owned by anyone.  
As always, we at Marxists Internet Archive encourage the widest possible distribution and sharing of the materials we archive, but, while we share Dave's wish this material be distributed freely, and without charge, the fact is that under the existing bourgeois intellectual property law neither David, nor we, nor anyone else, actually, have the legal right to restrict how this material is used or re-distributed. 
We thank David J. Romagnolo for his years of work meticulously re-creating a stunningly high resolution, re-type-set digital archive of Lenin's Collected Works  – making this was an outstanding service to the workers movement – and we encourage users to remember to credit David J. Romagnolo and www.marx2mao.com when reproducing or using these files.


                                                                *             *             *
Note: Besides Marxists.org, this collection can also be accessed at http:// archive.org, and of course, at http://www.marx2mao.com 


                                                                *             *             *

A Note on
  “Notes” and 
  Other Issues 

  Concerning 

    Lenin Collected Works








      Volume  1
1893 —1894 
PDF 




      Volume  2
1895—1897
   PDF



      Volume  3
The Development of Capitalism in
    Russia. 
 1896—1899
   PDF



      Volume  4
1898—1901
   PDF



      Volume  5
1901—1902
   PDF



      Volume  6
1902—1903
   PDF



      Volume  7     

1903—1904
   PDF



      Volume  8

January—July 1905
   PDF



      Volume  9

June—November 1905
   PDF


Volume 10    

November 1905—June 1906
   
PDF


Volume 11    

June 1906—January 1907
   PDF


Volume 12    

January-June 1907
   
PDF


Volume 13
June 1907—April 1908
   PDF


Volume 14
Materialism and
    Empirio-Criticism. 

 1908
   PDF


Volume 15

March 1908—August 1909
   PDF



      Volume 16

September 1909—December 1910
   
PDF



      Volume 17

1910—1912
   PDF



      Volume 18

1912—July 1913
   
PDF



      Volume 19

1913
   PDF



      Volume 20
December 1913—August 1914
   

PDF



Volume 21

August 1914—December 1915
   PDF



Volume 22
December 1915—July 1916
   PDF



Volume 23

August 1916—March 1917
   PDF



Volume 24
April —May 1917
   PDF



Volume 25
June —September 1917
   PDF



Volume 26

September 1917—February 1918
   PDF



Volume 27

February—July 1918
   PDF



Volume 28

July 1918—March 1919
   PDF



Volume 29

March—August 1919
   PDF



Volume 30

September 1919—April 1920
   PDF



Volume 31

April—December 1920
   PDF



Volume 32    

December 1920—August 1921
   PDF



Volume 33    

August 1921—March 1923
   PDF


Volume 34

Letters, 1895—1911
PDF


Volume 35

Letters, 1912—1922
   PDF


Volume 36

Letters, etc., 1900—1923
   PDF



      Volume 37

Letters to Relatives, 1893—1922
   PDF




      Volume 38      

Philosophical Notebooks.
 

 1895—1916
   PDF 




      Volume 39      10 of 22

Notebooks on Imperialism.
 
PDF



      Volume 40      0 of 45

Notebooks on the Agarian Question.
 PDF 




Volume 41     

1896—1917
   
PDF



      Volume 42

1917—1923
   PDF 



Volume 43
Letters, etc., 1893—1917
   PDF



      Volume 44

Letters, etc., 1917—1920
   PDF 





      Volume 45
Letters, etc., 1920—1923
   PDF


   
  





Works not published in the LCW are listed below:
   
    • Telegram to 
  Comrades Kuraev, Bosh, Minkin, and other Penza communists
    • The Soviets At Work






Lenin Works Index    
 Lenin Internet Archive
   |   
Marxists Internet 
      Archive


Director 
  of Lenin Internet Archive





 




==========

## Preface











LCW: 38: Preface by Progress Publishers



Lenin 
      Collected Works: Volume 38: Preface by Progress Publishers




Lenin Collected Works: 
Volume 38
Preface by
      Progress Publishers

    Volume 38 of the Fourth Edition of the Collected Works of
    V. I. Lenin comprises résumés and excerpts from books,
    plus his critical remarks and evaluations concerning various aspects
    of Marxist philosophy; it also includes notes, fragments and other
    philosophical material.
  

    The volume includes Lenin’s philosophical writings first
    published in Lenin Miscellanies IX and XII in
    1929-30, and then, from 1933 to 1947, published repeatedly
    as a separate book under the title of Philosophical
    Notebooks. This material comprises the contents of
    ten notebooks, eight of which, relating to 1914-15, were
    entitled by Lenin Notebooks on Philosophy. In
    addition, the volume includes comments on books dealing
    with problems of philosophy and the natural sciences made
    by Lenin as separate notes in other notebooks containing
    preparatory material, as well as excerpts from books by
    various authors, with notes and under lineation by Lenin.
  

    Unlike previous editions of Philosophical
    Notebooks, this volume contains Lenin’s comments and
    markings in G. V. Plekhanov’s pamphlet Fundamental
    Questions of Marxism and in V. Shulyatikov’s book
    The Justification of Capitalism in West-European
    Philosophy, from Descartes to E. Mach, markings and
    underlinings on those pages of A. Deborin’s article
    “Dialectical Materialism” which were not
    included in earlier editions; comments in G. V. Plekhanov’s
    book N. G. Chernyshevsky, including markings, which
    in the course of work on this edition were proved to have
    been made by Lenin; and a number of notes on books and
    reviews of books on philosophy and the natural
    sciences. Published in this volume for the first time is a
    note which Lenin wrote late in 1904 on a review of The
    Wonders of Life and The Riddle of the
    Universe, two works by the German biologist Ernst
    Haeckel.
  

    A large number of the items included in Philosophical
    Notebooks relate to 1914-16. It is no coincidence that
    Lenin devoted so much attention to philosophy, and above
    all, to Marxist dialectics, precisely during the First World
    War, a period in which all the contradictions of capitalism
    became extremely acute and a revolutionary crisis
    matured. Only materialist dialectics provided the basis for
    making a Marxist analysis of the contradictions of
    imperialism, revealing the imperialist character of the
    First World War, exposing the opportunism and
    social-chauvinism of the leaders of the Second
    International and working out the strategy and tactics of
    struggle of the proletariat. All the works of Lenin written
    during that period—the classical treatise
    Imperialism as the Highest Stage of Capitalism,
    Socialism and War, The United States of Europe Slogan, The
    Junius Pamphlet, Socialist Revolution and the Right of
    Nations to Self-Determination and other
    writings—are inseparable from Philosophical
    Notebooks. The creative elaboration of Marxist
    philosophy, the Marxist dialectical method, and a profound
    scientific analysis of the new historical period were the
    basis for Lenin’s great discoveries, which equipped the
    proletariat with a new theory of socialist
    revolution. Philosophical Notebooks is inspired by
    a creative approach to Marxist philosophy, which is
    indissolubly bound up with reality, the struggle of the
    working class and the policy of the Party.
  

    The volume opens with Lenin’s conspectus of The Holy
    Family, or Critique of Critical Criticism by Marx and
    Engels. The conspectus written in 1895 traces the
    formation of the philosophical and political world outlook
    of Marx and Engels. Lenin quotes and marks those passages
    in the book which show how Marx approached “the
    concept of the social relations of production”
    (p. 30 of this volume) and which characterise
    “Marx’s view—already almost fully
    developed--concerning the revolutionary role of the
    proletariat” (p. 26). Lenin gives prominence to Marx
    and Engels’ criticism of the subjective sociology of Brunn
    and Edgar Bauer and their followers and their idealist
    views on the role of “critical-minded people.” Lenin stresses the theses
    advanced by the founders of scientific communism: that the
    real and actual makers of history are the people, the
    working masses; and that “with the thoroughness of the
    historical action, the size of the mass who perform it will
    therefore increase” (p. 32). These theses are
    organically linked with the struggle waged by Lenin at that
    time against idealist Narodnik views on “heroes”
    and “the crowd,” against attempts to provide a
    theoretical basis for the cult of the individual. Lenin made
    a detailed résumé of the chapter of the book
    in which Marx thoroughly characterises the significance of
    l7th-l8th century English and French materialism.
  

Philosophical Notebooks pays great attention to
    German classical philosophy, one of the sources of
    Marxism. In a summary of Ludwig Feuerbach’s book,
    Lectures on the Essence of Religion, which he wrote
    apparently in 1909, Lenin emphasises Feuerbach’s
    contributions as a materialist and atheist. He also points
    out those propositions in the Lectures expressing
    the, materialist conjectures contained in Feuerbach’s views
    on society. On the other hand, Lenin reveals the weaknesses
    and limitations of Feuerbach’s materialism, noting that
    “both the anthropological principle and naturalism are
    only inexact, weak descriptions of 
    m a t e r i a l i s m”
    (p. 82). In comparing Marx and Engels’ works of the same
    period with Lectures on the Essence of Religion,
    which Feuerbach delivered in 1848-49 and which were
    published in 1851, Lenin writes: “How far,
    even at t h i s time (1848-1851), 
    h a d Feuerbach 
l a g g e d  b e h i n d  M a r x
    (The Communist Manifesto, 1847, Neue Rheinische Zeitung, etc.) and Engels 
(1845: Lage)” (p. 77).
  

    In elaborating the theory of materialist dialectics, Lenin
    paid special attention to the study and critical analysis of
    Hegel’s philosophical legacy. His résumés of
    Hegel’s The Science of Logic, Lectures on the History of
    Philosophy and Lectures on the Philosophy of
    History occupy a central place in Philosophical
    Notebooks.
  

    Lenin sharply criticises Hegel’s idealism and the mysticism
    of his ideas. But Lenin also reveals the significance of
    Hegelian dialectics and points out the necessity for
    evaluating it from a materialist standpoint. “Hegel’s
    logic,” wrote V. I. Lenin, “cannot be applied
    in its given form, it cannot be taken as given. One
    must s e p a r a t e  o u t from it the logical
    (epistemological) nuances, after purifying them from
    Ideenmystik. . .” (p. 266). In summarising
    Hegel’s writings, Lenin formulates a series of highly
    important propositions on the essence of materialist
    dialectics. 
  

    The brilliant article “On the Question of Dialectics,”
    written in 1915, is related to Lenin’s summary of Hegel’s
    works. Though small in size, this article is a
    crystallisation of unsurpassed depth and richness of thought
    of all the important and essential elements in materialist
    dialectics.
  

    Lenin’s résumés of Lassalle’s The
    Philosophy of Heraclitus the Obscure of Ephesus,
    Aristotle’s Metaphysics and Feuerbach’s
    Exposition, Analysis and Critique of the Philosophy of
    Leibnitz trace the historical preparation of
    materialist dialectics. Lenin examines the history of
    philosophy from Heraclitus and Democritus to Marx and
    Engels, and presents a profound Marxist evaluation of the
    work of outstanding thinkers. He reveals the progressive
    contribution which they made to the development of
    philosophical thought, and at the same time, discloses the
    historical limitations of their views.
  

    In his comments on books concerned with the natural
    sciences, as well as elsewhere in the volume, Lenin
    criticises attempts to reconcile a scientific explanation of
    nature with a religious world outlook, the vacillations of
    natural scientists—spontaneous
    materialists—between materialism and idealism, and
    their inability to distinguish between mechanistic and
    dialectical materialism. He inveighs against a contemptuous
    attitude toward philosophy and philosophical generalisations
    and demonstrates the vast importance of materialist
    dialectics for the natural sciences and for philosophical
    generalisations based on the discoveries of modern science.
  

    The last section of Philosophical Notebooks is made
    up of markings and comments by Lenin in books on philosophy
    (by G. V. Plekhanov, V. M. Shulyatikov, A. M. Deborin and
    other authors), which show how scathingly Lenin criticised
    distortions of dialectical and historical materialism. This
    criticism is a vivid example of the uncompromising
    struggle by Lenin against vulgar materialism and the
    slightest deviations from Marxist philosophy.
  

    The remarks made by Lenin in Plekhanov’s book on
    Chernyshevsky are of considerable interest. They are
    evidence of his great attention to the history of Russian
    social thought and his high opinion of its progressive,
    materialist traditions. Lenin stresses the revolutionary
    democracy and materialism of Chernyshevsky and his
    determined struggle against idealism. In pointing out the
    shortcomings of Plekhanov’s book and Plekhanov’s failure to
    see the class content of Chernyshevsky’s activity, Lenin
    writes: “Because of the theoretical
    difference between the idealist and materialist views of
    history, Plekhanov overlooked the
    practical-political and class difference between
    the liberal and the democrat” (p. 546).
  

    In Philosophical Notebooks, Lenin consistently
    upholds the principle of partisanship in philosophy, and
    demonstrates the organic connection between dialectical
    materialism and revolutionary practice.
  

Philosophical Notebooks contains invaluable
    ideological richness, and is of immense theoretical and
    political significance. In it Lenin elaborates dialectical
    and historical materialism, the history of philosophy,
    focussing his attention on the problems of materialist
    dialectics. Along with his basic philosophical work,
    Materialism and Empirio-criticism, Philosophical
    Notebooks is an outstanding achievement of Lenin’s
    creative genius.
  

    Lenin’s excerpts and comments provide a definition of
    dialectics as the science of the most general laws of
    development and cognition of the objective world. Of
    exceptional importance is his proposition on the identity of
    dialectics, logic and the theory of knowledge. He pointed
    out that the fundamental failure of metaphysical materialism
    was its inability to apply dialectics to the process and
    development of cognition; dialectics, he stressed,
    is the theory of knowledge of Marxism. In his
    Philosophical Notebooks Lenin advanced Marxist
    dialectics still further by elaborating the question of the
    dialectical process of cognition and the dictum that the
    dialectical way of cognising objective reality consists in
    the transition from living perception to abstract thought
    and from this to practice.
  

    In elaborating materialist dialectics, Lenin concentrated
    on the problem of contradictions. It is in Philosophical
    Notebooks that he explains that the doctrine of the
    unity and struggle of opposites is the essence and core of
    dialectics, that the struggle of opposites is the source of
    development. “The splitting of a single whole and the
    cognition of its contradictory parts ... is the
    e s s e n c e 
(one of the ‘essentials,’ one of the
    principal, if not the principal, characteristics or
    features) of dialectics” (p. 359).
  

    It may be presumed that the preparatory material of
    Notebooks on Philosophy is evidence of Lenin’s
    intention to write a special work on materialist dialectics,
    a task which he had no opportunity to fulfil. Although the
    material in Philosophical Notebooks does not
    constitute a complete work written by Lenin for
    publication, it is an important contribution to the
    development of dialectical materialism. The study of the
    great ideological content of Philosophical
    Notebooks is of tremendous importance for a thorough
    grasp of Marxist-Leninist philosophy, the theoretical
    foundation of scientific communism.
  

    * *

    *

    The summaries as well as the rest of this volume are given
    chiefly in chronological order. Remarks made in books have
    also been arranged chronologically in a separate section.
  

    All of Lenin’s underlineation has been reproduced in
    type. Words underscored by a wavy or a straight thin line
    have been set in italics; those underscored by two
    lines—in spaced italics; those underscored by three
    straight thin lines—in boldface, etc.
  

    The text of this edition has been checked with Lenin’s
    manuscripts; quotations have been verified with original
    sources.
  

    Notes, an index of the sources mentioned by Lenin, name and
    subject indexes are appended.
  

    Institute of Marxism-Leninism of the C.C., C.P.S.U.
  



 
Previous

 | 
 Next 

 
Lenin
      Collected Works 
 | 
 Lenin
      Internet Archive 

 




 


 




==========

## 
    Conspectus of the book The Holy
      Family by Marx and Engels











Conspectus of the Book The Holy Family by Marx and Engels



Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Conspectus of the Book
The Holy Family
 by Marx and Engels




Written: 
 Not earlier than April 25 (May 7), but not later than September 1895
Source: 
 Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th Edition, Moscow, 1976, Volume 38, pp. 19 - 51
Publisher: Progress Publishers
First Published: 1930 in Lenin Miscellany XII
Translated: Clemence Dutt
Edited: Stewart Smith
Original Transcription & Markup: R. Cymbala & 
 Marc Szewczyk
Re-Marked up & Proofread by: Kevin Goins (2007)
Public Domain: Lenin Internet Archive (2003). 
 You may freely copy, distribute, display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works.
 Please credit “Marxists Internet Archive” as your source.


Conspectus of the book “The
 Holy Family” by Marx and Engels was written by Lenin in 1895 during his first
 stay abroad when he left Russia to establish contact with the Emancipation 
 of Labour group.

 Note that this document has undergone special formating to ensure that Lenin’s
 sidenotes fit on the page, marking as best as possible where they were 
 located in the original manuscript. 

 
 
 

THE HOLY FAMILY, OR CRITIQUE OF CRITICAL CRITICISM

AGAINST BRUNO BAUER & CO.

BY FREDERICK ENGELS AND KARL 


 FRANKFORT-ON-MAIN
     LITERARY PUBLISHING HOUSE
     (J. RÜTTEN)
     1845[1]

This little book, printed in octavo, consists of
     a foreword (pp. III-IV)[2] (dated
     Paris, September 1844), a table of
     contents (pp. V-VIII) and text proper (pp. 1-335),
     divided into nine chapters (Kapitel). Chapters
     I, II and III were written by Engels, Chapters
     V, VIII and IX by Marx, Chapters IV, VI and VII
     by both, in which case, however, each has signed
     the particular chapter section or subsection,
     supplied with its own heading, that was written
     by him. All these headings are satirical up to
     and including the “Critical Transformation
     of a Butcher into a Dog” (the heading of
     Section 1 of Chapter VIII). Engels is
     responsible for pages 1-17
     Chapters I, II, III and sections 1 and 2 of
     Chapter IV, pages 138-142 (Section
     2a of Chapter VI) and pages
     240-245 (Section 2b of Chapter
     VII):







 i.e., 26 pages out of 335. 






The first chapters are entirely criticism of the style  
  (t h e  w h o l e 
  ( ! ) first chapter, pp. 1-5) of the Literary
  Gazette [[Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung of Bruno Bauer[3]—in their 
  foreword Marx and Engels say that their criticism is directed 
  against its first eight numbers]], criticism of its
                  distortion of history (Chapter II, pp. 5-12,
                  especially of English history), criticism of its
                  themes (Chapter III, pp. 13-14, ridiculing the
                  Gründlichkeit[4] of the account of some
                  dispute of Herr Nauwerk with the Berlin Faculty
                  of Philosophy), criticism of views on love
                  (Chapter IV, 3 by Marx), criticism of the
                  account of Proudhon in the Literary
                  Gazette ((IV,4) Proudhon, p. 22 u. 
  ff. bis[5] 74. At the beginning there
                  is a mass of corrections of the
                  translation: they have confused formule et
                  signification,[6] they have translated la
                  justice as Gerechtigkeit[7] instead of
                  Rechtpraxis,[8] etc.). This criticism
                  of the translation (Marx entitles it—Characterisierende
  Übersetzung No. I, II u.s.w.[9]) 
  is followed by Kritische Randglosse 
  No. I u.s.w.,[10] 
  where Marx defends Proudhon against the critics of the 
  Literary Gazette, counterposing his clearly socialist ideas 
  to speculation.
Marx’s tone in relation to Proudhon is very
                  laudatory (although there are minor reservations, for example 
  reference to Engels’ Umrisse zu einer Kritik der Nationalökonomie
[11] in the
                  Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher
[12]).
Marx here advances from Hegelian philosophy to socialism: 
  the transition is clearly observable—it is evident what Marx 
  has already mastered and how he goes over to the new sphere of ideas.
(36) “Accepting the relations of private
                  property as human and rational, political
                  economy comes into continual contradiction
                  with its basic premise, private property, a
                  contradiction analogous to that of the theologian,
                  who constantly gives a human interpretation to
                  religious conceptions and by that very fact
                  comes into constant conflict with his basic
                  premise, the superhuman character of religion. Thus, 
  in political economy wages appear at
                  the beginning as the proportionate share of
                  the product due to labour. Wages and profit on
                  capital stand in the most friendly and
                  apparently the most human relationship, reciprocally 
  promoting one another. Subsequently it turns
                  out that they stand in the most hostile
                  relationship, in inverse proportion
                  to each other. Value is determined at the
                  beginning in an apparently rational way by the
                  cost of production of an object and its social
                  usefulness. Later it turns out that value is
                  determined quite fortuitously, not bearing any 
  relation to cost of production or social
                  usefulness. The magnitude of wages is
                  determined at the beginning by free 
  agreement between the free worker and the free
                  capitalist. Later it turns out that the worker
                  is compelled to agree to the determination of
                  wages by the capitalist, just as the capitalist
                  is compelled to fix it as low as possible.
                  Freedom of the contracting Parthei[13]” [this is the way
                  the word is spelled in the book] “has been
                  supplanted by compulsion. The same
                  thing holds good of trade and all other economic
                  relations. The economists themselves
                  occasionally sense these contradictions, and the
                  disclosure of these contradictions constitutes
                  the main content of the conflicts between
                  them. When, however, the economists in one way
                  or another become conscious of these contradictions,
                  they themselves attack private
                  property in any one of its private
                  forms as the falsifier of what is in itself (i.e.,
                  in their imagination) rational wages, in
                  itself rational value, in itself rational
                  trade. Adam Smith, for instance, occassionally
                  polemises against the capitalists, Destutt de
                  Tracy against the bankers, Simonde de Sismondi
                  against the factory system, Ricardo against
                  landed property, and nearly all modern
                  economists against the non-industrial
                  capitalists, in whom private property appears as
                  a mere consumer.
“Thus, as an exception—and all the more so
                  when they attack some special abuse—the
                  economists sometimes stress the semblance of the
                  humane in economic relations, while, more often
                  than not, they take these relations precisely in
                  their marked difference from the humane, in
                  their strictly economic sense. They stagger
                  about within that contradiction without going
                  beyond its limits.
“Proudhon put an end to this
                  unconsciousness once for all. He took the
                  humane semblance of the economic
                  relations seriously and sharply opposed it to
                  their inhumane reality. He forced them
                  to be in reality what they imagine themselves to
                  be, or, more accurately, to give up their own idea
                  of themselves and confess their real
                  inhumanity. He therefore quite consistently
                  represented as the falsifier of economic
                  relations not one or another particular type of
                  private property, as other economists have done,
                  but private property as such, in its
                  entirety. He has done all that can be done by
                  criticism of political economy from the stand-point of 
  political economy.” (39)
Herr Edgar’s reproach (Edgar of the Literary
                  Gazette) that Proudhon makes a
                  “god” out of “justice,” Marx
                  brushes aside by saying that Proudhon’s treatise
                  of 1840[14] does not adopt “the
                  standpoint of German development of 1844”
                  (39), that this is a general failing of the French,
                  and that one must also bear in mind Proudhon’s
                  reference to the implementation of justice by
                  its negation—a reference making it possible to
                  have done with this Absolute in history as
                  well (um auch dieses Absoluten in der Geschichte
                  überhoben zu sein)—at the end of p. 39. “If
                  Proudhon does not arrive at this consistent
                  conclusion, it is owing to his misfortune in
                  being born a Frenchman and not a German.”
                  (39-40)
Then follows Critical Gloss No. II (40-46),
                  setting out in very clear relief Marx’s
                  view—already almost fully developed—concerning
                  the revolutionary role of the proletariat.
...“Hitherto political economy proceeded
                  from the wealth that the movement of
                  private property supposedly creates for the
                  nations to an apology of private
                  property. Proudhon proceeds from the opposite
                  side, which political economy sophistically
                  conceals, from the poverty bred by the movement of 
  private property, to his conclusions
                  negating private property. The first criticism
                  of private property proceeds, of course, from
                  the fact in which its contradictory essence
                  appears in the form that is most perceptible and
                  most glaring and most directly arouses man’s
                  indignation—from the fact of poverty, of
                  misery.” (41)
“Proletariat and wealth are opposites. As such they 
  form a single whole. They are both begotten by the world
                  of private property. The question is what particular place
                  each occupies within the antithesis. It is not sufficient to
                  declare them two sides of a single whole.
“Private property as private property, as
                  wealth, is compelled to maintain
                  itself, and thereby its opposite, the
                  proletariat, in existence. That is
                  the positive side of the contradiction, 
  self-satisfied private property.
“The proletariat, on the other hand, is
                  compelled as proletariat to abolish itself and
                  thereby its opposite, the condition for its
                  existence, that which makes it the proletariat,
                  i.e. private property. That is the
                  negative side of the contradiction, its
                  restlessness within its very self, dissolved and
                  self-dissolving private property.
“The propertied class and the class of the
                  proletariat present the same human
                  self-alienation. But the former class feels
                  happy and confirmed in this self-alientation, it
                  recognises alienation as its own power, and
                  has in it the semblance of human
                  existence. The class of the proletariat feels
                  annihilated in its self-alienation; it sees in it
                  its own powerlessness and the reality of an
                  inhuman existnece. To use an expression of
                  Hegel’s, the class of the proletariat is in
                  abasement indignation at this abasement, an
                  indignation to which it is necessarily driven
                  by the contradiction between its human
                  nature and its conditions of life,
                  which are the outright, decisive and
                  comprehensive negation of that nature.
“Within this antithesis the private
                  property-owner is therefore the
                  conservative side, the proletarian, the
                  destructive side. From the former
                  arises the action of preserving the antithesis,
                  from the latter, that of annihilating it.
“In any case, in its economic movement
                  private property drives towards its own
                  dissolution, but only through a development
                  which does not depend on it, of which it is
                  unconscious and which takes place against its will,
                  through the very nature of things, only inasmuch
                  as it produces the proletariat as
                  proletariat, misery conscious of its spiritual
                  and physical misery, dehumnaisation conscious of its
                  dehumanisation and therefore
                  self-abolishing. The proletariat executes the
                  sentence that private property pronounced on
                  itself by begetting the proletariat, just as it
                  executes the sentence that wage-labour
                  pronounced on itself by begetting wealth for
                  others and misery for itself. When the
                  proletariat is victorious, it by no means becomes
                  the absolute side of society, for it is
                  victorious only by abolishing itself and its
                  opposite. Then the proletariat disappears as
                  well as the opposite which determines it, private
                  property.
“When socialist writers ascribe this
                  historic role to the proletariat, it is not, as
                  Critical Criticism would have one think, because
                  they consider the proletarians as gods.
                  Rather the contrary. Since the abstraction of all
                  humanity, even of the semblance of
                  humanity, is practically complete in the
                  fully-formed proletariat; since the conditions of
                  life of the proletariat sum up all the
                  conditions of life of society today in their
                  most inhuman and acute form; since man has lost
                  himself in the proletariat, yet at the same time
                  has not only gained theoretical consciousness of
                  that loss, but through the no longer removable,
                  no longer disguisable, absolutely imperative
                  need—the practical expression of
                  necessity—is driven directly to revolt
                  against that inhumanity; it follows that the
                  proletariat can and must free itelf. But it
                  cannot free itself without abolishing the
                  conditions of its own life. It cannot abolish the
                  conditions of its own life without abolishing
                  all the inhuman conditions of life of
                  society today which are summed up in its own
                  situation. Not in vain does it go through the stern
                  but steeling school of labour. It is
                  not a question of what this or that proletarian,
                  or even the whole proletariat, at the moment
                  considers as its aim. It is a question of
                  what the proletariat is, and what, in
                  accordance with this being, it will
                  historically be compelled to do. Its aim and
                  historical action is irrevocably and clearly
                  foreshadowed in its own life situation as well
                  as in the whole organisation of bourgeois
                  society today. There is no need here to show that a
                  large part of the English and French proletariat
                  is already conscious of its historic
                  task and is constantly working to develop that
                  consciousness into complete clarity.”
                  (42-45)
CRITICAL GLOSS NO. 3



“Herr Edgar cannot be unaware that Herr Bruno Bauer 
  based all his arguments on ‘infinite self-consciousness’
  and that he also saw in this principle the creative principle 
  of the gospels, which, by their infinite unconsciousness, 
  appear to be in direct contradiction to infinite self-con-
  sciousness. In the same way Proudhon considers equality 
  as the creative principle of private property, which is in 
  direct contradiction to equality. If Herr Edgar compares




French equality with German
                  self-consciousness for an in-stant, he will see
                  that the latter principle expresses in Ger-man, 
  i.e., in abstract thought, what the former
                  says in French, that is, in the
                  language of politics and of thoughtful






observation. Self-consciousness is man’s equality with
  himself in pure thought. Equality is man’s consciousness
  of himself in the element of practice, i.e., therefore, man’s
  consciousness of other men as his equals and man’s attitude
  to other men as his equals. Equality is the French expression
  for the unity of human essence, for man’s consciousness
  of his species and his attitude towards his species, for the
  practical identity of man with man, i.e., for the social
  or human relation of man to man. As therefore destructive
  criticism in Germany, before it had progressed in Feuerbach
  to the consideration of real man, tried to solve everything
                  definite and existing by the principle of self-consciousness,
  destructive criticism in France tried to do the same by
  the principle of equality.” (48-49) 




“The opinion that philosophy is the abstract
                  expression of existing conditions does not
                  belong orginally to Herr Edgar. It belongs to
                  Feuerbach, who was the first to
                  de-scribe philosophy as speculative and mystical
                  empiricism,and proved it.” (49-50)







“‘We always come back to the same thing... Proudhon
  writes in the interests of the proletarians.’[15] He does not




write in the interests of self-sufficient criticism or out of
  any abstract, self-made interest, but out of a massive,
  real, historical interest, an interest that goes beyond crit-






icism,that will go as far as a crisis. Not only does Proud-
  hon write in the interests of the proletarians, he is himself
  a proletarian, un ouvrier. His work is a scientific manifesto
  of the French proletariat and therefore has quite a different
  historical significance from that of the literary botchwork
                  of a Critical Critic.” (52-53)
“Proudhon’s desire to abolish non-owning and the old
  form of owning is exactly identical to his desire to abol-
  ish the practically alienated relation of man to his ob-
  jective essence, to abolish the political-economic ex-
  pression of human self-alienation. Since, however, his
  criticism of political economy is still bound by the pre-
  mises of political economy, the reappropriation of the ob-
  jective world is still conceived in the political-economic
  form of possession.
“Proudhon indeed does not oppose owning to non-owning,
  as Critical Criticism makes him do, but possession to the
  old form of owning, to private property. He declares posses-
  sion to be a ‘social function.’ In a function, ‘interest’ is not
  directed however toward the ‘exclusion’ of another, but
                  toward setting into operation and realising my own powers,
  the powers of my being.
“Proudhon did not succeed in giving this
                  thought appro-




priate development. 
  The concept of ‘equal possession’ is a
                  political-economic one and therefore itself still an alienated
  expression for the principle that the object as being for
  man, as the objective being of man, is at the same time the
existence of man for other men, his human relation to
  other men, the social behaviour of man in relation
  to man. Proudhon abolishes political-economic estrangement
within political-economic estrangement.” (54-55)







[[This passage is highly characteristic, for it shows how
  Marx approached the basic idea of his entire “system,” sit
  venia verbo,[16]
  namely the concept of the social relations of
  production.]]
As a trifle, it may be pointed out that on p. 64 Marx
  devotes five lines to the fact that “Critical Criticism” trans-
  lates maréchal as “Marschall” instead of “Hufschmied.”[17]
Very interesting are: pp. 65-67
                  (Marx approaches the
  labour theory of value); pp. 70-71 (Marx answers Edgar’s
  charge that Proudhon is muddled in saying that the worker
  cannot buy back his product), 71-72 and 72-73 (spec-
  ulative, idealistic, “ethereal” (ätherisch) socialism—and
  “mass” socialism and communism).







p. 76.


(Section 1, first paragraph:
                  Feuerbach disclosed real mysteries,
                  Szeliga—vice versa.)




p. 77.


(Last paragraph: anachronism
                  of the n a ï v e 
                  relation of rich and poor: “si le riche le
                  savait!”[18])




pp.79-85.


(All these seven pages are extremely interesting. 
  This is Section 2, “The Mystery of Speculative Con-
  struction”—a criticism of speculative philosophy using 
  the well-known example of “fruit”—der Frucht—a crit-
  icism aimed directly a g a i n s t  H e g e l as well.
  Here too is the extremely interesting remark that Hegel “very
  often” gives a real presentation, embracing the thing
  itself—die S a c h e  
                  selbst—within the speculative pre-
  sentation.)








pp. 92, 93—


f r a g m e n t a r y 
                  remarks against Degradie
  rung der Sinnlichkeit.[19]








p. 101.


“He” (Szeliga) “is unable ... 
  to see that industry




 


and trade found universal
                  kingdoms that are quite
  different from Christianity and morality, family hap-
  piness and civic welfare.”






p. 102.


(End of the first paragraph—barbed
                  remarks on the
  significance of notaries in modern society.... “The notary
  is the temporal confessor. He is a puritan by profes-
  sion, and ‘honesty,’ Shakespeare says, is ‘no puritan.’
  He is at the same time the go-between for all possible
  purposes, the manager of civil intrigues and plots.”)








p. 110.


Another example of ridiculing abstract specula-
  tion: the “construction” of how man becomes master
  over beast; “beast” (das Tier) as an abstraction is changed
                  from a lion into a pug, etc.








p. 111.


A characteristic passage regarding Eugène Sue[20]:
  owing to his hypocrisy towards the bourgeoisie, he ideal-
  ises the grisette morally, evading her attitude to mar-
  riage, her “naïve” liaison with un étudiant[21] 
  or ouv-






rier.[22] “It is precisely in that
                  relation that she” (gri-
  sette) “constitutes a really human contrast to the sanc-
  timonious, narrow-hearted, self-seeking wife of the
  bourgeois, to the whole circle of the bourgeoisie, that
  is, to the official circle.”






p. 117.


The “mass” of the sixteenth
                  and the nineteenth
  centuries was different “von vorn herein.”[23]








pp. 118-121.


This passage (in Chapter VI: “Absolute Cri-
  tical Criticism, or Critical Criticism in the Person of
  Herr Bruno.” 1) Absolute Criticism’s First Campaign.
  a) “Spirit” and “Mass”) is 
  e x t r e m e l y important:
  a criticism of the view that history was unsuccessful
  owing to the interest in it by the mass and its reliance
  on the mass, which was satisfied with a “superficial” com-
  prehension of the “idea.”







“If, therefore, Absolute Criticism condemns some-
  thing as ‘superficial,’ it is simply previous history, the
  actions and ideas of which were those of the ‘masses.’
  It rejects mass history to replace it by critical history
  (see Herr Jules Faucher on Topical Questions in Eng-
  land
  [24]).” (119)  




“The ‘idea’ always exposed itself to ridicule inso-
  far as it differed from ‘interest.’ On the other hand,
  it is easy to understand that every mass ‘interest’ that




NB




asserts itself historically goes far beyond its real limits
  in the ‘idea’ or ‘imagination’ when it first comes on
  the scene, and is confused with human interest in
  general. This illusion constitutes what Fourier calls
  the tone of each historical epoch” (119)—as an illus-
  tration of this the example of the French Revolution
  (119-120) and the well-known words (1 2 0  in
  fine[25]):  




“With the thoroughness of the historical action, the
                  size of the mass who perform it will therefore increase.”




NB







How far the sharpness of Bauer’s division into
                  Geist[26] and Masse[27] goes is evident from this
                  phrase that Marx attacks: “In the mass, not
                  somewhere else, is the true enemy of the spirit
                  to be sought.” (121)  




Marx answers this by saying that the enemies of prog-
  ress are the products endowed with independent being 
  (verselbständigten) of the self-abasement of the mass, although
  they are not ideal but material products existing in an out-
  ward way. As early as 1789, Loustallot’s journal
[28] had the
  motto:




Les grands ne nous paraissent
                  grands Que parceque nous sommes à genoux.
                  Levons-nous![29]  




But in order to rise (122), says Marx, it is not
                  enough to do so in thought, in the idea.  




“Yet Absolute Criticism has learnt from Hegel’s Phen-
  omenology[30]
                  at least the art of converting real objective
  chains that exist outside me into merely ideal, merely sub-
  jective chains existing merely within me, and thus of
  converting all exterior palpable struggles into pure struggles
  of thought.” (122)  




In this way it is possible to prove, says Marx bitingly,
                  the pre-established harmony between Critical Criticism and
                  the censorship, to present the censor not as a police hangman
                  (Polizeischerge) but as my own personified sense of tact
                  and moderation.  




Preoccupied with its “Geist,” Absolute
                  Criticism does not investigate whether the
                  phrase, self-deception and pithlessness
                  (Kernlosigkeit) are not in its own empty 
  (windig) pretensions.  




“The situation is the same with ‘progress.’ In spite of
  the pretensions of ‘progress,’ continual retrogressions and
circular movements are to be observed. Far from suspecting
  that the category ‘progress’ is completely empty and 
  abstract, Absolute Criticism is instead so ingenious as to re-
  cognise ‘progress’ as being absolute, in order to explain
  retrogression by assuming a ‘personal adversary’ of
  progress, the mass.” (123-124)  




“All communist and socialist writers proceeded from
  the observation that, on the one hand, even the most
  favourable brilliant deeds seemed to remain without brilliant
  results, to end in trivialities, and, on the other, all progress
  of the spirit had so far been progress against the mass
  of mankind, driving it to an ever more dehumanised situation.
  They therefore declared “progress” (see Fourier) to be an
  inadequate abstract phrase; they assumed (see Owen, among
  others) a fundamental flaw in the civilised world; that is
                  why they subjected the real bases of contemporary society
  to incisive criticism. This communist criticism immediately
  had its counterpart in practice in the movement of the
great mass, in opposition to which the previous historical
                  development had taken place. One must be acquainted
  with the studiousness, the craving for knowledge, the moral
  energy and the unceasing urge for development of the French
  and English workers to be able to form an idea of the human
  nobility of this movement.” (124-125)  




“What a fundamental superiority over the
                  communist writers it is not to have traced
                  spiritlessness, indolence, superficiality and
                  self-complacency to their origin but to have
                  denounced them morally and exposed
                  them as the opposite of the spirit, of
                  progress!” (125)







“The relation between ‘spirit and mass,’ however, has
  still a hidden sense, which will be completely revealed in the course
                  of the reasoning. We only make mention of it
                  here. That relation discovered by Herr
                  Bruno is, in fact, nothing but a critically
                  caricatured culmination of Hegel’s conception of
                  history; which, in turn, is nothing but the
                  speculative expression of the
                  Christian-Germanic dogma of the
                  antithesis between spirit and
                  matter, between God and the
                  world. This antithesis is expressed in
                  history, in the human world itself, in such a
                  way that a few chosen individuals as
                  the active spirit stand opposed to the
                  rest of mankind, as the spiritless
                  mass, as matter.” (126)  




And Marx points out that Hegel’s conception of history
  (Geschichtsauffassung) presupposes an abstract and
  absolute spirit, the embodiment of which is the mass. Par-
  allel with Hegel’s doctrine there developed in France the theory of
                  the Doctrinaires [31]
   (126) who proclaimed thesovereignty of reason in opposition to the sovereignty of the
  people in order to exclude the mass and rule alone
  (allein).  




Hegel is “guilty of a double half-heartedness” (127):
  1) while declaring that philosophy is the being of the Abso-
  lute Spirit, he does not declare this the spirit of the philo-
  sophical individual; 2) he makes the Absolute Spirit the
  creator of history only in appearance (nur zum Schein),
  only post festum,[32]
 only in consciousness.  




Bruno does away with this half-heartedness; he
                  declares that Criticism is the Absolute
                  Spirit and the creator of his-
  tory in actual fact.  




“On the one side stands the Mass, as the
                  passive, spirit-less, unhistorical
                  material element of history; on the
                  other— the Spirit, Criticism,
                  Herr Bruno and Co. as the active ele-ment from
                  which all historical action arises. The act
                  of the transformation of society is reduced to
                  the brain work of Critical
                  Criticism.” (128)  




As the first example of “the campaigns of
                  Absolute Crit-icism against the Mass,”
                  Marx adduces Bruno Bauer’s attitude to the
                  Judenfrage, and he refers to the
                  refutation of Bauer[33] in
                  Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher.  




“One of the chief pursuits of Absolute
                  Criticism consistsin first bringing all
                  questions of the day into their right
                  setting. For it does not answer, of course, the
                  real questions—but substitutes
                  quite different ones.... It thus
                  distorted the ‘Jewish question,’ too, in such a way
                  that it did not need to investigate
                  political emancipation, which is the
                  subject-matter of that question, but could instead
                  be satisfied with a criticism of the Jewish
                  religion and a des-cription of the
                  Christian-German state.  




“This method, too, like all Absolute Criticism’s
                  original-ities, is the repetition of a
                  speculative verbal trick. Spec-ulative 
  philosophy, in particular
                  Hegel’s philosophy, must transpose all
                  questions from the form of common sense to the
                  form of speculative reason and convert thereal
                  question into a speculative one to be able
                  to answerit. Having distorted my
                  questions and having, like the cate-chism, placed
                  its own questions into my mouth,
                  specullative philosophy could, of course, again
                  like the catechism,
  have its ready answer to each of my questions.” (134-135)  





In Section 2a (...“‘Criticism’ and
                  ‘Feuerbach’—Damna-tion of
                  Philosophy...”)—pp. 138-142—written by
                  Engels, one finds Feuerbach warmly praised. In
                  regard to “Criti-cism’s” attacks on
                  philosophy, its contrasting to philosophy the
                  actual wealth of human relations, the “immense
                  content of history,” the “significance
                  of man,” etc., etc., right up to the
                  phrase: “the mystery of the system
                  revealed,”Engels says:  




“But who, then, revealed the mystery of the
                  ‘system’?Feuerbach. Who annihilated
                  the dialectics of concepts, the war of the gods
                  known to the philosophers along? Feuer-bach. 
  Who substituted for the old rubbish and
                  for ‘infinite self-consciousness’ not, it is
                  true, ‘the significance of man’—as
                  though man had another significance than that of
  being man—but still ‘Man’?
                  Feuerbach, and only Feuer-
  bach. And he did more. Long ago he did away with the
  very categories that ‘Criticism’ now wields—the ‘real
  wealth of human relations, the immense content of history,
  the struggle of history, the fight of the mass against the spirit,’
  etc., etc.  




“Once man is conceived as the essence, the
                  basis of all human activity and situations, only
                  ‘Criticism’ can invent new
                  categories and transform man himself
                  again into acategory and into the principle
                  of a whole series of categories as it is doing
                  now. It is true that in so doing it takes the
                  only road to salvation that remained for frightened
                  and persecuted theological
                  inhumanity. History does nothing,
                  it ‘possesses no immense wealth,’ it 
  ‘wages no battles.’ It is man
                  and not ‘history,’ real living man, that does all
                  that, that possesses and fights; ‘history’ is
                  not, as it were, a person apart, using man as a
                  means to achieve its own aims; history
                  is nothing but the activity of man pursuing
                  his aims. IfAbsolute Criticism,
                  after Feuerbach’s brilliant reasoning,
                  still dares to reproduce the old trash in a new
                  form...” (139-140) etc.—then, Engels says,
                  this fact alone is sufficient to assess the
                  Critical naïveté, etc.  




And after this, in regard to the opposition of
                  Spirit and “Matter” (Criticism calls
                  the mass “matter”), Engels
                  says:




“Is Absolute Criticism then not
                  genuinely Christian-German? After the
                  old contradiction between spiritualism 




and materialism has been fought out on all sides and over-
  come once for all by Feuerbach, ‘Criticism’ again makes
  a basic dogma of it in its ugliest form and gives the victory
  to the ‘Christian-German spirit.’” (141)








In regard to Bauer’s words: “To the extent
                  of the prog-ress now made by the Jews in
                  theory, they are emancipated; to the extent that
                  they wish to be free, they are free” (142),
                  Marx says:  




“From this proposition one can immediately
                  measurethe critical gap which separates
                  mass profane communism and socialism
                  from absolute socialism. The first
                  proposition of profane socialism rejects
                  emancipation in mere theory as an
                  illusion and for real freedom it demands
                  besides the idealistic ‘will,’ very
                  tangible, very material conditions.How low
                  ‘the Mass’ is in comparison with holy
                  Criticism,the Mass which considers material,
                  practical upheavalsnecessary, merely to win the
                  time and means requiredto deal with
                  ‘theory’!” (142)  




Further, (pp. 143-167), the most boring,
                  incredibly caviling criticism of the
                  Literary Gazette, a sort of word by
                  word commentary of a “blasting”
                  type. Absolutely noth-ing of interest.  




The end of the section ((b) The Jewish Question
                  No. II.pp. 142-185)—pp. 167-185 provides
                  an interesting answerby Marx to Bauer on the
                  latter’s defence of his book Juden-frage, 
  which was criticised in the Deutsch-Französische
  Jahrbücher. (Marx constantly refers to the
                  latter.) Marx heresharply and clearly stresses
                  the basic principles of his entireworld outlook.  




“Religious questions of the day have at
                  present a social sig-nificance” (167)—this
                  was already pointed out in the Deutsch-
                  Französische Jahrbücher. It characterised
                  the “real position of Judaism in
                  civil society today.” “Herr Bauer
                  explains the real Jew by the Jewish
                  religion, instead of explainingthe mystery
                  of the Jewish religion by the real
                  Jew.” (167-168)  




Herr Bauer does not suspect “that real,
                  worldly Judaism,and hence religious Judaism
                  too, is being continually pro-duced by
                  present-day civil life and finds its final
                  develop-ment in the money
                  system.”  




It was pointed out in the Deutsch-Französische Jahr-
  bücher that the development of Judaism has to be sought
  “in der kommerziellen und industriellen Praxis”[34] (169),
  —that practical Judaism “vollendete Praxis der christlichen
  Welt selber 
  ist.”[35] (169)  




“It was proved that the task of abolishing
                  the essence of Judaism is in truth the task of
                  abolishing Judaism in civil society,
                  abolishing the inhumanity of the present-day
                  practice of life, the summit of which is the
                  money system.” (169)  




In demanding freedom, the Jew demands
                  something that in no way contradicts political
                  freedom (172)—it is a question of
                  political freedom.  




“Herr Bauer was shown that it is by no means
                  contrary to political emancipation to
                  divide man into the non-re-ligious
                  citizen and the religious private
                  individual.” (172)  




And immediately following the above:  




“He was shown that as the state emancipates
                  itself from religion by emancipating itself from
                  state religion and leaving religion to
                  itself within civil society, so the indi-vidual
                  emancipates himself politically from
                  religion by re-garding it no longer as a public
                  matter but as a private
                  matter. Finally, it was shown that the
                  terroristic attitude of the French
                  Revolution to religion, far from
                  refuting this conception, bears it out.”
                  (172)  




The Jews desire allgemeine Menschenrechte.[36]  




“In the Deutsch-Französische
                  Jahrbücher it was
  expounded to Herr Bauer that this ‘free humanity’ and
  the ‘recognition’ of it are nothing but the recognition of the
selfish, civil individual and of the uncurbed movement
  of the spiritual and material elements which are the content
  of his life situation, the content of civil life today; that the
Rights of Man do not, therefore, free man from religion
  but give him freedom of religion; that they do not free
  him from property, but procure for him freedom of prop-
  erty; that they do not free him from the filth of gain but give
  him freedom of choice of a livelihood.  




“He was shown that the recognition of the Rights
  of Man by the modern state means nothing more than
  did the recognition of slavery by the ancient state. In
  fact, just as the ancient state had slavery as its natural
  basis, the modern state has civil society and the man of
  civil society, i.e., the independent man connected with
  other men only by the ties of private interest and uncon-
  scious natural necessity, the slave of labour for gain and
  of his own as well as other men’s selfish need. The mo-
  dern state has recognised this as its natural basis as
  such in the universal Rights of Man.”
  [37] (175)  





“The Jew has all the more right to the
                  recognition of his ‘free humanity’”
                  “as ‘free civil society’ is of a thoroughly
                  commercial and Jewish nature and the Jew is a necessary
  link in it.” (176)  




That the “Rights of Man” are not
                  inborn, but arose histor-ically, was known
                  already to Hegel. (176)  




Pointing out the contradictions of
                  constitutionalism,
                  “Criticism” does not generalise them (faßt
                  nicht den allge-meinen Widerspruch des
                  Constitutionalismus[38]). (177-178)
  If it had done so, it would have proceeded from constitu-tional 
  monarchy to the democratic representative
                  state, to the perfect modern state. (178)  




Industrial activity is not abolished by the
                  abolition of privileges (of the guilds,
                  corporations, etc.); on the con-trary it develops
                  more strongly. Property in land is not abolished
                  by the abolition of privileges of landownership,
                  “but, rather, first begins its universal
                  movement with the abolition of its privileges
                  and through the free division and free
                  alienation of land.” (180)  




Trade is not abolished by the abolition of trade
                  privilegesbut only then does it become
                  genuinely free trade, so also




with religion, “so religion
                  develops in its practical univer-sality 
  only where there is no privileged
                  religion (one calls to mind the North American
                  States).”







...“Precisely the slavery of bourgeois
                  society is in ap-pearance the
                  greatest freedom....” (181)  




To the dissolution (Auflösung) (182) of the
                  politicalexistence of religion (the
                  abolition of the state church), of
                  property (the abolition of the property
                  qualification for electors), etc.—corresponds
                  their “most vigorous life, which now obeys
                  its own laws undisturbed and develops into its
                  full scope.”  




Anarchy is the law of bourgeois society
                  emancipated from privileges. (182-183)



... C) CRITICAL BATTLE AGAINSTTHE FRENCH REVOLUTION



“The ideas”—Marx quotes
                  Bauer—“which the French Revolution gave
                  rise to did not, however, lead beyond the
order that it wanted to abolish by
                  force.  




“Ideas can never lead beyond an old
                  world order but only beyond the ideas of the old
                  world order. Ideas cannot carry anything
                  out at all. In order to carry out ideas men
                  are needed who dispose of a certain practical
                  force.” (186)







The French Revolution gave rise to the ideas of communism
  (Babeuf), which, consistently developed, contained the idea
  of a new  Weltzustand.[39]
In regard to Bauer’s statement that the state
                  must hold in check the separate egotistic atoms,
                  Marx says (188-189) that the members of civil
                  society are, properly speaking, by no means
                  atoms, but only imagine themselves to be such, for
                  they are not self-sufficient like atoms, but
                  depend on other persons, their needs continually
                  forcing this dependence upon them.
“Therefore, it is natural necessity, essential human
  properties, however alienated they may seem to be, and
interest that hold the members of civil society together;
civil, not political life is their real tie.... Only political
  superstition still imagines today that civil life must be
  held together by the state, whereas in reality, on the contrary,
  the state is held together by civil life.” (189)
Robespierre, Saint-Just and their party fell
                  because they confused the ancient
                  realistically-democratic society, based on
                  slavery, with the modern,
                  spiritualistically-democratic representative
                  state, based on bourgeois society. Before his
                  execution Saint-Just pointed to the table
                  (Tabelle a poster? hanging) of the Rights of
                  Man and said: “C’est pourtant moi qui
                  ai fait cela.”[40] “This
                  very table proclaimed the rights of a man who
                  cannot be the man of the ancient republic any
                  more than his economic and industrial
                  relations are those of the ancient
                  times.” (192)
On the 18th Brumaire,[41] 
  not the revolutionary movement
  but the liberal bourgeoisie became the prey of Napoleon.
  After the fall of Robespierre, under the Directorate, the
                  prosaic realisation of bourgeois society begins: Sturm 




und Drang
[42] of commercial enterprise, the whirl (Taumel)
  of the new bourgeois life; “real enlightenment of the
                  land of France, the feudal structure of
                  which had been smashed by the hammer of
                  revolution, and which the numerous new owners in
                  their first feverish enthusiasm now put under
                  all-round cultivation; the first movements of an
                  industry that had become free—these are a few of the
                  signs of life of the newly arisen bourgeois
                  society.” (192-193)




 
CHAPTER VI. ABSOLUTE CRITICAL CRITICISM,
                     OR CRITICAL CRITICISM
 IN THE PERSON OF HERR BRUNO
. . . 3) ABSOLUTE CRITICISM’S THIRD CAMPAIGN. . .
d) CRITICAL BATTLE AGAINST FRENCH MATERIALISM
                   (195-211)



[[This chapter (subsection d in the third section of
                  Chap-ter VI) is one of the most valuable in the book. Here
                  there is absolutely no word by word criticism, but a completely
  positive exposition. It is a short sketch of the history of
  French materialism. Here one ought to copy out
                  the whole chapter, but I shall limit myself to a short
                  summary of of the contents.]]
The French Enlightenment of the eighteenth century and
                  French materialism are not only a struggle against the
                  exist-ing political institutions, but equally an open struggle
                  against the metaphysics of the seventeenth century,
                  namely,




against the metaphysics of
                  Descartes, Malebranch, Spin-oza and
                  Leibnitz. “Philosophy was opposed to
                  metaphys-ics as Feuerbach, in his first decisive
                  attack on Hegel, opposed sober philosophy to
                  drunken speculation.” (196)






The metaphysics of the seventeenth century,
                  defeated by the materialism of the eighteenth
                  century, underwent a vic-torious and weighty
                  (gehaltvolle) restoration in German phi-losophy,
                  especially in speculative German philosophy of
                  the nineteenth century. Hegel linked it in a
                  masterly fashion with the whole of metaphysics
                  and with German idealism, and he founded ein
                  metaphysisches Universalreich.[43] 
  This was fol-lowed again by an “attack on 
  speculative metaphysics and metaphysics in general. 
  It will be defeated for ever by mater-ialism, which has 
  now been perfected by the work of specu-lation itself and
                  coincides with humanism. Just as Feuerbach in
                  the theoretical field, French and English
                  socialism and co-mmunism in the practical field
                  represented materialism coin-ciding with
                  humanism.” (196-197)
There are two trends of French materialism: 1) from Des-
  cartes, 2) from Locke. The latter mündet direkt in den
                  Soc-ialismus.[44] (197)
The former, mechanical materialism, turns into French
                  nat-ural science.
Descartes in his physics declares matter the only sub-
  stance. Mechanical French materialism takes over
                  Descartes’ physics and rejects his
                  metaphysics.
“This school begins with the
                  physician Le Roy, reaches its zenith
                  with the physician Cabanis, and the
                  physician Lamet-trie is its
                  centre.” (198)
Descartes was still living
                  when Le Roy transferred the mechanical
                  structure of animals to man and declared the
                  soul to be a modus of the body, and ideas
                  to be mechanical movements. (198) Le
                  Roy even thought that Descartes had
                  concealed his real opinion. Descartes protested.
At the end of the eighteenth century
                  Cabanis perfected Cartesian
                  materialism in his book Rapports du
                  physique et du moral de l’homme.[45]
From the very outset the metaphysics of the
                  seventeenth century had its adversary in
                  materialism. Descartes—Gas-sendi, the
                  restorer of Epicurean materialism, in England—
Hobbes.
Voltaire (199) pointed out that
                  the indifference of the Frenchmen of the
                  eighteenth century to the disputes of the
                  Jesuits and others was due less to philosophy that
                  to Law’s financial speculations. The
                  theoretical movement towards materialism is
                  explained by the practical Gestaltung[46]
 of French life at that time. 
  Materialistic theories corresponded to
                  materialistic practice.
The metaphysics of the seventeenth century (Descartes, 
  Leibnitz) was still linked with a positive (positivem)
                  content. It made discoveries in mathematics,
                  physics, etc. In the eighteenth century the
                  positive sciences became separated from it and
                  metaphysics war fad geworden.[47]
In the year of Malebranche’s death, Helvétius and Cond-illac
  were born. (199-200)
Pierre Bayle, through his weapon of scepticism,
                  theore-tically undermined seventeenth-century
                  metaphysics. He re-futed chiefly Spinoza and
                  Leibnitz. He proclaimed atheistic society. He
                  was, in the words of a French writer, “the
                  last metaphysician in the seventeenth-century sense
                  of the word and the first philosopher in the
                  sense of the eighteenth cen-tury.” (200-201)
This negative refutation required a positive,
                  anti-meta-physical system. It was provided by
                  Locke.
Materialism is the son of Great
                  Britain. Its scholastic Duns Scotus had
                  already raised the question: “ob die
                  Materie nicht denken könne?”[48]
 He was a nominalist. Nominalism is in general the first
                  expression of material-ism.[49]
The real founder of English materialism was
                  Bacon. (“The first and most
                  important of the inherent qualities of matter is
                  motion, not only as mechanical and mathematical movement,
  but still more as impulse, vital
                  spirit, tension, or ... the throes (Qual) ... of
                  matter.”—202)
“In Bacon, its
                  first creator, materialism has still concealed
                  within it a naïve way the germs of all-round
                  development. Matter smiles at man as a whole
                  with poetical sensuous brightness.”
In Hobbes, materialism becomes one-sided,
                  menschen- feindlich, mechanisch.[50] Hobbes systematised Bacon,
                  but he did not develop (begründet) more deeply
                  Bacon’s fund-amental principle: the origin of
                  knowledge and ideas from the world of the senses
                  (Sinnenwelt).—P. 203.
Just as Hobbes
                  did away with the theistic prejudices
                  of Bacon’s materialism, so Collins, Dodwell,
                  Coward, Hartley, Priestley, etc., destroyed the
                  last theological bounds of Locke’s
                  sensualism.[51]
Condillac directed Locke’s sensualism against seven-
  teenth-century metaphysics; he published a refutation of
                  the systems of Descartes, Spinoza, Leibnitz,
                  and Malebranche.
The French
                  “civilised” (205) the materialism of the
                  English.
In Helvétius (who also
                  derives from Locke), materialism was given a
                  properly French character.
Lamettrie is
                  a combination of Cartesian and English
                  mat-erialism.
Robinet has the most
                  connection with metaphysics.
“Just as
                  Cartesian materialism passes into
                  natural sci-ence proper, the other trend
                  of French materialism flows directly into
                  socialism and communism.”
                  (206)
Nothing is easier than to derive socialism
                  from the premis-es of materialism
                  (reconstruction of the world of the
                  senses—linking private and public
                  interests—destroying the Geburts-stätten[52] of crime, etc.).
Fourier proceeds immediately from the
                  teaching of the French materialists. The
                  Babouvists[53] were crude, immature
                  materialists. Bentham based his system on the
                  morality of Helvétius, while Owen takes
                  Bentham’s system as his starting-point for
                  founding English communism. Cabet
                  brought com-munist ideas from England into France
                  (populärste wenn auch flachste[54] representative of communism) 208.
   The “more scientific” are
                  Dézamy, Gay, etc., who
                  developed the teach-ing of materialism as
                  real humanism.
On pp. 209-211 Marx
                  gives in a note (two pages of small print)
                  extracts from Helvétius,
                  Holbach and Bentham, in or-der
                  to prove the connection of the materialism
                  of the eight-eenth century with English
                  and French communism of the nineteenth century.
Of the subsequent sections the
                  following passage is worth noting:
“The dispute between Strauss and 
  Bauer over Substance and
                  Self-Consciousness is a dispute within
                  Hegelian speculation. In Hegel there are
                  three elements: Spinoza’s Substance,
  Fichte’s Self-Consciousness,
                  and Hegel’s ne-cessary and contradictory
                  unity of the two, the Absolute
                  Spirit. The first element is metaphysically
                  disguised nature in separation
                  from man; the second is metaphysically disguised
spirit in separation from nature;
                  the third is the metaphysical-ly disguised
                  unity of both, real man and
                  the real human race” (220), and
                  the paragraph with its assessment of Feuer-bach:
“In the domain of theology,
                  Strauss quite consistently expounded
                  Hegel from Spinoza’s point of view, and
                  Bauer did the same from Fichte’s point of
                  view. Both criticised Hegel
                  insofar as with him each of the two elements was
falsified by the other, while they carried
                  each of the elements to its one-sided
                  and hence consistent development.—Both of them
                  therefore go beyond Hegel in their
                  Criticism, but both of them also remain within
                  the framework of his specu-lation and
                  each represents only one side of his
                  system. Feuer-




bach was the first to bring
                  to completion and criticise Hegel from
                  Hegel’s point of view, by resolving the
                  metaphysical Absolute Spirit into
                  ‘real man on the basis of nature,’ and
                  the first to bring to completion the Criticism
                  of religion by sketching in a masterly
                  manner the general basic features of the
                  Criticism of Hegel’s speculation and hence
                  of every kind of metaphysics.”
                  (220-221)







Marx ridicules Bauer’s “theory of
                  self-consciousness” on account of its
                  idealism (the sophisms of absolute idealism—222),
  points out that this is a periphrasing of
                  Hegel, and quotes the latter’s
                  Phenomenology and Feuerbach’s
                  criti-cal remarks (from Philosophie der
                  Zukunft,[55] p. 35, that philosophy
                  negates—negiert — the “materially
                  sensuous,” just as theology negates
                  “nature tainted by original sin”).








The following chapter (VII) again begins with a
                  series of highly boring, caviling criticisms
                  [1). Pp. 228-235]. In section 2a there
                  is an interesting passage.
Marx quotes from the
                  Literary Gazette the letter of a
                  “re-presentative of the Mass,” who calls
                  for the study of reality, of natural science and
                  industry (236), and who on that account was
                  reviled by “criticism”:
“Or”(!), exclaimed “the
                  critics” against this representa-tive of
                  the Mass,—“do you think that the knowledge of
                  his-torical reality is already complete? Or (!)
                  do you know




of any single period in history
                  which is actually known?”
“Or does Critical Criticism”—Marx
                  replies—“believe that it has reached even
                  the beginning of a knowledge of
                  histori-cal reality so long as it excludes
                  from the historical move-ment the
                  theoretical and practical relation of man to na-ture, 
  natural science and industry? Or does it think
                  that it actually knows any period without
                  knowing, for example, the industry of that
                  period, the immediate mode of pro-duction of
                  life itself? True, spiritualistic,
                  theological Crit-ical Criticism only
                  knows (at least it imagines it knows) the major
                  political, literary and theological acts of his-tory. 
  Just as it separates thinking from the senses,
                  the soul from the body and itself from the
                  world, it separates history from natural science
                  and industry and sees the origin of history not
                  in vulgar material production on the
                  earth but in vaporous clouds in the
                  heavens.” (238)






                  No-
                  ta
                  be-
                  ne
               




Criticism dubbed this representative of the mass
                  a mas-senhafter Materialist.[56] (239)
“The criticism of the French and the English is not
                  an abs-tract, preternatural personality outside
                  mankind; it is the real human activity
                  of individuals who are active members of society
                  and who as human beings suffer, feel, think and
                  act. That is why their criticism is a the same
                  time practical, their communism a socialism in which
                  they give practical, tangible measures, and in
                  which they do not only think but even more act;
                  it is the living real criticism of existing
                  society, the discov-ery of the causes of
                  ‘decay’.” (244)
[[The whole of Chapter VII
                  (228-257), apart from the pas-sages quoted above,
                  consists only of the most incredible capti-ous
                  criticisms and mockery, noting contradictions of
                  the most petty character, and ridiculing each and
                  every stupidity in the Literary
                  Gazette, etc.]]
In Chapter VIII (258-333)
                  we have a section on the “Crit-ical
                  Transformation of a Butcher into a
                  Dog”—and further on
E u g è n e 
                   S u e ’ s  Fleur de
                  Marie[57] (evidently a novel with
                  this title or the heroine of some novel or
                  other) with certain “radical“ but
                  uninteresting observations by Marx. Worth
                  mentioning perhaps are only
                  p.  2 8 5  Ⅹ — against Eugène
                  Sue’s defence of the prison cell system
                  (Cellularsystem).
“The mystery of this” (305)
                  (there was a quotation from
Anekdota
[58] above) “courage of
                  Bauer’s is Hegel’s Phenom-enology.
  Since Hegel here puts self-consciousness in the place of man,
  the most varied human reality appears only as a
                  definite form, as a determination of
                  self-consciousness. But a mere
                  determination of self-consciousness is a
                  ‘pure category,’ a
  mere ‘thought’ which
                  I can consequently also transcend in ‘pure’
                  thought and overcome through pure




thought. In Hegel’s
                  Phenomenology the material,
                  sensuous, objective bases of
                  the various alienated forms of human
                  self-consciousness are left as they
                  are. The whole destructive work results in the
                  most conservative philosophy
                  [sic!] because it thinks it has overcome
                  the objective world, the sensuously real
                  world, by merely transforming it into





a ‘thing of thought,’ a mere
                  determination of self-con-sciousness,
                  and can therefore dissolve its opponent, which
                  has become ethereal, in the ‘ether
                  of pure thought.’ The Phenomenology
  is therefore quite consistent in ending
                  by re-placing all human reality by ‘Absolute
                  Knowledge’ — Knowledge, because
                  this is the only mode of existence of
                  self-consciousness, and because
                  self-consciousness is con-sidered as the only
                  mode of existence of man;—Absolute
                  Knowledge for the very reason that
                  self-consciousness knows only itself and is no
                  more disturbed by any objective world. Hegel
                  makes man the man of self-consciousness
                  instead of making self-consciousness the
                  self-consciousness of man, of the real
                  man, and therefore of man living also in a real
                  objec-tive world and determined by that world. He
                  stands the world on its head and can
                  therefore in his head dissolve all
                  limita-tions, which nevertheless, of course,
                  remain in existence for e-vil
                  sensuousness, for real man. Moreover,
                  everything which betrays the limitations of
                  general self-consciousness— all
                  sensuousness, reality, individuality of men and of
                  their world—is neccessarily held by him to be a
                  limit. The whole of the Phe-nomenology
                  is intended to prove that self-consciousness
  is the only reality and
                  all reality....” (306) 




...“Finally, it goes without saying that if
                  Hegel’s Phe-nomenology, in spite of
                  its speculative original sin, gives in many
                  instances the elements of a true description of
                  hu-man relations, Herr Bruno and Co., on the
                  other hand, provide only an empty
                  caricature....” (307)





 






“Thereby Rudolph unconsciously revealed the
                  mystery, long ago exposed, that human misery
                  itself, the infinite ab-jectness which is obliged
                  to receive alms, has to serve as a
                  plaything to the aristocracy of money and
                  education to satisfy their self-love, tickle
                  their arrogance and amuse them.
“The
                  numerous charitable associations in Germany, the
                  numerous charitable societies in France and the
                  great num-ber of charitable quixotic societies
                  in England, the concerts, balls, plays, meals
                  for the poor and even public subscriptions for
                  victims of accidents have no other
                  meaning.” (309-310)
And Marx quotes from Eugène Sue:
“Ah, Madame, it is not enough to
                  have danced for the be-nefit of these poor
                  Poles.... Let us be philanthropic to the
                  end.... Let us have supper now for the
                  benefit of the poor!”[60] (310)
On pp. 312-313 quotations
                   f r o m 
                   F o u r i e r
                  (adultery is good tone, infanticide by the
                  victims of seduction— a vicious
                  circle.... “The degree of emancipation of
                  woman is the natural measure of general
                  emancipation....” (312) Civ-ilisation
                  converts every vice from a simple into a complex, am-
  biguous, hypocritical form), and Marx adds: 




“It is superfluous to contrast to Rudolph’s
                  thoughts Fourier’s masterly characterisation of
                  marriage[61] or the






works of the materialist section of
  French communism.” (313)
P. 313 u. ff., against the political-economic
  projects of Eugène Sue and Rudolph (presumably
                  the hero of Sue’s novel?), projects for the
                  association of rich and poor, and the organisation of labour
  (which the state ought to do), etc.—e.g., also the 
  Armenbank[62]
[7)—b) “The bank for the Poor” pp. 314-318] = 
  interest-free loans to the unem-ployed. Marx takes the
                   f i g u r e s 
                  of the project and exposes their meagreness in relation to need.
  And the idea of an Armenbank, says Marx, is no better than 
  Sparkas-sen[63]..., 
  i.e., die Einrichtung[64] of the bank “rests on
                  the delusion that only a different distribution of wages
  is needed for the workers to be able to live through the whole
                  year.” (316-317)
Section c) “Model Farm at Bouqueval”
                  318-320, Ru-dolph’s project for a model farm,
                  which was praised by “Criticism,” is
                  subjected to devastating criticism: Marx
                  de-clares it to be a utopian project, for on the
                  average one Frenchman gets only a quarter of a
                  pound of meat per day, only 93 francs in annual
                  income, etc.; in the project they work twice
                  as much as before, etc., etc. 
  ((Not interesting.)) 




320: “The miraculous means by which Rudolph
  accomp-lishes all his redemptions and
                  marvellous cures is not his fine words but his
                  ready money. That is what the moralists
  are like, says Fourier. One must be a
                  millionaire to be able to imitate their heroes.









“Morality is ‘Impuissance mise en 
  action.’[65] 
  Every time it fights a vice it is defeated. And Rudolph does 
  not even rise to the standpoint of independent morality based
                  at least on the consciousness of human
                  dignity. On the contrary, his morality is
                  based on the consciousness of human weakness. He represents 
  theological morality.” (320-321)
...“As in reality all differences boil down
  more and more to the difference between poor and
                  rich, so in the idea do
all aristocratic differences become
                  resolved into the opposi-tion between
                  good and evil. This distinction is
                  the last form that the aristocrat gives to his
                  prejudices....” (323-324)
...“Every movement of his soul is of infinite
  importance to Rudolph. That is why he constantly observes and
                  appraises them....” (Examples.)
                  “This great lord is like the members of
                  ‘Young England,’ who also wish to
                  reform the world, to perform noble deeds, and
                  are subject to similar hysterical
                  fits....” (326)  










  Has  not  Marx  in  mind  here  the  
   English  Tory  philanthropists  who 
   passed  the  Ten  Hours’  Bill?[66]







 

Notes
[1] The Holy Family, or
                  Critique of Critical Criticism. Against Bruno Bauer
                  and Co.—the first joint work of Karl Marx and
                  Frederick Engels. It was written between September
                  and November 1844 and was published in February 1845
                  in Frankfort-on-Main. 
“The Holy Family” is a mocking
                  reference to the Bauer brothers and their followers
                  grouped around the Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung
                  (General Literary Gazette). While
                  attacking the Bauers and the other Young Hegelians
                  (or Left Hegelians), Marx and Engels at the same
                  time criticised the idealist philosophy of
                  Hegel. 
Marx sharply disagreed with the Young Hegelians
                  as early as the summer of 1842, when the club of
                  “The Free” was formed in Berlin.  Upon
                  becoming editor of the Rheinische Zeitung
                  (Rhine Gazette) in October 1842, Marx
                  opposed the efforts of several Young Hegelian staff
                  members from Berlin to publish inane and pretentious
                  articles emanating from the club of “The
                  Free,” which had lost touch with reality and
                  was absorbed in abstract philosophical
                  disputes. During the two years following Marx’s
                  break with “The Free,” the theoretical and
                  political differences between Marx and Engels on the
                  one hand and the Young Hegelians on the other became
                  deep-rooted and irreconcilable. This was not only
                  due to the fact that Marx and Engels had gone over
                  from idealism to materialism and from revolutionary
                  democratism to communism, but also due to the
                  evolution undergone by the Bauer brothers and
                  persons of like mind during this time. In the
                  Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung, Bauer and his
                  group denounced “1842 radicalism” and its
                  most outstanding proponent—the Rheinische
                  Zeitung. They slithered into vulgar subjective
                  idealism of the vilest kind—propagation of a
                  “theory” according to which only select
                  individuals, bearers of the “spirit,” of
                  “pure criticism,” are the makers of
                  history, while the masses, the people, serve as
                  inert material or ballast in the historical
                  process. 
Marx and Engels decided to devote their first
                  joint work to the exposure of these pernicious,
                  reactionary ideas and to the defence of their new
                  materialist and communist outlook. 
During a ten-day stay of Engels in Paris the plan
                  of the book (at first entitled Critique of
                  Critical Criticism. Against Bruno Bauer and Co.)
                  was drafted, responsibility for the various
                  chapters apportioned between the authors, and the
                  “Preface” written.  Engels wrote his
                  chapters while still in Paris. Marx, who was
                  responsible for a larger part of the book, continued
                  to work on it until the end of November
                  1844. Moreover, he considerably increased the
                  initially conceived size of the book by
                  incorporating in his chapters parts of his economic
                  and philosophical manuscripts on which he had worked
                  during the spring and summer of 1844, his historical
                  studies of the bourgeois French Revolution at the
                  end of the 18th century, and a number of his
                  excerpts and conspectuses. While the book was in the
                  process of being printed, Marx added the words
                  The Holy Family to the title. By using a
                  small format, the book exceeded 20 printer’s sheets
                  and was thus exempted from preliminary censorship
                  according to the prevailing regulations in a number
                  of German states.
[2] Engels, F. und Marx, K., Die heilige Familie, 
  oder Kritik der kritischen Kritik, Frankfurt a. M., 1845. —Ed.
[3] Allgemeine
                  Literatur-Zeitung (General Literary
                  Gazette)—a German monthly published in
                  Charlottenburg from December 1843 to October 1844 by
                  Bruno Bauer, the Young Hegelian.
[4] pedantic
                  thoroughness—Ed.
[5] und folgende bis—and
                  following up to—Ed.
[6] formula and
                  significance—Ed.
[7] justice—Ed.
[8] juridical
                  practice—Ed.
[9] characterising translation
                  No. I, II, etc.—Ed.
[10] critical gloss No. I,
                  etc.—Ed.
[11] Umrisse zu einer Kritik
                  der Nationalökonomie (Outlines of a
                  Critique of Political Economy) was first
                  published by Engels at the beginning of 1844 in
                  Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher 
  (Franco-German Annals)—see Marx,
                  Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of
                  1844. Moscow, 1959, pp. 175-209.
[12] Deutsch-Französische
                  Jahrbücher (Franco-German Annals)—a
                  magazine published in German in Paris and edited by
                  Karl Marx and Arnold Ruge. The only issue to appear
                  was a double number published in February 1844. It
                  included Marx’s articles “A Critique of the
                  Hegelian Philosophy of Law (Introduction)” and
                  “On the Jewish Question,” and also Engels’
                  articles “Outlines of a Critique of Political
                  Economy” and “The Position of
                  England. Thomas Carlyle. ‘Past and Present’.”
                  These works mark the final transition of Marx and
                  Engels to materialism and communism. Publication of
                  the magazine was discontinued chiefly as a result of
                  the basic differences between Marx’s views and the
                  bourgeois-radical views of Ruge.
[13] party—Ed.
[14] This refers to Proudhon’s
                  work of 1840 Qu’est-ce que la propriété ou
                  Recherches sur le principe du droit et du
                  gouvernement (What Is Property? or Studies
                  on the Principle of Law and Government).  Marx
                  presents a critique of this work in a letter to
                  Schweitzer dated January 24, 1865 (see Marx and
                  Engels, Selected Correspondence, Moscow,
                  1955, pp. 185-192).
[15] Marx is quoting
                  Edgar.
[16] if the word may be
                  allowed—Ed.
[17]
                  “blacksmith”—Ed.
[18] “if the rich only
                  knew it!”—Ed.
[19] debasing of
                  sensuousness—Ed.
[20] This refers to Eugène Sue’s
                  novel Les mystères de Paris (Mysteries
                  of Paris), which was written in the
                  spirit of petty-bourgeois sentimentality. It was
                  published in Paris in 1842-43 and very popular in
                  France and abroad.
[21] a
                  student—Ed.
[22] worker—Ed.
[23] “from the
                  outset”—Ed.
[24] Marx is referring here to
                  articles by Jules Faucher entitled Englische
                  Tagesfragen (Topical Questions in
                  England), which were published in
                  Nos. VII and VIII (June and July 1844) of the
                  Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung.
[25] at the
                  end—Ed.
[26] spirit—Ed.
[27] mass—Ed.
[28] Loustallot’s journal of
                  1789—a weekly publication entitled
                  Révolutions de Paris (Parisian
                  Revolutions), which appeared in Paris from July
                  1789 to February 1794. Until September 1790 it was
                  edited by Elisée Loustallot, a revolutionary
                  publicist.
[29] The great only seem
                  great to us
     Because we are on our knees.
     Let us rise!—Ed.
[30] Phänomenologie des
                  Geistes (Phenomenology of Mind)
   by G. W. F. Hegel was first published in
                  1807. In working on The Holy Family, Marx
                  made use of Vol. II of the second edition of Hegel’s
                  works (Berlin, 1841). He called this first large
                  work of Hegel, in which the latter’s philosophical
                  system was elaborated, “the source and secret
                  of Hegel’s philosophy.”
[31]
Doctrinaires—members of a bourgeois
                  political grouping in France during the period of
                  the Restoration (1815-30). As constitutional
                  monarchists and rabid enemies of the democratic and
                  revolutionary movement, they aimed to create in
                  France a bloc of the bourgeoisie and landed
                  aristocracy after the English fashion. The most
                  celebrated of the Doctrinaires were Guizot, a
                  historian, and Royer-Collard, a philosopher. Their
                  views constituted a reaction in the field of
                  philosophy against the French materialism of the
                  18th century and the democratic ideas of the French
                  bourgeois revolution (see Holy Family ch.VI 3. d.).
[32] after the
                  event—Ed.
[33] The refutation of the
                  views expounded by Bruno Bauer in his book Die
                  Judenfrage (The Jewish Question),
                  Braunschweig, 1843, was made by Marx in an article
                  entitled “Zur Judenfrage” (“On the
                  Jewish Question”), published in 1844 in
                  Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher.
[34] “in commercial and
                  industrial practice”—Ed.
[35] “is the perfected
                  practice of the Christian world
                  itself”—Ed.
[36] the universal rights of
                  man—Ed.
[37] The Universal Rights
                  of Man—the principles enunciated in the
                  “Declaration of the Rights of Man and the
                  Citizen” and proclaimed during the time of the
                  French bourgeois revolution of 1789-93.
[38] does not conceive the
                  general contradiction of constitutionalism—Ed.
[39] world
                  order—Ed.
[40] “Yet it was I who
                  made that.”—Ed.
[41] The 18th Brumaire
                  (9 November 1799)—the day of the coup d’état of
                  Napoleon Bonaparte, who overthrew the Directorate
                  and established his own dictatorship.
[42] Storm and
                  stress—Ed.
[43] a metaphysical universal
           kingdom—Ed.
[44] flows directly into
           socialism—Ed.
[45] Cartesian
           materialism—the materialism of the followers of
           Descartes (from the Latin spelling of
           Descartes—Cartesius). The indicated
           book—Rapports du physique et du moral de l’homme
           (Relation of the Physical to the Spiritual in
           Man) by P. J. G. Cabanis—was published in Paris in
           1802.
[46] mould—Ed.
[47] became insipid—Ed.
[48] “whether matter can
           think?”—Ed.
[49] Nominalism—the trend in
           medieval philosophy that considered general concepts as
           merely the names of single objects in contrast to medieval
           “realism,” which recognised the existence of
           general concepts or ideas independent of things. 
Nominalism recognised objects as primary and
           concepts as secondary. Thus, as Marx says in The Holy
           Family, nominalism represents the first expression of
           materialism in the Middle Ages (see Marx and Engels, The
           Holy Family, Moscow, 1956, p. 172).
[50] misanthropic,
           mechanical—Ed.
[51] Sensualism—the
           philosophical doctrine that recognises sensation as the sole
           source of cognition.
[52] sources—Ed.
[53] Babouvists—adherents of
           Gracchus Babeuf, 
  who in 1796 led a utopian communist movement
           of “equals” in France.
[54] the most popular, though most
           superficial—Ed.
[55] Lenin is referring to Feuerbach’s
           Grundsätze der Philosophie der Zukunft
           (Principles
  of the Philosophy of the Future),
           1843, which constitutes a continuation of the latter’s
           aphorisms Vorläufige Thesen zu einer Reform der
           Philosophie (Preliminary Theses on the Reform of
           Philosophy), 1842, in which the author expounds the
           basis of his materialist philosophy and criticises Hegel’s
           idealist philosophy.
[56] mass materialist—Ed.
[57] Fleur de Marie—heroine
           of Eugène Sue’s novel Mysteries of Paris.
[58] Anekdota zur neuesten deutschen
           Philosophie und Publizistik. Von Bruno Bauer, Ludwig
           Feuerbach, Friedrich Köppen, Karl Nauwerk, Arnold Ruge und
           einigen Ungenannten (Unpublished Recent German
           Philosophical and Other Writings of Bruno Bauer, Ludwig
           Feuerbach, Friedrich KÃ¶ppen, Karl Nauwerk, Arnold Ruge and
           Several Anonymous Writers)—a collection of articles
           that were banned for publication in German magazines. It was
           published in 1843 in Zurich by Ruge and included Marx as one
           of its contributors.
[59] the law of the talion—an
           eye for an eye—Ed.
[60] criminal justice and justice for
           virtue!—Ed.
[61] plaything—Ed.
[62] bank for the poor—Ed.
[63] savings-banks—Ed.
[64] the institution—Ed.
[65] “impotence in
           action”—Ed.
[66] Tory philanthropists—a
           literary-political group—“Young England.” 
This group was formed in the early 1840s and
           belonged to the Tory Party. It voiced the dissatisfaction of
           the landed aristocracy with the increased economic and
           political might of the bourgeoisie, and resorted to demagogic
           methods to bring the working class under its influence and
           use it in its fight against the bourgeoisie. 
“In order to arouse sympathy,”
           Marx and Engels wrote in the Manifesto of the Communist
           Party, “the aristocracy were obliged to lose sight,
           apparently, of their own interests, and to formulate their
           indictment against the bourgeoisie in the interest of the
           exploited working class alone.” 
Ten Hours’ Bill—a law on the
           l0-hour working day for women and juveniles, adopted by the
           English Parliament in 1847.
Ⅹ
                  “According to Hegel, the criminal in his
                  punishment passes sentence on
                  himself. Gans developed this theory at
                  greater length. In Hegel this is the
                  speculative disguise of the old jus
                  talionis [59] that Kant
                  expounded as the only juridical penal
                  theory. For Hegel, self-judgment of the criminal
                  remains a mere ‘Idea,’ a mere speculative
                  interpretation of the current empirical
                  penal code. He thus leaves the mode of
                  application to the respective stages of development of the
  state, i.e., he leaves punishment just
                  as it is. Precisely in that does he show himself
                  more critical than this Critical echoer. A
                  penal theory that at the same time sees
                  in the criminal the man can do so only in
                  abstraction,
  in imagination, precisely
                  because punishment, coercion,
                  is contrary to human conduct. Besides, the
                  practical realisation of such a theory would
                  be impossible. Pure subjective arbitrariness
                  would replace abstract law because in each case
                  it would depend on official ‘honest and decent’
                  men to adapt the penalty to the individuality of the
                  criminal. Plato long ago had the insight to
                  see that the law must be one-sided and
                  must make abstraction of the individual.
  On the other hand, under human
                  conditions punishment will really be
                  nothing but the sentence passed by the culprit
                  on himself. There will be no attempt to persuade
                  him that violence from without, exerted on
                  him by others, is violence exerted on himself by
                  himself. On the contrary, he will see in
                  other men his natural saviours from the
                  sentence which he has pronounced on himself;
                  in other words, the relation will be exactly
                  reversed.” (285-286)
 






Works Index
     |   
   Volume 38

 | 

Collected Works
        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward




forward >





 




==========

## 
    Fr.  Überweg. Outline of the
      History of Philosophy
  (Revised by Max Heinze) 3
  volumes. 1876-1880. Leipzig











Fr. Überweg. Outline of the History of Philosophy



Vladimir Ilyich Lenin

      Fr. Überweg. Outline of the History of Philosophy



Written: 1903
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th Edition, Moscow, 1976, Volume 38, p. 52
Publisher: Progress Publishers
First Published: 1930
      in Lenin Miscellany XII, p. 347
Translated: Clemence Dutt
Edited: Stewart Smith
Original Transcription & Markup: R. Cymbala & Marc Szewczyk
Re-Marked up & Proofread by: Kevin Goins (2007)
Public Domain: Lenin Internet Archive (2003). You 
  may freely copy, distribute, display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. 
  Please credit “Marxists Internet Archive” as your source.

The note on Fr. Überweg's
    book “Grundriss der Geschichte der
    Philosophie.” (Bearbeitet von Max Heinze). 3
Vls. 1876-1880. Leipzig (Fr. Überweg,
Outline of the History of Philosophy,
revised by Max Heinze, 3 Vols.,
1876-1880, Leipzig) is recorded in the same notebook containing the
    remarks on Paulsen’s book Introduction to
    Philosophy. These entries were made in
    Geneva in 1903.


      (REVISED BY MAX HEINZE)
  
      THREE VOLUMES. 1876-1880. LEIPZIG
    

[The book is rather strange in character:
               rather short sections with a few words
               on the content of doctrines and very long
               explanations given in small print, consisting
               three-quarters of names and titles of books |
               moreover, out of date: bibliography up to the
               sixties and seventies |. Something
               unleserliches![1] A history of names and
               books!]

Notes
[1] unreadable!—Ed.
 






Works Index
     |   
   Volume 38

 | 

Collected Works
        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward




forward >





 




==========

## 
    Fr. Paulsen. Introduction to
      Philosophy 1899











Fr. Paulsen. Introduction to Philosophy



Vladimir Ilyich Lenin

      Fr. Paulsen. Introduction to Philosophy



Written: 1903
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 
 4th Edition, Moscow, 1976, Volume 38, pp. 53 - 55
Publisher: Progress Publishers
First Published: 1930 in Lenin Miscellany XII
Translated: Clemence Dutt
Edited: Stewart Smith
Original Transcription & Markup: R. Cymbala & 
     Marc Szewczyk
Re-Marked up & Proofread by: Kevin Goins (2007)
Public Domain: Lenin Internet Archive (2003). You may freely copy, distribute, display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet Archive” as your source.

Remarks on Fr. Paulsen’s
 book “Einleitung in die Philosophie,”
 1899 (Fr. Paulsen, Introduction to
 Philosophy, 1899) are contained in the
 same notebook in which the note on the book by
 Ãberweg is recorded (entries made in Geneva in
 1903). After the remarks in the notebook on
 Paulsen’s book, there follows: “Note on
 the Position of the New Iskra.” 
 (See Lenin, pres. ed., Vol. 7.)
 

 Note that this document has undergone special formating to ensure that Lenin’s
 sidenotes fit on the page, marking as best as possible where they were 
 located in the original manuscript. 


 



1899 
   



Highly characteristic is the frank formulation
      of the question in the introduction: the
      task of modern philos-ophy is “to
      reconcile the religious world outlook and
      the scientific explanation of nature”
      (p. IV[1]). Sic! And this
      idea is developed most circumstantially: there is said to
  be a struggle on two fronts—against materialism and “Je-
      suitism” (both Catholic and Protestant). Materialism, of
  course, is understood (described?) as rein mechanisch,
      physikalisch u.s.w.[2]
The author also says directly that modern
      philosophy rests on Kant 
  and is the representative of “idealistic mon-
      ism.”
Up to p. 10 ...“Peace between science and
    faith...”
And p. 11: “The real corner-stone of
    Kant’s philoso-phy” (to create
    this peace) ...“is to give to both their
    due: to knowledge against the scepticism of
    Hume, 
to faith a-gainst its dogmatic negation
    in materialism—that is the sum-total of
    his undertaking.” (12)
“What is capable of disappointing this
    hopeful” (the hope
    of this peace) “expectation is the
    absolutely anti-religious




radicalism that is at present
    becoming widespread in the broad mass of the
    population.... Thus atheism now ap-
    pears” (as formerly among the bourgeoisie)
    “as an article of faith of
    Social-Democracy” (pp. 14-15). “It is
    the cat-






echism turned inside out. And like
    the old dogmatism, this new, negative
    dogmatism, too, is hostile to science,






    ?
  



insofar as by its dogmas it puts
    fetters on the spirit of criticism and
    doubt.” (He recalls the term
    Antipfaffen[3] and
    assures us that Christianity has no predilection
    for the rich, that it (Christianity) will go
    through the same struggle towards which Europe
    is advancing.)
Refuting materialism 
and defending the theory
    of All-beseelung[4] (which he interprets in
    an idealist 
sense), Paulsen
    ignores: 1) that he is not refuting materialism,
    but merely some arguments of
    some materialists; 2) that he
contradicts himself in interpreting
    modern psychology in an idealist sense.
Ⅹ Cf. p. 126. 
“A force ... is nothing but a
            tendency to a certain action, and hence in its
            general essence coincides with an unconscious
            will.”
(Ergo—Seelenvorgänge und 
Kraft[5]
    are by no meansso unüberbrückbar[6] as it
    previously seemed to the author,
    p. 90 u. ff.[7])
Pp. 112-116: Why could not the Weltall[8] be the bearer of des
    Weltgeistes?[9] (because man and his
    brain are the highest development of
    mind, as the author himself admits. 




When Paulsen criticises materialists—he
    counterposes the highest forms of
    mind to matter. When he defends idealism
    and interprets modern psychology
    idealistically—he approximates the lowest
    forms of mind to Kräfte,[10]
    etc. That is the Achilles heel of his
    philosophy).






    NB
  




Cf. especially pp. 106-107, where Paulsen
            opposesthe view that matter
            is something dead.
The author seems to dispose too lightly of the con-
            cept that Gedanke ist Bewegung.[11]
His arguments a-mount only to “ordinary
common sense: senseless,”
“thought is not motion, but thought” (87).
Perhaps heat, too, is not motion, but heat??
Quite stupid are the author’s arguments that a
            physiol-ogist will not cease to speak about
            thoughts, instead of movements equivalent to
            these thoughts? And no one will ever
            cease to speak about heat.
One who has fallen in love does not speak to
            “his lady- love about the corresponding
            vascular-motor process.... That is obviously
            nonsense” (86-87). Precisely what is done
            by Herr Paulsen! And if we experience a lack of
            heat, we do not speak about heat being a form of
            motion, but of how to get some coal.
Paulsen considers that the statement that thought
            is Be-wegung[12], is sinnlos.[13] 
But he himself is against dualism, and speaks about the
            “equivalent” (140 and
            143)—“the physical equivalent of the
            psychical” (or Begleiterschein-ung[14]). Is not that the
            same begriffliche Konfusion[15] forwhich
            he contemptuously abuses Büchner?
When Paulsen declares that his parallelism is
            “not local” but “ideal”
            (p. 146), his dualist character shows still more
            clearly. That is no explanation of the matter, nor a
            theory, but a simple verbal trick.



 

Notes
[1] Paulsen, Fr.,
            Einleitung in die Philosophie, Berlin,
            1899.—Ed.
[2] purely mechanical,
            physical, etc.—Ed.
[3]
anti-clericalism—Ed.
[4] universal soul
            embodiment—Ed.
[5] soul processes and
            force—Ed.
[6]
            incompatible—Ed.
[7] und folgende—et
            seq.—Ed.
[8]
            universe—Ed.
[9] universal
            spirit—Ed.
[10]
            forces—Ed.
[11] thought is
            motion—Ed.
[12]
            motion—Ed.
[13]
            senseless—Ed.
[14] accompanying
            phenomenon—Ed.
[15] conceptual
            confusion—Ed.
Ⅹ Contra p. 86:
“Motion has absolutely nothing of thought in it....”
 






Works Index
     |   
   Volume 38

 | 

Collected Works
        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward




forward >





 




==========

## 
    Note on a Review of The Wonders of
      Life and The Riddle of the
      Universe by E. Haeckel











Note on a Review of The Wonders of Life and The Riddle of the Universe by E. Haeckel



Vladimir Ilyich Lenin

      Note on a Review of
The Wonders of Life and
The Riddle of the Universe
  by E. Haeckel
    



Written: late in 1904
Source: Lenin’s Collected
Works, 4th Edition, Moscow, 1976, Volume 38, page 56
Publisher: Progress Publishers
First Published: 1961 in Collected Works,
           Volume 38
Translated: Clemence Dutt
Edited: Stewart Smith
Original Transcription & Markup: R. Cymbala & 
Marc Szewczyk
Re-Marked up & Proofread by: Kevin Goins (2007)
Public Domain: Lenin Internet Archive (2003). 
You may freely copy, distribute, display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. 
Please credit “Marxists Internet Archive” as your source.

Note on a Feuilleton in the
        newspaper “Frankfurter Zeitung” of
        November 15, 1904, which comments on two books by
        E. Haeckel—Lebenswunder(Gemeinverständliche Studien über
        biologische Philosophie) [The Wonders of
        Life (Elementary Studies in Biological
        Philosophy)], Stuttgart (Alfred Kröner) and
        Welträtsel (The Riddle of the
        Universe)—was written on a separate sheet,
        which also contained a list of a number of foreign
        books on the agrarian question. The entry was made
        at the end of 1904. Lenin gave an evaluation of
        The Riddle of the Universe by E. Haeckel in
        Materialism and Empirio-Criticism.

Frankfurter Zeitung, 1904, No. 348 (December 15)
First morning edition
A Feuilleton on New Biological Books

Ernst Haeckel: Lebenswunder
         (Gemeinverständliche Studien über
         biologische Philosophie). Stuttgart. (Alfred
         Kröner.)
(To Haeckel, “the spirit is a physiological
         function of the cerebral cortex.” P. 378 of
         his book. To be sure, the reviewer is
         against this opinion.)
Welträtseln by the same author
         ((published earlier)) (in which it is
         demonstrated that, properly speaking, there are
         no world riddles).
 






Works Index
     |   
   Volume 38

 | 

Collected Works
        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward




forward >





 



==========

## 
    Remarks on Books on the Natural
    Sciences and Philosophy in the Sorbonne
    Library











Remarks on Books on the Natural Sciences and Philosophy in
    the Sorbonne Library




      Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
    

      Remarks on Books on the Natural Sciences and Philosophy
      in the Sorbonne Library
    


Written: first half of
     1909
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th Edition, Moscow, 1976, Volume 38, pp. 57 - 59
Publisher: Progress Publishers
First Published: 1933
     in Lenin Miscellany XXV
Translated: Clemence Dutt
Edited: Stewart Smith
Original Transcription & Markup: R. Cymbala &
     Marc Szewczyk
Re-Marked up & Proofread by: Kevin Goins (2007)
Public Domain: Lenin Internet Archive (2003). You may freely copy, distribute, display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet Archive” as your source.

Remarks on Books on the
    Natural Sciences and Philosophy in the Sorbonne
    Library were written on separate sheets
    during the first half of 1909.


 Note that this document has undergone special formating to ensure that Lenin’s
 sidenotes fit on the page, marking as best as possible where they were 
 located in the original manuscript. 








                           Sorbonne. New books:
                        
 C. 819(7) [1]



Richard Lucas, Bibliographie der radioaktiven
                  Stoffe, Hamburg und Leipzig, 1908, 8Â°.
(A. 47. 191). [2]
Mach, Grundriss der Physik (bearbeitet von Harbordt
                  und Fischer), Leipzig, 1905-8, 2 Volumes, 8Â°.
(A. 46. 979). [3] S. F. j.  587. [4]
Max Planck, Das Prinzip der Erhaltung der
                  Energie, Leipzig, 1908 (2 Auflage) 12Â°.
(A. 47. 232). [5] S. j. j.  63. [6]
Eduard Riecke, Handbuch der Physik, 4
                  Auflage, Leip- zig, 1908, 2 Volumes, 8Â°.
(A. 47. 338). [7] S. F. j.  301a. [8]
Fénelon Salignac, Questions de Physique
                  générale et d’Ast- ronomie, Toulouse, 1908,
                  4Â°.
(D. 55. 745). [9] C. 818 (2). [10]
J. J. Thomson, Die Korpuskulartheorie der Materie,
                  Braunschweig, 1908, 8Â°.
S. D. e. 101 (25). [11]

                  In the Sorbonne library:


Vierteiljahrsschrift für
      wissenschaftliche Philosophie,

     p. 5 3 (8Â°)
    (A. 16. 404). [12]
Archiv für Philosophie, 2te
    Abteilung, p. 48. (A. 17.

    027). [13]








Vierteiljahrsschrift für
wissenschaftliche Philosophie, 1909,

      Heft I. Raoul Richter’s review (sympathetic, indeed laud-
      atory) of:
    
Ludwig Stein, Philosophische StrÃ¶mungen der
Gegenwart,

      Stuttgart, 1908 (Enke) XVI+452 Seiten. (12 Mark.)
Seiten 1-293—philosophical trends—
294-445—philosophical problems
                  Ten trends in philosophy [14] :

                  1) neo-idealism (voluntarist metaphysics)
                  2) neo-positivism (pragmatism) of W. James
                  3) “new movement in natural philosophy” (Ostwald
                  and the “triumph” of energetics over materialism)
                  4) “neo-romanticism” (H. St. Chamberlain, etc.)
                  5) neo-vitalism
                  6) evolutionism (Spencer)
                  7) individualism (Nietzsche)
                  8) geisteswissenschaftliche Bewegung
      [15]
      (Dilthey)

                  9) philosophiegeschichtliche [16]

                  10) neo-realism (Eduard von Hartmann!!!).

New books:
Max Schinz, Die Wahrheit der Religion nach den neues-
                  ten Vertretern der Religionsphilosophie, Zürich, 1908, 8Â°.
                  (307 pages. 6. 50 Mark.)
Kr. Guenther, Vom Urtier zum Menschen, (Ein Bilder-
                  atlas.) Stuttgart, 1909. (7-19 pfennig
                  >< 1 Mark.)
 
A. Pelazza, R. Avenarius e l’empiriocriticismo, 1908?
                  9? Torino (Bocca). 130 Seiten.
Spaventa, La filosofia italiana nelle sue relazioni con
                  la filosofia europea, 1908? 9? Bari (Laterza).
 
New books (1909):
L. Boltzmann, Wiener wissenschaftliche Abhandlungen,
                  Leipzig, (Barth).
H. Strache, Die Einheit der Materie, des Weltäthers und
                  der Naturkräfte, Wien (Deuticke).
 








P. 48.
Archiv für Philosophie, 2
                  Abteilung=Archiv für  sys-

                  tematische Philosophie, 1908, Heft 4. Vitalis Nor-
                  strÃ¶m’s  second article(Seiten 447-496)
                  ((interesting;
                  almost all of it about Mach)).
 



Where is the first??
                           Note—is it late??






 


            Notes
         
[1] Letters and numbers denote
                  press-marks.—Ed.
[2] Letters and numbers denote
                  press-marks.—Ed.
[3] Letters and numbers denote
                  press-marks.—Ed.
[4] Letters and numbers denote
                  press-marks.—Ed.
[5] Letters and numbers denote
                  press-marks.—Ed.
[6] Letters and numbers denote
                  press-marks.—Ed.
[7] Letters and numbers denote
                  press-marks.—Ed.
[8] Letters and numbers denote
                  press-marks.—Ed.
[9] Letters and numbers denote
                  press-marks.—Ed.
[10] Letters and numbers
                  denote press-marks.—Ed.
[11] Letters and numbers
                  denote press-marks.—Ed.
[12] Letters and numbers
                  denote press-marks.—Ed.
[13] Letters and numbers
                  denote press-marks.—Ed.
[14] Ten Trends in
                  Philosophy—a list of ten chapters in the
                  first part of the book Modern Philosophical
                  Trends by L. Stein.
[15] humanities
                  movement—Ed.
[16]
                  philosophical-historical—Ed.
 






Works Index
     |   
   Volume 38

 | 

Collected Works
        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward




forward >





 



==========

## 
      Conspectus of Feuerbach’s Book
      Lectures on the Essence of
Religion











Conspectus of Feuerbach's Book Lectures on the Essence of Religion



Vladimir Ilyich Lenin

      Conspectus of Feuerbach’s Book
Lectures on the Essence of Religion




Written: 1909
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works,
  4th Edition, Moscow, 1976, Volume 38, pp. 61-83
Publisher: Progress Publishers
First Published: 1930
      in Lenin Miscellany XII
Translated: Clemence Dutt
Edited: Stewart Smith
Original Transcription & Markup:
R. Cymbala, & Marc Szewczyk,
Re-Marked Up & Proofread by:
Kevin Goins (2007)
Public Domain: Lenin Internet Archive (2003). 
  You may freely copy, distribute,
  display and perform this work; as well as make derivative
  and commer-cial works. Please
  credit “Marxists Internet Archive” as your source.
 
Conspectus of Feuerbach’s
    book “Vorlesungen über das Wesen der
    Religion” (Lectures on the Essence
    of Religion) is contained in a separate
    notebook whose cover was not preserved. On the
    first page in abbreviated form is written L.
    Feuerbach, Sämtliche Werke, Band 8, 1851;
    also indicated is the press-mark—8Â°. R. 807. There is no indication
    exactly when the Conspectus was worked out by
    Lenin. V. Adoratsky has suggested that it was
    written in 1909 (Lenin Miscellany
    XII). The following arguments speak in favour
    of this hypothesis. It has been established that
    the press-mark on the first page of the Conspectus
    is that of the French National Library (Paris) in
    which Lenin worked from January 13 to June 30,
    1909. The contents of Lectures on the Essence
    of Religion borders upon those works of
    Feuerbach that were used by Lenin in 1908 in
    writing his book Materialism and
    Empirio-Criticism, and some of Lenin’s
    remarks in the Conspectus are related to
    propositions formulated in his book. In the
    Conspectus, for example, Lenin notes: [[Feuerbach and natural science!!
    NB. Cf. Mach and Co. today]], and in
    Materialism and Empirio-Criticism he
    writes: “The philosophy of the scientist Mach
    is to science what the kiss of the Christian Judas
    was to Christ. Mach likewise betrays science into
    the hands of fideism by virtually deserting to the
    camp of philosophical idealism.”
    (V. I. Lenin, Materialism and
    Empirio-Criticism) Certain remarks in Lenin’s
    Conspectus are also related to theses in his
    article “On the Attitude of a Working-Class
    Party to Religion,” written in May 1909.


 Note that this document has undergone special formating to ensure that Lenin’s
 sidenotes fit on the page, marking as best as possible where they were 
 located in the original manuscript. 

 


L. FEUERBACH.
COLLECTED WORKS, VOL. 8, 1851
LECTURES ON THE ESSENCE OF
RELIGION






The preface is dated 1. I. 1851.—Feu-
                  erbach speaks here of the reasons why he did
                  not take part in the 1848 revolu- tion, which
                  had “such a shameful, such a barren
                  end” (VII).[1] The revolution of 1848
                  had no Orts- und Zeitsinn,[2] the
constitutionalists expected freedom
                  from the word des Herrn,[3]
  the republicans





                  8Â°. R. 807
               




(VII-VIII) from their desire
                  (“it was only necessary to desire
                  a republic for it to come into
                  being”).... (VIII)
“If a revolution breaks out again and I
                  take an active part in it, then you can ...
                  be sure that this revolution will be vic-
                  torious, that Judgment Day for the mon-
                  archy and hierarchy has arrived.” (VII)





  Feuerbach
                  did not
                  understand
                  the 1848
                  revolution
  





First lecture  (1-11).
   




                  P. 2: 
               

                  “We have had enough of political as
                  well as philosophical idealism; we
                  now want to be political materialists.”





Sic!!



 



                  3-4 
               

                 —Why Feuerbach fled to the
                 seclusion of the country: the break with the
                 “gottesgläubigen Welt”[4] p. 4
           




                (Z. 7 v. u.[5] ) (cf. p. 3 in
                f.[6] )—tolive with
                “nature” (5), ablegen[7] all
                “überspannten”[8] ideas.
 




      down with
                  “Überspann-
                  tes”!
          


 



                  7-11 
               

                  Feuerbach gives an outline of his
                  works (7-9): History of modern phi-
                  losophy (9-11 Spinoza, Leibnitz).
   


 




Second Lecture  (12-20).
  



 



                  12-14 
             
—Bayle.
   


 



                  15: 
               

Sinnlichkeit[9] for me means
                  “the true unity of the material and
                  the spiritual, a unity not thought up
                  and prepared, but existing, and which
                  therefore has the same significance as
               




                  ‘sensuous-
                  ness’ in
                  Feuerbach
               




                  reality for me.”



 




  Sinnlich[10] is not only
                  the Magen,[11] but also the Kopf[12] (15).
                


 



   (16-20: 
   

                  Feuerbach’s work on Immortality:
                  paraphrased.)
               


 




Third Lecture (21-30).
  



 




The objection was raised to my Essence of
                  Christianity [13] that for me man
                  does notdepend on anything, “there was opposition
                  to this alleged deification of man by me.”
                  (24) “The being, whom man presupposes ...
                  is nothing other than nature, not your
                  God.” (25)



 




“The unconscious being of nature is for
                  me the eternal being, without origin, the
                  first being, but first in point of time, and
                  not in point of rank, the physically but
                  not morally first being....” (27)



 




My denial includes also affirmation....
                  “It is, of course, a consequence of my doc-
                  trine that there is no God” (29), but this
                  follows from the conception of the essence
                  of God (=an expression of the essence
                  of nature, of the essence of man).



 




Fourth Lecture.



 




“The feeling of dependence is the basis
                 of religion.” (31) (“Furcht”[14] 33-4-5-6)



 




“The so-called speculative philosophers
                  are ... those philosophers who do not con-
                  struct their notions in accordance with
                  things, but rather construct things accord-
                  ing to their notions.” (31)





                  cf. Marx
  und Engels[15]



 




(Fifth Lecture).



 




— it is especially death that arouses
                  fear, belief in God. (41)



 




“I hate the idealism that divorces man
                  from nature; I am not ashamed of my de-
                  pendence on nature.” (44)



 




“As little as I have deified man in Wesen
                  des Christenthums, a deification with which
                  I have been stupidly reproached ... so little
                  do I want to deify nature in the sense
                  of theology....” (46-47)



 




Sixth Lecture — The cult of animals (50
                  u. ff.[16]).



 




“What man is dependent on is ... nature,
                  an object of the senses ... all the impressions
                  which nature makes on man through the
                  senses ... can become motives of religious
                  veneration.” (55)



 




(Seventh Lecture.)
                   



 




By egoism I understand, not the egoism
                  of the “philistine and bourgeois” (63), but
                  the philosophical principle of conformity
                  with nature, with human reason, against
                  “theological hypocrisy, religious and spec-
                  ulative fantasy, political despotism.” (63
                  i. f.) Cf. 64  very important.





                  “egoism” and
                  its
                  significance
               


 




Idem 68 i. f. and 69 i. f. — Egoism (in the
                  philosophical sense) is the root of religion.
  



 



   (70: 
   

                  Die Gelehrten[17] can only be
                  beaten
                  with their own weapons, i.e., by quo-
                  tations) ... “man die Gelehrten nur
                  durch ihre eigenen Waffen, d. h.
  Zitate, schlagen kann....” (70)



 




 
       Incidentally, on p. 78 Feuerbach uses
       the expression: Energie d. h. Thätigkeit.[18]
           This is worth noting. There is, indeed,
           a subjective moment in the concept of ener-
           gy, which is absent, for example, in the
           concept of movement. Or, more correctly,
           in the concept or usage in speech of the
           concept of energy there is something that
           excludes objectivity. The energy of the
           moon (cf.) versus the movement of the moon.
 





                  on the
                  question of
                  the word
                  energy
               


 



   107 
   

    i. f. ...“Nature is a primordial, pri-
                mary and final being....”
            


 



                  111: 
               

                  ... “For me ... in philosophy ... the
                  sensuousness is primary; but primary not
                  merely in the sense of speculative
                  philosophy, where the primary sig-
                  nifies that beyond the bounds of which
                  it is necessary to go, but primary
                  in the sense of not being derived, of
                  being self-existing and true.”
               




                  the sensuousness
                  =the prima-
                  ry, the self-
                  existing and
                  true
               


 




                  ...“The spiritual is nothing outside
                  and without the sensuous.”
               


 



  NB 
  
in general p. 111 ... “the truth
                  and essentiality (NB) of the senses, from
                  which ... philosophy ... proceeds....”
               


 



                  112 ... 
               

                  “Man thinks only by means of his
                  sensuously existing head, reason has
                  a firm sensuous foundation in the
                  head, the brain, the focus of the
                  senses.”
               




 








    See p. 112 on the veracity (Urkunden[19])  
    of the senses.  
      







        114: 
               

    Nature=the primary, unableitbares,
  ursprüngliches Wesen.[20]






NB

 ˘






“Thus, Die Grundsätze der
                  Philosophie is interconnected with the
                  Wesen der Re-ligion.”
  [21]
                  (113)




 




“I deify nothing, consequently not even
                  nature.” (115)



 


116 

— Answer to the reproach that Feuer-
                bach does not give a  definition of
                nature:


 




“I understand by nature the total-
  ity of all sensuous forces, things and
  beings which man distinguishes from





himself as not human.... Or, if the
  word is taken in practice: nature is
  everything that for man—indepen-
  dent of the supernatural whisperings





                  It turns out
                  that nature=
                  everything
                  except the





of theistic faith—proves to be imme-
                  diate and sensuous, the basis and
  object of his life. Nature is light,
  electricity, magnetism, air, water,
  fire, earth, animal, plant, man, in-
  





  supernatural.
                  Feuerbach is
                  brilliant but
                  not profound.
                  Engels defines
                  




sofar as he is a being acting involun-
  tarily and unconsciously—by the word 
  ‘nature’ I understand nothing more
  than this, nothing mystical, nothing
                  nebulous, nothing theological” (above:
                  in contrast to Spinoza).





  more profound-
                  ly the distinc-
  tion between
                  materialism
                  and idealism.
               


 




...“Nature is ... everything that you see
                  and that is not derived from human hands
                  and thoughts. Or if we penetrate into the
                  anatomy of nature, nature is the being,
                  or totality of beings and things, whose
                  appearances, expressions or effects, in which
                  precisely in their existence and essence are
                  manifested and consist, have their basis
                  not in thoughts or intentions and decisions
                  of the will, but in astronomical, or cosmic,
                  mechanical, chemical, physical, physiolo-
                  gical or organic forces or causes.” (116-117)



 




[Here too it amounts to opposing matter
                  to mind, the physical to the psychical.]
                  121 — against the argument that there must
                  be a prime cause (= God).



 




“It is only man’s narrowness and love of
                  convenience that cause him to put eternity
                  in place of time, infinity in place of the
                  endless progress from cause to cause, a stat-
                  ic divinity in place of restless nature,
                  eternal rest instead of eternal movement.”
                  (121 i. f.)



 


124-

                  125 Owing to their subjective needs, men
                  replace the concrete by the ab- stract,
                  perception by the concept, the many by the one,
                  the infinite Σ [22] of causes by the
                  single cause.
  


 




Yet, “no objective validity and exist-
                  ence, no existence outside ourselves” must
                  be ascribed to these abstractions. (125)





                  objectiv = außer uns[23]



 




...“Nature has no beginning and no end.
                  Everything in it is in mutual interaction,
                  everything is relative, everything at once
                  effect and cause, everything in it is all-
                  sided and reciprocal....” (129)



 




there is no place there for God (129-130;
                  simple arguments against God).



 




...“The cause of the first and general
                  cause of things in the sense of the
                  theists, theologians and so-called spec-
                  ulative philosophers is man’s under-
                  standing....” (130) “God is ... cause in
                  general, the concept of cause as essence
                  personified and become independent....”
                  (131)



 




“God is abstract nature, i.e., nature re-
                  moved from sensuous perception, mentally
                  conceived, made into an object or being





of the understanding; nature in the proper
                  sense is sensuous, real nature, as immedi-
                  ately manifested and presented to us by
                  the senses.” (133)





                  immediately
               


 




The theists see in God the cause of the
                  movement in nature (which they make into
                  a dead mass or matter). (134) The power of
                  God, however, is in reality the power of
                  nature (Naturmacht: 135).



 




...“Indeed it is only through their effects
                  that we perceive the properties of things....”
                  (136)



 




Atheism (136-137) abolishes neither das
                  moralische Über (= das Ideal)[24] nor das natürliche
                  Über (= die Natur.)[25]



 




...“Is not time merely a form of the
                  world, the manner in which particular
                  beings and effects follow one another? How
                  then can I ascribe a temporal beginning
                  to the world?” (145)





                  time and
                  world
               


 




...“God is merely the world in thought....
                  The distinction between God and the world
                  is merely the distinction between spirit
                  and sense, thought and perception....” (146)



 




God is presented as a being existing out-





side ourselves. But is that not precisely
                  an admission of the truth of sensuous being?
                  Is it not (thereby) “recognised that there
                  is no being outside sensuous being? For,
                  apart from sensuousness, have we any
                  other sign, any other criterion, of an exist-
                  ence outside ourselves, of an existence in-
                  dependent of thought?” (148)





                  being outside
                  ourselves =
                  independent
                  of thought
               


 




...“Nature ... in isolation from its mate-
                  riality and corporeality ... is God....” (149)





                  NB
                  nature outside,
                  independent of
                  matter = God
               


 




“To derive nature from God is equivalent





                  NB
               




to wanting to derive the original from the
                  image, from the copy, to derive a thing





                  theory of
                  ‘the copy’
               




from the thought of the thing.” (149)



 




Characteristic of man is Verkehrtheit (149
                  i. f.) verselbständigen[26] abstractions—
  for example, time (150) and
                  space:





“Although ... man has abstracted space
                  and time from spatial and temporal things,
                  nevertheless he presupposes those as the
                  primary grounds and conditions of the
                  latter’s existence. Hence he thinks of the
                  world, i.e., the sum-total of real things,
                  matter, the content of the world, as having
                  its origin in space and time. Even Hegel
                  makes matter arise not only in, but out of,





space and time....” (150)
                  “Also, it is really incomprehensible why
                  time, separated from temporal things, should not
                  be identified with God.” (151)





                  time outside
                  temporal
                  things = God
               


 




...“In reality, exactly the opposite holds
                  good, ...it is not things that presuppose
                  space and time, but space and time that
                  presuppose things, for space or extension





                  time and
                  space
               




presupposes something that extends, and
                  time, movement, for time is indeed only a
                  concept derived from movement, presup-
                  poses something that moves. Everything is
                  spatial and temporal....” (151-152)



 




“The question whether a God has created
                  the world ... is the question of the relation
                  of mind to sensuousness” (152—the most
                  important and difficult question of philos-





                  cf. Engels
  idem in Lud-
  wig Feuer-
   bach[27]





ophy, the whole history of philosophy
                  turns on this question (153)—the conflict
                  between the Stoics and the Epicureans,
                  the Platonists and the Aristotelians, the
                  Sceptics and the Dogmatists, in ancient
                  philosophy; between the nominalists and




153




realists in the Middle Ages; between the
                  idealists and the “realists or empiricists”






(sic! 153) in modern times.



 




It depends in part on the nature of people
                  (academic versus practical types) whether
                  they incline to one or another philosophy.





                  153
               


 




“I do not deny ... wisdom, goodness,
                  beauty; I deny only that, as such generic
                  notions, they are beings, whether in the
                  shape of gods or properties of God, or as
                  Platonic ideas, or as self-posited Hegelian
                  concepts....” (158)—they exist only as prop-
                  erties of men.





                  (materialism)
                  contra theol-
                  ogy and
                  idealism
                  (in theory)
               


 




Another cause of belief in God: man
                  transfers to nature the idea of his own
                  purposive creation. Nature is purposive—
                  ergo it was created by a rational being. (160)



 




“That which man calls the purposiveness
                  of nature and conceives as such is in real-
                  ity nothing but the unity of the world,
                  the harmony of cause and effect, the in-
                  terconnection in general in which every-
                  thing in nature exists and acts.” (161)
                  



 




...“Nor have we any grounds for imagin-
                  ing that if man had more senses or organs
                  he would also cognise more properties or
                  things of nature. There is nothing more
                  in the external world, in inorganic nature,
                  than in organic nature. Man has just as
                  many senses as are necessary for him to
                  conceive the world in its totality, in its
                  entirety.” (163)





                  If man had
                  more senses,
                  would he
                  discover more
                  things in the
                  world? No.
               


 







                     important against agnosticism  
                











 



                  168

      —Against Liebig on account of the
                  phrases about the “infinite wisdom”
                  (of God).... [[Feuerbach and
                  natural science!! NB. Cf. Mach and Co.[28]today.]] [Back to top]



 



                  174-

      175-178—Nature = a republican;
                  God = a monarch. [This occurs not
                  only once in Feuerbach!]
               


 



                  188-

                  190—God was a patriarchal monarch,
                  and he is now a constitutional monarch:
                  he rules, but according to laws.
               


 




Where does spirit (Geist) come from?—
                  ask the theists of the atheist. (196) They
                  have too disdainful (despektierliche: 196)





an idea of nature, too lofty an idea
                  of spir- it (zu hohe, zu vornehme (!!)
                  Vorstel- lung[29]).





                  NB
                  (cf. Dietz-
                  gen)[30]



 




Even a Regierungsrath[31] cannot be
                  directly explained from nature. (197)





                  witty!
               


 




“The spirit develops together with the
                  body, with the senses ... it is connected
                  with the senses ... whence the skull, whence
                  the brain, thence also the spirit; whence
                  an organ, thence also its functioning” ((197):
                  cf. above (197) “the spirit is in the head”).



 




“Mental activity is also a bodily activi-
                  ty.” (197-198)





                  Idem Dietzgen[32]



 




The origin of the corporeal world from the





spirit, from God, leads to the creation of
                  the world from nothing—“for whence does
                  the spirit get the matter, corporeal sub-
                  stances, if not from nothing?” (199)






 




...“Nature is corporeal, material, sen-
                  suous....” (201)





                  nature
                  is material
              


 




Jakob Boehme = a “materialistic
                  theist” (202): he deifies not only the
                  mind but also matter. For him God is ma-
                  terial—therein lies his mysticism. (202)





}


 




...“Where the eyes and hands begin, there
                  the gods end.” (203)
  



 




(The theists) have “blamed matter or
                  the inevitable necessity of na-
                  ture ... for the evil in nature” (212)





                  the necessity
                  of nature



 







 



213 in the middle and 215
in themiddle “natürliche” und “bürgerliche
   Welt.”[33]



 







                  a germ of
historical
                   materialism





 



                  (226): 
               
Feuerbach says that he is ending
                  the first part here (on nature as the basis
                  of religion) and passing to the second
  part: the qualitities of the human spir- it are manifested
                  in Geistesreligion.[34]



 



                  (232)—
               

                  “Religion is poetry”—it can be said,
  for faith = fantasy. But do I (Feuer-
  bach) not then abolish poetry? No.
               


 




I abolish (aufhebe) religion “only in-
                  sofar” (Feuerbach’s italics) “as it is
not poetry, but ordinary prose.” (233)





NB



 




Art does not require the recognition of
                  its works as reality. (233)



 




Besides fantasy, of great importance in
                  religion are das Gemüth[35] (261), the
                  prac- tical aspect (258), the search
                  for the better, for protection, help, etc.



 




(263)—In religion one seeks
                  consolation
                  (atheism is alleged to be trostlos[36]).— — —



 




“A concept, however, congenial to man’s
                  self-love, is that nature does not act with
                  immutable necessity, but that above the
                  necessity of nature is ... a being that loves
                  mankind.” (264) And in the next
                  sentence “Naturnotwendigkeit”[37] of the falling of a
                  stone. (264)





                  the necessity
                  of nature
               


 


p. 287



                       twice in the
                  middle: likewise
       “Notwendigkeit der
                  Natur.”[38]






NB



 




Religion = childishness, the childhood
                  of mankind (269), Christianity has made
                  a god of morality, it has created a moral
                  God. (274)



 




Religion is rudimentary education—one





can say: “education is true
        religion....” (275) “However, this
        is ... a misuse of words, for superstitious
        and inhuman ideas are always linked with the
        word religion.” (275)





                  Feuerbach
                  against
                  misuse of the
                  word religion
               


 




Eulogy of education—(277).



 




“Superficial view and
                  assertion ... that religion is absolutely of no
                  concern to life, namely to public, political
                  life.” (281)





                  NB
               




I would not give a farthing for a
                  political freedom that allows man to be a
                  slave of religion. (281)



 




Religion is innate in man (“this state-
                  ment ... simply means”) = superstition is
                  innate in man. (283)



 




“The Christian has a free cause of nature,
                  a lord of nature, whose will, whose word,
                  nature obeys, a God who is not bound by the
                  so-called causal nexus, by necessity, by the
                  chain which links effect to cause and cause





to cause, whereas the heathen god is
                  bound by the necessity of nature and cannot
                  save even his favourites from the fatal
                  necessity of dying.” (301) (Thus Feuerbach
                  says sys-





                  the necessity
                  of nature

  [NB]
               




tematically: Notwendigkeit
                  der Natur.)



 




“The Christian, however, has a free
                  cause because in his wishes he is not bound
                  by the interconnection of nature, nor by the
                  necessity of nature.” (301) ((And three
                  times more on this
                  page. Notwendig-





   [NB]
   




keit der Natur.))



 




And p. 302: “...all the laws or natural
                  necessities to which human existence is
                  subjected....” (302)





   [NB]
               


 





            | cf. 307: “Lauf der Natur.”[39]




 




“To make nature dependent on God, means
                  to make the world order, the necessity of
                  nature, dependent on the will.” (312) And




[NB]




p. 313 (above)—“Naturnotwendigkeit”!!



 



                  320: 
               

                  “necessity of nature” (der Natur)...
               


 




In religious ideas “we have ... examples-
  how in general man converts the subject-
  ive into the objective, that is to say, he makes
  that which exists only in his thought only in
  his thought, conception, imagination into
  something existing outside thought,





                  what is the
objective?
                  (according to
                  Feuerbach)
               




conception,
                  imagination....” (328)



 




 

“So Christians tear the spirit, the soul,
                  of man out of his body and make this
                  torn-out, disembodied spirit into their God.”
                  (332)






                  EntleibterGeist[40] = God
               




 




Religion gives (332) man an ideal. Man
               needs an ideal, but a human ideal corres-
               ponding to nature and not a supernatural
               ideal:



 




“Let our ideal be no castrated, disem-
               bodied, abstract being, let our ideal be the
               whole, real, all-sided, perfect, developed
               man.” (334)



 







Mikhailovsky’s ideal is 
only a vulgarised repetition of
this ideal of advanced bourgeois
democracy or of revolutionary
bourgeois democracy.








 




“Man has no idea, no conception, of
  any other reality, of any other existence,
                  than sensuous, physical existence....”
  (334)






  Sinnlich physisch[41]
  ((excellent
                  equating!))
  



 




“If one is not ashamed to allow the sen-
                  suous, corporeal world to arise from the
                  thought and will of a spirit, if one is not





ashamed to assert that things are not
                  thought of because they exist, but that
                  they exist because they are thought of;





                  NB
               




then let one also not be ashamed to allow
                  things to arise from the word; then let one
                  also not be ashamed to assert that words
                  exist not because things exist, but that
                  things exist only because words exist.”
                  (341-342)



 




A God without the immortality of the
                  soul of man is only a God in name:



 




...“Such a God is ... the God of some
                  rationalist natural scientists, who is noth-
                  ing but personified nature or natural
                  necessity, the universe, with which of course
                  the idea of immortality is incompatible.”



 







 349 






 




The last (30th) lecture, pp. (358-370),
                  could be put forward almost in its entirety
                  as a typical example of an enlightening
                  atheism with a socialist tint (concerning
                  the mass that suffers want, etc., p. 365
                  middle), etc. Final words: it was my task
                  to make you, my hearers,



 




“from friends of God into friends of man,
                  from men of faith into thinkers, from men
                  of prayer into workers, from candidates
                  for the beyond into students of this world,





from Christians, who, as they themselves
                  acknowledge and confess, are ‘half-
                  beast, half-angel,’ into men, whole men”
                  (370 end).






                  Feuerbach’s
                  italics
               


 




Next follow Additions and Notes. (371-
                  463)



 




Here there are many details, quotations,
                  which contain repetitions. I pass over all
                  that. I note only the most important of
                  that which affords some interest: the
                  basis of morality is egoism (392). (“Love
                  of life, interest, egoism”)... “there is





not only a singular or personal, but
                  also a social egoism, a family egoism,
                  a corporation egoism, a community egoism,
                  a patriotic egoism.” (393)





                  A germ of
                  historical
                  materialism!
               


 




...“The good is nothing but that which
                  corresponds to the egoism of all men....”
                  (397)



 




“One has only to cast a glance at history!





Where does a new epoch in history begin?
                  Only wherever an oppressed mass or major-
                  ity makes its well-justified egoism effec-
                  tive against the exclusive egoism of a na-
                  tion or caste, wherever classes of men (sic!)
                  or whole nations, by gaining victory over





                  NB
                  NB
                  A germ of
                  historical
                  materialism,
                  cf. Cherny-
               




the arrogant self-conceit of a patrician mi-
                  nority, emerge into the light of historical
                  glory out of the miserable obscurity of





                  shevsky[42]





the proletariat. So, too, the egoism of the
                  now oppressed majority of mankind must
                  and will obtain its rights and found a new
                  epoch in history. It is not that the aristoc-





                  NB
                  Feuerbach’s
                  “socialism”
               




racy of culture, of the spirit, must be abol-
                  ished; no indeed! it is merely that not
                  just a handful should be aristocrats and all
                  others plebeians, but that all should—
                  at least should—be cultured; it is not that
                  property in general should be abolished;
                  no indeed! it is merely that not just a hand-
                  ful should have property, and all others
                  nothing; all should have property.” (398)



 





               These lectures were delivered from
   1.XII.1848 to 2.III.1849 (Preface,
   p. V), and the preface to the book
   is dated 1.I.1851. How far, even
   at this time (1848-1851), had
   Feuerbach lagged behind Marx
   (The Communist Manifesto
   1847, Neue Rheinische Zeitung,
   etc.) and Engels (1845: Lage [43])
   





 




Examples from the classics of the use
                  of the words God and nature without dis-
                  tinction. (398-399)



 




Pp. 402-411—an
                  excellent, phi-
  losophical (and at the same time simple and clear)
                  explanation of the essence of religion.





 




“In the final analysis, the secret of
                  reli- gion is only the secret of the
                  combination in one and the same being of
                  consciousness with the unconscious, of the will
                  with the involuntary.” (402). The
                  Ego and the non-





                  NB
               




Ego are inseparably connected in man.
                  “Man does not grasp or endure the depths
                  of his own being and therefore splits it into
                  an 'Ego’ without a ‘non-Ego,’ which he





                  NB
               




calls God, and a ‘non-Ego’ without an
                  ‘Ego,’ which he calls nature.” (406)



 




P. 408—an excellent quotation from Sen-
                  eca (against the atheists) that they make nature
                  into a god. Pray!—Work![44] (p. 411)



 




Nature is God in religion, but nature





as Gedankenwesen.[45]
  “The secret of re-
  ligion is ‘the identity of the
                  subjective and objective,’ i. e., the
                  unity of the being





                  NB
               




of man and nature, but as distinct from the
                  real being of nature and mankind.” (411)



 




“Human ignorance is bottomless and the
                  human force of imagination is boundless;
                  the power of nature deprived of its foun-
                  dation by ignorance, and of its bounds
                  by fantasy, is divine omnipotence.” (414)





                  Sehr gut!
               


 




...“Objective essence as subjective, the
                  essence of nature as different from nature,
                  as human essence, the essence of man as





                  Sehr gut!
               




different from man, as non-human essence—





that is the divine being, that is the essence
                  of religion, that is the secret of mysticism
                  and speculation....” (415)





                  an excellent
                  passage!
               






            Speculation in Feuerbach = ideal-
            ist philosophy. NB.






 




“Man separates in thought the adjective





from the substantive, the property from
                  the essence.... And the metaphysical God
                  is nothing but the compendium, the total-
                  ity of the most general properties extracted
                  from nature, which, however, man by
                  means of the force of imagination—and
                  indeed in just this separation from sen-
                  suous being, matter, nature—reconverts
                  into an independent subject or being.”





                  NB
                  profoundly
                  correct!
                  NB
               




(417)



 




The same role is played by Logic
                  ((418)— obviously Hegel is
                  meant)—which converts das Sein,
                  das Wesen[46] into a special
                  real- ity—“how stupid it is to want to
                  make





metaphysical existence into a physical one,
                  subjective existence into an objective one,
                  and again logical or abstract existence into
                  an illogical real existence!” (418)





                  Excellent
                  (against
                  Hegel and
                  idealism)
               


 




...“‘Is there, therefore, an eternal gulf
                  and contradiction between being and think-
                  ing?’ Yes, but only in the mind; however
                  in reality the contradiction has long been
                  resolved, to be sure only in a way corres-
                  ponding to reality and not to your school
                  notions, and, indeed, resolved by not fewer
                  than five senses.” (418)





                  beautifully
                  said!
                   
               


 



                  428: 
               

                  Tout ce qui n’est pas Dieu, n’est
                  rien, i.e., tout ce qui n’est pas Moi, n’est
                  rien.[47]





                  bien dit!
               


 



                  431
               

                  -435. A good quotation from Gassendi.
  A very good passage: especially
433 God = a collection of adjectival words
                  (without matter) about the concrete
  and the abstract.
               




                  NB
               


 







 435
 


“The head is the house of representa-





                  NB
               




tives of the universe”—and if our








heads are stuffed with
                  abstractions, Gattungsbegriffen,[48] then of course we
                  derive (ableiten) “the individual from the
                  universal, i.e., ... nature from God.”






  the individual
                  and the uni-
                  versal = Na-
                  ture and God
  



 



                  436-
               

                  437: (Note No. 16.) I am not against
                  constitutional monarchy, but only the
democratic republic is
                  “‘immediately reasonable’
                  as the form of state ‘cor- responding to the
                  essence of man.’”
               




ha-ha!!



 





...“The clever manner of writing consists,
                  among other things, in assuming that the
                  reader also has a mind, in not expressing
                  everything explicitly, in allowing the read-
                  er to formulate the relations, conditions
                  and restrictions under which alone a prop-
                  osition is valid and can be conceived.”
                  (447)






                  hits the
                  mark!
               


 




Interesting is the answer to (Feuerbach’s)
                  critic Professor  von Schaden  (448-
                  449) and to  Schaller. (449-450-463)



 




...“I do indeed expressly put nature in
                  place of being, and man in place of think-
                  ing,” i.e., not an abstraction, but
                  something concrete— — —die
                  dramatische Psycholo- gie.[49] (449)





                  NB
                  “being and
                  nature,”
                  “thinking
                  and man”
               


 





That is why the term “the anthropolog-
                  ical principle” in philosophy,[50]
                  used by Feuerbach and Chernyshevsky, is
                  nar- row. Both the anthropological
                  principle and naturalism are only inexact,
                  weak descriptions of materialism.





 




“Jesuitism, the unconscious original and
                  ideal of our speculative philosophers.” (455)





                  bien dit!
               


 




“Thinking posits the discreteness of real-
                  ity as a continuum, the infinite multiplic-
                  ity of life as an identical singularity.
                  Knowledge of the essential, inextinguishable
                  difference between thought and life (or
                  reality) is the beginning of all wisdom
                  in thinking and living. Only the distinc-
                  tion is here the true connection.” (458)





                  concerning
                  the question
                  of the funda-
                  mentals of
                  philosophical
                  materialism
               


 







End of Volume 8






 





Volume 9 = “Theogony”
                  (1857).[51] There does not seem to
                  be anything of interest here, to judge from
                  skimming over the pages. Incidentally, p. 320,
                  Pars. 34, 36 (p. 334) and following should be
                  read. NB Par. 36 (p. 334)—on looking
                  through it, nothing appears to be of
                  interest. Quo-tations, and again quotations, to
                  confirm  what Feuerbach has already said.




 


            Notes
         
[1] Feuerbach, L.,
                  Sämtliche Werke, Bd. 8, Leipzig,
                  1851.—Ed.
[2] sense of place and
                  time—Ed.
[3] of the
                  monarch—Ed.
[4] “God-believing
                  world”—Ed.
[5] Zeile 7 von unten—line
                  7 from bottom—Ed.
[6] at the
                  end—Ed.
[7] to
                  discard—Ed.
[8]
                  “extravagant”—Ed.
[9]
sensuousness—Ed.
[10]
                  sensuous—Ed.
[11]
                  stomach—Ed.
[12] head—Ed.
[13] Das Wesen des
                  Christentums (The Essence of
                  Christianity) by L. Feuerbach was
                  published in 1841. In this work, Feuerbach takes a
                  firm materialist position in philosophy.
[14]
                  “fear”—Ed.
[15] The reference is to The
                  Holy Family by Frederick Engels and Karl Marx,
                  in which the authors wrote that Feuerbach outlined
                  “in a masterly manner the general basic
                  features of Hegel’s speculation and hence
                  of every kind of metaphysics.” (Marx
                  and Engels, The Holy Family, Moscow, 1956,
                  pp. 186-187.)
[16] und folgende—et
                  seq.—Ed.
[17] the
                  pundits—Ed.
[18] energy, i.e.,
                  activity—Ed.
[19]
                  evidence—Ed.
[20] underivable primordial
                  being—Ed.
[21] Das Wesen der Religion
                  (The Essence of Religion) by
                  L. Feuerbach was published in 1846. Grundsätze
                  der Philosophie der Zukunft (Principles of
                  the Philosophy of the Future) was
                  published in 1843.
[22]
                  summation—Ed.
[23] objective = outside
                  ourselves—Ed.
[24] the moral
                  highest (= the ideal)—Ed.
[25] the natural
                  highest (= nature)—Ed.
[26] perversity of endowing
                  abstractions with independence—Ed.
[27] The reference is to the
                  well-known passage on the basic question of
                  philosophy in Engels’ book Ludwig
  Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy 
  (see Marx and Engels, Selected Works, Vol.  II,
                  Moscow, 1958, pp. 369-370).
[28] Lenin contrasts here the
                  attitude toward natural science of Feuerbach, the
                  materialist, and of Mach, the subjective idealist. A
                  critical evaluation of Mach’s attitude toward
                  natural science is given by Lenin in Materialism
                  and Empirio-Criticism (see V. I. Lenin,
                  Materialism and Empirio-Criticism, Moscow,
                  1960, pp. 363-364).
[29] too lofty, too noble (!!)
                  an idea—Ed.
[30] Josef Dietzgen developed
                  analogous ideas. For example, in the book The
                  Nature of the Workings of the Human Mind
                  (Sämtliche Werke, Bd. 1, Stuttgart,
                  1922), in the paragraph “Spirit and
                  Matter,” he wrote: “Long ago, mainly
                  during early Christianity, it became customary to
                  look with disdain upon material, sensual and carnal
                  things, which become moth-eaten and rusty”
                  (p. 53).
[31] a state
                  counsellor—Ed.
[32] Josef Dietzgen wrote as
                  follows in The Nature of the Workings of the
                  Human Mind (Sämtliche Werke, Bd. 1,
                  Stuttgart, 1922), in the chapter “Pure Reason
                  or the Capacity to Think in General”:
                  “Thinking is a function of the brain, just as
                  writing is a function of the hand” (p. 11) and
                  further “... the reader will not misunderstand
                  me when I call the capacity to think a material
                  power, a sensuous phenomenon”
                  (p. 13).
[33] the “natural”
                  and “civil world”—Ed.
[34] spiritual
                  religion—Ed.
[35]
                  feeling—Ed.
[36]
                  comfortless—Ed.
[37] “natural
                  necessity”—Ed.
[38] “necessity of
                  nature”—Ed.
[39] “course of
                  nature”—Ed.
[40] disembodied
                  spirit—Ed.
[41] sensuous,
                  physical—Ed.
[42] See Lenin’s notations in
                  Plekhanov’s book N. G. Chernyshevsky (pp.
                  537-538, 540, 545, 546, 551-552 and 554 of this
                  volume).
[43] Neue Rheinische
                  Zeitung (New Rhine Gazette)
                  was published by Marx in Cologne from June 1,
                  1848 to May 19, 1849. 
Engels’ book The Condition of the
                  Working Class in England was published in
                  1845. Regarding the significance of this book, see
                  V. I. Lenin, pres. ed., Vol. 2, Moscow, 1960,
                  pp. 22-23.
[44] Lenin is referring to the
                  following passage in Feuerbach’s book
                  Vorlesungen über das Wesen der
                  Religion. Werke, Bd. 8, 1851, S. 411
                  (Lectures on the Essence
  of Religion,) Works, Vol. 8, 1851, p. 411):
                  “... godliness consists, so to speak, of two
                  component parts, of which one belongs to man’s
                  fantasy, the other to nature. Pray!—says one
                  part, i.e., God, distinct from nature; work!—says
                  the other part, i.e., God, not distinct from nature,
                  but merely expressing its Essence; for nature is the
                  working bee, Gods—the drones.”
[45] thought
                  entity—Ed.
[46] being,
                  essence—Ed.
[47] All that is not God is
                  nothing, i.e., all that is not I is
                  nothing.—Ed.
[48] generic
                  concepts—Ed.
[49] dramatic
                  psychology—Ed.
[50] The Anthropological
                  Principle—Feuerbach’s thesis that, in
                  discussing philosophical questions, it is necessary
                  to consider man as part of nature, as a biological
                  being. 
The anthropological principle was
                  directed against religion and idealism. However, by
                  considering man apart from the concrete historical
                  and social relations, the anthropological principle
                  leads to idealism in the understanding of the laws
                  of historical development. 
N. G. Chernyshevsky,
  in struggling against idealism,
                  also took the anthropological principle as his
                  starting-point and devoted a special work to this
                  question under the title “The Anthropological
                  Principle in Philosophy” (see N.
                  G. Chernyshevsky, Selected Philosophical Essays,
                  Moscow, 1953, pp. 49-135).
[51] The reference is to
                  L. Feuerbach’s Theogonie nach den Quellen des
                  klassischen, hebräischen und christlichen
                  Altertums. Sämtliche Werke, Bd. 9, 1857
                  (Theogony Based on Sources of Classical, Hebrew
                  and Christian Antiquity, Collected Works,
                  Vol. 9, 1857). Page 320—beginning of Â§ 34, which
                  is headed “‘Christian’ Natural Science”;
                  page 334 is in Â§ 36, which is headed “The
                  Theoretical Basis of Theism.”
 






Works Index
     |   
   Volume 38

 | 

Collected Works
        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward




forward >





 




==========

## 
      Conspectus of Hegel’s Book The
Science of Logic











Conspectus of Hegel's "The Science of Logic"



Vladimir Ilyich Lenin

      Conspectus of Hegel’s book The Science of Logic



Written: September-December 1914
First Published: 1929 in Lenin Miscellany IX
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th Edition, Moscow, 1976, Volume 38, p.85-241
Publisher: Progress Publishers
Translated: Clemence Dutt
Editor: Stewart Smith
Original Transcription & Markup: R. Cymbala & Andy Blunden
Re-Marked up & Proofread by: K. Goins (2007)
Public Domain: Lenin Internet Archive (2003).
  You may freely copy, distribute, display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and commercial
  works. Please credit “Marxists Internet Archive” as your source.

Conspectus of Hegel’s book “The Science 
  of Logic” consists of three notebooks, which have a common pagination
  from 1 to 115. On the cover of the first notebook, in addition to the inscription 
  "Hegel. Logic I," there is the entry: “Notebooks on Philosophy. Hegel, 
  Feuerbach and others.” On the cover of the second notebook, to the pagination 
  49-88, there is the appendage: NB p. 76 (pp. 192-193 of this volume). At the bottom 
  of page III, there is written: "End of Logic. 17.XII.1914.” The 
  conspectus was probably begun during the first half of September 1914, when Lenin
  moved from Poronin to Bern, Switzerland.
 

 Note that this document has undergone special formating to ensure that Lenin’s
 sidenotes fit on the page, marking as best as possible where they were 
 located in the original manuscript. 


 


Prefaces & Introduction:

Preface to the First Edition
Preface to the Second Edition
Introduction: General Concept of Logic


Book One: The Doctrine of Being


With What Should One Begin Science?
      Section One: Determinateness (Quality)
      Section Two: Magnitude (Quantity)
      Section Three: Measure


Book Two: Essence




      Section One: Essence as Reflection in Itself
      Section Two: Appearance
      Section Three: Actuality


Book Three: Subjective Logic or the Doctrine of the Notion


On the Notion in General
      Section One: Subjectivity
      Section Two: Objectivity 
      Section Three: The Idea


 






Works Index
     |   
   Volume 38

 | 

Collected Works
        |   L.I.A. Index





 



==========

## Preface to the First Edition










Prefaces and Introduction to the Conspectus of Hegel's Science of Logic



Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Prefaces and Introduction to the
  Conspectus of Hegel’s book
The Science of Logic



Note: Quoted text and page numbers—i.e., (25)—indicate links to passages in
     Hegel’s Science of Logic.







Bern: Log. I. 175
Hegel’s Werke
Bd. I. Philosophische Abhandlungen
"     II. The Phenomenology of Mind
"     III-V. The Science of Logic
"     VI-VII. (1 and 2) The Encyclopaedia
"     VIII. The Philosophy of Law
"     IX. The Philosophy of History
"     X. (3 parts) Aesthetics
"     XI-XII. The History of Religion
"     XIII-XV. The History of Philosophy
"     XVI-XVII. Miscellaneous Writings
"     XVIII. Philosophical Propaedeutic
"     XIX. (1 and 2) Hegel’s Correspondence















Full Title of
Collected
Works
G. W. Fr.
Hegel[1]



 


Collected Works of G. W. Fr.
Hegel,
Vol. III (Berlin, 1833)
(468 pages)





“Complete
edition by
circle of
friends of




“The Science of Logic.”[2]

Part 1. Objective Logic.





the deceased:
Marheineke,
Schulze,




Section 1. The Doctrine of Being.





Gans, Hen-




(Bern: Log I. 175)       





nin, Hotho,
Michelet,
Förster.”





PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION





      Vol. III,[3] p. 5 — a  shrewd statement about
        logic: it is a “prejudice” that it ”teach-es how to think”
        (just as physiology ”teaches ... to digest”??)


  ... “logical science, which is the true con-
  tent of genuine metaphysics or pure spec-
  ulative philosophy.... ” (6)


  ...“Philosophy cannot borrow its method
  froma subordinate science, such as mathe-
  matics....” (6-7)


  ...“But it can be only the nature of the
  content which stirs in scientific cognition,
  while at the same time it is this very
  reflection of the content which itself ini-
  tially posits and produces its determina-
  tion.” (7)



  (The movement of
  scientific cognition — that is the essential thing.)
  “Understanding (Verstand) makes deter-
  minations” (bestimmt), Reason (Ver-
  nunft) is negative and dialectical because
  it dissolves into nothing (“in Nichts auflöst”)
  the determinations of Understanding. (7)
  The combination of these two—“Reason
  which understands or Understanding which
  reasons” (7) =
  the positive.


      Negation of “the simple” ... “movement of Mind ...” (7)



  (The “path of self-construction” = the
path (this is the crux, in my  opinion) of
  real cognition, of the process of cognising,
  of movement from ignorance to knowledge.[4]







  The movement of consciousness, “like
  the development of all natural and
  spiri-tual life,” rests on “the nature of the pure



  This is char-
  acteristic!





  essentialities which make up the content 
  of Logic” (Natur der reinen Wessenheiten[5]).




 






     Turn it round: Logic and the theory 
     of knowledge must be derived from  
     “the development of all natural and  
     spiritual life”.






 




  Up to here: preface to the First Edition.




 




PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION





“To present the realm of thought in its
  philosophical aspect—that is, in its own






  (NB) immanent activity, or (which comes





excellent!





  to the same thing) in its necessary (NB)
  development....” (10)


  “The familiar forms of thought”—an im-
  portant beginning, “die leblosen Knochen
  eines Skeletts.”[6] (11)






    What is necessary is not  
      leblose Knochen, but living life.
  




      The connection between thought 
  and language (the Chinese language, inciden-
  tally, and its lack of development: (11),






  the formation of nouns and verbs. (11)
  In the German language words sometimes
  have “entgegengesetzte Bedeutung”[7] (12) 
  (not simply “different” but opposed mean-
  ings)—“a joy to thought....”













      the history  
      of thought =  
        the history of  
        language??
  









 




      The concept of force in Physics—and
      of polarity (“the things distinguished insep-
  arably (Hegel’s italics) bound up to-
  gether”). (12) The transition from force
  to polarity—a transition to “higher Denk-
  verhältnisse.”[8] (12)




 




[NB also p. 11.... “But if Nature in
  general is opposed, as physical, to what is
  mental, then it must be said that Logic
  is rather something supernatural....”]






  nature and 
  “das Geistige”[9]



 




      Logical forms Allbekanntes sind,[10] but
  ... “was bekannt ist, darum noch nicht
erkannt.[11] (13)


“Infinite progress”—“liberation” 
  of “forms
  of thought” from the matter (von dem
  Stoffe), ideas, desires, etc., elaboration of
  the general (Plato, Aristotle): the beginning
  of Knowledge....


      “It was only after nearly everything that
  was necessary ... was available, that people
  began to trouble themselves about philo-
  sophic knowledge,” says Aristotle (13-14);
  and the selfsame: the leisure of the Egyp-
  tian priests, the beginning of the mathe-
  matical sciences. (14) Preoccupation with
  “pure thought” presupposes “a long stretch
  of road already traversed by the mind






  of man.” In this kind of thought
 
  
  “those interests are hushed which move
  the lives of peoples and individuals.” (14)





 
  interests
  “move the lives
  of peoples”



 




  The categories of Logic are Abbrevi-
  aturen[12] 
  (“epitomiert”[13]
  in another pas-
  age) for the “endless multitude” of “par-
  ticulars of external existence and of ac-
  tion....” (15) In turn, these categories die-
nen[14] people in 
  practice (“in the
  intellectual exercise of living content, in
  production and interchange”). (15)




 





  “We do not say of our feelings, impulses
  and interests that they serve us—rather,
  they are regarded as independent faculties
  and powers...all this is just what we are.”
  (15)






the relation
of thought to
interests and
impulses...




   
  And concerning forms of thought (Denk-
  formen) it cannot be said that they serve
  us, for they permeate “all our ideas” (16),
  they are “the Universal as such.”





Objectivism: the categories of
    thought are not an auxiliary tool
    of man, but an expression of laws
    both of nature and of man—com-  
    pare further the antithesis—




  of “subjective thinking” and “the objec-
  tive concept of the very essence of things”.
  We cannot “get beyond the nature of things”.




 




  “Also the remark against the "Critical
  Philosophy.” (17) It conceives the relation
  between “three terms” (We, Thought,
  Things) so that thoughts stand “in the mid-
  dle” between things and us, and so that
  this middle term “separates” (abschließt) 
  “rather than... connects” (zusammenschli-
  eBen) us. This view may be met, says
  Hegel, by the “simple observation” that
  “these very things which are supposed
  to stand beyond (jenseits) our thoughts ...
  are themselves thought entities (Gedanken-
  dinge)” ... and “the so-called Thing-in-it-
  self is only ein Gedankendingder leeren
  Abstraktion.[15]”







  against
  Kantianism



 






In my opinion, the essence of the argu-  
    ment is: (1) In Kant,
      cognition demar-  
    cates (divides) nature and man; actually  
    it unites them; (2) In Kant, the “empty  
    abstraction” of the Thing-in-it-  
    self instead of living Gang, Bewegung,[16]  
    deeper and deeper, of our knowledge  
    about things.
  






 







  In Kant, Ding an sich[17] is an empty  
    abstraction, but Hegel demands abstrac-  
    tions which correspond to der Sache[18]:  
    “der objective Begriff der Dinge die  
    Sache selbst ausmacht,”[19] which cor-  
    respond—speaking materialistically—to  
    the real deepening of our knowledge of  
    the world.
  






 





  It is incorrect to say that Denkformen
  are only a “Mittel”, “zum Gebrauch.”[20]
  (17)


      It is also incorrect to say that they are
  “äußere Formen,”[21] “Formen die nur






an dem Gehalt, nicht der Gehalt selbst
  seien,” (forms which are merely forms at-
  tached to the content, and not the content
  itself). (17)...






NB



 







What Hegel demands is a Logic,  
    the forms of which would be ge-  
    haltvolle Formen,[22] forms of  
    living, real content, inseparably  
    connected with the content.





  And Hegel draws attention to “thoughts
  of all natural and spiritual things”, to the
  “substantial content....” (18)


      —“To bring into clear consciousness this
  logical character, which gives soul to mind
  and drives and operates in it, this is our
  problem.” (18)





Logic is the science not of ex-  
    ternal forms of thought, but of  
    the laws of development “of all  
    material, natural and spiritual  
    things”,
  i.e., of the development  
    of the entire concrete content of  
    the world and of its cognition, i.e.,  
    the sum-total, the conclusion of the  
    History of knowledge of the world.  
  




“Instinctive 
  action” (instinktartiges
  Tun) “is broken up ... into an infinitely di-
  verse matter.” On the other hand, “intelligent
  and conscious action” brings out “the con-
  tent of that which motivates” (den Inhalt
  des Treibenden) “out of its immediate unity
  with the subject” and makes it “an object
  for it” (for the subject).



  “In this web strong knots are formed
  now and then, which are foci of the arrest
  and direction of its” [the spirit’s, or the
  subject’s] “life and consciousness ....” (18)





   How is this to be understood?  
       Man is confronted by a web  
    of natural phenomena. Instinctive  
    man, the savage, does not distin-  
    guish himself from nature. Con-  
    scious man does distinguish, cate-  
    gories are stages of distinguishing,  
    i.e. of cognising the world, focal  
        points in the web, which assist  
    in cognising and mastering it.  
  





  “Truth is infinite” (19) —its finiteness
  is its denial, “its end”. The forms (Denk-
  formen[23]),
  if one regards them as forms, 
  “distinct from the substance and merely at-
  tached to it” are incapable of embrac-
  ing truth. The inaneness of these forms of
[formal logic] makes them deserving of
  “contempt” (19) and “derision.”  (20) The
  Law of identity, A = A, —vacuousness,
  “unerträglich.”[24]. (19)


  It is unfair to forget that these categories
  “have their place and validity in cognition.”
  (20) But as “indifferent forms” they can be
  “instruments of error and sophistry” (20),
  not of truth.


      “Contemplative thought” should include
  “der Inhalt”[25]
  as well as the “external form.”
  (20)




 










 “With this introduction of Content into  
    logical consideration,” the subject becomes  
    not Dinge but die Sache, der Begriff der  
    Dinge.[26]











NB

NB



 







      not things, but the laws[27]
    of their  
  movement, materialistically
  




      ...”the logos, the reason of that which
  is." (21)


      And on page (22) at the beginning,
the subject of logic is expressed in the
  words:




 




  ...“Entwicklung des Denkens in seiner
  Notwendigkeit.”













  “develop-  
      ment” of  
      thinking in  
      accordance  
       with its  
       necessity










 




      The categories have to be derived (and
  not taken arbitrarily or mechanically) (not
  by “exposition”, not by “assurances,” but
  with proofs) proceeding from the
  simplest, most fundamental (Being, Noth-
  ing, Becoming (das Werden)) (without
      taking others)—here, in them, “in this
  germ, the whole development.”  (23) 




 




INTRODUCTION: GENERAL CONCEPT OF LOGIC



 


      Logic is usually understood as being the
“science of thinking,” the “bare form of
      cognition.” (27) Hegel refutes this view.
  He is against Ding an sich[28] as “something
  beyond thought.” (29)


      Forms of thinking apparently “have no
  applicability to Things-in-themselves.” (31)
  Ungereimt wahre Erkenntnis,[29] which does
  not cognise the Thing-in-itself. But is not
  Verstand[30]
  also a Thing-in-itself? (31)


 “Transcendental idealism, carried
  more consistently to its logical conclusion, has
  perceived the nullity of the spectre of the
Thing-in-itself left over from the critical
  philosophy—that abstract shadow detached
  from all content—and has had the aim
  of demolishing it altogether. Also, this phi-
  losophy (Ficthe?) made a beginning of mak-
  inf reason develop its own determinations
  out of itself.  But the subjective attitude
  of this attempt did not admit of its being
  carried to completion.” (32)


  Logical forms are tote Formen[31]—
  for they are not regarded as an “organic
  unity,” (33) as “their living concrete unity”
  (ibidem).




 






  In the Phenomenology of Mind
  I have examined “the movement of con-
  sciousness, from the first direct contradiction
  (Gegensatz) between itself and the object, up
  to absolute knowledge. (34) This path goes
  through all the forms of the relation of con-
  sciousness to the object....”







 




  “Truth, as science, is pure self-conscious-
  ness unfolding itself...” (35) “objective think-
  ing“ ... ”the concept, as such, is that which
  exists in and for itself.” (35) (36: clerical-
  ism, God, the realm of truth, etc., etc.)



37:

  Kant imparted “an essentially subjec-
  tive signification” to “logical determi-
  nations”. But “thought determinations”
  have “an objective value and exist-
  ence”. (37)

      The old logic has fallen into
  Verachtung.[32] (38) It requires trans-
  formation...



39—

      The old, formal logic is exactly like
  a child’s game, making pictures out
  of jig-saw pieces (in Verachtung ge-
  kommen[33]:
  (38))



40

Philosophy must have its own method
      (not that of mathematics, contra Spi-
  noza, Wolff und Andere[34]).



40-41:

      “For method is the conscious-
  ness of the form taken by the inner
  spontaneous movement of its content,”





  NB





      and the rest of page 41 gives
  a good explanation of dialectics
         “es ist der Inhalt in sich, die Dia-
  lektik, die er an ihm selbst hat, welche
  ihn fortbewegt.” (42)
     “The given sphere of phenomena is
  moved forward by the content itself
  of this sphere, the dialectic, which
  it (this content) has in (an) itself” (i.e.,
  the dialectic of its own movement).



 






“The negative is to an equal extent pos-
  itive” (41)—negation is something defi-
  nite, has a definite content, the inner con-
  tradictions lead to the replacement of the
  old content by a new, higher one.







 





In the old logic there is no transition, de-
      velopment (of concept and thought), there







  is not “eines inneren, notwen-
  digen Zusammenhangs”[35] (43)
  of all the parts and “Übergang”[36] of some
  parts into others.






  NB



 






  And Hegel puts forward two basic require-
  ments:
  1)  “The necessity of connection”

       and

  2)  “the immanent emergence of distinctions”.




 








        Very important!! This is what it means,  
    in my opinion:
      1. Necessary connection, the ob-  
    jective connection of all the aspects,  
    forces, tendencies, etc., of the given  
    sphere of phenomena;
      2. The “immanent emergence of dis-  
    tinctions” - the inner objective logic of  
    evolution and of the struggle of the  
        differences, polarity.
  






 






Shortcomings of the Platonic dialectics
  in Parmenides. [37]


 “Dialectic is generally regarded as an
  external and negative procedure, that does
  not belong to the subject-matter itself,
  that is based on pure vanity, as a subjec-
  tive craving to shake and break down what
  is fixed and true,—or that at best leads
  to nothing but the inaneness of the dialec-
  tically treated matter.” (43)







 


44

  The great merit of Kant was that he
  removed “den Schein von Willkür”[38]
  from dialectics.



Two


  important things:





  (1)  Die Objektivität
            
         #
        des Scheins[39]









NB: unclear,
  return to it!!
  








  (2)  die Notwendigkeit des Wilderspruchs[40]

  selbstbewegende Seele[41]
   ... (“inher-
  ent negativity”) ... “the principle of all phys-
  ical and spiritual life” (44)





            
            
      #
        Is not the thought here that semblance  
    also is objective, for it contains one  
    of the aspects of the objective  
    world? Not only Wesen,[42]
  but  
    Schein, too, is objective. There is a
    difference between the subjective  
    and the objective, BUT IT, TOO,  
    HAS ITS LIMITS.





      The dialectical = 
     = “comprehending the antithesis in its unity....”



 






45 Logic resembles grammar, being one
  thing for the beginner and another thing
  for one who knows the language (and lan-
  guages) and the spirit of language. “It is
  one thing for him who approaches Logic
  and the Sciences in general for the first
  time and another thing for him who comes
  back from the sciences to Logic.”






  subtle and
  profound!



 





      Then logic gives “the essential character
  of this wealth” (des Reichtums der Welt-
  vorstellung[43]),
  “the inner nature of spir-
  it and of the world....” (46)




 






  “Not merely an abstract universal, but
  a universal which comprises in itself the
wealth of the particular” (47)






  c.f. Capital



 








    A beautiful formula: “Not mere-  
    ly an abstract universal, but a uni-  
    versal which comprises in itself  
    the wealth of the particular, the  
    individual, the single” (all the   
    (all the wealth of the particular  
    and single!)!! Très bien!
  






 





      “—Just
  as one and the same moral
  maxim in the mouth of a youth who
  understands it quite accurately does
  not have the significance and scope
  which it has in the mind of a man
  of years and experience, for whom it
  expresses the full force of its con-
  tent. 






      a good
  comparison
  (materialist)



 





  Thus, the value of logic only receives due
  appreciation when it is the result of ex-
  perience of the sciences; then it presents
  itself to the mind as universal truth, not
  as a particular department of knowledge
alongside other departments and realities,
  but as the essence of all this other con-
  tent....” (47)





  
      “sum-total of
  experience of
  the sciences”
NB

      (“Essence”)
  the “essential
  content of all
  other
      knowledge”



 


 





“The system of logic is the realm of
  shades" (47), free from "all sensuous con-
  creteness....”




 


(50)—

  ...“not abstract, dead and immo-
  bile, but concrete....”
  [This is characteristic! The spirit and
  essence of dialectics!]



(52)
  
  Note ... the results of Kant’s philos-
  ophy ...: “that reason can cognise no
  valid content, and with regard to
  absolute truth must be referred to
  faith....”









Kant: to res-
  trict “reason”
  and strength-
  en faith[44]







 








    (53) Once again, that Ding an  
    sich = an abstraction, the product  
    of thinking that abstracts.
  






 

Notes
[1] The first edition of Hegel’s works in German
consists of 18 volumes (1832-45) and an additional volume in two parts (1887).
[2] Wissenschaft der Logik (The Science of Logic)
consists of two parts (three books).
[3] Hegel, Werke, Bd. III, Berlin, 1833.—Ed.
[4] In the manuscript the words “from ignorance to knowledge” 
are struck out with a horizontal line, apparently instead of being underlined.—Ed.
[5] In the nature of pure essentialities—Ed.
[6] “the lifeless bones of a skeleton”—Ed.
[7] “opposed meanings”—Ed.
[8] “relations of thought”—Ed.
[9] “the mental”—Ed.
[10] “are familiar to all”—Ed.
[11] “what is familiar is not on that 
account necessarily known”—Ed.
[12] abbreviations—Ed.
[13]optimised—Ed.
[14] serve—Ed.
[15] a thought entity of empty abstraction—Ed.
[16] progress, the movement—Ed.
[17] the Thing-in-itself—Ed.
[18] the essence—Ed.
[19] “the objective concept of things constitutes
their very essence”—Ed.
[20] a “means,” “for 
use”—Ed.
[21] “external forms”—Ed.
[22] forms with content—Ed.
[23] forms of thought—Ed.
[24] “insufferable"—Ed.
[25] “content”—Ed.
[26]things, but the essence, the concept of things—Ed.
[27] The word “laws” is linked by an arrow with the word
“logos” in the next paragraph—Ed.
[28] Thing-in-itself—Ed.
[29] True cognition is absurd—Ed.
[30] understanding—Ed.
[31]dead forms—Ed.
[32] disrepute—Ed.
[33]It has fallen into disrepute.—Ed.
[34] and others—Ed.
[35] “an inner,  
necessary connection”—Ed.
[36]“transition”—Ed.
[37] Parmenides—the name of one of Plato’s 
dialogues, in which the philosophical views of Parmenides, the ancient Greek Eleatic
philosopher, are discussed.
[38] “the semblance of arbitrariness”—Ed.
[39] the objectivity of semblance—Ed.
[40] the necessity of contradiction—Ed.
[41] self-moving soul—Ed.
[42]essence—Ed.
[43] the wealth of the world view—Ed.
[44] Lenin is apparently referring to the following well-known 
statement by Kant in the preface 
to the second edition of Critique of Pure Reason:
“I would have to restrict the field of knowledge to make place for faith.”
 


<< Index to Lenin’s 
  Conspectus of Hegel’s Science of Logic  
 

  




Works Index
     |   
   Volume 38

 | 

Collected Works
        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward




forward >





 



==========

## The Doctrine of Being










Lenin's Conspectus of Hegelâs Science of Logic: Book I (The Doctrine of Being)



Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Conspectus of Hegelâs
Science of Logic — 
  Book I (The Doctrine of Being)



Note: Quoted text and page numbers—i.e., (67)—indicate links to passages in
     Hegel’s Science of Logic.





Book One:
      THE DOCTRINE OF BEING


WITH WHAT SHOULD ONE BEGIN SCIENCE?



(59)[1]
  ...(en passant)
  “the nature of 
  cognition” (idem
  p. 6 1)







  
  The theme
  of logic. To be
  compared to
  present-day
  “epistemol-
  ogy.”
  



(60)

...“There is nothing (Hegel’s italics)
  in Heaven, Nature, Spirit, or anywhere
  else, which does not contain immedia-
  cy as well as mediacy....”






NB








    1) Heaven—Nature—Spirit. Heaven
away: materialism.
2) Everything is vermittelt = mediat-
ed, bound into One, connected by transi-
tions. Away with Heaven—law-governed
connection of the whole (process)
of the world.
  






(62)

      “Logic is pure science, that is, pure
  knowledge in the WHOLE extent of
  its DEVELOPMENT....”









      1st line nonsense,
      2nd line brilliant.
  






 





      What should one begin with? “Pure Be-
  ing” (Sein) (63)—“no assumption to be
      made,” the beginning. “Not hold in itself
  any content ...” “to be mediated by noth-
  ing....”




(66)


  ...“The advance (des Erken-
  nens[2]) ...” 
  “must be determined by
  the nature of the ‘subject matter and the
  content itself ...’”







  NB



(68)
  
  Beginning contains both “Nichts”[3]
  and “Sein,”[4] it is their unity:

  ... “that which is beginning, as yet
  is not; it is merely advancing to-
  wards Being....” (from not-Be-
ing to Being: “not-Being, which
  is also Being”).














Nonsense about the absolute (68-69).
I am
      in general trying to read Hegel
  materialistically: Hegel is materialism
  which has been stood on its head (accord-
  ing to Engels[5])—that is to say, I cast
  aside for the most part God, the Abso-
  lute, the Pure Idea, etc.
  






(70-71)


One cannot begin philosophy with
the “Ego.” There is no “objective
movement”. (71)



 


SECTION ONE:
DETERMINATENESS (QUALITY)



(77)

      Pure Being—“without any further de-
  termination.”
      Bestimmung[6]
  is already Qualität.[7])






  Transition
  of Sein—into
Dasein[8]



      Existent (?)
  Being       
         Finite
  Being       



  —and this
  into Fürsich-
  sein (Being
  for Self?)





 





  Sein—Nichts—Werden[9]



“Pure Being and pure Nothing are ... the
same.” (78)

(81: This seems to be a “paradox.”) Their
  union is Werden.


      “Movement of immediate disappearance
  of the one into the other....”


      Nichts is opposed to dem Et-
  was.[10] But Etwas is already
  a determinate Being distinguish-
  ed from another Etwas, but it
  is a question here of simple
      Nichts. (79)



  (The Eleatics and Parmenides,
  especially the former, arrived
  at this abstraction of Being.)
  According to Heraclitus “all
  things flow” (80)..., i.e., ”every-
  thing is Becoming.”

  Ex nihilo nihil fit?[11] Out of Nichts
  comesSein (Werden)....


(81): “It would not be difficult to dem-
  onstrate this unity of Being and Noth-
  ing ... in every (Hegel’s italics) example,
  in every fact and thought” ... “neither
  in heaven nor on earth is there anything
  not containing both Being and Nothing.”
  Objections presume bestimmtes  Sein[12]
  (I have 100 taler or not) 82 i. f.,[13]—
  but that is not the question....







  “A determinate or finite Being is such
  as refers itself to another; it is a content
  which stands in a relation of necessity with
  other content or with the whole world.
  In view of the mutually determinate connec-
  tion of the whole, metaphysics couls make
  the assertion—which is really a tantology—
  that if the least grain of dust were destroyed
  the whole universe must collapse.” (83)








      “The neces-
  sary connec-
  tion of the
  whole
  world” ... “the
  mutually
      determinant
  connection of
  the whole”



 


(86):

  “What is first in science has had to
  show itself first, too, historically.”
(It sounds very materialistic!)






NB


(91):

  “Becoming is the subsistence of Be-
  ing as much as of not-Being....”
  “Transistion is the smae thing as
  Becoming....” (92 i. f.)



(94)





    “Paramenides, equally with Spinoza,
    will not admit transition from Being,
    or the absolute Substance, to the neg-
    ative, finite.”
  













  For Hegel, however, the unity or indi-
  visibility (p. 9 0 this term is some-
  times better than unity) of “Being” and
  “Nothing” gives the transition, Werden.









    The absolute and the relative, the fin-
nite and the infinite = parts, stages
of one and the same world. So etwa?[14]







(92:

  “We shall reserve for such Being as
  is mediated the term Existence.”)



102:

  According to Plato in the “Parme-
  nides,” the transition from Being and
  the One = “äußere Reflexion.”[15]



104:

  It is said that darkness is the ab-
  sence of light. But “as little is seen
  in pure light as in pure darkness....”



107

  —Reference to infinitely small mag-
  nitudes, which are taken in process
  of disappearing....






  “There exists nothing that is not a mean
  condition between Being and Nothing.”







NB


 





      “Unbegreiflichkeit des Anfangs”[16]—if
Nothing and Being exclude each other, but
  that is not dialectics, but Sophisterei.[17]
  (108)




 





  “For sophistry is an argument proceeding
  from a baseless supposition which is allowed
  without criticism or reflection; while we
  term dialectic that higher movement of
  Reason where terms appearing absolutely








  Sophistry
   
  and






  distinct pass into one another through them-
  selves, through what they are, and the as-
  sumption of their separateness cancels it-
  self.” (108)







  
   
  dialectics



 





Werden. Its moments: Entstehen und Vergehen.[18] (109)




 




          Das Aufheben des Werdens[19]—das
    Dasein.




  concrete, determinate Being (?)  







 


110:

  aufheben = ein Ende machen
          
        = erhalten
(aufbewahren zugleich)[20]



112:

  Dasein ist bestimmtes Sein[21] (NB
  114 “ein Konkretes”[22]),—Quality,
  separate from Anderes,—veränder-
lich und endlich.[23]






NB


114

  “Determinateness, taken thus isolated
  and by itself as existent determinate-
  ness, is Quality....” “Quality, which is
  to count as something separately exist-
  ing, is Reality.” (115)



117

  ...“Determinateness is negation....”
  (Spinoza) Omnis determinatio est ne-
  gatio,[24]
  “this statement is of im-
  measureable importance....”



120

  “Something is the first negation of
  negation....”






( Here the exposition
  is somewhat fragment-
  ary and highly
  obscure.)












  abstrakte und
  abstruse Hege-  
    lei[25] —
    Engels







125

  —...Two pairs of determinations: 1)
  “Something and Other”; 2)“Being-for-
  Other and Being-in-Self.”




127

  —Ding an sich[26]—“a very simple
  abstraction.” The proposition that we
  do not know what Things-in-themselves
  are seems sagacious. The Thing-in-itself
  is an abstraction from all determi-
  nation [Sein-für-Anderes[27]]
[from all| relation to Other], i.e., a
  Nothing. Consequently, the Thing-in-
  itself is “nothing but an abstraction,
  void of truth and content.”






NB








This is very profound: the Thing-in-
    itself and its conversion into a Thing-
    for-others (cf. Engels[28]). The Thing-
    in-itself is altogether an empty, lifeless
    abstraction. In life, in movement, each
    thing and everything is usually both
    “in itself” and “for others” in relation
    to an Other, being transformed from
    one state to the other.
  














    Sehr gut!! If
we ask what
Things-in-
themselves
are, so ist in
die Frage ge-
dankenloser
Weise die
Unmüglich-
keit der
Beanwort-
ung ge-
legt[29].... (127)
  






129

      En passant: dialectical philosophy
  which is unknown to “metaphysical
  philosophy, which includes also the
  critical philosophy.”







  Kantian-
  ism =
  metaphysics








Dialectics 
    is the teaching which
shows how Opposites can be and
how they happen to be (how they be-
    come) identical,—under what con-
ditions they are identical, becoming
transformed into one another,—why the
human mind should grasp these oppos-
ites not as dead, rigid, but as living, con-
ditional, mobile, becoming transformed 
into one another. En lisant Hegel[30]....
  






134:

  “Limit (is) simple negation or first
  negation” (das Etwas.[31] Every Some-
  thing has its Limit) “while Other is
  at the same time negation of negation....”



137:

“Etwas mit seiner immanenten. Gren-
  ze gesetzt als der Widerspruch seiner
  selbst, durch den es über sich hinaus-
  gewiesen und getrieben wird, ist das
Endliche.”









  (“Something, taken from
  the point of view of its imma-
  nent Limit—from the point of
  view of its self-contradiction,
  a contradiction which drives it
[this Something] and leads it
  beyond its limits, is the Finite.)
  








       When things are described as finite,—
  that is to admit that their not-Being
  is their nature (“not-Being constitutes their
      Being”).





       “They” (things) “are,
  but the truth of this
  being is their end.”










    Shrewd and clever! Hegel analyses
concepts that usually appear to be dead
and shows that there is movement in
    them. Finite?  That means moving to
an end! Something?—means not that
which is Other. Being in general?—
    means such indeterminateness that Be-
ing = not-Being. All-sided, univer-
sal flexibility of concepts, a flexibil-
ity reaching to the identity of oppo-
sites,—that is the essence of the matter.
This flexibility, applied subjectively =
eclecticism and sophistry. Flexibility,
applied objectively, i.e. reflecting the
all-sidedness of the material process
and its unity, is dialectics, is the correct
    reflection of the eternal development
of the world.
  










 N B
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 thoughts on
 dialectics en
 lisant Hegel



139

  —The infinite and the Finite, it is
  said, are opposite to one another?
  (see p. 148) (cf. p. 151).



141

  —Sollen und Schranke[32]—Moments of
  des Endlichen.[33]



143

  —“At Ought the transgression beyond
  finitude, Infinity, begins.”



143

  It is said that reason has its bounds.





  “When this assertion is made it is not
  seen that by the very fact that some-
  thing has been determined as a bound-
  ary, it has already been surpassed.”







  sehr gut!



144:

  A stone does not think, therefore its
  restrictedness (Beschränktheit) is no
  bound (Schranke) for it. But the stone
  also has its bounds, for instance its
  oxydisability, if it “is a base capable
  of being oxydised.”




    Evolution[34] of the stone  
  






144

-145:—Everything (human) passes be-
  yond its bounds (Trieb, Schmerz[35],
  etc.), but Reason, if you please, “can-
  not pass beyond its bounds”!
       “It is true that not every passage
  beyond the bound is a veritable eman
  cipation from it!”
       A magnet, if it had consciousness,
  would consider its turning to the north
  as freely made (Leibnitz). - No, it
      would know then all directions in space,





  and it would consider the one direction
  as a boundary to its freedom, a limi-
  tation of it.







  The dialect-
  ics of things
  themselves,



148

...“It is the nature of the finite to
  pass beyond itself, to negate its nega-
  tion and to become infinite....” Not
  external (fremde) power (Gewalt) (149)
  converts the finite into the infin-







  of Nature
  itself, of the
  course of
  events itself




  
  ite, but its (finite’s) nature (seine Natur).



151:

“Schlechte Unendlichkeit”[36]infini-
  ty qualitatively counterposed to fini-
  tude, not connected with it, separated
  from it, as if the finite were dies-
  seits,[37] and the infinite
  jenseits,[38]
  as if the infinite stood above the finite,
outside it ...



153::

  In fact, however, sind sie[39] (the
  finite and the infinite) untrennbar.[40]
      They are a unity.(155)



158

  -159: ...“The unity of finite and





  infinite is not an external juxtaposition
  of these terms, nor an improper con-
  nection contrary to their determinat-
  ion, and binding tbgether entities
  separate and opposed and mutually
  independent and hence incompatible;
  on the contrary, each in itself is this
  unity, and is so only in transcending
  itself, neither excelling the other in
  Being-in-Self and affirmative Existent
  Being. It has been demonstrated above
  that finitude exists only as a passing
  beyond itself; it thus contains infin-
  ity, which is its Other....”







  To be applied
  to atoms ver-
  sus electrons.
  In general
  the infinite-
  ness of mat-
  ter deep
  within...






  ...“The infinite progression, however,
  asserts more than this” (than the mere compar-
  ison of the finite with the infinite): “in it is
  also posited the connection (Hegel’s italics)
  of terms which also are distinct....” (160)








  The connec-
  tion (of all
  parts) of infi-
  nite progress



167

  “The nature of speculative thought ...
  consists solely in seizing the opposed
  moments in their unity.”
      The question how the infinite arrives
  at finite is sometimes considered as
  the essence of philosophy. But this
  question amounts to elucidating their
      connection....



168

  ...“In the other’ subjects, too, the art
  of putting questions demands some
  education; still more so in philosoph-
  ical subjects, if a better answer is to be
  received than that the question is idle.”







  Bien Dit!



[The

  relation to the Other has disappeared;
  what has remained is the relation to
  Self.]



173

  -174:     Fürsichsein—Being-for-Self—in-
  infinite Being, consummated qualitative
      Being. [The relation to the Other has dis-
  appeared; what has remained is the relat-
  ion to Self.] Quality reaches its climax
  (auf de Spitze) and becomes quantity.






  The idealism of Kant and Fichte... (181)
  “remains in the dualism” ((unclear)) “of
  existent Being and Being-for-Self...,”










  i.e., that there is no transition of the
          Thing-in-itself (mentioned in the fol-
  lowing sentence) to the appearance? of
  the object to the subject?













          Why Fürsichsein is Eins[41] is not clear
  to me. Here Hegel is extremely obscure,
  in my opinion.










The One is the old principle of the άτο-
  μον[42] (and the void). The void is considered
Quell der Bewegung[43] (185) not only
  in the sense that space is not filled, but
  also enthüllt;[44] “this profounder thought,
  that the negative in general contains the
  ground of Becoming, the unrest of
  self-movement.“ (186)








NB:
  Selbstbeweg-
  ung.[45]



183:


  “The ideality of Being-for-Self as
  totality thus, first, passes into reality,
  and into the most fixed and abstract
  of all, as One.”




       Dark Waters...   
  












    The thought of the ideal passing into
the real is profound: very important
for history. But also in the personal
life of man it is clear that this contains
much truth. Against vulgar materialism.
NB. The difference of the ideal from the
material is also not unconditional, not
        überschwenglich.[46]







189
  
  —Note: The monads of Leibnitz. The
  principle of Eins[47] and its incomplete-
  ness in Leibnitz.









        Obviously, Hegel takes his self-de-
velopment of concepts, of categories,
in connection with the entire history
        of philosophy. This gives still a new
aspect to the whole Logic.
  






193
...“It is an old proposition that One
  is Many, and more especially that the
Many are One...”



195

  ...“The distinction of One and Many
  has determined itself to be that of their
  I relation to one another; this is divided
  into two relations, Repulsion and At-
  traction....”









    In general, all this Fürsichsein[48]
was, probably, in part required by Hegel
to deduce “the transition of quality into
quantity” (199)—quality is determi-
nateness, determinateness for self, Ge-
stzte,[49]
it is the One—this gives the
impression of being very far fetched and
empty.
  








       Note, page 203 the remark, which is not
  devoid of irony, against that





       procedure of knowledge reflecting on
  experience, which first perceives determ-
  nations in the phenomenon, next makes
  them the basis, and assumes for their
  so-called explanation corresponding funda-
  mental materials or forces which are sup-
  posed to produce these determinations of
  the phenomenon....”








 


SECTION TWO:
MAGNITUDE (QUANTITY)






      Kant has four “antinomies.” In fact,
every concept, every category is similarly
  antinomous. (217)








 





  “The old scepticism did not shrink from
  the labour of demonstrating this contra-
  diction or antinomy in every concept which
  it found in the sciences.”






The role of
  scepticism in
  the history of
  philosophy



 




  
  Analysing Kant very captiously (and
  shrewdly), Hegel comes to the conclusion
  that Kant simply repeats in his conclusions
  what which was said in the premises, namely
  he repeats that there is a category of Kon-
  tinuität[50] and a category of 
  Diskretion.[51]




 





      From this it follows merely “that, takes
  alone, neither determination has truth,
  but only their unity. This is the true dia-
  lectic consideration of them, and the true
  result.” (226)










Wahrhafte
  Dialek-
     tik[52]







229:

      “Die Diskretion [translation? sepa-
  rateness,[53]
dismemberment]
  like die Kontinuität [contiguity (?),
  successiveness (?),[54]
continuity] is
  a moment of Quantity....”



232:

  “Quantum—which, first, means quan-
  tity having any determinateness or lim-
  it at all—is, in its complete determi-
  nateness, Number...”



234:

  “Anzahl amount enumeration? and
  Unit constitute the moments of Num-
  ber.”



248

  —On the problem of the role and sig-
  nificance of number (much about Py-
  thagoras, etc., etc.)






      Among other things, an apt remark:







  “The richer in determinateness, and hence
  in relation, thoughts become, the more con-
  fused, on the one hand, and the more arbit-
  rary and senseless, on the other hand, be-
  comes their representation in such forms
  as numbers.” (248-249) ((Valuation of
  thoughts: richness in determinations and










consequently in relations.))







In regard to Kant’s antinomies (world
  without beginning, etc.) Hegel again dem-
  onstrates des Längeren[55] that the premises
  take as proved that which has to be proved.
  (267-278)





Further the transition of quantity into
quality in the abstract-theoretical expo-
sition is so obscure that nothing can be
understood. Return to it!!
  






283:

  the infinite in mathematics. Hither-
  to ‘the justification has consisted
only in the correctness of the results
      (“welche aus sonstigen Gründen erwie-
  sen ist”[56]),...  and not in the clear-
  ness of the subject [c.f. Engels[57]].




NB




  285: In the infinitesimal calculus a
  certain inexactitude (conscious) is ig-
  nored, nevertheless the result obtained
  is not approximate but absolutely exact!



285:

      Notwithstanding this, to demand
  Rechtfertigung[58] here is “not as super-
  fluous” “as to ask in the case of the nose
  for a demonstration of the right to
  use it.”[59]









    Hegel’s answer is complicated, abst-
rus,[60] etc., etc. It is a question of
higher  mathematics; c.f. Engels
on the differential and integral calcu-
lus.[61]













    Interesting is Hegel’s remark made in
passing—“transcendentally, that is really
subjective and psychological”... “tran-
scendental, that is, in the subject” (288)
  












  Pp. 282-327 u. ff.—379
       A most detailed consideration of the
  differential and integral calculus, with
  quotations - Newton, Lagrange, Carnot,
  Euler, Leibnitz, etc., etc.,—showing
  how interesting Hegel found this “vanish-
  ing” of infinitely small magnitudes,
      this “intermediate between Being and
  not-Being.” Without studying higher
  mathematics all this is incomprehens-
  ible. Characteristic is the title: Carnot:
      “Réflexions sur la Métaphysique du calcul
  infinitésimal”!!![62]










  “The development of the concept Verhält-
  nis[63] (379-394) extremely obscure. Note
  only, p. 394, the remark on symbols, that
  there is nothing to be said against them in
  general. But “against all Symbolism” it
  must be said that it sometimes is “a con-
  venient means of escaping from compre-
  hending, stating and justifying the concep-
  tual determinations” (Begriffsbestimmun-
  gen). But precisely this is the concern
  of philosophy.


  “The common determinations of force,







  or substantiality, cause and effect, and
  others, are themselves too only symbols
  used to express, for example, vital and





?NB





  spiritual relations; that is, they are untrue
  determinations of those relations.” (394)




 


SECTION THREE:
MEASURE






      “In Measure, to put it abstractly, Qual-
  ity and Quantity are united. Being as
  such is the immediate self-identity of de-
  terminateness. This immediacy of determi-
  nateness has transcended itself. Quantity is
  Being which has returned upon itself in
  such a manner that it is simple self-identity
  as indifference to determinateness.” (395)
      The third term is Measure.


      Kant introduced the category of modal-
  ity (possibility, actuality, necessity) and
  remarks that in Kant:
       “This category means that it is the rela-
  tion of the object to thought. In the sense
  of this idealism, thought in general is
  essentially external to the Thing-in-itself...,
  objectivity, which is a quality of the other
  categories, is lacking in the categories of 
  modality.” (396)


  En passant: (397)


  Indian philosophy, in which Brahma
  passes to Siva (change = disappearance,
  arising)....


  The peoples deify Measure. (399)


  ? Measure passes into Essence (Wesen).


  (Regarding the question of Measure it is
  not without interest to note the remark
  made in passing by Hegel that “in devel-
  oped civil society aggregates of indivi-
  duals belonging to different trades are in
  a certain relation to one another.”) (402)


On the question of the category of Grad-
  ualness (Allmähligkeit), Hegel remarks:
       “Recourse is so readily made to this cat-
  egory in order to render intelligible to the
  eye or to the mind the disappearance of a
  Quality or of Something; for thus the illu-
  sion is created that one can almost be
  eye-witness of disappearance; for, Quantum
  being posited as limit external and variable
  by its very nature, change (as a change of
  Quantum only) needs no explanation. But
  in fact nothing is thereby explained; the
  change is also essentially the transition
  of one Quality into another, or (a more ab-
  stract transition) of one existence into a
  non-existence; and this contains a determi-
  nation different from that of gradual, which
  is only a decrease or increase and a one-
  sided retention of magnitude.


  “But already the ancients were aware of
  the connection by which a change appearing
  as merely quantitative turns into one which
  is qualitative, and they illustrated the
  confusions which arise from ignorance
  of this connection by popular examples...”
(405-406) (“bald”—the removal of one hair
  from a head; a “heap”—the removal of one
  grain...) “what” (here) “is refuted is” das
  einseitige Festhalten an der abstrakten
  Quantumsbestimmtheit (“the one-sided
  clinging to abstract quantitative deter-




 


  minateness,” i.e., “without taking account
  of the manifold changes and concrete quali-
  ties,” etc.). ...“Therefore those changes are
  no idle and pedantic joke; they are in them-
  selves correct and the product of a conscious-
  ness which takes an interest in the phenom-
  ena which occur in thought.






NB


 





  “Quantum when it is taken as indiffer-
  ent limit is that side from which an Exist-
  ent Being can unsuspectedly be attacked
  and destroyed. It is the cunning of the
  Notion to seize it from this side, where its
  Quality does not appear to come into play;
  and this so much so that the aggrandise-
  ment of a state or of a property, and so on,
  which leads in the end to disaster for the
  state or the owner of the property, may
  at first actually appear as their good for-
  tune.” 
(407)


  “It is a great merit to become acquainted
  with the empirical numbers of nature (as
  the distances of the planets from one
  another), but an infinitely greater merit
  to cause the empirical Quanta to disappear







  and to raise them into a universal form of
  quantitative determinations, so that they
  become moments of a law or Measure”;
  the merit of Galileo and Kepler... “They







Gesetz oder
  Maß [64]






demonstrated the laws which they discov-
  ered by showing that the totality of details







  of perception corresponds to these laws.”
  (416) But höheres Beweisen[65] of these laws
  must be demanded in order that their
  quantitative determinations be known from






?





  Qualitäten oder bestimmten Begriffen, die
  bezogen sind (wie Raum und Zeit).[66]


  The development of the concept des
  Maßes,[67] as a spezifische Quantität[68]
  and as reales Maß[69] (including Wahl-
  verwandtschaften[70]—for example,
  chemical elements, musical tones), very ob-
  scure.





A lengthy note on chemistry, with
a polemic against Berzelius and his
theory of electro-chemistry. (433-445)
  




  The “nodal line of measure relations”
  (Knotenline von Maßverhältnissen)—tran-
  sitions of quantity into quality... Gradual-
  ness and leaps.




 


NB





    And again p. 448, that gradualness
explains nothing without leaps.
  








NB


 





      In Hegel’s note as always, factual mate-
  rial, examples, the concrete (hence Feuer-
  bach said jestingly on one occasion that
  Hegel banished nature to his notes, Feuer-
  bach, Works, II, p. ?).[71]




 





  Pp. 448-452, a note included in the
table of contents (not in the text!! Pedant-
  ry!!): “Examples of such Nodal Lines;
  in this connection, that there are no leaps






Leaps!





  in nature.” 


  Examples: chemistry; musical tones; wa-
  ter (steam, ice)—p. 449—birth and death.




 





  Abbrechen der Allmähligkeit,
  p. (450)







Breaks
  in
  gradualness



 





  “It is said that there are no leaps in nature;
  and ordinary imagination, when it has to
  conceive an arising or passing away, thinks
  it has conceived them (as was mentioned)
  when it imagines them as a gradual emer-






Leaps!





  emergence or disappearance. But we saw that






 
  the changes of Being were in general not
  only a transition of one magnitude into
  another, but a transition from the quali-
  tative into the quantitative, and converse
  ly: a process of becoming other which
  breaks off graduality, and is qualitatively
  other as against the preceding Existent
  Being. Water on being cooled does not little
  by little become hard, gradually reaching
  the consistency of ice after having passed
  through the consistency of paste, but is
  suddenly hard; when it already has quite
  attained freezing-point it may (if it stands






Leaps!





  still) be wholly liquid, and a slight
  shake brings it into the condition of hardness.


  “The gradualness of arising is based upon
  the idea that that which arises is already,
  sensibly or otherwise, actually there, and
  is imperceptible only on account of its
  smallness; and the gradualness of vanishing
  is based on the idea that not-Being or the
  Other which is assuming its place equally
  is there, only is not yet noticeable;—
  there, not in the sense that the Other is
  contained in the Other which is there in
  itself, but that it is there as existence,
  only unnoticeable. This altogether can-
  cels arising and passing away; or the In-
  itself, that inner thing in which some-
  thing is before it attains its existence, is
  transmuted into a smallness of external
  existence, and the essential or conceptual
  distinction into a difference external and
  merely magnitudinal.—The procedure which
  makes arising and passing away conceiv-
  able from the gradualness of change is
  boring in the manner peculiar to tautol-
  ogy; that which arises. or passes away is
  prepared beforehand, and the change is
  turned into the mere changing of an exter-
  nal distinction; and now it is indeed a mere
  tautology. The difficulty for such Under-
  standing which attempts to conceive con-
  sists in the qualitative transition of Some-
  thing into its Other in general and its op-
  posite; Understanding, on the other hand,
  fancies identity and change to be of that
  indifferent and external kind which applies
  to the quantitative.


  “In the moral sphere, insofar as it is con-
  sidered in the sphere of Being, the same
  transition from quantitative to qualitative
  takes place, and different qualities appear
  to base themselves on differences in magni-
  tude. A ‘more’ or ‘less’ suffices to trans-
  gress the limit of levity, where something
  quite different, namely, crime, appears;
  whereby right passes over into wrong, and
  virtue into vice.—Thus too do states—
  other things being equal—derive a differ-
  ent qualitative character from magnitu-
  dinal difference....” (450-452)


   Further:
      Transition of Being into Essence (Wesen),
  expounded extremely obscurely.
      End of Volume I.




 




 

Notes
[1] Hegel, Werke, III, Berlin, 1833.—Ed.
[2] of knowledge—Ed.
[3] “nothing”—Ed.
[4] “being”—Ed.
[5] See F. Engels, Ludwig Feuerbach and the End
of Classical German Philosophy. (Marx and Engels, Selected Works,
Vol. II, Moscow, 1958, p. 372.) 
[6] determination—Ed.
[7] quality—Ed.
[8] Existent Being—Ed.
[9] Being—Nothing—Becoming—Ed.
[10] Something—Ed.
[11] Out of nothing comes nothing?—Ed.
[12] Determinate  Being—Ed.
[13] in fine—at the end—Ed.
[14] Perhaps so?—Ed.
[15] “external reflection”—Ed.
[16] “incomprehensibility of the beginning”—Ed.
[17] sophistry—Ed.
[18] arising and passing away—Ed.
[19] The superseding of Becoming.—Ed.
[20] supersede = terminate-maintain (simultaneously to
preserve)—Ed.
[21] Existent Being is Determinate Being—Ed.
[22] “concrete”—Ed.
[23] an other—variable and finite—Ed.
[24] every determination is negation—Ed.
[25] abstract and obscure Hegelianism—Ed.
[26] Thing-in-itself—Ed.
[27] being-for-other—Ed.
[28] See f. Engels, Ludwig Feuerbach and the End
of Classical German Philosophy. (Marx and Engels, Selected Works,
Vol. II, Moscow, 1958, p. 371.) 
[29] the question, in thoughtlessness, is so put as to render
an answer impossible—Ed.
[30] in reading Hegel—Ed.
[31] Something—Ed.
[32] Ought, or Should-be; and Bound or 
Boundary—Ed.
[33] the Finite—Ed.
[34] In the MS, the Russian letter “и”
appears above the last letter of the word for “evolution”. In Russian,
the ending “и” forms the plural of the word.—Ed.
[35] impulse, pain—Ed.
[36] “bad infinity”—Ed.
[37] on this side—Ed.
[38] on that side—Ed.
[39] they are—Ed.
[40] inseparable—Ed.
[41] One—Ed.
[42] atom (indivisible)—Ed.
[43] source of motion—Ed.
[44] contains—Ed.
[45] self-movement—Ed.
[46] inordinate—Ed.
[47] the One—Ed.
[48] Being-for-Self—Ed.
[49] the posited—Ed.
[50] continuity—Ed.
[51] discreteness—Ed.
[52] true dialectics—Ed.
[53] in the MS., the word “separateness” is crossed 
out.—Ed.
[54] In the MS., the words “contiguity, successiveness”
are crossed out.—Ed.
[55] in detail—Ed.
[56] “demonstrated on other grounds”—Ed.
[57] See F. Engels, Anti-Dühring, Moscow, 1959
pp. 74-76, 186.
[58] justification—Ed.
[59] An allusion to the couplet “The Question of Right,”
from Schiller’s satirical poem “The Philosophers,” which may be translated asfollows:
     Long have I used my nose for sense of smell.
   Indeed, what right have I to this, pray tell?

[60]abstruse—Ed.
[61] See F. Engels, Anti-Dühring, Moscow, 1959
pp. 186, 189.
[62] Reflections on the Metaphysics of the Infinitesimal Calculus—Ed.
[63] relation—Ed.
[64] law or measure—Ed.
[65] higher proof—Ed.
[66] qualities or determinate concepts (like space and 
time) that are related—Ed.
[67] measure—Ed.
[68] specific quantity—Ed.
[69] real measure—Ed.
[70] elective affinites—Ed.
[71] The reference is to a remark made by Feuerbach
in his work Vorläufige Thesen zur Reform der Philosophie (Preliminary Theses
on the Reform of Philosophy), appearing in Vol. II, p. 257, of Feuerbach’s Works
published in German in 1846.
 


<< Index to Lenin’s 
  Conspectus of Hegel’s Science of Logic  
 

  




Works Index
     |   
   Volume 38

 | 

Collected Works
        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward




forward >





 




==========

## Essence










Lenin's Conspectus of Hegel's Science of Logic: Book II (Essence)



Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Conspectus of Hegel’s
Science of Logic —
  Book II (Essence)



Note: Quoted text and page numbers—i.e., (66)—indicate links to passages in
   Hegel’s Science of Logic
and to Hegel’s Encyclopaedia
of the Philosophical Sciences in Outline, also known as the Shorter Logic.




Book Two:
Essence



Volume IV. (Berlin, 1834) Part I.
Objective Logic. Book II. The Doctrine
of Essence


SECTION ONE:
ESSENCE AS REFLECTION IN ITSELF




  “The truth of Being is Essence.” (3) [1]
  Such is the first sentence, sounding thor-
  oughly idealistic and mystical. But
  immediately afterwards, a fresh wind,






  so to speak, begins to blow: “Being is the
  immediate. Knowledge seeks to understand
  that truth[2] which Being, in and for
  itself, is, and therefore it does not halt”
  (does not halt NB) “at the imme-







theory
  of
  knowledge





  diate and its determinations, but pene-
  trates (NB) through (NB) it, assum-
  ing that behind (Hegel’s italics) this Being
  there is something other than Being itself,
  and that this background constitutes the
  truth of Being. This cognition is mediated
  knowledge, for it is not lodged immedi-
  ately. with and in Essence, but begins at
  an Other, at Being, and has to make a pre-






  liminary passage, the passage of transition
  beyond Being, or rather of entrance into
  it....”







  “passage”



 




  This Bewegung,[3] the path of knowl-
  edge, seems to be the “activity of cognition”
  (Tätligkeit des Erkennens) “external to Be-
  ing.”




 




  “However, this movement is the move-
  ment of Being itself.”







Objective
      signifi-
  cance



 




  “Essence ... is what it is ... by virtue
  of its own infinite movement of Being.”(4)


      “Absolute Essence has no Determinate
  Being. Into this, however, it must pass.”(5)


      Essence stands midway between Being
  and the Notion, as the transition to the No-
  tion (=Absolute).


      Subdivisions of Essence: Semblance or
  Show (Schein), Appearance (Erscheinung),
  Actuality (Wirlichkeit).


      Das Wesentliche und das Unwesentli-
  che.[4] (8) Der Schein. (9)


  In the unessential, in Semblance, there
  is a moment of not-Being. (10)




 







    i.e., the unessential, seeming, super-
ficial, vanishes more often, does not hold
so “tightly,” does not “sit so firmly” as
as “Essence.” Etwa[5]: the movement
of a river—the foam above and the deep
currents below. But even the
foam is an expression of essence!
  










 




Semblance and scepticism, Kantianism,
  respectively:
        “Semblance then is the phenomenon of
  scepticism; or again the appearance of ideal-
  ism, such an immediacy, which is neither
  Something nor Thing, and, generally, is
  not an indifferent Being which could be
  outside its determinateness and relation
  to the subject. Scepticism did not dare to






  affirm ‘it is’; modern idealism did not
  dare to regard cognition as a knowledge
  of the Thing-in-itself; with the former,









  
  Semblance was supposed to have no basis
  at all in any Being; with the latter, the
  Thing-in-itself was supposed incapable of
  entering into cognition. But at the same






  time scepticism admitted manifold deter-






NB




  minations of its Semblance, or rather its
  Semblance had for content all the manifold
  riches of the world. In the same manner
  the appearance of idealism comprehends
  the whole range of these manifold determi-
  natenesses.“









        You include in Schein[6] all the wealth
of the world and you deny the objectivity
of Schein!!
  








  Semblance and appearance are immediate-
  ly determined so diversely. The content
  may then have no basis in any Being nor in
  any thing nor Thing-in-itself; for itself it
  remains as it is: it has only been translated
  from being into Semblance; thus Semblance
  contains these manifold determinatenesses,






  which are immediate, existent and recip-
  rocally other. Semblance itself is, then,
  immediately determinate. It may have this
  or that content; but whatever content it
  has is not posited by itself but belongs to it
  immediately. The idealism of Leibnitz,







the imme-
  diacy of
  Semblance




  
  Kant or Fichte, like any other form of ideal-
  ism, did not reach beyond Being as deter-
  minateness, beyond this immediacy any
  more than scepticism. Scepticism allows







  they did not go
      deeper!





  the content “that which is immediately
  given”!! of its Semblance to be given
  to it; for it, it is immediate, whatever con-
  tent it is to have. The monad of Leibnitz
  develops its presentations out of itself;
  but it is no creative and connecting force,—
  the presentations arise in it like bubbles;
  they are indifferent and immediate rela-
  tive to one another, and therefore to the






  monad itself. Similarly Kant’s phenomenon
  is a given content of perception; it presup-
  poses affections, determinations of the sub-






cf. Machism!!



  
  ject which are immediate to one another
  and to the subject. The infinite limitation
  or check of Fichte's idealism refuses per-
  haps, to be based on any Thing-in_itself,
  so that it becomes purely a determinate-
  ness in the Ego. But this determinateness
  is immediate and a limit to the Ego, which,
  transcending its externality, incorporates
  it; and though the Ego can pass beyond
  the limit, the latter has in it an aspect
  of indifference by virtue of which it
  contains an immediate not-Being of
  the Ego, though itself contained in the
  Ego.” (10-11)


  ...“Determinations which distinguish it”
  (den Schein) “from Essence are deter-
  minations of Essence....” (12)




 




  ...“It is the immediacy of not-Being
  which constitutes Semblance; in Essence,
  Being is not-Being. Its nullity in itself is the
  negative nature of Essence itself....” (12)







  Semblance =
  the negative
  nature of
  Essence



 




  ...“These two moments thus constitute
  Semblance: Nullity, which however persists,
  and Being, which however is Moment; or
  again negativity which is in itself, and
  reflected immediacy. Consequently these
  moments are the moments of Essence it-
  self....”


  “Semblance is Essence itself in the deter-
  minateness of Being....” (12-13)









Semblance is (1) nothing, non-exis-
     tent (Nichtigkeit) which
     exists
     —(2) Being as moment









  “Thus Semblance is Essence itself, but
  Essence in a determinateness, and this in
  such a manner that determinateness is only
  its moment: Essence is the showing of it-
  self in itself.” (14)









  That which shows itself is essence in
one of its determinations, in one of its
  aspects, in one of its moments. Essence
  seems to be just that. Semblance is the
  showing (Scheinen) of essence itself in
  itself.









  ...“Essence ... contains Semblance within
  itself, as infinite internal movement....” (14)


  ...“In this its self-movement Essence is
  Reflection. Semblance is the same as Re-
  flection.” (14)









  Semblance (that which shows itself)
    is the Reflection of Essence in (it)
    itself.
    








  ...“Becoming in Essence—its reflective
  movement—is hence the movement from
  Nothing to Nothing and through Nothing
  back to itself....” (15)









  This is shrewd and profound. Move-
  ments “to nothing” occur in nature and
  in life. Only there are certainly none
  “from nothing.” Always from something.
    








  “Commonly Reflection is taken in the
  subjective meaning of the movement of
  judgment which passes beyond a given im-
  mediate presentation, seeking universal de-
  terminations for it or comparing them with,
  it.” (21) (Quotation from Kant—Critique
  of the Power of Judgment[7]).... “Here,
  however, neither the reflection of conscious-
  ness nor the more determinate reflection of
  understanding, which has the particular and
  the universal for its determinations, is in
  question, but only Reflection in general....”









  Thus here too, Hegel charges Kant
  with subjectivism. This NB. Hegel is
  for the “objective validity” (sit venia
  verbo[8]) of Semblance,
  “of that which
  is immediately given” [the expression
  “that which is given” is gener-
  ally used by Hegel, and here see p. 21
  i.f.; p. 22]. The more petty philosophers
  dispute whether essence or that which
  is immediately given should be taken
  as basis (Kant, Hume, all the Machists).
  Instead of o r, Hegel puts and, explain-
  ing the concrete content of this “and.”









  “Die Reflexion is the showing of Essence
  into itself” (27) (translation? Reflectivity?
  Reflective determination? Рефлексия is
  not suitable).[9]


  “It” (das Wesen) “is a movement through
  different moments, absolute self-media-
  tion....” (27)
      Identity — Difference — Contradiction
             (+Gegensatz[10])   (Ground)...
         (  in particular )
             (  antithesis   )


      Therefore Hegel elucidates the one-sided-
  ness, the incorrectness of the “law of iden-
  tity” (A = A), of the category (all determi-
  nations of that which is are categories—
  pp. 27-28).


  “If everything is self-identical it is not
  distinguished: it contains no opposition
  and has no ground.” (29)


  “Essence is ... simple self-identity.” (30)


      Ordinary thinking places resemblance and
  difference next to (“daneben”) each other,
  not understanding “this movement of
  transition of one of these determinations
  into the other” (31)


      And again, against the law of identity
  (A = A): its adherents 




 




  “since they cling to this rigid Identity
  which as its opposite in Variety, they do
  not see that they are thereby making it
  into a one-sided determinateness, which
  as such as no truth.” (33)






NB
   
  terms under-
  lined by me





  (“Empty tautology”: 32)


  “It contains only formal truth,
  which is abstract and incomplete.” (33)









  Kinds of reflection: external, etc.; ex-
  pounded very obscurely.









    The principles of difference: “All things
  are different....” “A is also not A....” (44) 


      “There are no two things which are en-
  tirely alike....”


      There is a difference in one or another
  aspect (Seite), Rücksicht, etc. “insofern,”[11]
      etc.

bien dit!!

  “The customary tenderness for things,
  whose only care is that they shall not
  contradict one another, forgets here as else-
  where that this is no solution of the contra-
  diction, which is merely planted elsewhere,
  namely, into subjective or external re-
  flection; and that the latter does in fact
  contain the two moments—which this re-
  moval and transplantation proclaim to be
  a mere positedness—in one unity as tran-
  scended and related to each other.”(47)


      (This irony is exquisite! “Tenderness”
  for nature and history (among the philis-
  tines)—the endeavour to cleanse them from
  contradictions and struggle....)


  The result of the addition of plus and mi-
  nus is nought. “The result of contradiction
  is not only nought.” (59)


  The solution of the contradiction, the re-
  duction of positive and negative to “only
  determinations” (61) converts Essence (das
  Wesen) into Ground (Grund) (ibidem).




 




  ...“Resolved Contradiction is, then,
  Grund, that is, Essence as unity of Positive
  and Negative....” (62)






NB


 




  “Even a slight experience in reflective
  thought will perceive that, if anything has
  just been determined as Positive, it straight-
  way turns into Negative if any progress
  is made from that base, and conversely
  that a Negative determination turns into
  Positive; that reflective thought becomes
  confused in these determinations and con-
  tradicts itself. Insufficient acquaintance
  with the nature of these determinations
  leads to the conclusion that this confusion
  is a fault which should not occur, and
  attributes it to a subjective error. And
  in fact this transition does remain mere









    confusion insofar as the necessity for this
metamorphosis is not present to
    consciousness.“ (63)











 




  ...“The opposition of Positive and Nega-
  tive is especially taken in the meaning
  that the former (although etymologically
  it expresses being posited or positedness)
  is to be an objective entity, and the latter
  subjective, belonging only to external
  reflection and in no way concerned with
  the objective, which is in and for itself
  and quite ignores it.” (64) “And indeed if
  the Negative expresses nothing but the
  abstraction af subjective caprice....” (then
  it, this Negative, does not exist “für das
  objective Positive”[12])....









  Truth, too, is the Positive, as knowl-
  edge, corresponding with its object but
  it is this self-equality only insofar as
  knowledge has already taken up a negative
  attitude to the Other, has penetrated the
  object, and transcended that negation which
  the object is. Error is a Positive, as an
  opinion affirming that which is not in










  Truth and
      Object





  and for itself, an opinion which knows






  itself and asserts itself. But ignorance is
  either indifference to truth and error, and
  thus determined neither as positive nor as
  negative,—and if it is determined as a de-







    that which
  is in and for
  itself





  ficiency, this determinatian belongs to ex-
  ternal reflection; or else, objectively and
  as proper determinatian af a nature, it
  is the impulse which is directed against
  itself, a negative which contains a positive
  direction.—It is of the greatest impor-
  tance to recognise this nature af the Deter-
  minations af Reflection which have been
  considered here, that their truth consists
  only in their relation to each other, and
  therefore in the fact that each contains the
  other in its own concept. This must be
  understood and remembered, far without
  this understanding not a step can really  
  be taken in philosophy.” (65-66) This
  from the Note 1.————


  Note 2. “The Law of the Excluded Middle”


  Hegel quotes this proposition af the ex-
  cluded middle. “Something is either A or
  not A; there is no third” (66) and “anal-
  yses” it. If it implies that “alles ein
  Entgegengesetztes ist,”[13] that everything
  has its positive and its negative determi-
  nation, then it is all right. But if it is
  understood as it is generally understood,
  that, of all predicates, either a given
  one, or its not-Being, applies, then this
  is a “triviality”!! Spirit ... sweet, not sweet?
  green, not green? The determination should
  lead to determinateness, but in this triv-
  iality it leads to nothing.


      And then—Hegel says wittily—it is
  said that there is no third. There is a third
  in this thesis itself. A itself is the third, for
A can be both + A and - A. “The Some-
  thing thus is itself the third term which
  was supposed to be excluded.” (67)









  This is shrewd and correct. Every con-
  crete thing, every concrete something,
  stands in multifarious and often con-
  tradictory relations to everything else,
  ergo it is itself and some other.









Note 3 (at the end of Chapter 2, Sec-
  tion 1 of Book II of the Logic). “the
Law of Contradiction.”


  “If now the primary Determinations of
  Reflection—Identity, Variety and Oppo-
  sition—are established in a proposition,
  then the determination into which they
  pass over as into their truth (namely Con-
  tradiction) should much more so be com-
  prehended and expressed in a proposition:
all things are contradicto-
  ry in themselves, in this meaning,






  that this proposition as opposed to the
  others expresses much better the truth
  and essence of things.—Contradiction,










  which emerges in Opposition, is no more
  than developed Nothing; and this is already
  contained in Identity, and occurred in the
  expression that the law of identity states
  nothing. This negation further determines
  itself into Variety and into Opposition,
  which now is posited Contradiction.


  “But it has been a fundamental prejudice
  of hitherto existing logic and of ordinary
  imagination that Contradiction is a deter-
  mination having less essence and immanence
  than Identity; but indeed, if there were








  
    any question of rank, and the two deter-
    minations had to be fixed as separate, Cont-
    radiction would have to be taken as the
    more profound and more fully essential.
  












  For as opposed to it Identity is only the
  determination of simple immediacy, or









      of dead Being, while Contradiction is the
rood of all movement and vitality,
  and it is only insofar as it contains a Con-
    tradiction that anything moves and
    has impulse and activity.











 




  “Ordinarily Contradiction is removed,






  first of all from things, from the existent
  and the true in general; and it is asserted
  that there is nothing contradictory. Next
  it is shifted into subjective reflection,
  which alone is said to posit it by relat-










  ing and comparing it. But really it does
  not exist even in this reflection, for it is
  impossible to imagine or to think anything
  contradictory. Indeed, Contradiction, both
  in actuality and in thinking reflection, is
  considered an accident, a kind of abnormal-
  ity or paroxysm of sickness which will soon
  pass away.


  “With regard to the assertion that Con-
  tradiction does not exist, that it is non-
  existent, we may disregard this statement.
  In every experience thete must be an ab-
  solute determination of Essence—in every
  actuality as well as in every concept.
  The same remark has already been made
  above, under Infinity, which is Contradic-
  tion as it appears in the sphere of Being.
  But ordinary experience itself declares that
  at least there are a number of contradic-
  tory things, arrangements and so forth, the
  contradiction being present in them and
  not merely in an external reflection. But
  it must further not be taken only as an
  abnormality which occurs just here and






  there; it is the Negative in its essential
  determination, the principle all self-










movement, which consists of nothing else
  but an exhibition of Contradiction. Exter-










  nal, sensible motion is itself its immediate
  existence. Something moves, not because
  it is here at one point of time and there
  at another, but because at one and the
  same point of time it is here and not here,
  and in this here both is and is not. We
  must grant the old dialecticians the contra-
  dictions which they prove in motion; but
  what follows is not that there is no mo-
  tion, but rather that motion is existent
  Contradiction itself.


  “And similarly internal self-movement
  proper, or impulse in general (the appe-
  titive force or nisus of the monad, the en-
  telechy of absolutely simple Essence), is
  nothing else than the fact that something is
  in itself and is also the deficiency or the neg-
  ative of itself, inbne and the same respect.
Abstract self-identity has no vi-
  tality but the fact that Positive in itself
  is negativity causes it to pass outside itself






  and to change. Something therefore is
  living only insofar as it contains Contra-
  diction, and is that force which can both










  comprehend and endure Contradiction. But






  if an existent something cannot in its pos-
  itive determination also encroach on its
  negative, cannot hold fast the one in the
  other and contain Contradiction within it-
  self, then it is not living unity, or Ground,
  but perishes in Contradiction. Speculative










  thought consists only in this, that thought
  holds fast Contradiction and itself in Con-
  tradiction and not in that it allows itself
  to be dominated by it—as happens to imag-
  ination—or suffers its determinations to be
  resolved into others, or into Nothing.”
(67-70)


  Movement and “self-movement” (this
  NB! arbitrary (independent), spon-
  taneous, internally-necessary movement),
  “change,” “movement and vitality,” “the
  principle of all self-movement,” “impulse”
  (Trieb) to “movement” and to “activity”—
  the opposite to “dead Being”—who
  would believe that this is the core of “He-
  gelianism,” of abstract and abstrusen (pon-
  derous, absurd?) Hegelianism?? This core
  had to be discovered, understood, hin-
  überretten,[14] laid bare, refined, which is
  precisely what Marx and Engels did.


  The idea of universal movement and
  change (1813 Logic) was conjectured before
  its application to life and society. In regard
  to society it was proclaimed earlier (1847)
  than it was demonstrated in application
  to man (1859).[15]



  “In movement, impulse, and the like,






  the simplicity of these determinations con-
  ceals the contradiction from imagination;
  but this contradiction immediately stands
  revealed in the determinations of relation.







  simplicity
  conceals





  The most trivial examples—above and be-
  low, right and left, father and son, and so
  on without end—all contain Contradiction
  in one term. That is above which is not
  below; ‘above’ is determined only as not
  being ‘below,’ and is only insofar as there
  is a ‘below,’ and conversely: one deter-
  mination implies its opposite. Father is
  the Other of son, and son of father, and
  each exists only as this Other of the other;
  and also the one determination exists only
  in relation to the other: their Being is one
  subsistence..........(70)


  ”Thus although Imagination everywhere
  has Contradiction for content, it never
  becomes aware of it; it remains an external
  reflection, which passes from Likeness to
  Unlikeness, or from negative relation to
  intro-reflectedness of the different terms.






  It keeps these two determinations external
  to each other, and has in mind only these
  and not their transition, which is the es-
  sential matter and contains the Contradic-










  tion.—On the other hand, intelligent reflec-
  tion, if we may mention this here, consists
  in the understanding and enunciating of
  Contradiction. It does not express the con-
  cept of things and their relations, and has
  only determinations of imagination for ma-
  terial and content; but still it relates them,
  and the relation contains their contradic-
  tion, allowing their concept to show through
  the contradiction.—Thinking Reason, on
  the other hand, sharpens (so to speak)
  the blunt difference of Variety, the mere
  manifold of imagination, into essential
  difference, that is, Opposition. The mani-
  fold entities acquire activity and vitality
  in relation to one another only when driven
  on to the sharp point of Contradiction;
  thence they draw negativity, which is the
  inherent pulsation of self-movement and
  vitality....” (70-71)




 







NB
       (1) Ordinary imagination grasps dif-
  ference and contradiction, but not the
transition from one to the other,
this however is the most
  important.
       (2) Intelligence and understanding.
       Intelligence grasps contradiction,
enunciates it, brings things into rela-
  tion with one another, allows the
  “concept to show through the contra-
  diction,” but does not express the
  concept of things and their relations.
       (3) Thinking reason (understanding)
  sharpens the blunt difference of vari-
  ety, the mere manifold of imagination,
  into essential difference, into opposi-
  tion. Only when raised to the peak of
    contradiction, do the manifold enti-
  ties become active (regasm) and lively
  in relation to one another,—they re-
  ceive[16] acquire that negativity which
  is the inherent pulsation
  of self-movement and
  vitality.







 




  Subdivisions:
      Der Grund—(ground)
  (1) Absolute Ground—die Grundlage (the
        foundation). “Form and Matter.” “Con-
        tent.”
      (2) Determinate Ground (as the ground
            [for] a determinate content)









  Its transition to Conditioning Media-
  tion
  die bedingende Vermittelung









  (3) The Thing-in-Itself (transition to Exis-
  tence). Note."The Law of Ground"


      Customary proposition: “Everything has
  its sufficient Ground.”


  “In general this just means that what is
  must be considered not as an existent im-
  mediate, but as a posited entity. We must
  not remain at immediate Determinate Be-
  ing or at determinateness in general, but
  must pass back to its Ground....”(76)
      It is superfluous to add: sufficient Ground.
  What is insufficient, is not Ground.


      Leibnitz, who made the law of sufficient
      ground the basis of his philosophy, un-
  derstood more profoundly. “Leib-
  nitz especially opposed the sufficiency of 
  Ground to causality in its strict
  meaning of mechanical efficacy.”
(76) He looked for “Beziehung” der Ursach-
  en[17] (77),——“the whole as essential unity.”




 







  He looked for ends, but teleology
  does not belong here, according to
  Hegel, but to the doctrine of the No-
  tion.







 




  ...“The question cannot therefore be
  asked, how Form is added to Essence; for
  Form is only the showing of Essence in
  itself—it is its own immanent (sic!) Re-
  flection....” (81)




 







  Form is essential. Essence is
  formed. In one way or another also in
  dependence on Essence....







 




Essence as formless identity (of itself
  with itself) becomes matter. (82)


  “...It” (die Materie[18]) “is the real foun-
  dation or substratum of Form....”(82)


  “If abstraction is made from every de-
  termination and Form of a Something,
  indeterminate Matter remains. Matter is
  a pure abstract. (—Matter cannot be seen
  or felt, etc.—what is seen or felt is a de-
  terminate Matter, that is, a unity of Matter
  and Form).” (82)


      Matter is not the Ground of Form, but
  the unity of Ground and Grounded. (83)
  Matter is the passive, Form is the active
  (tätiges). “Matter must be formed,
  and Form must materialise itself....” (84)




 







  Now this, which appears as the activity
  of Form, is equally the proper movement
  of Matter itself....” (85-86)









NB


 




  ...“Both—the activity of Form and the
  movement of Matter—are the same.... Mat-
  ter is determined as such or necessarily has
  a Form; and Form is simply material,
  persistent Form.” (86)


  Note: “Formal Method of Explanation
  from Tautological Grounds”


  Very often, Hegel says, especially in the
  physical sciences, “Grounds” are explained
  tautologically: the movement of the earth
  is explained by the “attractive force” of
  the sun. And whatthen is attractive force?
  It is also movement!! (92) Empty tautol-
  ogy: why does this man go to town? Be-
  cause of the attractive force of the town!
  (93) It also happens in science that at first
  molecules, the ether, “electrical matter” 
  (95-96), etc., are put forward as “ground,”
  and then it turns out “that they”(these con-
  cepts) “are determinations deduced from
  that for which they are meant to be the
  grounds—hypotheses and figments derived
  by an uncritical reflection....” (96) Or it is
  said that “we do not know the inner nature
  itself of these forces and classes of matter...”
  (96) then there remains indeed Nothing to
  “explain,” but one must simply limit one-
  self to the facts.... 


      Der reale Grund[19]... is not tautology,
  but already “some other determination of
  Content.” (97)


      On the question of “Ground” (Grund),
  Hegel remarks inter alia:
       “If it is said of Nature that it is the
  ground of the world, then what is called
  Nature is identical with the world, and
  the world is nothing but Nature itself.”
(100) On the other hand, “if Nature is to
  be the world, a manifold of determinations
  is added externally....”


  Since everything has “mehere”—“Inhalts-
  bestimmungen, Verhältnisse und Rücksich-
  ten,”[20] so any number of arguments for
  and against can be put forward. (103)
  That is what Socrates and Plato called
  sophistry. Such arguments do not contain
  “the whole extent of the thing,” they do not
  “exhaust” it (in the sense “of constituting its
  connections” and “containing all” its sides).

  
  The transition of Ground (Grund) into
  condition (Bedingung).




 







If I am not mistaken, there is much
  mysticism and leeres[21] pedantry in
  these conclusions of Hegel, but the basic
  idea is one of genius: that of the univer-
  sal, all-sided vital connection of every-
  thing with everything and the reflec-
  tion of this connection—materialistiisch
  auf den Kopf gestellter Hegel[22]
  human concepts, which must likewise
  be hewn, treated,flexible, mobile, rel-
  ative, mutually connected, united in
  opposites, in order to embrace the world.
  
  Continuation of the work of Hegel and
  Marx must consist in the dialec-
  tical elaboration of the history of hu-
  man thought, science and technique.

  
  ———————————————


  A river and the drops in this river.
  The position of every drop, its relation
  to the others; its connection with the
  others; the direction of its movement;
  its speed; the line of the movement—
  straight, curved, circular, etc.—upwards,
  downwards. The sum of the movement.
  Concepts, as registration of individual
  aspects of the movement, of individ-
  ual drops (=“things”), of individual
  “streams,” etc. There you have à peu
  près[24] the picture of the world according
  to Hegel’s Logic,—of course minus God
  and the Absolute.   










  And purely
  logical
  elaboration?
  Das fällt
  zusam-
  men.[23]
  It must
  coincide, as
  induction and
  deduction in
Capital
   
   
   
   
   
   
  ———
   
   
   
   
  The word
  “moment” is
  often used
  by Hegel in
  the sense of
  moment of
connec-
  tion,
  moment
  of concate-
  nation
  


 




  “When all the conditions of a thing are
  present, it enters into existence....” (116)




 







  Very Good! What has the Absolute
      Idea and idealism to do with it?

—————————

  Amusing, this “derivation” of . . . exis-
        tence.... 







 

SECTION TWO:
APPEARANCE




      The first phrase: “Essence must appear....”
  (119) The appearance of Essence is (1)
  Existenz (Thing); (2) Appearance (Erschei-
  nung). (“Appearance is what the Thing
  is in itself, or its truth” “The intro-
  reflected self-existent world stands opposed
      to the world of Appearance....“ (120) (3)
  Verhältnis (relation) and Actuality.


      Incidentally: “Demonstration in general
  is mediated cognition....” (121)


  ...“The various kinds of Being demand
  or contain their own kind of mediation;
  consequently the nature of demonstration
  too is different for each.......” (121)




 







          And again ... on the existence of
  God!! This wretched God, as soon as
  the word existence is mentioned, he
  takes offence.







 




      Existence differs from Being by its medi-
  ation (Vermittlung: 124) [?By concrete-
  ness and Connection?]


  ...“The Thing-in-itself and its medi-
  ated Being are both contained in Existence,
  and each is an Existence; the Thing-in-it-
  self exists and is the essential Existence
  of the Thing, while mediated Being is its
  unessential Existence....” (125)









  The Thing-in-itself is related to
  Being as the essential to the non-
  essential?









  ...“The latter” (Ding-an-sich) “is not sup-
  posed to contain in itself any determinate
  multiplicity, and consequently obtains this
  only when brought under external reflec-
  tion, but remains indifferent to it. (—The
  Thing-in-itself has colour only in relation
  to the eye, smell in relation to the nose,
  and so forth.)...” (126)


  ...“A Thing has the Property of effecting
  this or that in an Other, and of disclosing
  itself in a peculiar manner in its relation
  to it....” (129) “The Thing-in-itself thus
  exists essentially....” (131)


      The Note deals with “The Thing-in-itself
  of Transcendental Idealism....”


  ...“The Thing-in-itself as such is no more
  than the empty abstraction from all deter-
  minateness, of which it is admitted that
  nothing can be known just because it is
  meant to be the abstraction from all deter-
  mination....”(131)


  Transcendental idealism ... places “all
  determinateness of things (both with regard
  to form and to content) in consciousness...”
(131) “accordingly, from this point of view,
  it falls within me, the subject, that I see
  the leaves of a tree not as black but as
  green, the sun as round and not as square,
  and taste sugar as sweet and not as bit-
  ter; that I determine the first and second
  strokes of a clock as successive and not as
  simultaneous, and determine the first to be
  neither the cause nor the effect of the
  second, and so forth” (131)....Hegel further
  makes the reservation that he has here
  investigated only the question of the
  Thing-in-itself and “äußerliche Refle-
  xion.”[25]




 




  “The essential inadequacy of the stand-
  point at which this philosophy halts con-
  sists in this, that it clings to the abstract
  Thing-in-itself as to an ultimate determi-
  nation; it opposes Reflection, or the deter-
  minateness and multiplicity of the Prop-
  erties, to the Thing-in-itself; while in
  fact the Thing-in-itself essentially has this
  External Reflection in itself, and deter-
  mines itself as an entity endowed with its
  proper determinations, or Properties; whence
  it is seen that the abstraction of the Thing,
  which makes it pure Thing-in-itself, is an
  untrue determination.” (132)







  the core =
  against sub-
  jectivism and
  the split
  between the
      Thing-in-
  itself and
  appearances



 




  ...“Many different Things are in essen-
  tial Reciprocal Action by virtue of their
  Properties; Property is this very recipro-
  cal relation, and apart from it the Thing
  is nothing....” (133)


  Die Dingheit[26] passes over into Eigen-
  schaft.[27] (134) Eigenschaft into “matter”
  or “Stoff”[28] (“things consist of sub-
  stance”), etc.


  “Appearance at this point is Essence
  in its Existence....” (144) “Appearance ...
  is the unity of semblance and Existence....”
(145)




 




  Unity in appearances: “This unity is the
  Law of Appearance. Law therefore is the
  positive element in the mediation of the
  Apparent.” (148)







  law (of
  appearances)



 




|Here in general utter obscurity.
  But there is a vital thought,evident-
  ly: the concept of law is one of the
  stages of cognition by man of
unity and connection, of the recip-
  rocal dependence and totalityof the
  world process. The “treatment” and
  “twisting” of words and concepts to
  which Hegel devotes himself here is
  a struggle against making the con-
  cept of law absolute, against simplify-
  ing it, against making a fetish of it.
NB for modern physics!!!|






  “This enduring persistence which belongs
  to Appearance in Law....” (149)







  NB  ||
  Law ||
  is the endur-
  ing (the
  persisting) in
  appearances



 




  ...“Law is the Reflection of Appearance
  into identity with itself.” (149) (Law is
  the identical in appearances: “the Reflection
  of Appearance into identity with itself.”)







  (Law is the
      identical in
  appearances)





  ...“This identity, the foundation of Ap-
  pearance, which constitutes Law, is the
  peculiar moment of Appearance....” (150)







NB





  Hence Law is not beyond Appearance,
  but is immediately present in it; the realm
  of Laws is the quiescent (Hegel’s italics)
  reflection of the existing or appearing
  world....” (150)







  Law = the
      quiescent
  reflection of
  appearances
  NB



 







  This is remarkably materialistic
  and remarkably appropriate (with
  the word “ruhige”[29]) determination.
  Law takes the quiescent—and there-
  fore law, every law, is narrow, in-
  complete, approximate.







 




  “Existence passes back into Law as into
  its Ground; Appearance contains them
  both—simple Ground and the dissolving
  movement of the appearing universe, of
  which Ground is the essentiality.”
  “Hence law is essential appearance.”
(150)







  NB
  Law is
  essential
  appear-
  ance








  Ergo, law and essence are concepts
  of the same kind (of the same order),
  or rather, of the same degree, expressing
  the deepening of man’s knowledge of
  phenomena, the world, etc.









  The movement of the universe in ap-
  pearances, (Bewegung des erscheinenden
  Universums), in the essentiality of this
  movement, is law.







NB
  (Law is the
  reflection of
  the essential
  in the move-





  “The realm of Laws is the quies-
  cent content of Appearance; Appearance
  is this same content, but presents itself
  in unquiet change and as Reflection into
  other.... Appearance, therefore, as against







  ment of the
  universe.)
  (Appearance,
      totality)
  ((law = part))





  Law is the totalisy, for it contains Law,
but also more, namely the moment
  of self-moving Form.” (151)







  (Appearance
  is richer
  than law)



 







  But further on, although unclearly,
  it is admitted, it seems, p. 154,
  that law can make up for this Man-
  gel[30]
  and embrace both the negative
  side and the Totalität der Erschei-
  nung[31] (especially 154 i. f.). Re-
  turn to this!







 




  The World in and for itself is identical
  with the World of Appearances, but at the
  same time it is opposite to it. (158) What
  is positive in the one is negative in the
  other. What is evil in the World of Appear-
  ances is good in the world which is in and
  for itself. Cf.—Hegel says here—The Phe-
  nomenology of Mind, p. 121 et seq.


  “The Appearing and the Essential World
  are each ... the independent whole of Exis-
  tence. One was to have been only reflected
  Existence, and the other only immediate
  Existence; but each continues itself in
  the other, and consequently in itself is the
  identity of these two moments....Both
  in the first instance are independent, but
  they are independent only as totalities,
  and they are this insofar as each essentially
  has in itself the moment of the other....”
(159-160)




 







  The essence here is that both the
  world of appearances and the world in
  itself are moments of man’s knowledge
  of nature, stages, alterations or deepen-
  ings (of knowledge). The shifting of
  the world in itself further and further
from the world of appearances—that is
  what is so far still not to be seen in Hegel.
N B. Have not Hegel’s “moments” of
  the concept the significance of “mo-
  ments” of transition?







 




  ...“Thus Law is Essential
  Relation.” (160) (Hegel’s italics)


( Law is relation. This N B for the
  Machists and other agnostics, and for the
  Kantians, etc. Relation of essences or be-
  tween essences. )


  “The term world expresses the formless
  totality of multifariousness....” (160) 


  And the third chapter (“Essential Rela-
  tion”) begins with the proposition: “The
  truth of Appearance is Essential Relation....”
(161)


Subdivisions:
       The relation of Whole to
  Parts;
  this relation passes into the following one
  (sic!! (p. 168)):—of Force to its Man-
  ifestation;—of Inner to Outer.—
  The transition to Substance, Actu-
  ality.


  ...“The truth of the relation consists,
  then, in mediation....” (167)


  “Transition” to Force: “Force is the neg-
  ative unity into which the contradiction
  of Whole and Parts has resolved itself; it
  is the truth of that first Relation.”
(170)


  ((This is one of 1,000 similar passages
  in Hegel, which arouse the fury of naïve
  philosophers like Pearson, the author of The
  Grammar of Science.[32]—He quotes a
  similar passage and exclaims in fury: What
  a galimatias is being taught in our schools!!
  And in a certain limited sense he is right.
  To teach that is stupid. One must first of all
extract the materialistic dialectics from
  it. Nine-tenths of it, however, is chaff,
  rubbish.))


      Force makes its appearance as “belong-
  ing” (als angehörig) (171) ”to the existing
  Thing or Matter....” “When therefore it is
  asked how the Thing or Matter comes to
have a Force, then the Force appears as
  connected with it externally, and impressed
  on the Thing by an alien power.” (171)




 




  ...“This is apparent in all natural,
  scientific, and, in general,
  intellectual development;










  and it is essential to understand that the First,
  when as yet Something is internal, or in
  its concept, is, for this reason, only its
  immediate and passive existence....” (181)




 







#
     The beginning of everything can
be regarded as inner—passive—and
at the same time as outer.
     But what is interesting here is
not that, but something else: Hegel’s
criterion of dialectics that has acci-
dentally slipped in: “in all nat-
ural, scientific and in-
tellectual development”:
here we have a grain of profound
truth in the mystical integument of
Hegelianism!
  








  Example: the germ of a man, says Hegel,
  is only internal man, dem Anderssein Preis-
  gegebenes,[33] the passive.  Gott[34] at first
  is not yet Spirit. “Immediately,
  therefore, God is only Nature.”
  (182)
       (This is also characteristic!!)
  







      Feuerbach
  daran
  “knüpft
  an”.[35]
  Down with
  Gott, there
  remains
Nature.[36]



 


SECTION THREE:
ACTUALITY




  ...“Actuality is the unity of Essence and
  Existence....”(184)


      Subdivisions: 1) “The Absolute”—
  2) Actuality proper. “Actuality, Possibil-
  ity and Necessity constitute the formal
  moments of the Absolute.” 3) “Absolute
      Relation”: Substance.[37]


      “In it itself” (dem Absoluten) “there is
  no Becoming” (187)—and other nonsense about
      the Absolute....


      The Absolute is the absolute Absolute...




 




      The Attribute is a relative Absolute...






(!!)



 




  In a “note” Hegel speaks (all too gener-
  ally and obscurely) of the defects of the
  philosophy of Spinoza and Leibnitz.






  Inter alia note:
       “The one-sidedness of one philosophic
  principle is generally faced by its opposite
  one-sidedness, and, as everywhere, totality
  at least is found as a dispersed complete-
  ness” (197)






      usually: from
  one extreme
  to the other
      totality =(in
  the shape of)
  dispersed
  completeness





Actuality is higher than Being, and
  higher than Existence.




 





(1)


      Being is Imme-
  diate


  “Being is not
  yet actual.” (200)
  It passes into other.







(2)


  Existence (it
  passes into Ap-
  pearance)


  —arises out of Ground,
  out of Conditions,
  but it still lacks the
  unity of “Relfection
  and immediacy.”




(3)


  Actuality


  unity of Existence
  and Being-in-self
  (Ansichsein)



 






  ...“Actuality also stands higher than Exis-
  tence” (200)....


  ...“Real Necessity is a relation which
  is full of content”.... “But this Necessity is
  at the same time relative....” (211)


  “Absolute Necessity then is the truth
  into which Actuality and Possibility in
  general pass back, as well as Formal and
  Real Necessity.” (215)


  (Continued)[38]...


      (End of Volume II of the Logic, the Doc-
  trine of Essence)...


It is to be noted that in the small Logic
  (the Encyclopaedia)[39] the same thing is
  expounded very often  more clearly, with
  concrete examples. Cf. idem Engels and
  Kuno Fischer.[40]


      On the question of “possibility,” Hegel
  notes the emptiness of this category and
  says in the Encyclopaedia:
       “Whether a thing is possible or impossible
  depends on the content, i.e., on the sum-
  total of the moments of Actuality which in
  its unfolding discloses itself to be Ne-
  cessity.” (Encyclopaedia, Vol. VI, p. 287,[41]
  Â§ 143, Addendum.)




 







“The sum-total, the en-
  tirety of the moments of
  Actuality, which, in its  unfold-
  ing discloses itself to be Necessity.”
       The unfolding of the sum-total of
  the moments of actuality N B = the
  essence of dialectical cognition.







 




      Cf. In the same Encyclopaedia, Vol. VI,
p. 289, the eloquent words on the vanity of
  mere delight at the wealth and flux of the
  phenomena of nature and on the neces-
  sity

 
  ...“of advancing to a closer insight into
  the inner harmony and uniformity
  of nature....” (289) (Closenessto materialism.)


  Ibidem Encyclopaedia, p. 292: “Devel-
  oped Actuality, as the coincident alternation
  of Inner and Outer, the alternation of their
  opposite motions combined in a single
  motion, is Necessity.”






Encyclopaedia, Vol. VI, p. 294:
  ...“Necessity is blind only insofar as it
  is not understood....”


  Ibidem, p. 295 “it happens to him” (dem
  Menschen[42])...
  “that from his activity there
  arises something quite different from what
  he had meant and willed....”


  Ibidem, p. 301 “Substance is an essen-
  tial stage in the Process of
  development of the Idea....”












  Read: an important stage in the proc-
  ess of development of human knowl-
  edge of nature and matter.







 




Logik,[43] Vol. IV


      ...“It” (die Substanz) “is the Being in all
  Being....” (220)[44]


  The Relation of Substantiality passes
  over into the Relation of Causality. (223)


  ...“Substance attains ... Actuality only
  when it has become Cause....” (225).




 







  On the one hand, knowledge of mat-
  ter must be deepened to knowledge (to
  the concept) of Substance in order to
  find the causes of phenomena. On the
  other hand, the actual cognition of the
  cause is the deepening of knowledge
  from the externality of phenomena to
  the Substance. Two types of examples
  should explain this: 1) from the his-
  tory of natural science, and 2) from the
  history of philosophy. More exactly:
  it is not “examples” that should be
  here—comparison n’est pas raison,[45]—
  but the quintessence of the history of
  both the one and the other + the his-
  tory of technique.







 




  ...“Effect contains nothing whatever which
  Cause does not contain...” (226) und um-
  gekehrt[46]....




 







  Cause and effect, ergo, are merely mo-
  ments of universal reciprocal dependence,
  of (universal) connection, of therecip-
  rocal concatenation of events, merely
  links in the chain of the development
  of matter.







 




NB:
       “It is the same fact which displays itself
  first as Cause and then as Effect,—here as
  peculiar persistence and there as posited-
  ness or determination in an Other.” (227)




 







NB
       The all-sidedness and all-embrac-
  ing character of the interconnection
  of the world, which is only one-
  sidedly, fragmentarily amd incom-
  pletely expressed by causality.









  NB



 




  “But we may here and now observe that,
  insofar as the relation of cause and effect
  is admitted (although in an improper sense),
  effect cannot be greater than cause; for
  effect is nothing further than the manifes-
  tation of cause.” (230)




 




  And further about history. Hegel says
  that it is customary in history to quote
anecdotes as the minor “causes” of major
  events—in fact they are only occasions,
  only äußere Erregung,[47] which “the inner






  in history
  “minor causes
  of major
  events”





  spirit of the event would not have required.”
(230) “Consequently, these arabesques of
  history, where a huge shape is depicted as
  growing from a slender stalk, are a spright-
  ly but a most superficial treatment.” (Ibi-
  dem)




 







  This “inner spirit”—c.f. Plekhanov[48]—
  is an idealistic, mystical, but a very
  profound indication of the historical
  causes of events. Hegel subsumes his-
  tory completely under causality and un-
  derstands causality athousand times
  more profoundly and richly than the
  multitudeof “savants” nowadays.







 




  “Thus a stone in motion is cause; its
  movement is a determination which it has,
  while besides this it contains many other
  determinations of colour, shape, and so
  on, which do not enter into its causal na-
  ture.” (232)









  Causality, as usually understood by
  us, is only a small particle of universal
  interconnection, but (a materialist ex-
  tension) a particle not of the subjective,
  but of the objectively real intercon-
  nection.







 




  “But the movement of the Determi-
  nate Relation of Causality has now
  resulted in this, that the cause is not
  merely extinguished in the effect, and
  with it the effect too (as happens in Formal
  Causality),—but the cause in its extinction,
  in the effect, becomes again; that effect
  vanishes into cause, but equally becomes
  again in it. Each of these determinations
  cancels itself in its positing and posits it-
  self in its cancellation; what takes place
  is not an external transition of causality
  from one substratum to another, but this
  its becoming other is at the same time
  its own positing. Causality, then, presup-
  poses or conditions itself.” (235)




 







  “The movement of the relation of cau-
  sality” = in fact: the movement of mat-
  ter, respective the movement of history,
  grasped, mastered in its inner connec-
  tion up to one or other degree of breadth
  or depth....







 




  “At this point Reciprocity presents itself
  as a reciprocal causality of presupposed
  substances conditioning each other; each
  is, in relation to the other, at once active
  and passive substance.” (240)


  “In Reciprocity, original Causality pre-
  sents itself as an arising out of its negation
  (or passivity) and as a passing away into
  it—as a Becoming....




 




  “Necessity and Causality have, then,
  vanished in it; they contain both the imme-
  diate identity (as connection and relation)






  “connection
  and relation”





  and the absolute substantiality of dis-






tincts, and therefore their absolute con-
  tingency,—the original unity of substan-
  tial variety, hence absolute contradiction.
  Necessity is Being, because it is;—the self-






  “unity of sub-
  stance in the
  distinct”  





  unity of Being, which has itself for ground;
  but, conversely, because it has a ground,






  it is not Being, it is nothing whatever but
Semblance, relation or mediation. Cau-
  sality is this posited transition of original
  Being, or cause, into Semblance or mere






  relation,
      mediation





  positedness, and conversely of positedness
  into originality; but the identity itself
  of Being and Semblance is, still, inner Ne-
  cessity. This internality (or Being-in-Self)
  transcends the movement of Causality; and
  concurrently, the substantiality of the sides






  which are in relation is lost—Necessity
  reveals itself. Necessity does not become
  Freedom because it vanishes, but only
  because its identity (as yet an inner iden-
  tity) is manifested.” (241-242)






  necessity does
  not disap-
  pear, when it
  becomes
  freedom



 







  When one reads Hegel on causality,
  it appears strange at first glance that
  he dwells so relatively lightly on this
  theme, beloved of the Kantians. Why?
    Because, indeed, for him causality is
  only one of the determinations of univer-
  sal connection, which he had already
  covered earlier, in his entire exposition,
  much more deeply and all-sidedly; al-
  ways and from the very outset empha-
  sising this connection, the reciprocal
  transitions, etc., etc. It would be very
  instructive to compare the “birth-
  pangs” of neo-empiricism (respective
  “physical idealism”) with the solutions
  of rather with the dialectical method
  of Hegel.







 




  It is to be noted also that in the Ency-
  clopaedia Hegel stresses the inadequacy
  and emptiness of the bare concept of “re-
  ciprocal action.”


Vol. VI, p. 308 [49]:
       “Reciprocity is undoubtedly the proxi-
  mate truth of the relation of cause and
  effect, and stands, so to say, on the thresh-
  old of the Notion, nevertheless, precisely
  on this account one should not rest con-
  tent with applying this relation, insofar
  as it is a matter of, conceptual cognition.




 




  If one gets no further than considering
  a given content merely from the point of
  view of reciprocity, then such an atti-
  tude is in fact quite without concept; it is






  mere
  “recipro-
  city” =
  emptiness





  then merely a matter of a dry fact, and






  the requirement of mediation, which is
  the point of immediate concern in apply-
  ing the relation of causality, still remains






  the require-
  ment of med-
  iation, (of





  unsatisfied. On closer examination, the
  deficiency in the application of the rela-
  tion of reciprocal action is seen to be that
  this relation, instead of being the equiva-
  lent of the Notion, has itself to be grasped
  first of all. And this occurs through its






  connection),
  that is the
  point at issue
  in applying
  the relation
  of causality





  two sides not being left as an immediate
  datum but, as was shown in the two pre-
  ceding paragraphs, being recognised as mo-
  ments of a third, higher determination,
  which is precisely the Notion. If, for
  example, we regard the customs of the
  Spartans as the effect of their constitu-
  tion, and the latter, conversely, as the
  effect of their customs, such a view may






  perhaps be correct, but it is a conception
  that. gives no final satisfaction, because in
  point of fact it enables neither the con-
  stitution nor the customs of this people






NB
   
     
  NB





  to be understood. Such understanding can
  only come about when these two aspects,
  and likewise all the other special aspects
  of the life and the history of the Spartans
  are recognised to be grounded in this
  Notion.” (308-309)






  all the “spe-
  cial aspects”
  of the whole
  (“Begriff”[50])



 




— — — — —
       At the end of the second volume of the
Logic, Vol. VI, p. 243, in the transition
  to the “Notion,” the determination is given:
  “the Notion, the realm of Subjectivity, or
  of Freedom....”




 







NB  Freedom = Subjectivity
                 
        (“or”)
  End, Consciousness, Endeavour
                 
                 
          NB







 


 

Notes
[1] Hegel, Werke, Bd. IV, Berlin, 
1834.—Ed.
[2] Incidentally. Hegel more than once pokes fun at [cf.
the passages cited above on gradualness] the word (and the concept)
erklären (explanation), obviously opposing to the metaphysical solution once
for all (“it has been explained”!!) the eternal process of cognition
penetrating deeper and deeper. Cf. Volume III, p. 463: “can be cognised
or,as they say, explained.”—Ed.
[3] movement—Ed.
[4] The Essential and the Unessential.—Ed.
[5] approximately.—Ed.
[6] Semblance or Show—Ed.
[7] The refernece is to Die Kritik der Urteilskraft by Kant.
[8] If it may be called that—Ed.
[9] Variants of the translation of the German word “die 
Reflexion” into Russian are given within the parentheses.—Ed.
[10] The word Gegensatz is crossed out in the MS.—Ed.
[11] consideration, etc., “insofar as,” etc.—Ed.
[12] “for the objective positive”—Ed.
[13] “everything is the term of an opposition”—Ed.
[14] rescued—Ed.
[15] Lenin is referring to the appearance of the following three
works: Hegel’s Science of Logic
(the first two books were published
in 1812 and 1813, respectively); Marx and Engels’ Manifesto of the
Communist Party (written at the end of 1847 and published in February 1848); and
Darwin’s Origin of Species (published in 1859).
[16] The word “receive” is crossed out in the MS.—Ed.
[17] “relation” of causes—Ed.
[18] matter—Ed.
[19] real Ground—Ed.
[20] “multiple”—“content determinations,
relations and considerations”—Ed.
[21] empty—Ed.
[22] Hegel materialistically turned upside down—Ed.
[23] It coincides.—Ed.
[24] approximately—Ed.
[25] “external reflection”—Ed.
[26] thinghood—Ed.
[27] property—Ed.
[28] “substance”—Ed.
[29] “quiescent”—Ed.
[30] deficiency—Ed.
[31] Totality of Appearance—Ed.
[32] The reference is to K. Pearson’s work The
Grammar of Science, London, 1892.
[33] something given up to otherness—Ed.
[34] God—Ed.
[35] “links up” to this—Ed.
[36] nature—Ed.
[37] Here Lenin’s manuscript gives the list of chapters of Section III:
1) “The Absolute”; 2) “Actuality”; 3) “The Absolute 
Relation.”—Ed.
[38] At this point Lenin’s manuscript continues in a new 
notebook.—Ed.
[39] The reference is to Enzyklopädie der philosophischen Wissenschaften
im Grundrisse. Hegel, Werke, Bd. 6, Berlin, 1840 (Encyclopaedia of
the Philosophical Sciences in Outline, Hegel, Works, Vol. 6, Berlin, 1840). “Logic”
constitutes Part I of the Encyclopaedia and is referred to by Lenin as “small” to
distinguish it from the “large” Scienceof Logic, which consists of three volumes.
[40] Lenin is referring to remarks by Engels on Hegel’s Encyclopaedia.
See Engels’ letter to Marx dated September 21, 1874. Also see Engels’ letter to Conrad Schmidt
dated November 1, 1891 (Marx and Engels, Selected Correspondence, Moscow, 1955, pp. 519-520).
     Kuno Fischer—a German bourgeois historian of philosophy and
the author of The History of Modern Philosophy, one of whose volumes (Vol. 8) is devoted to Hegel.
[41] Hegel, Werke, Bd. VI, Berlin, 1840.—Ed.
[42] to man.—Ed.
[43] Logic—Ed.
[44] Hegel, Werke, Bd. IV, Berlin, 1834.—Ed.
[45] comparison is not proof—Ed.
[46] and vice versa—Ed.
[47] external stimulus—Ed.
[48] See G. Plekhanov, “For the Sixtieth Anniversary
of Hegel’s Death,” (Selected Philosophical Works, Vol. I, Moscow, 1960).
[49] Hegel, Werke, Bd. VI, Berlin, 1840.—Ed.
[50] “notion”—Ed.
 


<< Index to Lenin’s 
  Conspectus of Hegel’s Science of Logic  
 

  




Works Index
   |   
 Volume 38

 | 

Collected Works
      |   L.I.A. Index




<
backward




forward >





 



==========

## Subjective Logic or the Doctrine of the
      Notion











Lenin's Conspectus of Hegel's Science of Logic: Book III (Subjective Logic or the Doctrine of the Notion)



Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Conspectus of Hegel’s
Science of Logic —
  Book III (Subjective Logic or
  the Doctrine of the Notion)


Note: Quoted text and page numbers—i.e., (167)—indicate links to passages in
   Hegel’s Science of Logic
and to Hegel’s Encyclopaedia
of the Philosophical Sciences in Outline, also known as the Shorter Logic.
 
The section known as Lenin’s “Summary of Dialectics” also exists in
the Lenin Internet Archive on a
separate page paired with Lenin’s “On the Question of Dialectics”—KCG, 2007.




Book Three:
(Subjective Logic or the Doctrine of the Notion)


Vol. V. The Science of Logic
Part II:  Subjective Logic   or  the Doctrine
of the Notion

ON THE NOTION IN GENERAL




  In the first two parts, says Hegel, I had
  no Vorarbeiten,[1] but here, on the other
  hand, there is “verknöchertes Material”[2]
  (which it is necessary to “in Flüssigkeit brin-
  gen”[3]...) (3) [4]


  “Being and Essence are the moments of
  its becoming” (=des Begriffs).[5] (5)









  Should be inverted: concepts are
  the highest product of the brain,
  the highest product of matter.







 




  “Accordingly Objective Logic, which con-
  siders Being and Essence, really constitutes
  the genetic exposition of the Notion.” (6)






9-10: 

  The great significance of the phi-
  losophy of Spinoza as the philosophy
  of substance (this standpoint is very
advanced, but it is incomplete and
  not the most advanced: in general
  the refutation of a philosophic system
  does not mean discarding it, but de-
  veloping it further, not replacing it
  by another, one-sided opposed system,
  but incorporating it into something
  more advanced). In Spinoza’s system
  there is no free, independent, conscious
  subject (it lacks “the freedom and inde-
  pendence of the self-conscious subject”)
(10),
  but in Spinoza also thought
  is an attribute of substance. (10 i. f.[6])



13 

  i. f.: Incidentally—just as at one time
  it was the fashion in philosophy “das
  Schlimme nachzusagen” der Einbil-
  dungskraft und den Gedächtnisse[7]—so
  now it is the fashion to belittle
  the significance of the “notion” (=“das
  höchste des Denkens”[8]) and to praise
  “das Unbegriefliche”[9] |allusion to
  Kant?|.



 






Passing to criticism of Kantian-
  ism, Hegel regards as Kant’s great
  merit (15) the advancement of the
  idea of the “transcendental unity of
  apperception” (the unity of the con-
  sciousness in which the Begriff is cre-
  ated), but he reproaches Kant for his
one-sidedness and subjec-
  tivism:




 




  “The object is truly in and for it-
  self only as it is in thought; as it is in
  intuition or ideation, it is appear-
  ance....” (16) (Hegel raises Kant’s
  idealism from being subjective to be-
  ing objective and absolute)....







  from intui-
  tion to
  cognition of
  objective
  reality...



 




Kant admits the objectivity of con-
  cepts (Wahrheit[10] is their object),
  but all the same leaves them subjective.


   He makes Gefühl und Anschau-
   ung[11] precede Understanding. (Ver-
   stand). Hegel speaks of this as
   follows:


“Now, first, with regard to this relation
  of the understanding or the Notion to the
  stages which are supposed to precede it,
  it is of importance what science it is that
  is being treated, in order to determine the
  form of these stages. In our science, since
  it is pure logic, these stages are Being and
Essence. In psychology, sensation and in-
  tuition and also ideation in general pre-
  cede understanding. In the Phenomenology
  of Mind, since it is the doctrine of con-
  sciousness, the acsent was made through
  the stages of sensuous consciousness and,
  next, perception, to understanding.” (17)
  In Kant the exposition is very “incom-
  plete” here.


  After that—the CHIEF THING—






  ...“The Notion must not here be
  considered as an act of self-conscious
  understanding, or as subjective under-
  standing: what we have to do with






  is the Notion in and for itself, which
  constitutes a STAGE AS WELL OF







  The “eve” of
  the transfor-





NATURE AS OF SPIRIT.  LIFE,
  OR ORGANIC NATURE, IS
  THAT STAGE OF NATURE AT
  WHICH THE NOTION EMER-
  GES.” (18)







  mation of
  objective
  idealism into
  materialism



 




  There follows a very interesting passage
  (pp. 19-27) where Hegel refutes Kant,
preciselyepistemologically (Engels
probably had this passage in mind when he
  wrote in Ludwig Feuerbach[12] that the main
  point against Kant had already been made
  by Hegel, insofar as this was possible
  from an idealistic standpoint),—exposing
  Kant’s duality and inconsistency, his,so
  to speak, vacillation between empiricism
  (= materialism) and idealism, Hegel him-
  self arguing wholly and exclu-
  sively from the standpoint of a more
  consistent idealism.




 







  Begriff is still not the highest concept:
  still higher is the Idea = the unity of
  Begriff and Reality.







 




  “‘It is only a notion’ is a thing com-
  monly said; and not only the Idea, but sen-
  suous, spatial, and temporally palpable
  existence is opposed to the Notion, as
  something which is more excellent than
  it. And the abstract is counted of less
  worth than the concrete, because from the
  former so much, of that kind, of material
  has been omitted. To those who hold this
  view, the process of abstraction means that
for our subjective needs one or another
  characteristic is taken out of the concrete in
  such a manner that, while so many other
  properties and modifications of the ob-
  ject are omitted, it loses nothing in value






  or dignity. They are the real and are reck-
  oned as counting in full, only they are
  left on the other side; and it is only the
  incapacity of understanding to absorb such
  riches that forces it to rest content with







  Kant
  belittles the
  power of
  reason





  meagre abstraction. But if the given ma-
  terial of intuition and the manifold of
  ideation are taken as the real in opposi-
  tioh to that which is thought and to the






  Notion, then this is a view the renuncia-
  tion of which is not only a condition of
  philosophy, but is assumed even by reli-
  gion; for how can these be needed and
  have significance if the fugitive and super-
  ficial appearance of the sensuous and the in-
  dividual are taken for the truth?.. Con-







  the more
      consistent
  idealist
  clings to
God!





  sequently, abstracting thought must not
  be considered as a mere setting-aside of
  the sensuous material, whose reality is
  said not to be lowered thereby; but it is
  its transcendence, and the reduction of it
  (as mere appearance) to the essential, which
  manifests itself in the Notion only.” (19-21)




 







Essentially, Hegel is completely right
  as opposed to Kant. Thought proceeding
  from the concrete to the abstract—
  provided it is correct (NB) (and Kant,
  like all philosophers, speaks of correct
  thought)—does not get away from
  the truth but comes closer to it. The
  abstraction of matter, of a law of nature,
  the abstraction of value, etc., in short
all scientific (correct, serious, not ab-
  surd) abstractions reflect nature more
  deeply, truly and completely. From
  living perception to abstract thought,
and from this to practice,—such is the
  dialectical path of cognition of
truth, of cognition of objective real-
  ity. Kant disparages knowledge in order
  to make way for faith: Hegel exalts
  knowledge, asserting that knowledge is
  knowledge of God. The materialist exalts
  knowledge of matter, of nature,
  consigning God, and the philosophical
  rabble that defends God, to the rubbish
  heap.







 




  “A principal misapprehension here is
  that the natural principle or the beginning,
  which is the starting-point in natural de-
  velopment or in the history of the individ-
  ual in its formation, is taken as the true
  and as that which is first also in the No-
  tion.” (21) (—It is correct that people
  begin with that, but truth lies not in
  the beginning but in the end, or rather,
  in the continuation. Truth is not the ini-
  tial impression)....“But philosophy is not
  meant to be a narrative of what happens,
  but the cognition of what is true in happen-
  ings.” (21)


  In Kant there is “psychological ideal-
  ism” (22): Kant's categories “are only
  determinations which are derived from self-
  consciousness.” (22) Rising from under-
  standing (Verstand) to Reason (Vernunft),
  Kant belittles the significance of thought,
  denying is the capacity to “reach perfected
  truth.” (23)


  “It is declared” (Kant) “to be an abuse if
  logic, which ought to be merely a canon
  of judgment, is regarded as an organ for
  the production of objective discoveries. The
  notions of Reason, in which a higher






  force (an idealistic phrase!) and a deeper
  (correct!!) content were of necessity
  divined, are less Konstitutives[13] |it should
  be: Objektives[14]| than even the categories;
  they are mere ideas. Their use may cer-
  tainly be permissible, but these intelligible










  essences, which should wholly unlock the
  truth, are to signify no more than hypothe-
  ses; and it would be completely arbitrary
  and reckless to ascribe any truth to them
  in and for themselves, since they can occur
  in no kind of experience. Could it ever
  have been thought that philosophy would
  gainsay the validity of the intelligible essences
  because they are without the spatial and
  temporal material of sensuousness?” (23)









  Here, too, Hegel is essentially right:
value isa category which entbehrt des
  Stoffes der Sinnlichkeit,[15] but it is
truer than the law of supply and
  demand.
  Only Hegel is an idealist; hence the
  nonsense of “konstitutives,”[16] etc.









  Kant, on the other hand, quite clearly recog-
  nises the “objectivity” (24) of thought
  (“des Denkens”) (“an identity of the Notion
  and the thing” (24))—but, on the other hand,






  “the assertion is made again that we sure-
  ly cannot know things as they are in and
  for themselves, and that truth does not
  allow cognising reason to approach it; that
  truth which consists in the unity of object
  and Nation is after all only appearance, and







NB
      Hegel in
  favour of the
  cognisability
  of the Thing-
  in-itself





  the reason now is that content is only the
  manifold of intuition. Of this argument it
  has been remarked that this manifoldness,
  insofar as it belongs to intuition as op-
  posed to the Notion, is transcended precisely
  in the Notion, and that the object is led back






  by the Notion into its non-contingent essen-
  tiality; the latter enters into appearance,
  and for this very reason the appearance is
  mamfestatlon not merely non-essential, but
  manifestation of Essence.” (24, 25)







  appearance is
  manifestation
  of essence



 




“It will always remain a matter for aston-
  ishment how the Kantian philosophy knew
  that relation of thought to sensuous exist-
  ence, where it halted, for a merely rela-
  tive relation of bare appearance, and fully
  acknowledged and asserted a higher unity
  of the two in the Idea in general, and, for
  example, in the idea of an intuitive under-
  standing; but yet stopped dead at this rel-






  ative relation and at the assertion that the
  Notion is and remains utterly separated







NB
NB





  from reality;—so that it affirmed as truth
  what it pronounced to be finite knowledge,
  and declared to be superfluous, improper,
  and figments of thought that which it
  recognised as truth, and of which it estab-
  lished the definite notion” (26)







NB



 




  In logic, the Idea “becomes the creator
  of Nature.” (26)







  !!Ha-ha!



 




  Logic is “formelle Wissenschaft”[17] (27)
  as against the concrete sciences (of nature
  and mind), but its object matter is “die
  reine Warheit”[18]....(27)


      Kant himself, in asking what truth is (27)
  (the Critique of Pure
      Reason p. 83) and
  giving a trivial answer (“correspondence
  of knowledge with its object”), strikes at
  himself, for “the fundamental assertion
  of transcendental idealism” is
           —that “cognition is not capable of appre-
  hending Things-in-themselves”(27)—
           —and it is clear that all this is “an
  untrue idea.” (28)


      In arguing against the purely formal con-
  ception of logic (which Kant, too, is said
  to have)—saying that from the ordinary
  standpoint (truth is the correspondence
|“Übereinstimmung”| of knowledge with
  the object) correspondence “essentially de- 
  mands two sides” (29), Hegel says that the
  formal element in logic is “pure truth” (29)
  and that


  ...“this formal element must therefore
  be thought of as being in itself much richer
  in determinations and content, and as hav-
  ing infinitely more influence upon the
  concrete, than it is generally held to have....
(29)




 




  ...“But, even if the logical forms are to
  be regarded as nothing more than formal
  functions of thought, yet this character
  would make them worthy of an investi-
  gation as to how far they correspond to
  the truth in themselves. A system of logic
  which neglects this can claim at most
  to have the value of a natural-historical
  description of the empirical phenomena of
  thought.” (30-31) (Herein is said to lie







  ?
   
   
   
   
  ?





    the immortal merit of Aristotle), but “it
  is necessary to go further....” (31)









  Thus, not only a description of the
forms of thought
  and not only a nat-
  ural-historical descrip-
  tion of the phenomena of
  thought (wherein does that differ from
  adescription of forms??) but also
correspondence with truth,
  i.e.??, the quintessence  or, more sim-
  ply, the results and outcome of the his-
  tory of thought?? Here Hegel is ideal-
  istically unclear, and fails to speak
  out fully. Mysticism.





Not psychology, not the
phenomenology of mind,
but logic = the question
of truth.
      
















  In this con-
  ception, log-
  ic coincides
  with the
theory of
  knowl-
  edge. This
  is in general
  a very
  important
  question. ‡









  Cf. Encyclopaedia, Vol. VI, p. 319 [19]:
  “But in point of fact they” (die logischen
  Formen[20]), “turned round as forms of the
  notion, constitute the living spirit of the
  actual....”











    The general
  laws of move-
  ment of the
    world and
    of thought







 




      Begriff in its development into “adäquaten







‡





  Begriff,”[21] becomes the Idea. (33)[22]
  “Notion in its objectivity is the object
  which is in and for itself.” (33)







NB
   
NB










  = objectivism + mysticism
  and betrayal of development
    







 

SECTION ONE:
    SUBJECTIVITY





  The dialectical movement of the “No-
  tion”—from the purely “formal” notion
  at the beginning—to the Judgement (Urteil),
  then—to the Syllogism (Schluß) and—fi-
  nally to the transformation of the subjectiv-
  ity of the Notion into its objectivity.
  (34-35)[23]


  The first distinguishing feature of the
  Notion is Universaltity (Allegemeinheit). NB:
  The Notion grew out of Essence, and the
  latter out of Being.




 




      The further development of the Uni-
  versal, the Particular (Besonderes) and the
Individual (Einzelnes) is in the highest
  degree abstract and “abstruse.”


  The further development of the Uni-
  versal, the Particular (Besonderes) and the
Individual (Einzelnes) is in the highest
  degree abstract and “abstruse.”










  En lisant...
    These parts
    of the work
    should be
    called: a best
    means for
    getting a
    headache![24]












  Kuno Fischer expounds the “abstruse”
  considerations very poorly, taking up the
lighter points—examples  from the Ency-
  clopaedia, and adding banalities
  (against the French Revolution. Kuno
  Fischer, Vol. 8, 1901, p. 530), etc.,
  but not showing the reader how to look
  for the key to the difficult transitions,
  nuances, ebbs and flows of Hegel’s
  abstract concepts.












Obviously, here too the chief thing
  for Hegel is to trace the transitions.
  From a certain point of view, under
  certain conditions, the universal is the
  individual, the individual is the uni-
  versal. Not only (1) connection, and
  inseparable connection, of all concepts
  and judgements, but (2) transitions from
  one into the other, and not only transi-
  tions, but also (3) identity of opposites—
  that is the chief thing for Hegel. But
  this merely “glimmers” through the fog of
  extremely abstruse exposition. The his-
tory of thought from the standpoint
  of the development and application of
  the general concepts and categories of
  the Logic—voilà ce qu’il faut![25]

 












  Or is this
after all a
  tribute to old
  formal logic?
  Yes! And
  another trib-
  ute—a trib-
  ute to mys-
  ticism =
  idealism





    Voilà an
abundance of
“determina-
tions” and of
Begriffsbe-
stimmungen[26]
in this part
of the Logic!
  



 




  Quoting, on p. 125, the “famous” syllo-
  gism—“all men are mortal, Gaius is a man,
  therefore he is mortal”—Hegel shrewdly






  adds: “Boredom immediately descends when
  such a syllogism is heard approaching”—
  this is declared to be due to the “unnützen






  True!





  Form,”[27] and Hegel makes the profound
  remark:






  “All things are a Syllogism, a universal
  which is bound together with individuality
  through particularity; but of course they
  are not wholes consisting of three propo-
  sitions.” (126)






NB
  “All things
  are a syllo-
  gism”...
NB



 







Very good! The most common logical
  “figures”—(all this is in the Par. on the
  “First Figure of the Syllogism”) are the
  most common relations of things, set
  forth with the pedantic thoroughness of
  a school textbook, sit venia verbo.[28]







 







  Hegel’s analysis of syllogisms (E.—
  B.—A., Eins[29]; Besonderes[30]; Allge-
  meines,[31]
  B.—E.—A., etc.) recalls
  Marx’s imitation of Hegel in Chapter
  I.[32]







 





On Kant





      Inter alia:
       “Kant’s Antinomies of Reason are just
  this, that first one determination of a No-
  tion is made the foundation of the Notion,
  and next, and with equal necessity,
  the other....” (128-129)




 







  One
  would
  have to
  return to
  Hegel for
  a step-by-
  step anal-
  ysis of
  any cur-
  rent logic
  and theo-
  ry of
  knowl-
  edgeof
  a Kan-
  tian, etc.



   
     
NB:
  Umkeh-
  ren[33]
  Marx
applied
  Hegel’s
  dialectics
  in its
  rational
  form to
  political
  economy




  The formation of (abs-
  tract) notions and opera-
  tions with them already in-
  cludes the idea, conviction,
consciousness of
  the law-governed character
  to the world. To distinguish
  causality from this connec-
  tion is stupid. To deny the
  objectivity of notions, the
  objectivity of the universal
  in the individual and in the
  particular, is impossible.
  Consequently, Hegel is much
  more profound than Kant,
  and others, in tracing the
  reflection of the movement
  of the objective world in the
  movement of notions. Just
  as the simple form of value,
  the individual act of ex-
  change of one given com-
  modity for another, already
  includes in an underdeveloped
  form all the main contradic-
  tions of capitalism,—so the
  simpler generalisation, the
  first and simplest formation
  of notions (judgements, syl-
  logisms, etc.) already de-
  notes man’s ever deeper cog-
  nition of the objective con-
  nection of the world. Here is
  where one should look for
  the true meaning, signifi-
  cance and role of Hegel’s
Logic. This NB.




     
     
   
     
NB
  Con-
  cerning
  the
  ques-
  tion of
  the true
  signifi-
  cance of
  He-
  gel’s
Logic





   






Two aphorisms:
  




  Concerning
  the question
  of the criti-
  cism of mod-
  ern Kantian-
  ism, Mach-
  ism, etc.:




  1. Plekhanov criticises Kantianism (and
  agnosticism in general) more from a vul-
  gar-materialistic standpoint than from a
  dialectical-materialistic standpoint, inso-
  far as he merely rejects their views a li-
  mine,[34]
  but does not correct them (as He-
  gel corrected Kant), deepening, generalis-
  ing and extending them, showing the
connection and transitions of
  each and every concept.








  2. Marxists criticised (at the beginning
  of the twentieth century) the Kantians
  and Humists more in the manner of Feuer-
  bach (and Büchner) than of Hegel.








  ...“An experience which rests upon in-
  duction is taken as valid although admitted-
  ly the perception is not completed; but no
  more can be assumed than that no example
  can be produced contrary to this experience,
  insofar as the latter is true in and for
  itself.” (154)


NB







  This passage is in the §: “The Syllo-
  gism of Induction.” The simplest truth
  obtained in the simplest inductive way
  is always incomplete. Ergo: the connection
  of induction with analogy—with sur-
  mise (scientific foresight), the relativity
  of all knowledge and the absolute con-
  tent in each step forward in cognition.












Aphorism: It is impossible completely
  to understand Marx’s Capital, and es-
  pecially its first chapter, without having
  thoroughly studied and understood the
whole of Hegel’s Logic. Consequently,
  half a century later none of the Marxists
  understood Marx!!













  The transition from the syllogism
  of analogy (about analogy) to the syllogism
  of necessity,—from the syllogism of induc-
  tion to the syllogism of analogy,—the
  syllogism of the universal to the individ-
  ual—the syllogism[35] from the individual
  to the universal,—the exposition of con-
  nection and transitions |con-
  nection is transition|, that is Hegel’s





    aphorism.




  task. Hegel actually proved that
  logical forms and laws are not an empty
  shell, but the reflection of the objec-








tive world. More correctly, he did not
  prove, but made a brilliant guess.






 




  In the Encyclopaedia Hegel re-
  marks that the division of Understanding
  and Reason, of Notions of one kind or
  the other must be understood in such a way
       “that our mode of behaviour is either






  to stop short at the merely negative and
  abstract form of the Notion, or to conceive
  the latter, in accordance with its true






  abstract and
  concrete
  notions





  nature, as that which is at once positive





  
  and concrete. Thus, for example, if freedom
  is regarded as the abstract opposite of ne-
  cessity, this is merely the Notion of under-
  standing of freedom, whereas the true and
  rational Notion of freedom contains ne-
  cessity as transcended within it.” (Pp. 347-
  348), Vol. VI[36])






  Freedom and
  Necessity



 




      Ibidem p. 349: Aristotle described the
  logical forms so completely that “essen-
  tially” there has been nothing to add.


  Usually the “figures of the syllogism”
  are regarded as empty formalism. “They”
  (these figures) “have, however, a very fun-
  damental meaning, based on the necessity
  that every moment, as determination of
  the Notion, itself becomes the whole and
mediating Ground.” (352, Vol. VI)


Encyclopaedia (Vol. VI, pp. 353-354)




 




  “The objective meaning of the figures
  of the syllogism is in general that every-
  thing rational is manifested as a threefold
  syllogism, such that each of its members
  assumes the position of one of the extremes






NB





  as well as that of the mediating middle.
  Such, for example, is the case with the three
  branches of philosophy, i. e., the Logical






  Idea, Nature and Mind. Here it is Nature
  that is first of all the middle, connecting
  member. Nature, this immediate totality,
  unfolds itself in the two extremes of the






NB





  Logical Idea and Mind.”[37]




 







“Nature, this immediate totality, un-
  folds itself in the Logical Idea and
  Mind.” Logic is the science of cognition.
  It is the theory of knowledge. Knowl-
  edge is the reflection of nature by man.
  But this is not simple, not an imme-
  diate, not a complete reflection, but
  the process of a series of abstractions,
  the formation and development of con-
  cepts, laws, etc., and these concepts,
  laws, etc., (thought, science = “the log-
  ical Idea”) embrace conditionally, ap-
  proximately, the universal, law-governed
  character of eternally moving and de-
  veloping nature. Here there are actually,
  objectively, three members: 1) nature;
  2) human cognition = the human
brain (as the highest product of this
  same nature), and 3) the form of reflec-
  tion of nature in human cognition, and
  this form consists precisely of con-
  cepts, laws, categories, etc. Man cannot
  comprehend = reflect = mirror nature as
  a whole, in its completeness, its “imme-
  diate totality,” he can only eternally
  come closer to this, creating abstrac-
  tions, concepts, laws, a scientific pic-
  ture of the world, etc., etc.













  NB:
    Hegel “only”
    deifies this
    “logical
    idea,” obe-
    dience to
    law, univer-
    sality







 




  + “Spirit, however, is only spirit through
  being mediated by Nature....”It is Spirit
  that recognises the logical Idea in Nature






NB





  and so raises it to its essence....” “The
  logical Idea is ‘the absolute Substance
  both of Spirit and of Nature, the universal,
  the all-pervading.’” (353-354)


  In regard to analogy an acute observation:






      “It is the instinct of reason which allows
  one to divine that one or another empiri-
  cally found determination has its roots in
  the inner nature or genus, of an object,
  and which bases itself further on this de-
  termination.” (357) (VoL VI, p. 359)









  And p. 358: And justifiable contempt for
  the philosophy of nature has been
  evoked by the futile play with empty
  analogies.  













  Against
  himself!









  In ordinary logic[38] thought is formal-
  istically divorced from objectivity.


  “Thought is held here to be a mere sub-
  jective and formal activity, and what is
  objective is held to be, in contrast to
  thought, something firm and present for
  itself. This dualism, however, is not the
  truth, and it is thoughtless procedure to
  accept the determinations of subjectivity
  and objectivity in this way without fur-
  ther question, and without inquiring into
  their origin....” (359-360) In reality, sub-
  jectivity is only a stage of development
  from Being and Essence—whereupon this
  subjectivity “dialectically ‘breaks through
  its barrier’” and “opens out into objectiv-
  ity by means of the syllogism.” (360)









  Very profound and clever! The laws
  of logic are the reflections of the objec-
  tive in the subjective consciousness of
  man.







 




  Vol. VI, p. 360
       “The realised Notion” is the object.


  This transition from the subject, from
  the notion, to the object is said to seem
  “strange,” but by the object one should
      understand not simply Being, but some-
  thing definitive, “something independent,
  concrete and complete in itself....” (361)
  “The world is the other being of the Idea.”


  Subjectivity (or the Notion) and the
  object—are the same and not the same....
  (362).









  Nonsense about the ontological argu-
  ment, about God!













  ...“It is wrong to regard subjectivity and
  objectivity as a fixed and abstract antithe-
  sis. Both are wholly dialectical....” (367)





    NB


   



 


SECTION TWO:
      OBJECTIVITY




(Logic) V, 178:[39]
       The twofold significance of objectivity:
  ...“similarly a twofold significance appears
  for Objectivity: it stands opposed to the in-
  dependent Notion, but also is that which






  objectivity





  is in and for itself....” (178)




 




      ...“The knowledge of truth is placed in
  the cognition of the object as object without
  the addition of any subjective reflection...”
  (178)






  cognition of
  the object



 







Discourses on “mechanism”—further
  on—extremely abstruse and almost com-
  plete nonsense.
       Further, idem about chemism, the stages
  of “judgment,” etc.







 




  The paragraph entitled “Law” (198-199)
  does not give what could be expected
  from Hegel on such an interesting question.
  It is strange why “law” is referred to “mech-
  anism”?




 




  The concept of law approximates
  here the concepts “order” (Ordnung);
  uniformity (Gleichförmigkeit); necessi-






  this approxi-
  mation is
  very important





  ty; the “soul” der objektiven Totalität;[40]
  the “principle of self-movement.”




 







All this from the standpoint that mech-
  anism is the other-being of spirit, of
  the Notion, etc., of the soul, of individ-
  uality.... Obviously, playing with
  empty analogies!







 




      To be noted: on p. 210 the concept of






  “Naturnotwendigkeit”[41] is encountered—
  “both mechanism and Chemism are, then,
  comprehended under natural necessity”...
  for we see here “its” (des Begriffs) “submer-









((( sion into externality” (ibidem).     ))






  “nature =
  submersion
  of the No-
  tion into
  externality”
  (ha-ha!)





  “It was mentioned that the opposition be-
  tween Teleology and Mechanism is, in the
  first instance, the more general opposition
  between freedom and necessity. Kant sets






      freedom and
  necessity





  out the opposition in this form under the
  Antinomies of Reason, as the ‘Third Con-
  flict of Transcendental Ideas.’” (213) Briefly
  repeating Kant’s proofs, thesis and antith-
  esis, Hegel notes the hollowness of these
  proofs and directs attention to the result
  of Kant’s considerations:






  Kant’s solution of this Antinomy is
  the same as the general solution of the
  others: that reason can prove neither of
  these propositions, since we can have no
  determinant principle a priori about the pos-
  sibility of things according to mere empirical






      Hegel versus
  Kant (on
  freedom and
  necessity)





  laws of nature; consequently the two must






not be regarded as objective prop-
  ositions but as subjective maxims;









  on the one hand I ought always to reflect
upon all natural events according to the
  principle of pure natural mechanism; but






  this does" not prevent me from investigat-
  ing certain forms of nature, should the
  occasion be given, according to another






  Bien!





  maxim, namely, that of final causes;—as
  though these two maxims (which further
  are supposed to be required only by human
  reason) were not in the same opposition
  in which the propositions stand.—As was






  observed above, from this whole standpoint
  the only question which is demanded by
  philosophic interest is not looked into,
  namely, which of these two principles is
  true in and for itself; but, for this point









  of view, it is irrelevant whether the prin-
  ciples are to be considered as objective de-
  terminations of nature (that is here, as de-
  terminations existing externally) or as mere
  maxims of a subjective cognition.—But
  in fact this is a subjective, that is, a
  contingent, cognition, which applies
  one or the other maxim as the occasion
  may suggest according to whether it thinks
  it appropriate to the given objects, but
  otherwise does not ask about the truth
  of these determinations themselves, wheth-
  er both are determinations of the objects
  or of cognition.” (215-216)




 







Hegel:

  “The End has turned out
  to be the third term with
  respect to Mechanism and
  Chemism; it is their truth.
  Since it still stands within
  the sphere of Objectivity or
  of the immediacy of the to-
  tal Notion, it is still affec-
  ted by externality as such;
  an objective world to which
  it relates itself still stands
  opposed to it. From this
  side mechanical causality
  (in which generally Chem-
  ism must be included)
  still appears in this End-
  relation (which is external),
  but as subordinated to it
  and as transcended in and
  for itself.” (216-217)


...“From this results the
  nature of the subordination
  of the two previous forms
  of the objective process: the
  Other, which in them lies
  in the infinite progress, is
  the Notion which at first
  is posited as external to
  them, which is End; not
  only is the Notion their
  substance, but also exter-
  nality is the moment which
  is essential to them and con-
  stitutes their determinate-




 
 
 
 

Materialist Dialec-
  tics:

  ”The laws of the external
  world, of nature, which are
  divided into mechanical
  and chemical (this is very
  important) are the bases of
  man’s purposive activity.


  In his practical activity,
  man is confronted with the
  objective world, is depend-
  ent on it, and determines
  his activity by it.


  From this aspect, from
  the aspect of the practical
  (purposive) activity of man,
  the mechanical (and chemi-
  cal) causality of the world
  (of nature) appears as though
  something external, as
  though something secon-
  dary, as though something
  hidden.


  Two forms of the ob-
  jective process: nature
  (mechanical and chemical)
  and the purposive ac-
  tivity of man. The mutual
  relation of these forms. At
  the beginning, man’s ends
  appear foreign (“other”) in
  relation to nature. Human
  consciousness, science (“der








  ness. Thus mechanical or
  chemical technique sponta-
  neously offers itself to the
  End-relation by reason of
  its character of being deter-
  mined externally; and this
  relation must now be
  further considered.” (217)




 
 
 
 


  Begriff”), reflects the essence,
  the substance of nature,
  but at the same time this
  consciousness is something
  external in relation to na-
  ture (not immediately, not
  simply, coinciding with it).















MECHANICAL  AND
  CHEMICAL TECHNIQUE
  serves human ends just be-
















  cause its character (essence)
  consists in its being deter-
  mined by external condi-
  tions (the laws of nature).




 
((TECHNIQUE and the
   OBJECTIVE world.
TECHNIQUE and ENDS))


 




  ...“It” (der Zweck[42]) “has before it an
  objective, Mechanical and Chemical world,
  to which its activity relates itself as to
  something already given....” (219-220) “To
  this extent it still has a truly extra-
  mundane existence, namely, insofar as
  this objectivity stands opposed to it....”
(220)




 







  In actual fact, man’s ends are engen-
  dered by the objective world and pre-
  suppose it,—they find it as something
  given, present. But it seems to man
  as if his ends are taken from outside
  the world, and are independent of the
  world (“freedom”).
       ((NB. All this in the § in “The Sub-
  jective End.” NB)) (217-221)  









  “The End binds itself with objectivity
  through a Means, and in objectivity with
  itself.” (221 §: “The
      Means.”)





 
  Further, since the End is finite it has
  a finite content; accordingly it is not
  absolute or utterly in and for itself reason-
  able. The Means however is the external
  middle of the syllogism which is the realisa-
  tion of the End; in it therefore reason-
  ableness manifests itself as such—as pre-
  serving itself in this external Other and
  precisely through this externality. To that
  extent the Means is higher than the finite
  Ends of external usefulness: the plough
  is more honourable than those immediate
  enjoyments which are procured by it, and
  serve as Ends. The instrument is preserved,
  while the immediate enjoyments pass away






  the germs of
  historical
  materialism
  in Hegel





  and are forgotten. IN HIS TOOLS MAN
  POSSESSES POWER OVER EXTERNAL
  NATURE. ALTHOUGH AS REGARDS
  HIS ENDS, HE FREQUENTLY IS SUB-
  JECTED TO IT.” (226)






  Hegel and
  historical
  materialism



 









Vorbericht, i.e., preface of the book
  dated: Nuremberg, 21.VII.1816














  This is in the §:
  “The Realised End”
  













HISTORICAL MATERIALISM AS
  ONE OF THE APPLICATIONS AND
  DEVELOPMENTS OF THE IDEAS OF
  GENIUS—SEEDS EXISTING IN
  EMBRYO IN HEGEL.







 







    “The teleological process is the transla-
    tion into objectivity of the Notion (sic!)
    which exists distinctly as Notion....” (227)







 





THE CATEGO-
  RIES OF LOGIC
  AND HUMAN
  PRACTICE




When Hegel endeavours—sometimes
  even huffs and puffs—to bring man’s
  purposive activity under the categories
  of logic, saying that this activity
  is the “syllogism” (Schluß), that the
  subject (man) plays the role of a “mem-
  ber” in the logical “figure” of the



   



NB







“syllogism,” and so on—THEN THAT
IS NOT MERELY STRETCHING A
POINT, A MERE GAME. THIS HAS
A VERY PROFOUND, PURELY MA-
TERIALISTIC CONTENT. IT HAS TO
BE INVERTED: THE PRACTICAL
ACTIVITY OF MAN HAD TO LEAD
HIS CONSCIOUSNESS TO THE REPE-













TITION OF THE VARIOUS LOGICAL
  FIGURES THOUSANDS OF MILLIONS
  OF TIMES  IN ORDER THAT
  THESE FIGURES COULD OBTAIN
  THE SIGNIFICANCE OF AXIOMS.
  THIS NOTA BENE.







NB





 




  “The movement of the End has now
  achieved that the moment of externality
  is posited not only in the Notion, and
  the Notion is not only Ought and tendency,
  but, as concrete totality, is identical





NB





  with immediate Objectivity.” (235) At the
  end of the § on “The Realised End,” at the
  end of the section (Chapter III: “Te-
  leology”)—of Section II: “Objectivi-
  ty,” the transition to Section III: “The
  Idea.”





  NB



 







Remarkable: Hegel comes to the “Idea”
  as the coincidence of the Notion and the
  object, as  truth, through  the
  practical, purposive activity of man.
  A very close approach to the view that
  man by his practice proves the objective
  correctness of his ideas, concepts, knowl-
  edge, science.








 THE
  SUBJECTIVE
  NOTION AND
  SUBJECTIVE
  END TO
0BJEC-
  TIVE
TRUTH



 


SECTION THREE:
THE IDEA




  The beginning of Section III: “The Idea”




 




  “The Idea is the adequate Notion: ob-
  jective truth, or the truth as
  such.” (236)







 




  In general, the introduction to Section III
  (“The Idea”) of Part II to the Logic
  (“Subjective Logic”) (Volume V, pp.236-
  243) and the corresponding §§ of the






Encyclopaedia (§§ 213-215)—ARE PER-
  HAPS THE BEST EXPOSITION OF
  DIALECTICS. Here too, the coincidence,






NB





  so to speak, of logic and epistemology is
  shown in a remarkable brilliant way.


  The expression “Idea” is used also in
  the sense of a simple representation.
      Kant.




 




      “Kant has claimed the expression idea
  again for the Notion of reason. Now accord-






  Hegel against
  Kant





  ing to Kant the Notion of reason is to be






  the Notion of the unconditioned, and, with
  respect to phenomena, to be transcen-
  dental, which means that it is impossible
  to make any adequate empirical use of
  it. Notions of reason (according to Kant)
  are to serve for the conceptual compre-
  hension, and Notions of understanding
  for the bare understanding, of percep-
  tions. But, in fact, if the latter really





  
  against the
  transcenden-
  tal in the
  sense
  of sepa-
  ration of
  (objective)
  truth from
  empiricism





  are Notions then they are Notions,—con






  ceptual comprehension takes place through
  them....” (236)






très bien!



 







  See also below on Kant







 




  It is equally incorrect to regard the Idea
  as something “unreal”—as people say: “it
  is merely an idea.”




 




  If thoughts are merely subjective and
  contingent they certainly have no further
  value; but in this they are not inferior
  to temporal and contingent actualities,
  which also have no further value except that






très bien!





  which is proper to contingencies and phe-
  nomena. And if conversely the Idea is not
  to be rated as true because, with respect
  to phenomena, it is transcendental, and no
  object can be assigned to it, in the sen-
  suous world, coinciding with it, this
  is a strange lack of understanding,—for
  so the Idea is denied objective validity
  because it lacks that which constitutes
  appearance, or the untrue being of the ob-
  jective world.” (237-238)


In relation to practical ideas, Kant him-
  self admits that the appeal to experience
  against ideas is pöbelhaft[43]: he holds ideas
  as a Maximum to which one should endeav-
  our to bring actuality closer. And Hegel
  continues:
       “But, the result having been reached that
  the Idea is the unity of the Notion and
  Objectivity, the truth, it must not merely
  be considered as a goal which must be






  approached while it still remains a kind
  of beyond; it must be held that whatever
  is actual is only insofar as it contains
  and expresses the Idea. The object, and






Hegel against
  “Jenseits”[44]
  of Kant





  the objective and subjective world, not






  merely ought to conform to the Idea, but
  are themselves the conformity of Notion
  and reality; that reality which does not
  correspond to the Notion is mere appear-
  ance, or that subjective, contingent, ca-
  pricious entity which is not the truth.” (238)






      The confor-
  mity of con-
  cepts with
  objects is
not
      subjective



 
 



   





  “It” (die Idee) “is,  first,
  simple truth, the identity
  of the Notion and Objec-
  tivity as a universal....
(242)


  ...“Secondly, it is the re-
  lation of the Subjectivity,
  which is for itself, of the
  simple Notion to its Ob-
  jectivity which is distinct
  from it, the former is es-
  sentially the impulse to tran-
  scend this separation....


  ...“As this relation, the
  Idea is the process in which
  it sunders itself into in-
  dividuality and its inor-
  ganic nature, and again
  brings the latter back un-
  der the power of the sub-
  ject, returning to the first
  simple universality. The
  self-identity of the Idea is
  one with the process; and
  the thought which frees ac-
  tuality from the semblance
  of purposeless changeabili-
  ty and transfigures it into
  the Idea must not imagine
  this truth of actuality as
  a dead repose or bare pic-
  ture, matt, without im-
  pulse or motion, or as a gen-
  ius, number, or abstract
  thought. In the Idea the
  Notion reaches freedom, and
  because of this the Idea
  contains also the harshest






  The idea (read: man’s
  knowledge) is the coinci-
  dence (conformity) of no-
  tion and objectivity (the
  “universal”). This—first.


  Secondly, the idea is the
relation of the subjectiv-
  ity (= man) which is for
  itself (= independent, as it
  were) to the objectivity
  which is distinct (from
  this Idea)....


  Subjectivity is the im-
  pulse to destroy this sepa-
  ration (of the idea from
  the object).
  
       Cognition is the process
  of the submersion (of
  the mind) in an inorganic
  nature for the sake of
  subordinating it to the
  power of the subject and
  for the sake of gener-
  alisation (cognition of the
  universal in its phenome-
  na)....
  
       The coincidence of
  thought with the object is a
process: thought (= man)
  must not imagine truth in
  the form of dead repose,
  in the form of a bare pic-
  ture (image), pale (matt),
  without impulse, without
  motion, like a genus, like
  a number, like abstract
  thought.
  
       The idea contains also





NB





opposition; its repose con-
  sists in the security and
  certainty with which it eter-
  nally creates and eternally
  overcomes it, coinciding in
  it with itself.”






  the strongest contradiction,
  repose (for man’s thought)
  consists in the firmness and
  certainty with which he
  eternally creates (this con-
  tradiction between thought
  











  and object) and eternally
  overcomes it....
   




 





Cognition is the eternal, endless
  approximation of thought to the ob-
  ject. The reflection of nature in man’s
  thought must be understood not “life-
  lessly,” not “abstractly,” not dev-
  oid of movement, not with-
  out contradictions, but in the
  eternal process of movement, the aris-
  ing of contradictions and their solution.



 

NB



 




  “The Idea is ... the Idea
  of the True and of the
Good, as Cognition and Vo-
  lition.... The process of this
  finite cognition and (NB)
action (NB) makes the
  universality, which at first
  is abstract, into a totali-
  ty, whence it becomes per-
  fected objectivity.”  (243)






  The idea is Cognition and
  aspiration (volition) [of
  man]... The process of (tran-
  sitory, finite, limited) cog-
  nition and action converts
  abstract concepts into per-
  fected objectivity.




 




  Also in the Encyclo-
  paedia (Vol. VI).[45]  En-
  cyclopaedia § 213
(p. 385)







 




  ...“The Idea is truth,
  for truth is the correspond-
  ence of objectivity with
  the Notion.... But also
everything actual, insofar
  as it is true, is the Idea...
  The individual Being is
  some one aspect of the
  Idea; hence it requires also
  other actualities, which
  likewise appear as existing
  specially for themselves; it
  is only in all of them to-
  gether and in their rela-
  tion that) the Notion is
  realised. The individual by
  itself does not correspond
  to its Notion; this limi-
  tation of its determinate
  existence constitutes its fi-
  nitude and its downfall....”






  Individual Being (an ob-
  ject, a phenomenon, etc.)
  is (only) one side of the
  Idea (of truth). () Truth re-
  quires still other sides of
reality, which likewise ap-
  pear only as independent
  and individual (besonders
  für sich bestehende[46]).
Only in theirto-
  tality, (zusammen), and
  in their relation (Be-
  ziehung) is truth realised.




 





(The totality of all sides of the
  phenomenon, of reality and their (re-
  ciprocal) relations—that is what
  truth is composed of. The relations
  (= transitions = contradictions) of
  notions = the main content of logic,
bywhich these concepts (and their
  relations, transitions, contradictions)
  are shown as reflections of the objec-
  tiveworld. The dialectics of things
  produces the dialectics of ideas, and
  not vice versa.)






  Hegel
  brilliantly
divined the
  dialectics of
  things (phenom-
  ena, the world,
nature) in
  the dialectics
  of concepts #



 





# This aphorism should be expressed
  more popularly, without the word dia-
  lectics: approximately as follows: In
  the alternation, reciprocal dependence
  of all notions, in the identity of their
  opposites, in the transitions of one no-
  tion into another, in the eternal change,
  movement of notions, Hegel brilliantly
divined PRECISELY THIS RELA-
  TION OF THINGS, OF NATURE.






  indeed
divined,
  not more




 



   
  what
  consti-
  tutes
  dialec-
  tics?






=......................
  mutual dependence of notions
      ”          
  ”     all     
    ”
         without exception
  transitions of notions from
                   
     one into another
      ”          all
           ”    without
                
                    exception.







  = NB
      Every notion oc-
  curs in a certain
relation,
  in a certain
  connection with
all the others









 
 
 
 



  The relativity of opposition between notions...
  the identity of opposites between notions.


 




 




  “Truth is first of all taken to mean
  that I know how something is. This is
  truth, however, only in reference to con-
  sciousness, or formal truth, bare correct-
  ness. (§ 213, 386) Truth in the deeper
  sense, on the contrary; consists in the
  identity between objectivity and the
  Notion....


“A bad man is an untrue man, i.e.,
  a man who does not behave in confor-
  mity with the notion of him, or his posi-
  tion. Nothing, however, can exist entire-
  ly devoid of identity between the no-
  tion and reality. Even what is bad and
  untrue has being only insofar as its real-
  ity still, somehow, conforms to its no-
  tion....


  ...“Everything deserving the name of
  philosophy has always been based on
  the consciousness of an absolute unity
  of that which the understanding
  accepts as valid only in its sep-
  aration....”




 



  The differ-
  ences between
  Being and
  Essence, be-
  tween Notion
  and Objec-
  tivity, are
  relative





  “The stages of Being and Essence hith-
  erto considered, as well as those of No-
  tion and of Objectivity, are not, when so
  distinguished, something permanent,
  resting upon themselves. But they have
  proved to be dialectical, and their truth con-
  sists only in being moments of the
  idea.” (387-388)





 




  Vol. VI, 388








  The moments of the cognition (= of
  the “idea”) of nature by man—these
  are the categories of logic.




 




  Vol. VI, p. 388 (§ 214):


  “The Idea may be described in many
  ways. It may be called reason (this is the
  proper philosophical signification of rea-
  son); also subject-object; the unity of the
  ideal and the real, of the finite and the
  infinite, of soul and body; the possibility
  which has its actuality in its own self;
  that whose nature can be conceived only
  as existent, etc. All these descriptions






  apply, because the Idea contains all the
  relations of understanding; but contains
  them in their infinite self-return and self-







  (the idea)
  truth is
  all-sided





      identity.


  “It is easy work for the understanding to
  show that everything said of the Idea is
  self-contradictory. But that can quite as well
  be rendered to the understanding or rather
  it is already accomplished in the idea. And
  this work, which is the work of reason, is
  certainly not so easy as that of the under-
  standing.—The understanding may demon-
  strate that the Idea is self-contradictory,
  because, for instance, the subjective is
  only subjective and is always confronted
  by the objective; that Being is something
  quite different from the notion and there-
  fore cannot be extracted out of it; and that
  likewise the finite is only finite and the






  exact antithesis of the infinite, and there-
  fore not identical with it; and so on with
  all the determinations. Logic, however,
  demonstrates the opposite of all this, name-










  ly, that the subjective, which is to be
  subjective only, the finite, which is to be
  finite only, the infinite, which is to be
  infinite only, and so on, have no truth,
  but contradict themselves, and pass into
  their opposites. Thus, this transition, and
  the unity in which the extremes are in-
  cluded as transcended, as appearance or
  moments, is revealed as their truth. (388)




 








  “The understanding, when it tackles the
  Idea, falls into a double misunderstand-






NB:









  ing. First, it takes the extremes of the
  Idea (be they expressed as they will, so
  long as they are in their unity) still in
  that sense and determination in which






  Abstractions
  and the
  “concrete
  unity” of









  they are not in their concrete unity, but






  opposites.









  remain abstractions outside of the Idea.
  “It” (der Verstand[47]) “no less mistakes the
relation between them, even when it has






  A beautiful
  example: the




  NB
  the in-
  divid-
  ual =
  the uni-
  versal
    





  been expressly stated; thus, for example, it over-
  looks even the nature of the copula
  in the judgment, which affirms that
  the individual, the subject, is just as
  much not individual, but uni-
  versal.—In the second place, the understand-






  simplest and
  clearest. The
  dialectic of
  notions and
  its material-
   ist roots   










  ing believes its reflection,—that the self-indent-
  ical Idea contains its own negative, the
  contradiction,—to be an external reflec-
  tion which does not lie within the Idea itself.
  In fact, however, this is not the understand-
  ing’s own wisdom. The Idea itself
  is the dialectic which for ever sepa-






  The dialectic
  is not in man’s
  understand-
  ing, but in
  the “idea,”
  i.e., in objec-
  tive reality









  rates and distinguishes the self-identical
  from the differentiated, the subjective from












  “eternal
  life” =
  dialectics










  the objective, the finite from the infinite, the soul
  from the body. Only insofar is it an eter-
  nal creation, eternal vitality,
  and eternal spirit....” (389)







 








  VI, § 215, p. 390:




 



  The idea
  is ... a process






  The Idea is essentially a process, be-
  cause its identity is the absolute and free
  identity of the notion, only insofar as
  it is absolute negativity and for that
  reason dialectical.”




 



  This NB  






  Hence, Hegel says, the expression “uni-
  ty” of thinking and being, of finite and
  infinite, etc., is falsch,[48] because it ex-
  presses “quietly persisting identity.” It is
  not true that the finite simply neutral-
  ises (“netralisiert”) the infinite and vice
  versa. Actually, we have a process.











  If one calculates ... every second more
  than ten persons in the world die, and
  still more are born. “Movement” and “mo-
  ment”: catch it. At every given moment
  ... catch this moment. Idem in simple
mechanical motion (contra Chernov).[49]









  “The idea as a process runs through
  three stages in its development. The first
  form of the idea is Life....The second form
  is ... the idea in the form of Knowledge,
  which appears under the double aspect
  of the theoretical and practical idea. The
  process of knowledge results in the resto-
  ration of unity enriched by difference,
  and this gives the third form, that of
  the Absolute Idea...” (391)




 







  The idea is “truth” (p. 385, § 213).
  The idea, i.e., truth as a process—
  for truth is a process—passes in its
development (Entwicklung) through three
  stages: 1) life; 2) the process of knowl-
  edge, which includes human practice
  and technique (see above); 3) the stage
  of the absolute idea (i.e., of complete
  truth).
       Life gives rise to the brain. Nature
  is reflected in the human brain. By
  checking and applying the correctness
  of these reflections in his practice and
  technique, man arrives at objective
  truth.






  Truth is a
  process. From
  the subjective
  idea, man
  advances
  towards objec-
  tive truth
through
  “practice”
  (and
  technique).











  Logic. Volume V.






  Section Three: Idea. Chapter I. Life.


      The question of Life does not belong to
  “logic as it is commonly imagined.” (Bd.
  V. p. 244[50])
  If, however, the subject-mat-
  ter of logic is truth, and “truth as
  such wesentlich im Erkennen
  ist,[51]” then cognition has to be dealt
      with—in connection with cognition it is
  already (p. 245) necessary to speak of
life.


      Sometimes so-called “pure logic” is fol-
  lowed by “applied” (angewandte) logic, but
  then...




 




  ...“every science must be absorbed in
  logic, since each is an applied logic in-
  sofar as it consists in apprehending its
  object in forms of thought and of the
  Notion.” (244)






  every science
      is applied
  logic



 







The idea of including Life in
  logic is comprehensible—and brilliant—
  from the standpoint of the process of
  the reflection of the objective world
  in the (at first individual) consciousness
  of man and of the testing of this
  consciousness (reflection) through prac-
  tice—see:







 





  ...“Consequently,
  the original Judg-
  ment of Life con-
  sists in this, that
  it separates itself
  as individual sub-
  ject from the objec-
  tive....” (248)






  Encyclopaedia[52]

  § 216: only in their
  connection are
  the individual
  limbs of the body
  what they are.
  A hand,
  separated from
  the body, is a
  hand only in
  name (Aristotle).






  Life = indi-
  vidual sub-
  ject separates
  itself from
  the objective












  If one considers the relation of sub-
  ject to object in logic, one must take
  into account also the general premises
  of Being of the concrete subject (= life
  of man) in the objective surroundings.
        






 




  Subdivisions:[53]
  1) Life, as “the living individual” (§ A)
  2) “The Life-process”
  3) “The Process of Kind” (Gattung), re-
       production of man, and transition to
           cognition.









  (1) “subjective totality” and “indiffer-
  ent objectivity.”
  (2) The unity of subject and object







 





  ...“This
  objectivity of
  the Living
  Entity is
Organism; the
  objectivity is
  the means
  and instru-
  ment of the
  End....” (251)






  Encyclopaedia § 219: ...“Inorganic
  nature which is subdued by the living
  being suffers this because it is in itself
  the same as life is for itself.”


  Invert it = pure materialism. Ex-
  cellent, profound, correct!! And also
  NB: shows how extremely correct and
  apt are the terms “an sich” and “für
  sich”!!![54]






NB










  Further, the “subsumption” under log-
  ical categories of “sensibility” (Sensi-
  bilität), “irritability” (Irritabilität)—
  this is said to be the particular in con-
  trast to the universal!!—and “reproduc-
  tion” is an idle game. Forgotten is the
  nodal line, the transition into a dif-
  ferent plane of natural phenomena.
       And so on. Pain is “actual existence”
  of contradiction in the living individual.









  Hegel
  and the
   play with
  “organic
  Notions”
   
   
  !!!



  
   



   
  The comic
  in Hegel






  Or again, reproduction of
  man ... “is their” (of two
  individuals of different sex)
  “realised identity, is the
  negative unity of the kind
  which intro-reflects itself
  out of the division....” (261)






   
  Hegel
  and the
  play with
   “organism”



 



  Logic. Volume V.
  Section III. The Idea.
  Chapter II. The Idea of Cognition
  (pp. 262-327)



 




  ...“Its” (des Begriffs[55]) “reality in gener-
  al is the form of its determinate existence,
  and what matters is the determination
  of this form; upon this depends the
  distinction of that which the Notion is in
  itself or as subjective, and of what it is
  as submerged into Objectivity, and next
  in the Idea of Life.” (263)






  subjective
  consciousness
  and its sub-
  mersion in
  objectivity



 





  mysticism! 





  ...“Spirit not only is infi-
  nitely richer than Nature,
  but the absolute unity of
  opposites in the Notion con-
  stitutes its essence....” (264)





  ?
   
   mysticism!



 





Hegel
  against
  Kant






  In Kant “the Ego” is as a transcenden-
  tal subject of thoughts” (264); “At the
  same time this Ego, according to Kant’s
  own expression, is awkward in this respect,









  i.e., that in
  Kant the
?  “Ego” is
  an empty
  form
  (“self-
  extraction”)
  without
  concrete
  analysis of
  the process
  of cognition










  that we must always make use of it in
  order to make any judgment about it....”
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
(p. 265)




 








  “In his” (= Kant’s) “criticism of these
  determinations” (namely: abstrakte ein-





  NB:
  Kant and
  Hume—
  sceptics






  seitige Bestimmungen “der vormaligen—
  pre-Kantian—Metaphysik”[56] concerning the
  “soul”) “he” (Kant) “simply followed Hume’s
  sceptical manner: holds fast to that which
  appears as Ego in self-consciousness, from






NB









which however everything empirical must
  be omitted, since the aim is to know its
  essence, or the Thing-in-itself. Now noth-
  ing remains but the phenomenon of the
I think which accompanies every idea;
  and nobody has the slightest notion of this
  ‘I think.’” (266) # # #




 











Apparently, Hegel perceives scepti-
  cism here in the fact that Hume and
  Kant do not see the appearing Thing-
  in-itself in “phenomena,” divorce phe-
  nomena from objective truth, doubt the
  objectivity of cognition, remove, weg-
  lassen, alles Empirische[57] from the
  Ding-an-sich....[58] And Hegel contin-
  ues:  









  Wherein does
  Hegel see the
  scepticism of
  Hume and
  Kant?



 








  # # # ...“It must certainly be admitted
  that it is impossible to have the slightest
  notion of Ego or anything else (the No-
  tion included), if no Notion is formed
  and a halt is made at the simple, fixed,
general idea and name.” (266)






   It is impossi-
  ble to under-
  stand without
  the process of
  understand-
  ing (of cog-
  nition, con-
  crete study,
  etc.)



 











  In order to understand, it is necessary
  empirically to begin understanding,
  study, to rise from empiricism to the uni-
  versal. In order to learn to swim, it is
  necessary to get into the water.







 








According to Hegel, the old metaphysics,
  in the endeavour to cognise truth, divided
  objects in accordance with the characteris-
  tic of truth into substances and phenomena.
  Kant’s Critique rejected the investigation
  of truth.... “But to stand fast at appearance
  and what proves to be mere sensuous
  representation in everyday consciousness
  is tantamount to a renunciation of the
  Notion and of philosophy.” (269)






  Kant restricts
  himself to
  “phenomena”



 








  § A:
  “The Idea of the True. At first the sub-
  jective Idea is impulse.... Consequently,
  the impulse has the determinateness of
  cancelling its own subjectivity, of making
  concrete its reality (which was abstract
  at first) I and of filling it, for content,
  with the world which is presupposed by
  its subjectivity.... As Cognition is the Idea
  as End or as subjective idea, so the ne-
  gation of the world which is presupposed
  as being in itself is first negation....”
(274-275)













  i.e. the first stage, moment, begin-
  ning, approach of cognition is its fini-
  tude (Endlichkeit) and subjectivity, the
  negation of the world-in-itself—the end
  of cognition is at first subjective....







 



      Kant
  elevated
one
  side to






  “Strangely enough this side
  of finitude has latterly” (ob-
  viously Kant) “been seized upon
  and has been taken to be the
absolute relation of Cognition—






Hegel
  against
  Kant:




  the Abso-
  lute
   
  in Kant,
  the Thing-
  in-itself
  is an
  absolute
  “Jenseits”[59]






  as though the finite as such was
  to be the absolute! From this
  point of view the Object is
  assigned the unknown property
  of being a Thing-in-itself beyond
  cognition, which, together with
  truth, is considered an absolute
Beyond for Cognition.










  The determinations of thought in general,
  the categories and the determinations of
  reflection as well as the formal Notion










  and its moments, are here given the posi-
  tion not that they are finite determina-
  tions in and for themselves, but that they
  are so in the sense that they are subjective






  Kant’s
  subject-
  ivism









  as against that empty Thinghood-in-itself;
  the error of taking this relation of the
  untruth of Cognition as valid has become
  the universal opinion of modern times.”
(276)




 











  Kant took the finite, transitory, re-
  lative, conditional character of human
  cognition (its categories, causality, etc.,
  etc.) as subjectivism, and not as the
  dialectics of the idea (= of nature itself),
  divorcing cognition from the object.







 








  ...“But cognition must by its own pro-
  cess resolve its finitude and therefore its
  contradiction.” (277)






  But the proc-
  ess of cogni-
  tion leads it
  to objective
  truth









  ...“It is one-sided to imagine analysis
  in such a manner as though nothing were
  in the object except what has been put
  into it; and it is equally one-sided to
  think that the determinations which re-
  sult are simply taken out of it. The former
  idea is, as is known, the thesis of sub-
  jective idealism, which in analysis takes
  the activity of Cognition only as a one-
  sided positing, beyond which the Thing-
  in-itself remains hidden; the latter idea
  belongs to so-called realism, which takes
  the subjective Notion as an empty iden-
  tity that absorbs the thought-determina-
  tions from without.” (280)
       ...“But the two moments cannot be sep-
  arated; in its abstract form, into which






   
   
   
  Hegel against
  subjective
  idealism and
  “realism”









  analysis elaborates it, the logical is cer-
  tainly present only in Cognition; while
  conversely it is not only something posited
but also something which is in itself.” (280)






  The Objectiv-
  ity of logic



 











Logical concepts are subjective so long
  as they remain “abstract,” in their ab-
  stract form, but at the same time they
  express also the Things-in-themselves.
  Nature is both concrete and abstract,
both phenomenon and essence, both mo-
  ment andrelation. Human concepts are
  subjective in their abstractness, sepa-
  rateness, but objective as a whole, in
  the process, in the sum-total, in the
  tendency, in the source.







 














  Very good is § 225 of the Encyclopae-
  dia where “cognition” (“theoretical”) and
  “will,” “practical activity,” are depicted
  as two sides, two methods, two means
  of abolishing the “one-sidedness” both
  of subjectivity and of objectivity.










 








  And further 281-282 very important
  on the transition of the categories
  into one another (and against Kant, p. 282).






NB



 








  Logic, Vol. V, p. 282 (the end)[60]


  ...“Kant ... takes up the determinate
  connection (the relation-notions and the










  synthetic principles themselves) from for-
  mal logic as given. They ought to have
  been deduced by the exposition of the
  transition of this simple unity of self-con-
  sciousness into these its determinations and
  distinctions; but Kant spared himself the
  trouble of demonstrating this veritably
  synthetic progress, that of the self-
  producing Notion.” (282)





 











Kant did not show the transi-
  tion of the categories into one another.







 








  286-287—Turning once more to higher
       mathematics (showing, inter alia, that
       he is familiar with Gauss’ solution of
       the equation Xm—1=0[61], Hegel again
       touches on the differential and integral 
       calculus, and says that:










  “to this day mathematics by itself, that
  is, in a mathematical manner, has failed
  in justifying these operations, which are
  based upon this transition” (from one mag-
  nitude to another), “for the transition is
  not of a mathematical nature.” Hegel says
  that Leibnitz, to whom is ascribed the hon-
  our of having discovered the differential
  calculus, effected this transition “in a most
  inadequate manner, a manner both thor-
  oughly notionless and unmathematical....”
(287)





 








  “Analytic cognition is the first premise
  of the whole syllogism,—the immediate
  relation of the Notion to the Object. Con-
  sequently, identity is the determination
  which it recognises as its own: it is only
  the apprehension of what is. Synthetic
  Cognition endeavours to form a Notion
  of what is, that is, to grasp the multiplic-
  ity of determinations in its unity. Hence
  it is the second premise of the syllogism
  in which terms various as such are related.
  Its goal is therefore necessity in general.”
(288)


  Regarding the practice in certain scien-
  ces (e.g., physics) of taking various “for-
  ces,” etc., for “explanation,” and of pulling
  in (stretching), adjusting the facts, etc.,
  Hegel makes the following clever remark:


  “It is now seen that the so-called expla-
  nation and proof of the concrete element
which is brought into Propositions is partly










  a tautology and partly a confusion of the
  true relationship; partly, too, it is seen that
  this confusion served to disguise the trick
  of Cognition, which takes up the data of
  experience one-sidedly (the only manner






  remarkably
  correct and
  profound









  in which it could reach its simple defini-
  tions and formulas), and does away with
  refutation from experience by proposing
  and taking as valid experience not in its
  concrete totality but as example, and only
  in that direction which is serviceable for
  the hypotheses and the theory. Concrete
  experience being thus subordinated to the
  presupposed determinations, the foundation
  of the theory is obscured, and is exhibited
  only from that side which is in conformity
  with the theory.” (315-316)





  
  (c.f. the polit-
  ical econo-
  my of the
  bourgeoisie)
   
       
  against sub-
  jectivism and
  one-sidedness



 








  The old metaphysics (e.g., of Wolff
  [example: ridiculous pomposity over tri-
  vialities, etc.]) was overthrown by Kant
  and Jacobi. Kant showed that “strict de-
  monstration” led to antimonies,
       “but he” (Kant) “did not reflect upon
  the nature of this demonstration, which is
  bound to a finite content; yet the two stand
  and fall together.” (317)






  i.e., Kant
  did not un-
  derstand the
universal









  Synthetic cognition is still not complete,
  for “the Notion does not become unity with






  law of the
  dialectics of









  itself in its object or its reality.... Hence
  in this Cognition the Idea does not yet
  reach truth because of the inadequacy of
  the object to the subjective Notion.—But
  the sphere of Necessity is the highest






  the “Finite”?









  point of Being and of Reflection; in and
  for itself it passes over into the freedom
  of the Notion, while the inner identity
  passes over into its manifestation, which
  is the Notion as Notion....”




 








  ...“The Idea, insofar as the Notion is
  now for itself the Notion determinate in
  and for itself, is the Practical Idea, or
Action.” (319) And the following § is
  headed “B:
  The Idea of the Good.”





 











  Theoretical cognition ought to give
  the object in its necessity, in its all-
  sided relations, in its contradictory mo-
  vement, an-und für-sich.[62] But the human
  notion “definitively” catches this object-
  ive truth of cognition, seizes and masters
  it, only when the notion becomes “being-
  for-itself” in the sense of practice. That
  is, the practice of man and of mankind
  is the test, the criterion of the object-
  ivity of cognition. Is that Hegel’s idea?
  It is necessary to return to this.









Hegel on
  practice and
  the objectiv-
  ity of cog-
  nition
   
   



 











  Why is the transition from practice,
  from action, only to the “good,” das
  Gute? That is narrow, one-sided! And
  the useful?
       There is no doubt the useful also
  comes in. Or is this, according to Hegel,
  also das Gute?







 











  All this in the chapter “The Idea
  of Cognition” (Chapter II)—in the tran-
  sition to the “Absolute Idea” (Chapter
  III)—i.e., undoubtedly, in Hegel prac-
  tice serves as a link in the analysis
  of the process of cognition, and indeed
  as the transition to objective (“abso-
  lute,” according to Hegel) truth. Marx,
  consequently, clearly sides with Hegel
  in introducing the criterion of practice
  into the theory of knowledge: see the
  Theses on Feuerbach.[63]







 






   
   
   
Practice in the theory
       of knowledge:









             Alias:
         Man’s consciousness
    not only reflects the ob-
    jective world, but cre-
    ates it.









 







(320) “As subjective It”
  (der Begriff) “has again the
  presupposition of an other-
  ness which is in itself; it is
  the impulse to realise itself,
  or the end which tries to
  give itself objectivity in the
  objective world, and to car-
  ry itself out, through itself.
  In the Theoretical Idea the
  subjective Notion stands op-
  posed, as the universal
  which is indeterminate in
  and for itself, to the ob-
  jective world, from which
  it draws determinate con-
  tent and fulfilment. But in
  the Practical Idea it stands
  opposed as actual to the
  actual. But the self-certain-
  ty which the subject has
  in the fact of its deter-
  minateness in and for itself,
  is a certainty of its own
actuality and of the non-
  actuality of the world;....”
  ......






The notion (= man), as
  subjective, again presup-
  posed an otherness which
  is in itself (= nature inde-
  pendent of man). This no-
  tion (= man) is the im-
  pulse to realise itself, to
  give itself objectivity in
  the objective world through
  itself, and to realise (ful-
  fil) itself.
       In the theoretical idea
  (in the sphere of theory)
  the subjective notion (cog-
  nition?), as the universal
  and in and for itself inde-
  terminate, stands opposed
  to the objective world, from
  which it obtains determi-
  nate content and fulfilment.
       In the practical idea (in
  the sphere if practice) this
  notion as the actual (act-
  ing?) stands opposed to the
  actual.
       The self-certainty which
  the subject [[here sudden-











  ly instead of“Notion”]] has
  in its being in and for it-
  self, as a determinate sub-
  ject, is a certainty of its
  own actuality and of the
non-actuality of the world.














i.e., that the world
  does not satisfy man and
  man decides to change
  it by his activity.









 






...“This determinateness,
  which is contained in the
  Notion, and is equal to it,
  and includes within itself
  the demand of the individ-
  ual external actuality, is
  the Good. It appears with






    The essence:
       The “good” is a “demand
  of external actuality,” i.e.,
  by the “good” is understood
  man’s practice = the de-
  mand (1) also of external
  actuality (2).








  the dignity of absoluteness,
  because it is the totality of
  the Notion within itself—
  the objective in the form
  simultaneously of free unity








  and subjectivity. This Idea
  is higher than the Idea
  of Cognition which has
  already been consid-
  ered, for it has not only the
  dignity of the universal but
  also of the simply ac-
  tual....” (320-321)






Practice is higher
  than (theoretical)
  knowledge, for it has not
  only the dignity of univer-
  sality, but also of immedi-
  ate actuality.








   
       ...“Consequently, the ac-
  tivity of the end is not di-
  rected against itself, for the
  purpose of absorbing and
  assimilating a given deter-
  mination; it aims rather at
  positing its own determi-
  nation, and, by transcend-
  ing the determinations of






   
       “The activity of the end
  is not directed against it-
  self....
       but aims, by destroying
  definite (sides, features,
  phenomena) of the exter-
  nal world, at giving itself
  reality in the form of ex-
  ternal actuality....”








  the external world, at giv-
  ing itself reality in the form
  of external actuality....”
(321)




 




      ...“The realised Good is good by virtue of what it is
  already in the Subjective End, in its Idea; realisation gives
  it an external existence....” (322). “Presupposed to it (the
  Good) is the objective world, in the presupposition of which
  the subjectivity and finitude of the Good consists and
  which, as being other, pursues its own course; and in it
  even the realisation of the Good is exposed to obstacles,
  and may even be made impossible....” + (322-323) ...“Pre-
  supposed to it (the Good) is the objective world, in the pre-
  supposition of which the subjectivity and finitude of the Good
  consists and which, as being other, pursues its own
  course; and in it even the realisation of the Good is exposed
  to obstacles, and may even be made impossible.....+
  (322-323)




 





  NB
   
   
  NB








  The “objective world” “pursues its own course,
  and man’s practice, confronted by this objective
  world, encounters “obstacles in the realisation”
  of the End, even “impossibility....”







 






  + ...“Thus the Good remains an Ought; it is in and for
  itself, but Being, as last and abstract immediacy, remains
  determined against it as a not-Being too....”++ (323)




 







  The Good, welfare, well-meaning aspirations, remain
  a SUBJECTIVE OUGHT....







 









  ++ ...“Although the Idea of the perfected









  Good is an absolute postulate, it is no more
  than a postulate,—that is, the absolute
  infected with the determinateness of





  Two worlds:
  subjective





subjectivity. There are still two worlds
  in opposition: one a realm of subjec-





  and
  objective





tivity in the pure spaces of trans-
  parent thought, the other a realm
  of objectivity in the element of an exter-
  nally manifold actuality, which is an
  unexplored realm of darkness. The com-
  plete development of the unresolved con-









  tradiction, of that absolute end which the
  barrier of this actuality insuperably op-
  poses, has been considered more closely
  in Phänomenologie des Geistes, p. 453
  et seq....” (323)




 










A gibe at the pure “spaces of transparent thought”
  in the realm of subjectivity, which is confronted by the
  “darkness” of “objective,” “manifold” actuality.









  NB



 







  ...“In the latter” (= der theoretischen
  Idee[64] in
  contrast to der praktischen Idee[65])
  ...“Cognition knows itself only as appre-
  hension, as the self-identity of the No-
  tion, which for itself is indeterminate;
  fulfilment, that is, objectivity determined
  in and for itself, is given to it, and that
  which truly is is the actuality that is









  present independently of subjective
  positing. The Practical Idea on the other











  hand counts this actuality (which at the
  same time opposes it as an insuperable
  barrier) as that which in and for itself
  is null, which is to receive its true deter-
  mination and sole value through the ends
  of the Good. Will itself consequently bars









  the way to its own goal insofar as it
  separates itself from Cognition and
  external actuality does not, for it,
  retain the form of that which truly












is; consequently the Idea of the Good can
  find its complement only in the Idea of
  the True.” (323-324)




 










  Cognition ... finds itself faced by
  that which truly is as actuality present
  independently of subjective opinions
  (Setzen[66]). (This is pure materi-
  alism!) Man’s will, his practice, itself
  blocks the attainment of its end
  ...in that it separates itself from cog-
  nition and does not recognise external
  actuality for that which truly is (for
  objective truth). What is necessary is
  the union of cognition and
practice.









  Nota bene



 







And immediately following this:
       “But it makes this transition through









  itself” (the transition of the idea of truth
  into the idea of the Good, of theory into
  practice, and vice versa). “In the syllo-
  gism of action one premise is the immediate












  relation of the good end to actuality,
  of which it makes itself master, directing
  it (in the second premise) as external
means against external actuality.” (324)





  NB
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
  NB








  The “syllogism of action” ... For He-
  gel action, practice, is a logical
  “syllogism,” a figure of logic. And
  that is true! Not of course, in the sense
  that the figure of logic has its other
  being in the practice of man (=abso-
  lute idealism), but vice versa: man’s
  practice, repeating itself a thousand
  million times, becomes consolidated
  in man’s consciousness by figures of logic.
  Precisely (and only) on account of this
  thousand-million-fold repetition, these
  figures have the stability of a preju-
  dice, an axiomatic character.
  First premise: The good end (subjective
               
          end) versus actuality
               
          (“external actuality”).
  Second premise: The external means (in-
                 
           strument), (objective).
  Third premise or conclusion: The coin-
               
            cidence of subjective
               
            and objective, the test
               
            of subjective ideas, the
               
            criterion of objective
               
            truth.







 







  ...“The realisation of the Good in the
  teeth of an opposing and other actuality
  is the mediation which is essential for
  the immediate relation and actualisation
  of the Good....” (325)


  ...“If now in spite of this” (through activ-
  ity) “the end of the Good should not be
  realised, then this is a relapse of the Notion
  to the standpoint which the Notion has
  before its activity—the standpoint of that
  actuality which was determined as null
  and yet was presupposed as real. This
  relapse becomes a progress to bad infin-
  ity; it has its only ground in the fact
  that in the transcendence of this abstract









  reality the transcendence is equally imme-
  diately forgotten, or that it is forgotten
  that this reality has already been presup-
  posed as non-objective actuality which is
  null in and for itself.” (325)





 



  NB:








  The non-fulfilment of ends (of human
  activity) has as its cause (Grund) the
  fact that reality is taken as non-existent
  (nichtig), that its (reality’s) objective
  actuality is not being recognised.







 










  “By the activity of the objective No-
  tion external actuality is altered, and its
  determination is accordingly transcended;
  and by this very process it loses merely
  apparent reality, external determinability,
  and nullity, and it is thus posited as being
  in and for itself....” (326) +








 

















NB
   








The activity of man, who has  
  constructed an objective picture of  
      the world for himself, changes  
  external actuality, abolishes its  
  determinateness (= alters some  
  sides or other, qualities, of it),  
  







  NB
   








  and thus removes from it the fea-  
  tures of Semblance, externality and  
  nullity, and makes it as being in  
  and for itself (= objectively true).  
  























 







+ ...Presupposition in general is here
  transcended,—that is, the determination









  of the Good as an end which is merely
  subjective and restricted in its content,











  the necessity of realising it by subjective
  activity, and this activity itself. In the
  result mediation transcends itself; the
  result is an immediacy which is not the
  reconstitution of the presupposition but
  rather the fact of its transcendedness. The
  Idea of the Notion which is determined
  in and for itself is thus posited no longer
  merely in the active subject, but equally









  as an immediate actuality; and the latter
  conversely is posited as it is in Cogni-
  tion, as objectivity which truly is."
(326)




 




  The results of activity is the test of subjective cognition
  and the criterion of OBJECTIVITY WHICH TRULY IS.




 







  ...“In this result then Cognition is re-









  constructed and united with the
  Practical Idea; the actuality which is 
  found as given is at the same time determined











  as the realised absolute end,—not however
  (as in inquiring Cognition) merely as ob-
  jective world without the subjectivity of
  the Notion, but as objective world whose
  inner ground and actual persistence is the
  Notion. This is the Absolute Idea.” (327)
  ((End of Chapter II. Transition to Chap-
  ter III: “The Absolute Idea.”))


  Chapter III: “The Absolute Idea.” (327)


  ...“The Absolute Idea has turned out
  to be the identity of the Theoretical and the
  Practical Idea; .each of these by itself
  is one-sided....” (327)




 










  The unity of the theoretical idea (of
      knowledge) and of practice—this
    NB—and this unity precisely in
    the theory of knowledge, for
    the resulting sum is the “absolute idea”
    (and the idea = “das objektive Wahre”[67])







 







  What remains to be considered is no lon-
  ger Inhalt,[68] but ...“the universal element
  of its form—that is, the method.” (329)


  “In inquiring cognition the method is
  likewise in the position, of a tool, of a
  means which stands on the subjective side,
  whereby the subjective side relates itself to
  the object.... But in true cognition the meth-
  od is not merely a quantity of certain
  determinations; it is the fact that the No-
  tion is determined in and for itself, and
  is the middle member” (in the logical figure
  of the syllogism) “only because it equally
  has the significance of objective....” (331)


  ...“The absolute method” (i.e., the meth-
  od of cognition of objective truth) “on
  the other hand does not behave as exter-
  nal reflection; it draws the determinate
  element directly from its object itself,
  since it is the object’s immanent principle
  and soul.—It was this that Plato demanded









  of cognition, that it should consider things
  in and for themselves, and that while part-
  ly considering them in their universality
  it should also hold fast to them, not catch-
  ing at externals, examples and compari-
  sons, but contemplating the things alone
  and bringing before consciousness what
  is immanent in them....” (335-336)




 







  This method of “absolute cognition” is ana-
  lytic... “but equally it is synthetic” (336)




 



  One of the
  defini-
  tions of
dialectics





“Dieses so sehr synthetische als analy-
  tische Moment des Urteils, wodurch das
  anfängliche Allgemeine aus ihm selbst als
  das Andere Seiner sich bestimmt, ist das
dialektische zu nennen” ... (336) (+ see
  the next page).[69]   →














  “This equally synthetic and analytic
  moment of the Judgment, by which (the
  moment) the original universality [gen-
  eral concept] determines itself out of
  itself as other in relation to itself,
  must be called dialectical.”







 








[Back to top]
      A determination which is not a clear
  one!![70]


  1) The determination of the concept out
  of itself [the thing itself must be consid-
  ered in its relations and in its develop-
  ment];


      2) the contradictory nature of the thing
  itself (das Andere seiner[71]), the contra-
  dictory forces and tendencies in each phe-
  nomenon;
    

      3) the union of analysis and synthesis.


      Such apparently are the elements of
  dialectics.
   

      One could perhaps present these ele-
  ments in greater detail as follows:





Elements
  of dialec-
  tics






    the objectivity of consideration
    (not examples, not divergencies, but
the Thing-in-itself).
            
          X


    the entire totality of the manifold
relations of this thing to others.
      

        the development of this thing,
(phenomenon, respectively), its own
movement, its own life.
      

the internally contradictory tenden-
cies (and sides) in this thing.
      

        the thing (phenomenon, etc.) as the
    sum  and
          #
unity of opposites.
      

        the struggle, respectively unfold-
ing, of these opposites, contradictory
strivings, etc.
      

        the union of analysis and synthesis—
the break-down of the separate parts
and the totality, the summation of
these parts.
      

    the relations of each thing (phenome-
non, etc.) are not only manifold, but
general, universal. Each thing (phe-
nomenon, process, etc.) is connected
with  every other.    X


        not only the unity of opposites, but
the transitions of every de-
termination, quality, feature, side,
property into every other [into its
opposite?].
      

        the endless process of the discovery
of new sides, relations, etc.
      

        the endless process of the deepening
of man’s knowledge of the thing, of
phenomena, processes, etc., from ap-
pearance to essence and from less pro-
found to more profound essence.
      

        from co-existence to causality and from
one form of connection and reciprocal
dependence to another, deeper, more
general form.
      

        the repetition at a higher stage of
certain features, properties, etc., of
the lower and
      

        the apparent return to the old (nega-
tion of the negation).
      

        the struggle of content with form and
conversely. The throwing off of the
form, the transformation of the con-
tent.
      

        the transition of quantity into quality
and vice versa ((15 and 16
are examples of 9))
      




 







  In brief, dialectics can be defined as the doctrine of
  the unity of opposites. This embodies the essence
  of dialectics, but it requires explanations and develop-
  ment.








 








  + (continuation. See the previous
  page.[72])


←...“Dialectics is one of 
  those ancient
  sciences which has been most misjudged in
  modern metaphysics [here obviously = the-
  ory of knowledge and logic] and in the
  popular philosophy of ancients and mod-





  Plato and
      dialectics






  erns alike....” (336) Diogenes Laertius
  said of Plato that he was the father of
dialectics, the third philosophical science
  (as Thales was the father of natural phi-
  losophy and Socrates of moral philoso-










  phy), but that those who are particularly
  loud in talking about this merit of Plato’s
  give little thought to it....





 



  The objec-
  tivity of
  dialectics






  ...“Dialectics has often been considered
  an art, as though it rested upon a sub-
  jective talent and did not belong to the
  objectivity of the Notion....” (336-337)












      It is an important merit of Kant’s to have
  re-introduced dialectics, to have recognised
  it as “necessary” (a property) “;of reason”
  (337) but the result (of the application
  of dialectics) must be “opposite” (to Kant-
  ianism). See below.




 








There follows a very interesting, clear
  and important outline of dialectics.


...“Besides generally appearing as con-
  tingent, dialectics usually has this more
  detailed form, that when in respect of any
  particular object, e.g., the world, mo-
  tion, point, etc., it is shown that it has
  any particular determination—e.g. (in
  the order of the above-mentioned objects)
  finitude in space or time, presence at
this place, absolute negation of space—
  it is, however, shown further that it has
  with equal necessity the opposite deter-
  mination, e.g., infinity in space and time,
  non-presence at this place, and a rela-
  tion to space, consequently spatiality. The









  
  older Eleatic school applied its dialec-
  tics chiefly against motion; Plato frequent-
  ly against contemporary ideas and con-
  cepts (especially those of the Sophists),






  from the
  history of
  dialectics









  but also against pure categories and re-










flection-determinations; the developed lat-
  er scepticism extended it not only to
  the immediate so-called data of conscious-
  ness and maxims of ordinary life, but






  the role of
  scepticism in
  the history of
      dialectics









  also to all the concepts of science. The
  conclusion which is drawn from such dia-
  lectics is contradiction and the nullity of
  the assertions made. But it may occur in
  a double sense,—in the objective sense,
  the object which thus contradicts itself
  being held to cancel itself and to be null
  (—this was, for instance, the Eleatic con-
  clusion, by which, for example, the world,
  motion, and the point were deprived of
truth), or in the subjective sense, cogni-










tion being held to be defective. The latter
  conclusion is sometimes understood to mean
  that it is only this dialectics that effects
  the trick of an illusive show. This is the






  dialectics is
  understood
  to be a trick









  ordinary view of so called sound common
  sense, which holds fast to the evidence
  of the senses and to customary ideas and
  expressions....” (337-338)


  Diogenes the Dog,[73] for example,
  proved movement by walking up and
  down, “a vulgar refutation” (338), says
   Hegel.




 



  Kantian-
  ism = (also)
  scepticism






  ...“Or again the result reached—that of
  subjective nullity—relates, not to the dia-
  lectic itself, but rather to the cognition
  against which it is directed, and in the
  sense of scepticism and likewise of the
  Kantian philosophy, to cognition in gener-










  al....” (338)




 








  “The fundamental prejudice here is
  that the dialectic has only a negative re-
  sult,” (338)




 








  Among other things, it is said that
  it is a merit of Kant’s to have drawn
  attention to dialectics and to the con-
  sideration “of the determinations of thought
  in and for themselves” (339)




 





  That is cor-
  rect!
Image and
thought,







  “The object in its existence without
  thought and Notion is an image or a name:
  it is what it is in the determinations of
  thought and Notion....”





  the develop-
  ment of both,
  nil aliud[74]




  The object
  manifests
  itself as
  dialectical







  ...“It must not therefore be considered the
  fault of an object, or of cognition, that they
  manifest themselves as dialectical by their
  nature and by an external connection....”





  Concepts are
  not immobile
  but—in and
  for them-
  selves, by
  their na-
  ture =
transition







  ...“Thus all opposites which are taken
  as fixed, such as, for example, finite and
  infinite, or individual and universal, are
  contradictory not by virtue of some exter-
  nal connection, but rather are transitions
  in and for themselves, as the considera-
  tion of their nature showed....” (339)




 










“Now this is the standpoint which was
  referred to above, in which a universal
     #
  first term considered in and for itself
  shows itself to be its own Other....” (340)






  #
  The first uni-
  versal con-
  cept (also =
  the first
  encountered,
  universal
  concept)



 








...“But the Other is essentially not the






  This is very









  empty negative or Nothing which is com-
  monly taken as the result of dialec-
  tics, it is the Other of the first, the negative






  important for
  understand-
  ing









  of the immediate; it is thus determined






  dialectics









  as mediated,—and altogether contains the
  determination of the first. The first is thus
  essentially contained and preserved in the
  Other.—To hold fast the positive in its neg-












  ative, and the content of the presupposition












  in the result, is the most important part
  of rational cognition; also only the simplest
  reflection is needed to furnish conviction
  of the absolute truth and necessity of this
  requirement, while with regard to the
examples of proofs, the whole of Logic
  consists of these.” (340)




 











Not empty negation, not futile negation, not scepti-
  cal negation, vacillation and doubt is characteristic and
  essential in dialectics,—which undoubtedly contains the
  element of negation and indeed as its most important
  element — no, as a moment of development, retaining
  the positive, i.e., without any vacillations, without any
  eclecticism.







 








Dialectics consists in general in the ne-
  gation of the first proposition, in its re-
  placement by a second (in the transition
  of the first into the second, in the demon-
  stration of the connection of the first
  with the second, etc.). The second can be
  made the predicate of the first—










— “for example, the finite is infinite,
  one is many, the individual is the
  universal....” (341)




 








  ...“The first or immediate term is the No-





  “in itself” =
  potentially,
  not yet de-
  veloped, not
  yet unfolded






  tion in itself, and therefore is the nega-
  tive only in itself; the dialectical moment
  with it therefore consists in this, that
  the distinction which it implicitly contains
  is posited in it. The second term on the
  other hand is itself the determinate en-










tity, the distinction or relation; hence with
  it the dialectical moment consists in the
  positing of the unity which is contained
  in it....”— (341-342)




 








(In relation to the simple and origi-
  nal, “first,” positive assertions, proposi-
  tions, etc., the “dialectical moment”, i.e.,
  scientific consideration, demands the dem-
  onstration of difference, connection, tran-
  sition. Without that the simple positive
  assertion is incomplete, lifeless, dead. In
  relation to the “second,” negative propo-
  sition, the “dialectical moment” demands
  the demonstration of “unity,” i.e., of
  the connection of negative and positive,
  the presence of this positive in the nega-
  tive. From assertion to negation—from
  negation to “unity” with the asserted—
  without this dialectics becomes empty ne-
  gation, a game, scepsis.)




 








  ... —“If then the negative, the deter-
  minate, the relation, judgment, and all
  determinations which fall under this sec-
  ond moment, do not of themselves appear
  as contradictory and dialectical, this is
  a mere fault of thought which does not
  confront its thoughts one with another.
  For the materials—opposite determinations
  in one relation—are posited already and
  are at hand for thought. But formal thought
  makes identity its law, and allows the
contradictory content which lies before it










  to drop into the sphere of sensuous repre-
  sentation, into space and time, where the
  contradictory terms are held apart in spa-
  tial and temporal juxtaposition and thus
  come before consciousness without mu-
  tual contact.” (342)






   
  NB



 











  “Come before consciousness without
  mutual contact” (the object)—that is
  the essence of anti-dialectics. It is only
  here that Hegel has, as it were, allowed
  the ass’s ear of idealism to show them-
  selves—by referring time and space (in
  connection with sensuous representation)
  to something lower compared with
thought. Incidentally, in a certain sense,
  sensuous representation is, of course,
  lower. The crux lies in the fact that
  thought must apprehend the whole “re-
  presentation” in its movement, but for
  that thought must be dialectical. Is
  sensuous representation closer to
  reality than thought? Both yes and no.
  Sensuous representation cannot, appre-
  hend movement as a whole, it can-
  not, for example, apprehend movement
  with a speed of 300,000 km. per second,
  but thought does and must apprehend it.
  Thought, taken from sensuous representa-
  tion, also reflects reality; time is a form
  of being of objective reality. Here, in the
  concept of time (and not in the relation
  of sensuous representation to thought)
  is the idealism of Hegel.







 








  ...“In this connection this thought[75]
  makes it its fixed principle that contradic-
  tion is unthinkable; but in truth the think-
  ing of contradiction is the essential mo-
  ment of the Notion; in point of fact formal
thought does think contradiction, but im-
  mediately disregards it, and with the asser-
  tion of that principle” (the statement that
  contradiction is unthinkable) “passes over
  to abstract negation.” (342)




 








  “The negativity which has just been
  considered is the turning-point of the
  movement of the Notion. It is the simple





  the kernel of dialectics






  point of negative self-relation, the inter-
  nal source of all activity, vital and spirit-
  ual self-movement, the dialectic soul which










  all truth has in it and through which it





  the criterion
  of truth
  (the unity
  of the con-
  cept and






  alone is truth; for the transcendence of
  the opposition between the Notion and
  Reality, and that unity which is the truth,
  rest upon this subjectivity alone.—The
  second negative, the negative of the neg-





  reality)






  ative, which we have reached, is this










  transcendence of the contradiction, but is
  no more the activity of an external reflec-
  tion than the contradiction is; it is the in-
  nermost and most objective moment of Life
  and Spirit, by virtue of which a subject,
  the person, the free, has being.” (342-343)




 











  Important here is 1) the char-
  acterisation of dialectics: self-move-
  ment, the source of activity, the
  movement of life and spirit; the
  coincidence of the concepts of the
  subject (man) with reality; 2) ob-
  jectivism to the highest degree (“der
  objektivste Moment”[76]).  







 








  This negation of the negation is the
  third term, says Hegel (343)—“if number
  is applicable”—but it can also be taken
  as the fourth (Quadruplicität[77]), (344)
  counting two negations: the “simple” (or
“formal”) and the “absolute.” (343 i.f.)













  The difference is not clear to me, is not the absolu-
  te equivalent to the more concrete?













  “That this unity, as well as the whole
  form of the method, is a triplicity is wholly,
  however, the merely superficial and ex-
  ternal side of the manner of cognition” (344)






  NB:
  the “triplici-
  ty” of dialec-
  tics is its
  external su-
  perficial side









  —but, he says, that is already “an infi-
  nite merit of Kant’s philosophy” that it
  at least (even if ohne Begriff[78]) demon-
  strated this.




 








  “Formalists, it is true, have also seized
  upon triplicity, and have held fast to its
  empty framework; and this form has been
  rendered tedious and of ill-repute by the
  shallow misuse and the barrenness of mod-
  ern so-called philosophic construction,
  which consists simply in attaching the for-
  mal framework without concept and im-
  manent determination to all sorts of mat-
  ter and employing it for external arrange-
  ment. But its inner value cannot be dimin-
  ished by this vapid misuse, and it must
  still be deemed of high value that the out-
  ward form of the rational has been dis-
  covered, albeit not understood.” (344-345)






   
   
  Hegel sav-
  agely attacks
  formalism,
  tedious and
  idle play
  with
      dialectics



 








  The result of the negation of the nega-










  tion, this third term is “not a qui-
  escent third term, but, as this unity”
  (of contradictions), “is self-mediating
  movement and activity....” (345)


  The result of this dialectical transforma-
  tion into the “third” term, into the synthe-
  sis, is a new premise, assertion, etc., which
  in turn becomes the source of a further
  analysis. But into it, into this “third”
stage has already entered the “content”
  of cognition (“the content of cognition as
  such enters within the sphere of contempla-
  tion”) — and the method is extended into
  a system. (346)


  The beginning of all consideration, of
  the whole analysis—this first premise—
  now appears indeterminate, “imperfect”;
  the need arises to prove, “derive” (ablei-
  ten) (347) it and it turns out that
  “this may seem equivalent to the demand
  for an infinite backward progress in proof and
  derivation” (347)—but, on the other hand,
  the new premise drives forward....


  ...“Thus, cognition rolls forward from con-
  tent to content. This progress determines
  itself, first, in this manner, that it be-
  gins from simple determinatenesses and
  that each subsequent one is richer and
more concrete. For the result contains its
  own beginning, and the development of
  the beginning has made it the richer by
  a new determinateness. The universal is
  the foundation; the progress therefore must
  not be taken as a flow from Other to Other.
  In the absolute method the Notion pre-
  serves itself in its otherness, and the uni-
  versal in its particularisation, in the Judg-
  ment and in reality; it raises to each next
  stage of determination the whole mass of
  its antecedent content, and by its dialec-
  tical progress not only loses nothing and
  leaves nothing behind, but carries with
  it all that it has acquired, enriching and
  concentrating itself upon itself....” (349)


(This extract is not at all bad as a kind
  of summing up of dialectics.)


  But expansion requires also deepening










  (“In-sich-gehen”[79]) “ and greater extension
  is also higher intensity.” (349)






 








  “The richest consequently is also the
  most concrete and subjective, and that
  which carries itself back into the simplest
  depth is also the most powerful and com-
  prehensive.” (349)






This NB: The
richest is
  the most
      concrete
  and most
subjec-
  tive









  “In this manner it comes about that each
  step in the progress of further determi-
  nation in advancing from the indetermi-
  nate beginning is also a rearward approach
  to it, so that two processes which may
  at first appear to be different (the regres-
  sive confirmation of the beginning and its
  progressive further determination) coincide
  and are the same.” (350)


  It is impermissible deprezieren[80] this
  indeterminate beginning:










  “It requires no apology that it”
  (the beginning) “may be admitted mere-
  ly as provisional and hypothetical. Any
  objections which might be advanced—
  about the limits of human cognition, or
  the need of a critical investigation of the
  instrument of cognition before the prob-
  lem is attacked—are themselves supposi-






NB:
  Hegel against
  Kant
  |
  |
  |
  |
  |









  tions which, as concrete determinations,
  imply the need for their mediation and
  proof. Formally then they are no better
  than that beginning against which they






  |
  |
  |
  |









  protest, and rather require a derivation
  by reason of their more concrete content; so
  that it is sheer presumption to demand






  |
  |
  |









  that they should have preferential consid-
  eration. Their content is untrue, for they






  |
  ↓









  make incontrovertible and absolute what
  is known to be finite and untrue (namely,












  a restricted cognition which is determined
  as form and instrument as against its





   
   
  against Kant
  (correct)






  content); and this untrue cognition is it-
  self form and regressive confirmation.—
  The method of truth too knows the begin-
  ning to be incomplete because it is be-
  ginning, but also knows this incomplete
  term in general as necessary, because truth
  is only the coming to itself through the
  negativity of immediacy....” (350-351)




 



   
   
  Science is a
circle of
  circles
   
   
   
  NB: the con-
  nection of the
  dialectical
  method with
  “erfülltes
  Sein”[81] with
  Being that is
  full of con-
  tent and
  concrete
  





  ...“By reason of the nature of the method
  which has been demonstrated, science is
  seen to be a circle which returns upon it-
  self, for mediation bends back its end into
  its beginning, simple ground. Further, this
  circle is a circle of circles.... The various
  sciences ... are fragments of this chain....”
(351)
       “The method is the pure Notion which
  is related only to itself; it is therefore
  the simple self-relation which is Being.
  But now it is also Being fulfilled, the self-
  comprehending Notion, Being as the con-
  crete and also thoroughly intensive to-
  tality....”(352)










  ...“Secondly, this Idea” ((die Idee des
  absoluten Erkennens[82])) “still is logical,
  it is enveloped in pure thought, and is
  the science only of the divine Notion.
  The systematic development is itself a real-
  isation, but is maintained within the
  same sphere. Since the pure Idea of Cogni-
  tion is to that extent enclosed in subjectiv-
  ity, it is an impulse to transcend the latter,
  and pure truth, as the last result, also










  becomes the beginning of another sphere
  and science. This transition need here only
  be intimated.




 








  “For the Idea posits itself as the abso-
  lute unity of the pure Notion and its
  Reality, and thus gathers itself into the
  immediacy of Being; and in doing so,
  as totality in this form, it is Nature.”
(352-353)






  Transition
  from the Idea
  to Na-
  ture...



 










  This sentence on the last (353) page of
  the Logic is highly noteworthy. The tran-
  sition of the logical idea to nature. It
  brings one within a hand’s grasp of mate-
  rialism. Engels was right[83] when he said
  that Hegel’s system was materialism turned
  upside down. This is not the last sen-
  tence of the Logic, but what comes after
  it to the end of the page is unimportant.



  End of the Logic. 17.XII.1914.












NB: In the small
  Logic (Ency-
  clopaedia, Par.
  244, Zusatz[84]
  p.414 [85]
  the last sen-
  tence of the
  book reads:
  “diese seiende
  Idee aber
  ist die
  Natur”[86]







  
   







  It is noteworthy that the whole chapter on the “Absol-
  ute Ideas” scarcely says a word about God (hardly ever
  has a “divine” “notion” slipped out accidentally) and
  apart from that—this NB—it contains almost nothing
  that is specifically idealism, but has for its main
  subject the dialectical method. The sum-
  total, the last word and essence of Hegel’s logic is the
dialectical method—this is extremely noteworthy. And
  one thing more: in this most idealistic of
  Hegel’s works there is the least idealism and the
most materialism. “Contradictory,” but a fact!






  NB



  
   

  
   
Vol. VI, p. 399[87]
  
   








    The Encyclopaedia § 227—excellent on
the analytical method (to “analyse” the
  “Given concrete” phenomenon—“to give the





  NB:
  “genus, or
  force and
  law”
  (genus = law)






  form of abstraction” to its individual
  aspects and “herausheben” “to bring into
  relief”—“the genus, or force and law”
  p. 398—and on its application:










  It is not at all “an arbitrary matter” (398)
  whether we apply the analytical or the
  synthetical method (as man pflegt zu sprech-
  en[88])—“it
      is the form of the very objects
  that have to be cognised upon which it
  depends” (399)


  Locke and the empiricists adopt the
  standpoint of analysis. And they often
  say that “in general cognition cannot
  do more.” (398)


  “It is, however, at once apparent that





  Quite correct
Cf. Marx’s
  remark in
Capital,
  I, 5, 2[89]






  this turns things upside down, and that
  cognition which wishes to take things as
  they are thereby falls into contradiction
  with itself.” The chemist, for example,
  “martert”[90] a piece of flesh and discovers










  in it nitrogen, carbon, etc. “But then these
  abstract substances have ceased to be
  flesh.”


  There can be many definitions, for ob-
  jects have many aspects.


  “The richer the object to be defined,
  i.e., the more numerous the aspects which
  it offers to one’s notice, the more various
  also are the definitions framed from them”
(400 § 229)—for example, the definition
  of life, of the state, etc.


  In their definitions, Spinoza and Schel-
  ling present a mass of “speculation” (Hegel
  here obviously uses this word in the good
  sense) but “in the form of assurances.”
  Philosophy, however, must prove and de-
  rive everything, and not limit itself to
      definitions.


  Division (Einteilung) must be “natural
  and not merely artificial, i.e., arbitrary.”
(401)


Pp. 403-404— anger at 
  “construction”
  and the “play” of construing, whereas it
  is a question of the Begriff, the “Idee,” of “Ein-
  heit des Begriffs und der Objektivität....”[91]
(403)


  In the small Encyclopaedia § 233,
  section b is entitled das Wollen[92]
  (which in the large Logic is “Die Idee des
  Guten”[93]).


      Activity is a “contradiction”—the pur-
  pose is real and not real, possible and
  not ... etc.


  “Formally, however, the disappearance
  of this contradiction consists in activity
  abolishing the subjectivity of the pur-
  pose and along with it the objectivity,
  the opposite, in virtue of which both
  are finite, and abolishing not merely the
  one-sidedness of this subjectivity, but the
  subjectivity as a whole” (406).


  The standpoint of Kant and Fichte (es-
  pecially in moral philosophy) is the stand-
  point of purpose, of subjective ought (407)
  (without connection with the objective)....


      Speaking of the Absolute Idea, Hegelridicules (§ 237, Vol. VI, p. 409) “decla-
  mation” over it, as if everything were
  revealed in it, and he remarks that
       “the absolute idea” ... is ... “the univer-
  sal,” “but the universal not merely as ab-
  stract form, to which (sic!) the particular
  content stands contrasted as an Other,





  très bien!
   
  A beautiful
  comparison!
  Instead of
  banal reli-
  gion, one
  must take all
  kinds of ab-
  stract truths






  but as the absolute form into which all
  determinations, the whole fullness of the
  content posited by it, have retreated. In
  this respect the absolute idea can be com-
  pared to an old man, who utters the same
  statements of religion as a child, but for
  whom they have the significance of his
  whole lifetime. Even if the child under-
  stands the religious content, it is for him
  still only something outside of which the
  whole of life and the whole of the world
  lie.” (410)




 



  excellent!






  ...“The interest lies in the whole move-
  ment....” (§ 237, 409)




 








  ...“The content is the living develop-
  ment of the idea....” “Each of the stages
  hitherto reviewed is an image of the ab-
  solute, but at first in a limited way....”
(401)


  § 238 Addendum:
       “The philosophical method is both ana-
  lytical and synthetical, but not in the
  sense of a bare juxtaposition or a mere
  alternation of these two methods of finite
  cognition, but rather in such a way that
  it holds them transcended in itself, and





  très bien






in everyone of its movements, there-
  fore, it proves itself simultaneously ana-
  lytical and synthetical. Philosophical










  thought proceeds analytically, insofar as it





  very
  good!
  (and graphic)






  only accepts its object, the Idea, allows
  the latter its own way and, as it were,
  only looks on at its movement and de-
  velopment. To this extent philosophising
  is wholly passive. Philosophic thought,










  however, is equally synthetic and shows
  itself to be the activity of the Notion itself.
  That, however, involves the effort to re-
  frain from our own fancies and private
  opinions, which always seek to obtrude
  themselves....” (411)


(§ 243, p. 413)... “Thus the method is
  not an external form, but the soul and
  notion of the content....”


  (End of the Encyclopaedia; see above
  on the side the extract from the end of Log-
  ic.[94])
 




 

Notes
[1] previous works—Ed.
[2] “ossified material”—Ed.
[3] “to render fluid”—Ed.
[4] Hegel, Werke, Bd. V, Berlin, 1834.—Ed.
[5] of the Notion—Ed.
[6] in fine—at the end—Ed.
[7] “to speak ill” of imagination and memory—Ed.
[8] “the summit of thought”—Ed.
[9] “the incomprehensible”—Ed.
[10] truth—Ed.
[11] sensation and intuition—Ed.
[12] See F. Engels, Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical
German Philosophy (Marx and Engels, Selected Works, Vol. II, Moscow, 1958, p. 371).
[13] constitutive—Ed.
[14] objective—Ed.
[15] dispenses with the material of sensuousness—Ed.
[16] constitutive—Ed.
[17] “formal science”—Ed.
[18] “pure truth”—Ed.
[19] Hegel, Werke, Bd. VI, Berlin, 1840.—Ed.
[20] the logical forms—Ed.
[21] “adequate notion”—Ed.
[22] Hegel, Werke, Bd. V, Berlin, 1834.—Ed.
[23] Hegel, Werke, Bd. V, Berlin, 1834.—Ed.
[24] Lenin wrote this in English.—Ed.
[25] That’s what is needed!—Ed.
[26] notion-determinations—Ed.
[27] “otiose form”—Ed.
[28] If I may be allowed to say so.—Ed.
[29] individual—Ed.
[30] particular—Ed.
[31] universal—Ed.
[32] Chapter I of Capital—Ed.
[33] to be inverted—Ed.
[34] from the threshold—Ed.
[35] Apparently the preposition “to” before the
word “syllogism” is omitted.—Ed.
[36] Hegel, Werke, Bd. VI, Berlin, 1840.—Ed.
[37] Hegel, Werke, Bd. VI, Berlin, 1840.—Ed.
[38] The word “logic” in the manuscript is linked to the word
“here” in the following quotation from Hegel.—Ed.
[39] Hegel, Werke, Bd. V, Berlin, 1834.—Ed.
[40] of objective totality—Ed.
[41] “natural necessity”—Ed.
[42] the End—Ed.
[43] vulgar—Ed.
[44] “beyond”—Ed.
[45] Hegel, Werke, Bd. VI, Berlin, 1840.—Ed.
[46] existing specially for themselves.—Ed.
[47] the understanding—Ed.
[48] false—Ed.
[49] A critique of the metaphysical views of the Machist V.
Chernov is presented by Lenin in 
his book Materialism and Empirio-Criticism
(see V. I. Lenin, Materialism and Empirio-Criticism, Moscow, 1960).
[50] Hegel, Werke, Bd. V, Berlin, 1834.—Ed.
[51] essentially is in cognition—Ed.
[52] Hegel, Werke, Bd. VI, Berlin, 1840.——Ed.
[53] Hegel, Werke, Bd. V, Berlin, 1834, pp. 248-262.—Ed.
[54] “in itself” and “for itself”!!!—Ed.
[55] the Notions—Ed.
[56] abstract one-sided determinations of 
“former—pre-Kantian—metaphysics”—Ed.
[57] everything empirical—Ed.
[58] Thing-in-itself—Ed.
[59] “Beyond”—Ed.
[60] At this point Lenin’s manuscript continues
in the notebook “Hegel. Logic. Section III”—Ed.
[61] The solution of this equation was given by Gauss
in his work Diisquisitiones arithmeticae (Arithmetical Studies), 1801.
[62] in and for itself—Ed.
[63] Lenin is referring to Marx’s “Theses on Feuerbach,”
written in 1845 and published by Engels in 1888 as an appendix to Ludwig Feuerbach and the
End of Classical German Philosophy (see Marx and Engels, Selected Works, Vol. II,
Moscow, 1958, pp. 403-405).
[64] the Theoretical Idea—Ed.
[65] the Practical Idea—Ed.
[66] positing—Ed.
[67] “the objectivly true”—Ed.
[68] content—Ed.
[69] In the manuscript, there is an arrow from the parenthesis 
pointing to the paragraph: “Dialectics is...,” located on the following 
page ofthe manuscript. (See p. 223 of this volume.)—Ed.
[70] This section is known as Lenin’s “Summary of Dialectics,” and
also exists in the Lenin Internet Archive on a separate page paired with
Lenin’s “On the Question of Dialectics”—KCG, 2007.
[71] the other of itself—Ed.
[72] See p. 220 of this volume.—Ed.
[73] The reference is to Diogenes of Sinope, a
representative of the Cynic school who was nicknamed the “Dog,”
probably because of his beggarly life and disregard for public morals.
[74] noting else—Ed.
[75] formal thought—Ed.
[76] “the most objective moment”—Ed.
[77] quadruplicity—Ed.
[78] without any concept—Ed.
[79] Going into itself—Ed.
[80] to depreciate—Ed.
[81] “fulfilled Being”—Ed.
[82] the idea of absolute cognition—Ed.
[83] See F. Engels, Ludwig Feuerbach and the End 
of Classical German Philosophy (Marx and Engels, Selected Works,
Vol. II, Moscow, 1958, p. 372).
[84] addendum—Ed.
[85] Hegel, Werke, Bd. VI, Berlin, 1840.—Ed.
[86] “but this Idea which has Being is Nature”—Ed.
[87] Hegel, Werke, Bd. VI, Berlin, 1840.—Ed.
[88] is usually said—Ed.
[89] See K. Marx, Capital, Vol. I, Moscow, 1959,
Chapter VII, p. 179. In footnote 1, Marx quotes from Hegel’s Encyclopaedia:
“Reason is just as cunning as she is powerful. Her cunning consists principally
in her mediating activity, which, by causing objects to act and react on each other
in accordance with their own nature, in this way, without any direct interference
in the process, carries out reason’s intentions.” (Hegel; Enzyklopädie,
Erster Theil, “Die Logik,” Berlin, 1840, S. 382).
[90] tortures—Ed.
[91] the Notion, the “idea”, “the unity
of the Notion and objectivity”—Ed.
[92] volition—Ed.
[93] “The Idea of the Good”—Ed.
[94] See p. [233] of this volume.—Ed.

 


<< Index to Lenin’s 
  Conspectus of Hegel’s Science of Logic  
 

  




Works Index
   |   
 Volume 38

 | 

Collected Works
      |   L.I.A. Index




<
backward




forward >





 



==========

## Summary of Dialectics










Lenin's Summary of Hegel's Dialectics



Vladimir Ilyich Lenin

  Summary of Dialectics




Written: 1914
Source: Lenin’s Collected
  Works, 2nd English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 38, pp. 220-222
Publisher: Foreign Languages Publishing House
First Published: 1961 in Collected Works,
      Volume 38
Translated: Clemens Dutt
Original Transcription & Markup: R. Cymbala & 
  Andy Blunden
Re-Marked up & Proofread by: K. Goins (2007)
Public Domain: Lenin Internet Archive (2003). 
  You may freely copy, distribute, display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. 
  Please credit “Marxists Internet Archive” as your source.

Note that this document has undergone special formating to ensure that Lenin’s
      sidenotes fit on the page, marking as best as possible where they were 
  located in the original manuscript. 
    

 




       
  [... Back to Book 3, Section 3 of Lenin’s Conspectus]




 







  A determination which is not a clear
  one!!


  1) The determination of the concept out
  of itself [the thing itself must be consid-
  ered in its relations and in its develop-
  ment];


      2) the contradictory nature of the thing
  itself (das Andere seiner[1]), the contra-
  dictory forces and tendencies in each phe-
  nomenon;
    

      3) the union of analysis and synthesis.


      Such apparently are the elements of
  dialectics.
   

      One could perhaps present these ele-
  ments in greater detail as follows:




 





Elements
  of dialec-
  tics






    the objectivity of consideration
    (not examples, not divergencies, but
the Thing-in-itself).
            
          X


    the entire totality of the manifold
relations of this thing to others.
      

        the development of this thing,
(phenomenon, respectively), its own
movement, its own life.
      

the internally contradictory tenden-
cies (and sides) in this thing.
      

        the thing (phenomenon, etc.) as the
    sum  and
          #
unity of opposites.
      

        the struggle, respectively unfold-
ing, of these opposites, contradictory
strivings, etc.
      

        the union of analysis and synthesis—
the break-down of the separate parts
and the totality, the summation of
these parts.
      

    the relations of each thing (phenome-
non, etc.) are not only manifold, but
general, universal. Each thing (phe-
nomenon, process, etc.) is connected
with  every other.    X


        not only the unity of opposites, but
the transitions of every de-
termination, quality, feature, side,
property into every other [into its
opposite?].
      

        the endless process of the discovery
of new sides, relations, etc.
      

        the endless process of the deepening
of man’s knowledge of the thing, of
phenomena, processes, etc., from ap-
pearance to essence and from less pro-
found to more profound essence.
      

        from co-existence to causality and from
one form of connection and reciprocal
dependence to another, deeper, more
general form.
      

        the repetition at a higher stage of
certain features, properties, etc., of
the lower and
      

        the apparent return to the old (nega-
tion of the negation).
      

        the struggle of content with form and
conversely. The throwing off of the
form, the transformation of the con-
tent.
      

        the transition of quantity into quality
and vice versa ((15 and 16
are examples of 9))
      




 







  In brief, dialectics can be defined as the doctrine of
  the unity of opposites. This embodies the essence
  of dialectics, but it requires explanations and develop-
  ment.







 




       [... Back to Book 3, Section 3 of Lenin’s Conspectus] 





 

Notes
[1] the other of itself—Ed.
 


<< Index to Lenin’s 
  Conspectus of Hegel’s Science of Logic  
 

  




Works Index
     |   
   Volume 38

 | 

Collected Works
        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward




forward >





 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
On the Question of Dialectics


Written: 1915
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th Edition, Moscow, 1976,
  Volume 38, pp. 357-361
Publisher: Progress Publishers
First Published: 1925 in Bolshevik, No. 5-6
Translated: Clemence Dutt
Edited: Stewart Smith
Original Transcription & Markup: R. Cymbala & 
  Marc Szewczyk
Re-Marked up & Proofread by: Kevin Goins (2007)
Public Domain: Lenin Internet Archive (2003). 
  You may freely copy, distribute, display and 
  perform this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. 
  Please credit “Marxists Internet
  Archive” as your source.

The fragment On the Question of Dialectics 
  is contained in a notebook between the conspectus of Lassalle’s book
  on Heraclitus and the conspectus of Aristotle’s Metaphysics.
  Written in 1915 in Bern.
  

  Note that this document has undergone special formating to ensure that Lenin’s
  sidenotes fit on the page, marking as best as possible where they were 
  located in the original manuscript. 


 




      The splitting of a single whole and the cognition of its contradictory
      parts (see the quotation from Philo on Heraclitus 
  at the beginning of Section III, “On Cognition,” in Lasalle’s 
  book on Heraclitus[1]) is 
  the essence (one of the “essentials,” 
  one of the principal, if not the principal, characteristics or features) of 
  dialectics. That is precisely how Hegel, 
  too, puts the matter (Aristotle in 
  his Metaphysics continually grapples with
  it and combats Heraclitus and Heraclitean ideas).
    


  The correctness of this aspect of the content of dialectics
  must be tested by the history of science. This aspect of dialectics
  (e.g. in Plekhanov)
  usually receives inadequate attention: the
  identity of opposites is taken as the sum-total of
  examples [“for example, a 
  seed,” “for example, primitive
  communism.” The same is true of Engels. But it is
  “in the interests of popularisation...”] and not
  as a law of cognition (and as a law of the
  objective world).
    




  In mathematics: + and —. Differential and integral.
  In mechanics: action and reaction.
  In physics: positive and negative electricity.
  In chemistry: the combination and dissociation of atoms.
  In social science: the class struggle.




The identity of opposites 
  (it would be more correct, perhaps, to say their “unity,”—although
  the difference between the terms identity and unity is not
      particularly important here. In a certain sense both are
      correct) is the recognition (discovery) of the contradictory,
      mutually exclusive, opposite tendencies 
  in all phenomena
      and processes of nature (including mind and society). The
      condition for the knowledge of all processes of the world in 
  their “self-movement,” in their
  spontaneous development, in their real life, is the knowledge of them as a
      unity of opposites. Development is the “struggle” of
      opposites. The two basic (or two possible? Or two historically
      observable?) conceptions of development (evolution) are:
      development as decrease and increase, as repetition, and
      development as a unity of opposites (the division of a unity
      into mutually exclusive opposites and their reciprocal
      relation).


In the first conception of motion,
      self - movement, its driving force, its source, its motive, remains 
  in the shade (or this source is made external—God, subject,
  etc.). In the second conception the chief attention is directed precisely
  to knowledge of the source of “self”
  - movement.



      The first conception is lifeless, pale and dry. The second is
      living. The second alone furnishes the key to
  the “self-movement” of everything existing; it alone furnishes
  the key to “leaps,” to the “break in continuity,”
  to the “transformation into the opposite,” to the destruction of the
  old and the emergence of the new.



      The unity (coincidence, identity, equal action) of opposites is
      conditional, temporary, transitory, relative. The struggle of
      mutually exclusive opposites is absolute, just as development
      and motion are absolute.







NB: The distinction between subjectivism (scepticism, sophistry,
      etc.) and dialectics, incidentally, is that in (objective)
      dialectics the difference between the relative and the absolute is itself
      relative. For objective dialectics there is an
      absolute within the relative. For subjectivism and sophistry 
  the relative is only relative and excludes the absolute.
    





  In his Capital, 
  Marx first analyses the simplest, most
  ordinary and fundamental, most common and everyday relation
  of bourgeois (commodity) society, a relation encountered billions
  of times, viz., the exchange of commodities. In this very simple
  phenomenon (in this “cell” of bourgeois society) analysis
  reveals all the contradictions (or the germs of all
  contradictions) of modern society. The subsequent exposition
  shows us the development (both growth and movement) of
  these contradictions and of this society in the Σ[2] of its
  individual parts. From its beginning to its end.



      Such must also be the method of exposition (i.e., study) of dialectics
      in general (for with Marx the dialectics of bourgeois society
      is only a particular case of dialectics). To begin with what is
      the simplest, most ordinary, common, etc., with any proposition:
      the leaves of a tree are green; John is a man: Fido is a dog,
      etc. Here already we have dialectics (as Hegel’s genius
      recognised): the individual is the universal.
      
  (cf. Aristoteles, Metaphisik, translation by Schegler, Bd. II, S. 40, 3.
  Buch, 4. Kapitel, 8-9: “denn natürlich kann man nicht der Meinung sin, 
  daß es ein Haus (a house in general) gebe außer den sichtbaren 
  Häusern,” “ού γρ άν 
  ΰείημεν είναί
  τινα οίχίαν παρα
  τχς τινάς 
  οίχίας”).[3] Consequently, the opposites (the individual 
  is opposed to the universal) are identical: the individual exists only in the 
  connection that leads to the universal. The universal exists only in the
      individual and through the individual. Every individual is (in
      one way or another) a universal. Every universal is (a fragment,
      or an aspect, or the essence of) an individual. Every universal
      only approximately embraces all the individual objects. Every
      individual enters incompletely into the universal, etc., etc.
      Every individual is connected by thousands of transitions with
      other kinds of individuals (things, phenomena, processes) etc.
  Here already we have the elements, the germs, the
      concepts of necessity, of objective connection in nature,
      etc. Here already we have the contingent and the necessary, the phenomenon
      and the essence; for when we say: John is a man, Fido is a dog,
      this is a leaf of a tree, etc., we disregard a
      number of attributes as contingent; we separate the essence from
      the appearance, and counterpose the one to the other.



  Thus in any proposition we can (and must) disclose as in a “nucleus”
  (“cell”) the germs of all the elements of dialectics, and thereby
  show that dialectics is a property of all human knowledge in general.
      
      And natural science shows us (and here again it must be
      demonstrated in any simple instance) objective nature
      with the same qualities, the transformation of the individual
      into the universal, of the contingent into the necessary,
      transitions, modulations, and the reciprocal connection of
      opposites. Dialectics is the theory of knowledge of
      (Hegel and) Marxism. This is the “aspect” of the
      matter (it is not “an aspect” but the essence
      of the matter) to which Plekhanov, not to speak of other
      Marxists, paid no attention.
    
*  *  *


      Knowledge is represented in the form of a series of circles both
      by Hegel (see Logic) 
  and by the modern “epistemologist”
  of natural science, the eclectic and foe of Hegelianism (which he did not
  understand!), Paul Volkmann (see his Erkenntnistheorische Grundzüge,[4] S.)
    





  
      “Circles” in philosophy: [is a chronology of persons
  essential? No!]

      Ancient: from Democritus to Plato and the dialectics
  of Heraclitus.
      
      Renaissance: Descartes 
  versus Gassendi (Spinoza?)
      Modern:   Holbach—Hegel   (via   Berkeley,   Hume, 
  Kant). Hegel—Feuerbach—Marx





Dialectics as living, many-sided knowledge (with the number
      of sides eternally increasing), with an infinite number of shades
      of every approach and approximation to reality (with a philosophical
      system growing into a whole out of each shade)—here we have
      an immeasurably rich content as compared with “metaphysical”
  materialism, 
  the fundamental misfortune of which is its inability to
      apply dialectics to the Bildertheorie,[5] to the process and
      development of knowledge.






  Philosophical idealism
  is only nonsense from the stand-
  point of crude, simple, metaphysical materialism. From
  the standpoint of dialectical materialism, on the other
  hand, philosophical idealism is a one-sided, exaggerated,
  überschwengliches (Dietzgen)[6] development (inflation,
  distension) of one of the features, aspects, facets of  knowl-
  edge, into an absolute, divorced from matter, from nature,







  apotheosised. Idealism is clerical obscurantism. True. But
  philosophical idealism is (“more 
  correctly” and
  “in addition”) a road to
  clerical obscurantism
through one of the shades of the infinitely com-
  plex knowledge (dialectical) of man.





  NB
  this
   aphor-
  ism




Human knowledge is not (or does not follow) a straight line, but
      a curve, which endlessly approximates a series of circles, a
      spiral.  Any fragment, segment, section of this curve can be
      transformed (transformed one-sidedly) into an independent,
      complete, straight line, which then (if one does not see the
      wood for the trees) leads into the quagmire, into clerical
      obscurantism (where it is anchored by 
  the class interests of the ruling classes).  Rectilinearity and one-sidedness,
      woodenness and petrification, subjectivism and subjective
      blindness—voilà the epistemological roots of idealism. And
      clerical obscrutantism (= philosophical idealism), of course,
      has epistemological roots, it is not groundless; it is a
      sterile flower undoubtedly, but a sterile flower that
      grows on the living tree of living, fertile, genuine, powerful,
      omnipotent, objective, absolute human knowledge.

 

Notes
[1] See p. 348 of this volume—Ed.
[2] summation—Ed.
[3] “for, of course, one cannot hold the opinion 
  that there can be a house (in general) apart from visible houses.”—Ed.
[4] P. Volkmann, Erkenntnistheorische Grundzüge der 
  Naturwissenschaften, Leipzig-Berlin, 1910, p. 35.—Ed.
[5] theory of reflection—Ed.
[6] The reference to the use by Josef Dietzgen of the term
  “überschwenglich,” which means: exaggerated, excessive, infinite;
  for example, in the book Kleinere philosophische Schriften (Minor Philosophical
  Writings), Stuttgart, 1903, p. 204, Dietzgen uses this term as follows: 
  “absolute and relative are not infinitely separated.”
 






Works Index
  |   
Volume 38

 | 

Collected Works
        |   L.I.A. Index





 



==========

## Notes on Reviews of Hegel’s Logic











Notes On Reviews Of Hegel's Logic



Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Notes On Reviews Of Hegel’s Logic

Written: December, 1914
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th Edition, Moscow, 1976,
  Volume 38, pp. 238-241
Publisher: Progress Publishers
First Published: 1930 in Lenin Miscellany XII
Translated: Clemence Dutt
Edited: Stewart Smith
Original Transcription & Markup: David Walters
Re-Marked up & Proofread by: Kevin Goins (2008)
Public Domain: Lenin Internet Archive (2003).You may freely copy, distribute, display and 
  perform this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. 
  Please credit “Marxists Internet Archive” as your source.

Notes on Reviews of Hegel’s “Logic”—written
    after December 17, 1914 at the end of the third notebook of the conspectus of Hegel’s
Science of Logic.
 
Note that this document has undergone special formating to ensure that 
Lenin’s sidenotes fit on the page, marking as best as possible 
where they were located in the original manuscript. 
  

 







Preuβische Jahrbücher[1] (Bd. 151)
  1913, March, an article by Dr. Ferd. J.
  Schmidt: “Hegel and Marx.” The author hails
  the return to Hegel, reviles “theoreticoco-
  gnitive scholasticism,” quotes the neo-Hegel-
  ians Constantin Rössler and Adolf Lasson
  (of the Preuβische Jahrbücher) and, in
  connection with Plenge’s book, states that
  Marx did not understand the significance
  of the “national idea” as a synthesis. Marx’s
      merit—that of organising the workers—was
  a great one, but ... one-sided.





   
NB  






  An example of the “liberal” (or rather
  bourgeois, worker-loving—for the author
  is probably a conservative) castration of
  Marx.













MacTaggart, Ellis M’Taggart: Studies
  in the Hegelian Dialectic, Cambridge, 1896
  (259 pp.). Review in Zeitschrift für Phi-
  losophie,[2] 
  Bd. 119 (1902), S. 185— — —,
  says that the author is an expert on Hegel’s
  philosophy, which he defends against Seth,
  Balfour, Lotze, Trendelenburg, etc. (the au-
  thor MacTaggart is obviously an
  arch-idealist).



Emil Hammacher: Die Bedeutung der
  Philosophie Hegels. (92 SS.) 1911, Leipzig.
     Review in 
  Zeitschrift für Philosophie,
  Bd. 148 (1912), p. 95. Says that the book
  contains rather good observations on “the
  reappearance of post Kantian idealism at the
  present time,” that Windelband is an agnostic
  (p. 96), etc., but that the author completely
  failed to understand Hegel’s “absolute ideal-
  ism,” as incidentally also Riehl, Dilthey and
  and other “stars.” The author is said to have
  undertaken a task beyond his powers.



  Andrew Seth: The Development from Kant
  to Hegel with Chapters on the Philosophy
  of Religion, London, 1882. Review in Zeit-
  schrift für Philosophie, Bd. 83, S. 145 (1883).
       The author is said to defend Hegel against
  Kant. (Laudatory in general.)



Stirling: The Secret of Hegel. Review
  in the same journal, Bd. 53 (1868), p. 268.
  The author is said to be an exceptionally
  fervent worshipper of Hegel, whom he in-
  terprets for English readers.



  Bertrando Spaventa: Da Socrate a He-
  gel, Bari, 1905. (432 pp. 4,50 lire). Review
  ibidem, Bd. 129 (1906)—the book is said
  to be a collection of articles, inter alia
  about Hegel, of whom Spaventa is a faith-
  ful adherent.



Stirling: The Secret of Hegel.


  Italian:


Spaventa: Da Socrate a Hegel.
  Raff. Mariano.


  German:


Michelet and Haring. Dialektische
  Methode Hegels (1888).
       Schmitt. Das Geheimnis der Hegel-
  schen Dialektik (1888).



Regarding recent literature on Hegel.
      Neo-Hegelians: Caird, Bradley.
      J. B. B a i l l i e:  The 
  Origin and
   Significance of Hegel’s Logic, London, 1901
  (375 pp.). A review in Revue Philosophique,[3]
1902, 2, S. 312. Says that he does not merely
  repeat Hegelian terminology (like Véra), but tries
  to examine and explain historically. Incidentally,
  Chapter X: the relation of logic to nature (Hegel
  is said not to have achieved his aim). Hegel’s
  significance is that he “demonstrated the object-
  ive character of knowledge.” (p. 314)



William Wallace: Prolegomena
  to the Study of Hegel’s Philosophy and
  Especially of his Logic, Oxford and Lon-
  don, 1894. Review in Revue Philo-
  sophique, 1894, 2, p. 538. Second
  edition, the first was in 1874. The author
  translated Hegel’s Logic.









  By the same
  author: 1894
  a translation
  of The Philo-
  sophy
  of Mind,[4]
  with an
  explanatory
  chapter.
  Review ibid.










  “Mr. Wallace accurately expounds the
  Hegelian conception of this science (logic)
  ... a science which governs both the philo-
  sophy of nature and that of mind, since pure
  thought or the Idea is the common basis
  both of material reality and psychical real-
  ity.”













  On Wallace, a laudatory but shallow
  review in Zeitschrift für Phi-
  ospohie, Bd. 111 (1898), p. 208.







 








P. Rotta: La renaissance de Hegel
  et “la philosophia perennis” in the Italian
Rivista di Filosofia, 1911, I—(review in
Revue Philosophique, 1911, 2, p. 333).
       Rotta is a supporter of Caird. Seemingly,
  nil.




 







  an idealist
  interpreta-
  tion of
  energy??










Among other things... “Bradley’s neo-
  Hegelian conception of an invisible energy
  transferred from one manifestation to an-
  other, present and operative in all changes
  and all particular activities.”[5]




 








J. Grier Hibben: Hegel’s Logic,
  an Essay in Interpretation, New York,
1902 (313 pp.).




 



  The writer
  of the re-
  view[6] notes
  in general
  “the rebirth
  of Hegelian-
  ism in the
  Anglo-Saxon
  countries”






  Review in Revue Philosophique, 1904,
  Vol. I, p. 430: “In spite of its title, the
  work of M. H. is not an interpretative
  commentary but rather an almost literal
  summary.” The author has compiled some-
  thing in the nature of a dictionary of the
  terms used in Hegel’s Logic. But this, it is
  said, is not the essence of the matter: “The
  commentators are still in dispute over





  ... “in recent
  years”.






  the very position taken by Hegel, over
  the fundamental meaning and true aim
  of his dialectic. The celebrated criticisms
  of Seth are opposed by recent exegeses
  which attribute a quite different significance
  to the Logic, taken as a whole, notably such
  as those of MacTaggart and G. Noël.”
  (431)




 








  According to Hibben, Hegel’s Logic “n’est
  pas un simple système spéculatif, une plus ou





  NB  






  moms savante combinaison de concepts abs-
  traits; elle est on même temps ‘une interpró-
  tation de la vie universelle dans toute la plén-
  itude de sa signification concrète.’”[7] (p. 430)





    NB



 

Notes
[1] Preussische
  Jahrbücher (Prussian Annals)—German conservative monthly on problems of
  politics, philosophy, history and literature, published in Berlin from 1858
  to 1935.
[2] The 
  reference is to Zeitschrift für Philosophie und philosophische Kritik 
  (Journal of Philosophy and Philosophical Criticism), which was founded in 
  1837 by Immanuel Hermann Fichte, German idealist philosopher. Originally it
  was called Zeitschrift für Philosophie und spekulative Theologie (Journal
  of Philosophy and Speculative Theology). It was edited by German
  idealist philosophy professors. Publication ceased in 1918.
[3] Revue
  Philosophique (Philosophical Review) a journal founded in Paris in 1870.
[4] Philosophy 
  of Mind—English translation of the third part of Hegel’s 
  Encyclopaedia 
  of the Philosophical Sciences, which consists of three 
  parts—“Logic,”
  “Philosophy of Nature,” and “Philosophy 
  of Mind.”
[5] The quotation is 
  from the review of the book by A. Chiappelli, Le pluralisme moderne et le monisme
  (Modern Pluralism and Monism), in the journal Revue Philosophique, 1911, 
  Vol. LXXII, p. 333.
[6] L. Weber—Ed.
[7] “is not a 
  simple speculative system, a more or less scientific combination of abstract concepts;
  it is at the same time ‘an interpretation of universal life in all the
  fullness of its concrete significance.’”—Ed.
 






Works Index
    |   
  Volume 38

 | 

Collected Works
    |   L.I.A. Index




  < backward




  forward >





 



==========

## Conspectus of Hegel’s Book
  Lectures on the History of Philosophy











Conspectus of Hegel’s Book Lectures On the History of Philosophy



Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Conspectus of Hegel’s Book
Lectures On the History
  of Philosophy

Written: 1915
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th Edition, Moscow, 1976,
  Volume 38, pp. 243-302
Publisher: Progress Publishers
First Published: 1930 in Lenin Miscellany XII
Translated: Clemence Dutt
Edited: Stewart Smith
Transcription & Markup: K. Goins
Public Domain: Lenin Internet Archive (2008).You may freely copy, distribute, display and 
  perform this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. 
  Please credit “Marxists Internet Archive” as your source.

Conspectus of Hegel’s book “Lectures on the
    History of Philosophy” consists of two notebooks on whose covers is
written Hegel. The conspectus was made in 1915 in Bern.
 
    Note that this document has undergone special formating to ensure that 
Lenin’s sidenotes fit on the page, marking as best as possible 
where they were located in the original manuscript. 
  

 

Introduction to the History of Philosophy


Volume XIII. Volume I of The History of
  Philosophy. History of Greek Philosophy


Ionic Philosophy
Pythagoras and Pythagoreans
The Eleatic School
The Philosophy of Heraclitus
Leucippus
Democritus
The Philosophy of Anaxagoras


Volume XIV. Volume II of The History
  of Philosophy


The Philosophy of the Sophists
The Philosophy of Socrates
The Socratics
The Philosophy of Plato
The Philosophy of Aristotle
The Philosophy of the Stoics
The Philosophy of Epicurus
The Philosophy of the Sceptics


Volume XV. Volume III of The 
  History of Philosophy.  (The End of Greek Philosophy, Medieval and Modern
               
           Philosophy up to Schelling, pp. 1-692)


The Neo-Platonists
Hegel on Plato’s Dialogues

 





Works Index
    |   
  Volume 38

 | 

Collected Works
    |   L.I.A. Index




 



==========

## Introduction to the History of Philosophy











Conspectus of Hegel’s Book Lectures On the History of Philosophy: Introduction



Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Conspectus of Hegel’s Book
Lectures On the History
  of Philosophy:
Introduction to the History of Philosophy

Written: 1915
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th Edition, Moscow, 1976,
  Volume 38, pp. 245-246
Publisher: Progress Publishers
First Published: 1930 in Lenin Miscellany XII
Translated: Clemence Dutt
Edited: Stewart Smith
Transcription & Markup: Kevin Goins
Public Domain: Lenin Internet Archive (2008).You may freely copy, distribute, display and 
  perform this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. 
  Please credit “Marxists Internet Archive” as your source.


Note that this document has undergone special formating to ensure that 
Lenin’s sidenotes fit on the page, marking as best as possible 
where they were located in the original manuscript. 
  

 
HEGEL. LECTURES ON THE HISTORY
      OF PHILOSOPHY, WORKS, VOL. XIII
INTRODUCTION TO THE HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY



  p. 37 [1]


  ...“If the truth is abstract it
  must be untrue. Healthy human rea-
  son goes out towards what is con-
  crete.... Philosophy is what is most an-
  tagonistic to abstraction, it leads back




   
   
   
   
   
  p. 40:     


  to the concrete....”
   
   
   
   
  comparison of the history of phi-
  losophy with a circe—“a circle ...
  which, as periphery, has very many
  circles....”









  A very pro-
  found correct
  comparison!!
  Every shade
  of thought =
  a circle on
  the great
  circle (a spi-
  ral) of the
  development
  of human
  thought in
  general







 


conceptions of the systems appearing in
  the history of Philosophy be entirely di-
  vested of that which pertains to their
  outward form, their relation to the partic-
  ular and the like, the various stages in
  the determination of the Idea itself are
  found in its logical Notion.”


  “Conversely in the logical progression
  taken for itself, there is, so far as its prin-
  cipal elements are concerned, the progres-
  sion of historical manifestations; but it is
  necessary, of course, to be able to discern
  these pure Notions in what the historical
  form contains.” (43)


  P. 56—ridicule of the chasing after fash-




   
   
   
   
   NB




  ion,—after those who are ready “auch
  jedes Geschwöge (?) für eine Philo-
  sophie auszuschreien.”[2] Pp. 57-58—
  excellent for strict historicity in the
  history of philosophy, so that one
  should not ascribe to the ancients a 
  “development” of their ideas, which
  is comprehensible to us but which
  in fact was not present in the ancients.


  Thales, for example, did not possess
  the conception άρχή[3] (as a prin-
  ciple), did not possess the concept of
cause...


  ...“Thus there are whole nations
  which have not this concept” (of cause)
  “at all; indeed it involves a great
  step forward in development....” (58)




 









      Extremely lengthy, empty and tedious on the relation
  of philosophy to religion. In general, an introduction of
  almost 200 pages—impossible!!







 

 

Notes
[1] Hegel, Werke, Bd. XIII, Berlin, 1833.—
[2] “to call every twaddle (?) a philosophy”—Ed.
[3] beginning—Ed.
 



<< Back to the Table of Contents



 





Works Index
    |   
  Volume 38

 | 

Collected Works
    |   L.I.A. Index




  < backward




  forward >




 



==========

## Volume I of The History of
Philosophy. History of Greek Philosophy











Conspectus of Hegel’s Book Lectures On the History of Philosophy: Volume XIII. Volume I of The History of Philosophy.
    History of Greek Philosophy



Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Conspectus of Hegel’s Book
Lectures On the History
  of Philosophy:
Volume XIII. Volume I of The History of Philosophy.
    History of Greek Philosophy

Written: 1915
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th Edition, Moscow, 1976,
  Volume 38, pp. 247-268
Publisher: Progress Publishers
First Published: 1930 in Lenin Miscellany XII
Translated: Clemence Dutt
Edited: Stewart Smith
Transcription & Markup: Kevin Goins
Public Domain: Lenin Internet Archive (2008).You may freely copy, distribute, display and 
  perform this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. 
  Please credit “Marxists Internet Archive” as your source.


Note that this document has undergone special formating to ensure that 
Lenin’s sidenotes fit on the page, marking as best as possible 
where they were located in the original manuscript. 
  

 
VOLUME XIII.
  VOLUME I OF THE HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY.
  HISTORY OF GREEK PHILOSOPHY
IONIC PHILOSOPHY[1]




  “Anaximander (610-547 B. C.) supposes
  man to develop from a fish.” (213)




 
PYTHAGORAS AND PYTHAGOREANS[2]




   ...“Hence the determinations are dry,
  destitute of process, undialectical, and sta-
  tionary....” (244)





  
  negative de-
  termination
  of dialectics








  This refers to the general ideas of the
  Pythagoreans;—“number” and its sig-
  nificance, etc. Ergo: it is said in regard
  to the primitive ideas of the Pythago-
  reans, their primitive philosophy; their
  “determinations” of substance, things,
  the world, are “dry, destitute of process
    (movement), undialectical.”







 




  Tracing predominantly the dialectical in
  the history of philosophy, Hegel cites the






  views of the Pythagoreans: ...“one, added
  to even, makes odd (2+1 = 3);—added
  to odd, it makes even (3+1 = 4);—it”
  (Eins[3])
  “has the property of making ge-
  rade (= even), and consequently it must
itself be even. Thus unity contains in it-
  self different determinations.” (246)







  Musical harmony and the philosophy of
  Pythagoras:






  (“harmony of
  the world”)





  “The subjective, and, in the case of hear-
  ing, simple feeling, which, however, exists
  inherently in relation, Pythagoras has at-
  tributed to the understanding, and he at-
  tained his object by means of fixed deter-
  minations.” (282)






  relation of
  the subjec-
  tive to the
  objective



 




  Pp. 265--266: the movement of the heav-






  enly bodies—their harmony—the har-
  mony of the singing heavenly spheres
  inaudible to us (in the Pythago-
  reans): Aristotle, De coelo, II, 13
  (and 9)[4]:




 




  ...“Fire was placed by the Pythagoreans
  in the middle, but the Earth was made
  a star that moved around this central body
  in a circle....” But for them this fire was
  not the sun.... “They thus rely, not on
  sensuous appearance, but on grounds....
  These ten spheres”  










              
              
      ten spheres or orbits
  or movements of the ten planets: Mer-
  cury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Sun,
  Moon, Earth, the Milky Way and the
  Gegenerde[5]
    (—antipode?) invented “for
  an even number,” for 10[6]









            
            
            
          “like all that
  is in motion, make a sound; but each
  makes a different tone, according to the
  difference in its size and velocity. This
  is determined by the different distances,
  which bear a harmonious relationship to
  one another, in accordance with musical
  intervals; by this means a harmonious
  sound (music) arises in the moving spheres
  (world)....”





 




Concerning the soul, the Pythagoreans
  thought “die Seele set: die Sonnenstäub-
  chen”[7] (p. 268) (= dust particle, atom)
  (Aristotle, De anima, I, 2).”[8]










  An allusion
  to the struc-
      ture of
      matter!




  the role of
  dust (in the
  sunbeam) in
  ancient
  philosophy





  In the soul—seven circles (elements)
  as in the heavens. Aristotle, De ani-
  ma, I, 3—p. 269.






  Pythagore-
  ans:
  “guesses,”
  fantasies
  on the resem-
  blance of the
  macrocosm
  and the
  microcosm



 




  And here immediately are recounted the
  fables that Pythagoras (who had taken
  from the Egyptians the doctrine of the im-
  mortality of the soul and the transmi-
  gration of souls) related about himself, that
  his soul had dwelt 207 years in other people,
  etc., etc. (271)




 







  NB: the linking of the germs of scien-
  tific thought with fantasy à la religion,
  mythology. And nowadays! Likewise,
  the same linking but the proportions
  of science and mythology are different.







 




  More on the theory of numbers of Pytha-
  goras.
      “Numbers, where are they? Dispersed
  through space, dwelling in independence
  in the heaven of ideas? They are not
  things immediately in themselves, for a
thing, a substance, is something quite
  other than a number—a body bears no
  resemblance to it.” 254
      Quotation |from Aristotle?—Met-
  aphysik, I, 9, is it not? From Sextus
  Empiricus? Unclear|.  






   
   
   
   
  NB



 




  Pp. 279-280—the Pythagoreans accept the






ether (...“A ray penetrates from the
  sun through the dense and cold ether,”
  etc.)









  Thus the conjecture about the ether
  has existed for thousands of years, re-
  maining until now a conjecture. But
  at the present time there are already
  a thousand times more subsurface chan-
  nels leading to a solution of the prob-
  lem, to a scientific determination of
  the ether.







 
THE ELEATIC SCHOOL[9]




  In speaking of the Eleatic school, Hegel
  says about dialectics:






  ...“We here” (in der eleatischen Schule[10])
  “find the beginning of dialectics, i.e.,
  simply the pure movement of thought
  in Notions; likewise we see the opposition
  of thought to outward appearance or sen-
  suous Being, or of that which is implicit
  to the being-for-another of this implicit-
  ness, and in the objective existence we see
  the contradiction which it has in itself,
  or dialectics proper....” (280) See the next
  page.[11]





  
  what is
  dialectics?
   
  (α)
     
     
     
  (β)



 




Here are essentially two determinations
  (two characteristics, two typical features;
  Bestimmungen, keine Definitionen[12]) of
  dialectics[13]:


  α) “the pure movement of thought
     in Notions”;
  β) “in the (very) essence of objects
     (to elucidate) (to reveal) the con-
     tradiction which it (this essence)
     has in itself (dialectics
     proper).”


  In other words, this “fragment” of He-
  gel’s should be reproduced as follows:
      Dialectics in general is “the pure move-
  ment of thought in Notions“ (i.e., putting
  it without the mysticism of idealism:
  human concepts are not fixed but are
  eternally in movement, they pass into
  one another, they flow into one another,
  otherwise they do not reflect living life.
  The analysis of concepts, the study of
  them, the “art of operating with them”
  (Engels)[14] always
  demands study of the
movement of concepts, of their inter-
  connection, of their mutual transitions).


  In particular, dialectics is the study
  of the opposition of the Thing-in-itself
  (an sich), of the essence, substratum, sub-
  stance—from the appearance, from “Be-
  ing-for-Others.” (Here, too, we see a tran-
  sition, a flow from the one to the other: the
  essence appears. The appearance is essen-
  tial.) Human thought goes endlessly deeper
  from appearance to essence, from essence of
  the first order, as it were, to essence of
  the second order, and so on without
  end.


  Dialectics in the proper sense is the
study of contradiction in the very essence
  of objects: not only are appearances tran-
  sitory, mobile, fluid, demarcated only
  by conventional boundaries, but the es-
  sence of things is so as well.






  Hegel on
  dialectics
  (see the
  previous
  page



 




  Sextus Empiricus presents the point of
  view of the Sceptics as follows:






  ...“Let us imagine that in a house in
  which there are many valuables, there
  were those who sought for gold by night;
  each would then think that he had found
  the gold, but would not know for certain
  whether he had actually found it. Thus
  philosophers come into this world as into
  a great house to seek the truth, but were
  they to reach it, they could not tell
  whether they had really attained it....”
  (288-289)






  the compari-
  son is
  a tempting
  one...



 




  Xenophanes (the Eleatic) said:






  “Did beasts and lions only have hands,
      Works of art thereby to bring forth, as
  do men,
      They would, in creating divine forms,
  give to them
      What in image and size belongs to them-






  Gods in the
  image of
  man





  selves....” (289-290)


  “What especially characterises Zeno is
  dialectics, which ... begins with him....”
  (302)


  “We find in Zeno likewise true objective
dialectics.” (309)


  (310: on the refutation of philosophic
  systems: “Falsity must not be demonstrat-
  ed as untrue because the opposite is true,
  but in itself....”)




 




  “Dialectics is in general α) external dia-
  lectics, in which this movement is differ-
  ent from the comprehension of this move-






  dialectics





  ment; β) not a movement of our intelli-
  gence only, but what proceeds from the
nature of the thing itself, i. e., from the
  pure Notion of the content. The former
  is a manner of regarding objects in such
  a way that reasons are revealed and aspects
  of them shown, by means of which all
  that was supposed to be firmly fixed, is
  made to totter. There may be reasons which
  are altogether external too, and we shall
  speak further of this dialectics when deal-
  ing with the Sophists. The other dialectics,






  however, is the immanent contemplation
  of the object: it is taken for itself, without
  previous hypothesis, idea or obligation,
  not under any external conditions, laws,
  grounds. We have to put ourselves right
  into the thing, to consider the object in
  itself and to take it in the determina-
  tions which it has. In regarding it thus,
  it” (er) (sic!) “shows from itself that it con-
  tains opposed determinations, and thus
  transcends itself; this dialectics we more
  especially find in the ancients. Subjec-






  objective
  dialectics





  tive dialectics, which reasons from exter-
  nal grounds, does justice when it is granted
  that: ‘in the correct there is what is not
  correct, and in the false the true as well.’
  True dialectics leaves nothing whatever
  to its object, as if the latter were defi-
  cient on one side only; but it disintegrates
  in the entirety of its nature....” (p. 311)




 




  With the “principle of development” in
  the twentieth century (indeed, at the end
  of the nineteenth century also) “all are
  agreed.” Yes, but this superficial, not
  thought out, accidental, philistine “agree-
  ment” is an agreement of such a kind as
  stifles and vulgarises the truth.—If every-
  thing develops, then everything passes from
  one into another, for development as is
  well known is not a simple, universal and
  eternal growth, enlargement (respective dim-
inution), etc.—If that is so, then, in the
  first place, evolution has to be under-
  stood more exactly, as the arising and
  passing away of everything, as mutual
  transitions.—And, in the second place,
  if everything develops, does not that
  apply also to the most general concepts
  and categories of thought? If not, it means
  that thinking is not connected with being.
  If it does, it means that there is a dialec-
  tics of concepts and a dialectics of cogni-
  tion which has objective significance. +






  Regarding
  the question
  of dialec-
  tics and
  its objective
  significance...






   
   
   
   
   
  NB 




   I.
   
   
   
   
   II.


  The principle  
  of develop-
  ment...
   
   
  The principle
  of unity...


  + In addition, the uni-
      versal principle of de-
      velopment must be com-
      bined, linked, made to
      correspond with the uni-
  versal principle of the
unity of the
  world, nature, motion,
      matter, etc.





 




  “Zeno’s treatment of motion was above
  all objectively dialectical....” (p. 313)




 




  ...“Movement itself is the dialectic of
  all that is....” It did not occur to Zeno
  to deny movement as “sensuous certainty,”
  it was merely a question “nach ihrer (move-
  ment’s) Wahrheit” (of the truth of move-
  ment). (313) And on the next page, where
  he relates the anecdote how Diogenes the
  Cynic, of Sinope, refuted movement by
  walking, Hegel writes:






  NB. This can
  and must be
turned
  round: the
  question is
  not whether
  there is
  movement,
  but how








  to express
  it in the logic
  of concepts





  ...“But the anecdote continues that, when
  a pupil was satisfied with this refutation,
  Diogenes beat him, on the ground that,
  since the teacher had disputed with reasons,
the only valid refutation is one derived
  from reasons. Men have not merely to sat-
  isfy themselves by sensuous certainty, but
  also to understand....” (314)






  Not bad!
  Where is this
  continuation
  of the anec-
  dote taken
  from? It is
  not to be
  found in Dio-
  genes Laerti-
  us, VI, § 39,[15]
  or in Sextus
  Empiri-
  cus, III, 8[16]
  (Hegel p.
  314). Did He-
  gel invent it?





  Zeno has four ways of refuting motion:
  1. That which is moving to an end must






  first cover half of the path. And of
  this half, again first its half, and so
  on ad infinitum.


  Aristotle replied: space and time
  are infinitely divisible (δννάμει[17])
  (p. 316), but not infinitely divided
  (ένεργεία[18]), Bayle (Dictionnaire,[19]
  Vol. IV, article Zeno) calls this reply
  of Aristotle’s pitoyable[20] and says:


    ...“if one drew an infinite number
of lines on a particle of matter, one
would not thereby introduce a division
that would reduce to an actual infin-
ity that which according to him was
    only a potential infinity....”


  And Hegel writes (317): “Dies si ist
  gut!”[21]









  i.e., if one carried out the infinite
  division to the end!!









  ...“The essence of space and time is mo-
  tion, for it is universal; to understand
  it means to express its essence in the form






  correct!





of the Notion. As unity of negativity and
  continuity, motion is expressed as the No-
  tion, as thought; but neither continuity
  nor discontinuity is to be posited as the
  essence....” (pp. 318--319)









  “To understand means to express in the
  form of notions.” Motion is the essence
  of space and time. Two fundamental con-
  cepts express this essence: (infinite) con-
  tinuity (Kontinuitä) and “punctuality”
  (= denial of continuity, discontinu-
  ity). Motion is the unity of continuity
  (of time and space) and discontinuity (of
  time and space). Motion is a contra-
  diction, a unity of contradictions.







 







  Überweg-Heinze, 10th edition, p. 63
  (§ 20), is wrong when he says that Hegel
  “defends Aristotle against Bayle.” Hegel
  refutes both the sceptic (Bayle) and the
  anti-dialectician (Aristotle).
      Cf. Gomperz, Les penseurs de la
  Grèce, p ...[22], the forced recognition, under
  the lash, of the unity of contradictions,
  without recognising dialectics (owing to
  cowardice of thought)....







 




  2. Achilles will not overtake the tortoise.






  “First the half” and so on endlessly.
  Aristotle answers: he will overtake
  it if he be permitted “to overstep the
  limits.” (320)
      And Hegel: “This answer is cor-
  rect and contains all that can be
  said” (p. 321)—for actually the half
  here (at a certain stage) becomes the
  “limit”....




 




...“If we speak of motion in general, we
  say that the body is in one place and then
  it goes to another; because it moves it is
  no longer in the first, but yet not in the






  cf. Chernov’s
  objections
  against
  Engels[23]





  second; were it in either it would be at
  rest. If we say that it is between both,
  this is to say nothing at all, for were it
  between both, it would be in a place, and






  this presents the same difficulty. But move-
  ment means to be in this place and not
  to be in it; this is the continuity of space
  and time—and it is this which first makes
  motion possible.” (Pp. 321--322)






NB
  correct!








  Movement is the presence of a body in
  a definite place at a given moment and
  in another place at another, subsequent
  moment—such is the objection which Cher-
  nov repeats (see his Philosophical Studies)
  in the wake of all the “metaphysical”
  opponents of Hegel.
      This objection is incorrect: (1) it de-
  scribes the result of motion, but not mo-
  tion itself; (2) it does not show, it does
  not contain in itself the possibility of mo-
  tion; (3) it depicts motion as a sum, as
  a concatenation of states of rest, that is
  to say, the (dialectical) contradiction is
  not removed by it, but only concealed,
  shifted, screened, covered over.







 




  “What makes the difficulty is always
  thought alone, since it keeps apart the mo-
  ments of an object which in their separa-
  tion are really united.” (322)






  correct!



 




  We cannot imagine, express, measure,
  depict movement, without interrupting con-
  tinuity, without simplifying, coarsening,
  dismembering, strangling that which is liv-






  ing. The representation of movement by
  means of thought always makes coarse,
kills,—and not only by means of thought,
  but also by sense-perception, and not only
  of movement, but every concept.
      And in that lies the essence of dialectics.
      And precisely this essence is ex-
  pressed by the formula: the unity, identity
  of opposites.





 




  3. “The flying arrow rests.”






  And Aristotle's answer: the error
  arises from the assumption that “time
  consists of the individual Nows” (έχ
  τών νϋν) p. 324.


  4. Half is equal to the double: motion






  measured in comparison with an un-
  moving body and in comparison with
  a body moving in the opposite
  direction.


  At the end of the § on Zeno, Hegel com-
  pares him to Kant (whose antinomies, he
  says, “do no more than Zeno did here”).


  The general conclusion of the dialectic
  of the Eleatics: “the truth is the one, all
  else is untrue”—“just as the Kantian phi-
  losophy resulted in “We know appearances
  only.” On the whole the principle is the
  same.” (p. 326)


  But there is also a difference.




 




  “In Kant it is the spiritual that de-
  stroys the world; according to Zeno, the
  world of appearance in itself and for itself
  has no truth. According to Kant, it is our
  thought, our spiritual activity that is bad;—
  it shows excessive humility of mind to be-
  lieve that knowledge has no value....”
  (327)






  Kant and his
(subjectiv-
  ism, scep-
  ticism, etc.)



 




  The continuation of the Eleatics in Leu-
  cippus and among the Sophists...




 
THE PHILOSOPHY OF HERACLITUS




After Zeno (? he lived after Heracli-
  tus?)[24] Hegel 
  passes on to Heraclitus and
  says:
      “It” (Zeno’s dialectics) “may, to that
  extent, also be called subjective dialec-
  tics, insofar as it rests in the contemplative
  subject, and the one, without this dialec-
  tics, without this movement, is one ab-
  stract identity....” (328)






NB





  but it was previously said, see the
  passage quoted from p. 309, and
  others, that Zeno’s dialectics is ob-
  jective dialectics. Here is some kind
  of superfine “distinguo.” Cf. the
  following:









   “Dialectics: (α) external dialectics,
  a reasoning which goes hither and
  thither, without reaching the soul of the






  NB





  thing itself; (β) the immanent dialectics
  of the object, but (NB) following within
  the contemplation of the subject; (γ) the
  objectivity of Heraclitus, i.e., dialectics
  itself taken as principle.” (328)






  NB







α)
β)
 
 
γ)
  

    subjective dialectics.
    in the object there is dialectics,
    but I do not know, perhaps it is
    Schein,[25] merely appearance, etc.
    fully objective dialectics, as the
    principle of all that is
  





 




  (In Heraclitus): “Here we see land; there is








  no proposition of Heraclitus which
  I would not have adopted in my Log-
  ic....” (328)








  “Heraclitus says: Everything is be-
  coming; this becoming is the principle.
This is contained in the expression: Being
  no more is than not-Being....” (p. 333)






  NB



 




  “The recognition of the fact that Being
  and not-Being are only abstractions de-
  void of truth, that the first truth is to be
  found only in Becoming, forms a great ad-
  vance. The understanding comprehends both
  as having truth and validity in isolation;
  reason on the other hand recognises the one
  in the other, and sees that in the one its
  other” (NB “its other”) “is contained—
  that is why the All, the Absolute is to be
  determined as Becoming.” (334)


  “Aristotle says (De mundo,[26] Chapter 5)






  that Heraclitus ‘joined together the
  complete whole and the incomplete’
  (part)” ... “what coincides and what
  conflicts, what is harmonious and what
  discordant; and from out of them all
  (the opposite) comes one, and from
  one, all.” (335)


  Plato, in his Symposium,[27] puts forward
  the views of Heraclitus (inter alia in their
  application to music: harmony consists
  of opposites), and the statement: “The art
  of the musician unites the different.”


  Hegel writes: this is no objection against
  Heraclitus (336), for difference is the es-
  sence of harmony:






  “This harmony is precisely absolute Be-
  coming, change,—not becoming other, now
  this and then an other. The essential
  thing is that each different thing, each
  particular, is different from another, not
  abstractly so from any other, but from its
  other. Each particular only is, insofar
  as its other is implicitly contained in its
  Notion....”






  Quite right
  and impor-
  tant: the
  “other” as
its other,
  development
  into its
  opposite



 




  “So also in the case of tones; they must
  be different, but so that they can also
  be united....” (336) P. 337: incidentally
Sextus Empiricus (and Aristotle) are reckon-
  ed among the ... “best witnesses”....


  Heraclitus said: “die Zeit ist das erste
  körperliche Wesen”[28] (Sextus Empiricus)—
  p. (338)


  körperliche[29]—an “unfortunate” expres-
  sion (perhaps, Hegel says (NB), it was
  chosen by a sceptic (NB),—but time, he
  says, is “das erste sinnliche Wesen”[30]....


  ...“Time is pure Becoming, as per-
  ceived....” (338)


  In regard to the fact that Heraclitus
  considered fire as a process, Hegel says:
  “Fire is physical time, it is this absolute
  unrest” (340)—and further, in regard to
  the natural philosophy of Heraclitus:






  ...“It” (Natur) “is process in itself....”
  (344) “Nature is the never-resting, and
  the All is the transition out of the
  one into the other, from division into
  unity, and from unity into division....”
  (341)
      “To understand Nature means to rep-
  resent it as process....” (339)


  Here is what is said to be the narrow-






  ness of natural scientists:






  ...“we listen to their account“ (Natur-
  forscher[31]), “they only observe and say
  what they see; but this is not true, for un-
  consciously they transform what is im-
  mediately seen by means of the Notion.






NB




 
  And the strife is not due to the opposi-






  tion between observation and the absolute
  Notion, but between the limited rigid
  notion and the Absolute Notion. They
  show that changes are non-existent....”
  (344-345)






NB





...“Water in its decomposition re-
  veals hydrogen and oxygen: these have
  not arisen for they were already there
  as such, as the parts of which the water
  consists” (thus Hegel mimics the na-
  tural scientists)....




 




  “As we find in all expression of per-
  ception and experience; as soon as men
  speak, there is a Notion present, it
  cannot be withheld, for in conscious-
  ness there is always a touch of univer-
  sality and truth.”











  Quite right and important—it is pre-
  cisely this that Engels repeated in more
  popular form, when he wrote that natu-
  ral scientists ought to know that the re-
  sults of natural science are concepts, and
  that the art of operating with concepts
  is not inborn, but is the result of 2,000
  years of the development of natural science
  and philosophy.[32]
      The concept of transformation is taken
  narrowly by natural scientists and they
  lack understanding of dialectics.







 




  ...“He” (Heraclitus) “is the one who first
  expressed the nature of the infinite, and
  who first understood nature as infinite in
  itself, i.e., its essence as process....” (346)


  On the “concept of necessity”—cf. p.
347. Heraclitus could not see truth in
  “sensuous certainty” (348), but in “necessity”
  (είμαρμένη[33])—((λόγοζ[34])).




 




  NB || “Absolute mediation” (348)






(“absolute
  connec-
  tion”)



 




“The rational, the true, that which I
  know, is indeed a withdrawal from the
  objective as from what is sensuous, individ-
  ual, definite and existent; but what rea-
  son knows within itself is just as much
necessity or the universal of being; it is
  the essence of thought as it is the essence
  of the world.” (352)






  NB: Necessi-
  ty = “the universal of
  Being” (the
  universal in
  Being)
  (connection,
  “absolute
  mediation”)



 
LEUCIPPUS




  368: “The development of philosophy in






  The develop-





  history must correspond to the de-
  velopment of logical philosophy; but
  there will still be passages in the lat-
  ter which are absent in historical de-
  velopment.”






  ment of phi-
  losophy in
  history “must
  correspond”
  (??) to the
  development
  of logical
  philosophy








  Here there is a very profound and cor-
  rect, essentially materialist thought (ac-
  tual history is the basis, the foundation,
  the Being, which is followed by conscious-
  ness).







 




  Leucippus says that atoms are invisible
  “because of the smallness of their body”
  (369)—Hegel, however, replies that this
  is “Ausrede”[35] (ibid.), that 
  “Eins”[36] cannot
  be seen, that “das Princip des Eins” “ganz
  ideell”[37]
  (370), and that Leucippus is no
  “empiricist”, but an idealist.





((stretching of a point
  by the idealist Hegel,
  course, stretching a point.))



 







  ([Straining to make Leucippus conform
  to his Logic, Hegel expatiates on the impor-
  tance, the “greatness” of the principle (368)
  Fürsichsein,[38] descrying it in Leucippus.
  It savours in part of stretching a point.][39]


      But there is also a grain of truth in it;
  the nuance (the “moment”) of separateness;
  the interruption of gradualness; the mo-
  ment of the smoothing out of contradic-
  tions; the interruption of continuity—the
  atom, the one. (Cf. 371 i.f.):—“The one
  and continuity are opposites....”
    

Hegel’s logic cannot be applied in its
  given form, it cannot be taken as given.
  One must separate out from it
  the logical (epistemological) nuances, after
  purifying them from Ideenmystik[40]: that
  is still a big job.)







 




  “The Atomists are, therefore, generally
  speaking, opposed to the idea of the crea-
  tion and maintenance of the world by
  means of a foreign principle. It is in the
  theory of atoms that natural science first
  feels released from the need for demonstrat-
  ing a foundation for the world. For if nature
  is represented as created and held together
  by another, then it is conceived of as not
  existent in itself, and thus as having its
  Notion outside itself, i.e., its basis is
  foreign to it, it has no basis as such, it is
  only conceivable from the will of another—
  as it is, it is contingent, devoid of ne-
  cessity and Notion in itself. In the idea
  of the atomists, however, we have the con-
  ception of the inherency of nature, that is
  to say, thought finds itself in it....” (372-373)






  materialism
  (Hegel is
  afraid of the
  word: keep
  away from
  me) versus
  atomism



 




In the presentation—according to Dio-
  genes Laertius, IX, § 31-33—of the atomism
  of Leucippus, the “vortex” (Wirbel— 
  δίνην)[41]
  of atoms, Hegel finds nothing of interest
  (“no interest,” ...“empty representation,”
  “dim, confused ideas”—p. 377 i.f.).






  NB



 




  Hegel’s blindness, the one-sidedness of
  the Idealist!!




 
DEMOCRITUS




  Democritus is behandelt[42] by Hegel in
  a very stiefmütterlich[43] fashion, in all
  pp. 378-380! The spirit of materialism is
  intolerable to the idealist!! The words of
  Democritus are quoted (p. 379):






  “Warmth exists according to opin-
  ion (νόμφ) and so do cold and colour,
  sweet and bitter; only the indivisible
  and the void are in accordance with
  truth (έτεή)” (Sextus Empiricus, Ad-
  versus Mathematicos, VII, § 135).[44]








  And the conclusion is drawn:






  ...“We see this much, that Demo-
  critus expressed the difference between
  the moments of Being-in-itself and
  Being-for-other more distinctly....”
      (380)






  By this “the way is at once opened up”
  to “the bad idealism,” that ... “meine Emp-
  findung, mein....”[45]






  “bad ideal-
  ism” (my
  feeling) cf.
  Mach[46]



 




  ...“A sensuously notionless manifold of
  feeling is established, in which there is
  no reason, and with which this idealism
  has no further concern.”






  Hegel
  versus
  E. Mach...



 
THE PHILOSOPHY OF ANAXAGORAS




      Anaxagoras. Noΰς[47] “the cause of the world
  and of all order,” and Hegel elucidates this:






  ...“Objective thought ... reason in the
  world, also in nature—or as we speak of
  genera in nature, they are the universal.
  A dog is an animal, this is its genus, its
  substantial; the dog itself is this. This
  law, this understanding, this reason is
  itself immanent in nature, it is the essence
  of nature; the latter is not formed from
  without as men make a chair.” (381-382)






NB
  the concept
  of genus is
  “the essence
  of nature,” is
law...



 




  “Noΰς is the same as soul (Aristotle
  on Anaxagoras)—p. 394





  and ...[48] the elucidation of this
1eap from the general in nature
  to the soul; from objective to subjec-
  tive, from materialism to idealism.
  C’est ici que ces extrêmes se touchent
  (et se transforment!)[49]







 




  On the homoeomeriae[50] of Anaxagoras
  (particles of the same kind as the whole
  body) Hegel writes:
      “Transformation is to be taken in a






  double sense, according to existence and
  according to the Notion....” (403-404)
  Thus, for instance, it is said that water
  can be removed—the stones remain; blue
  colour can be removed, red, etc., will
  remain.






  transforma-
  tion (its
  significance)



 




  “This is only according to existence;
  according to the Notion, they only inter-
  penetrate, it is inner necessity.” Just as
  one cannot remove the heart by itself from
the living body without the lungs perish-
  ing, etc.


  “Nature likewise exists only in unity,
  just as the brain exists only in unity with
  the other organs” (404)


  whereby some conceive transformation
  in the sense of the presence of small
  qualitatively determined particles and
  their growth (respective diminution)
  [combination and separation]. The
  other conception (Heraclitus)—the
  transformation of the one into an other.
  (403)





 







  Existence and Notion—are to be dis-
  tinguished in Hegel approximately as
  follows: fact (Being) taken separately,
  torn from its connection, and connection
  (the Notion), mutual relation, concat-
  enation, law, necessity.







 




  415: ...“The Notion is that which things
  are in and for themselves....”


  Hegel speaks of grass being the end for
  animals, and the latter for men, etc., etc.,
  and concludes:
      “It is a circle which is complete in itself,
  but whose completion is likewise a passing
  into another circle; a vortex whose mid-
  point, that into which it returns, is found
  directly in the periphery of a higher circle
  which swallows it up....” (414)




 




  So far the ancients are said to have fur-
  nished little: “Universal is a meagre deter-
  mination; everyone knows of the univer-
  sal, but not of it as essence.” (416)






  NB:
  the “univer-
  sal” as “es-
  sence”



 




  “But here we have the beginning of
  a more distinct development of the relation-
  ship of consciousness to Being, the de-
  velopment of the nature of knowledge as
  a knowledge of the true.” (417) “The mind
has gone forth to express essence as thought.“
  (418)






  “development
  of the nature
  of knowl-
  edge”



 




  “We see this development of the univer-
  sal, in which essence goes right over to the
  side of consciousness, in the so much de-
  cried worldly wisdom of the Sophists.”(418)


((End of the first volume)) [The second
  volume begins with the Sophists.]




 


 

Notes
[1] The Ionic school, or Miletian school (from the town
  of Miletus, trading and cultural centre of the ancient world on the coast of
  Asia Minor), was the earliest school of naturalistic materialism (6th century
  B.C.) in the history of Greek philosophy. (See F. Engels, Dialectics of 
  Nature, Moscow, 1954, p. 250.)

[2] Pythagorean philosophy (6th-4th. century 
  B.C.)—an idealist philosophy that considered the essence of all things
  to lie in numbers. Named after Pythagoras, the founder of a philosophical,
  religious and political league in Crotona (Southern Italy) that fought for
  the supremacy of the aristocracy.

[3] one—Ed.

[4] Aristotle’s
  work De coelo (On the Heavens)
  belongs to his natural-philosophic writings and consists of four books that
  are subdivided into chapters. In modern editions, these books are designated
  by Roman nvmerals and the chapters by Arabic ones.

[5] Antichthon—Ed.

[6] The number ten was viewed by the Pythagoreans as
  sacred, as the most perfect number, embracing the entire nature of numbers.

[7] “the soul is solar dust”—Ed.

[8] Aristotle’s work De anima (On the Soul)
  belongs to his natural-philosophic writings and consists of three books. 

[9] The Eleatic school (end of 6th-5th century
  B.C.) was named after the town of Elea in Southern Italy. In contradistinction
  to the natural dialectic teachings of the Miletian school, and of Heraclitus,
  regarding the changeable nature of things, the Eleatic school believed in 
  their indivisible, immovable, unchangeable, homogeneous, continuous, eternal
  essence. At the same time, some of the propositions of representatives of 
  the Eleatic school, and particularly the proofs advanced by Zeno concerning
  the contradictoriness of motion (the so-called paradoxes of Zeno), despite
  their metaphysical conclusions, played a positive role in the development of
  ancient dialectics, having raised the problem of expressing in logical concept
  the contradictory character of the processes of motion.

[10] In the Eleatic school—Ed.

[11] The next page of the manuscript contains the text
  given below.—Ed.

[12] determinations, not definitions—Ed.

[13] Determination is the comprehensive conception
  of the object which characterises its essential aspects and connections with
  the surrounding world and the laws of its development. Definition,
  in this case, is the abstract formal-logical determination that takes into
  account only the external features of the object.

[14] See F. Engels, Anti-Dühring, Moscow, 1959,
  p. 21. Also see p. 264 of this volume.

[15] The reference is to the work of Diogenes Laertius, 
  Lives and Opinions of Famous Philosophers, consisting of ten books.
  It was published in ancient Greek by G. Gübner, Vols. 1-2, Leipzig, 1830-33.

[16] The reference is to the work of Sextus Empiricus,
  Basic Tenets of Pyrrhonism, in three books.

[17] in potentiality—Ed.

[18] in actuality—Ed.

[19] The reference is to Pierre Bayle, Dictionnaire
  historique et critique (Historical and Critical Dictionary), 4 Vols., 
  Amsterdam and Leyden,1740.

[20] pitiful—Ed.

[21] “This if is good!”—Ed.

[22] Lenin has in mind the French translation of the
  first volume of Theodor Gomperz’s work Griechische Denker (Greek Thinkers).

[23] The reference is to § 1 of the book by V. Chernov, 
  Philosophicaland Sociological Studies, Moscow, 1907.

[24] Heraclitus (c. 530-470 B.C.) lived prior to Zeno
  of Elea (c. 490-480 B.C.). Hegel discusses Heraclitus after the Eleatics because
  his philosophy, especially his dialectics, was superior to that of the Eleatics,
  in particular, the dialectics of Zeno. Whereas Eleatic philosophy embodied,
  in Hegel’s view, the category of being, Heraclitus’ philosophy
  was an historical expression of the higher, more concrete and genuine category
  of becoming. This is an example of how Hegel “adapted” the history
  of philosophy to fit the categories of his logic. At the same time Hegel’s
  treatment of Heraclitus and the Eleatics reflected the actual law-governed
  nature of the history of philosophy as a science. Such deviations from the
  chronological order are quite legitimate in examining the history of individual
  aspects or categories of philosophy, since in this case their development
  emerges in a form free from historical accident. Lenin wrote the following
  in his fragment On the Question of Dialectics about the “circles”
  in philosophy: “Ancient: from Democritus to Plato and the dialectics
  of Heraclitus” and remarks: “Is a chronology of persons essential?
  No!” (See present volume, p. 360.)
  
[25] semblance, show—Ed.

[26] The work De mundo (On the Universe),
  included in Aristotle’s collected works, was written after Aristotle’s
  death by an unknown author at the end of the 1st or beginning of the 2nd 
  century A.D.

[27] Symposium (Feast)—a dialogue by Plato. 

[28] “Time is the first corporeal 
  essence.”—Ed.

[29] corporeal—Ed.

[30] “the first sensuous essence”—Ed.

[31] of natural scientists—Ed.

[32] See F. Engels, Anti-Dühring, Moscow,
  1959, pp. 21-22.

[33] fate—Ed.

[34] logos—Ed.

[35] “subterfuge”—Ed.

[36] “One”—Ed.

[37] “the principle of the One” is “altogether
  ideal”—Ed.

[38] Being-for-itself—Ed.

[39] In Lenin’s manuscript these five lines have
  been crossed out.—Ed.

[40] mysticism of ideas—Ed.
        [Back to note #14]

[41] Diogenes Laertius (p. 
  235)—“vertiginem”—Latin translation.—Ed.

[42] treated—Ed.

[43] step-motherly—Ed.

[44] The reference is to the work of Sextus Empiricus,
  Against Mathematicians, consisting of 11 books, six of which are
  devoted to a critique of grammar, rhetoric, geometry, arithmetic, astronomy
  and music, and five (Against Dogmatists) to a critique of logic,
  physics and ethics.
 
[45] “my feeling, mine”

[46] A critique of the subjective idealist teachings
  of Mach on sensations
  was presented by Lenin in his book Materialism and
  Empirio-Criticism, Chapter 1, §§ 1 and 2 (V. I. Lenin, Materialism
  and Empirio-Criticism, Moscow, 1960, pp. 32-61).
 
[47] reason—Ed.

[48] A word has remained undeciphered here.—Ed.

[49] “It is here that these extremes come into
  contact (and are transformed!).—Ed.

[50] Homoeomeriae — according to Aristotle, a
  term used by Anaxagoras to denote tiny material elements consisting in their
  turn of an infinite number of smaller particles and containing all existing
  properties (“all in everything”). The elements themselves are
  inert and set in motion by νοΰς (mind, reason), believed
  by Anaxagoras to be a kind of fine and light matter. He explained any emergence
  and destruction by the junction and separation of elements. In the extant
  fragments of Anaxagoras’ works these elements are called “seeds”
  or “things”; the term homoeomeriae was introduced by Aristotle.

 



<< Back to the Table of Contents



 





Works Index
    |   
  Volume 38

 | 

Collected Works
    |   L.I.A. Index




  < backward




  forward >




 



==========

## Volume II of The History of
Philosophy











Conspectus of Hegel’s Book Lectures On the History of Philosophy: Introduction



Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Conspectus of Hegel’s Book
Lectures On the History
  of Philosophy:
Volume XIV.
    Volume II Of the History Of Philosophy

Written: 1915
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th Edition, Moscow, 1976,
  Volume 38, pp. 269-300
Publisher: Progress Publishers
First Published: 1930 in Lenin Miscellany XII
Translated: Clemence Dutt
Edited: Stewart Smith
Transcription & Markup: Kevin Goins
Public Domain: Lenin Internet Archive (2008).You may freely copy, distribute, display and 
  perform this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. 
  Please credit “Marxists Internet Archive” as your source.


Note that this document has undergone special formating to ensure that 
Lenin’s sidenotes fit on the page, marking as best as possible 
where they were located in the original manuscript. 
  

 
VOLUME XIV.
VOLUME II
    OF  THE HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY
THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE SOPHISTS[1]




  Speaking of the Sophists, Hegel in ex-
  treme detail chews over the thought that
  sophistry contains an element common to
  all culture (Bildung) in general, our own
  included, namely, the adducing of proofs
  (Gründe) and Gegengründe[2] —“reflecting
  reasoning”;—the finding of the most di-
  verse points of view in everything; ((sub-
  jectivity—lack of objectivity)). In discuss-
  ing Protagoras and his famous thesis (man
  is the measure of all things) Hegel places
Kant close to him:






  ...“Man is the measure of everything,—
  man, therefore, is the subject in general;
  the existent, consequently, is not in iso-
  lation, but is for my knowledge—conscious-
  ness is essentially the producer of the con-
  tent in what is objective, and subjective
  thinking is thereby essentially active. And
  this view extends even to the most modern
  Philosophy, as when, for instance, Kant
  says that we only know phenomena, i.e.,
  that what seems to us to be objective, to
  be reality, is only to be considered in its
  relation to consciousness, and does not
  exist without this relation....” (31)[3]






  Protagoras
  and
  Kant



 




The second “moment” is objectivity
  (das Allgemeine[4]),
  “it is posited by
  me, but is likewise in itself objec-
  tively universal, not posited by me....”
  (32)






  Diese “Relativität”[5] (32) “Every-
  thing has a relative truth only” (33),
  according to Protagoras.






  the relativ-
  ism of the
  Sophist...



 




  ...“Kant’s phenomenon is no more than
  an external impulse, an x, an unknown,
  which first receives these determinations
  through our feeling, through us. Even if
  there were an objective ground for our
  calling one thing cold and another warm,
  we could indeed say that they must have
  diversity in themselves, but warmth and
  cold first become what they are in our
  feeling. Similarly ... things are, etc. ...
  thus experience was called a phenome-
  non....“ (34)






  Kant
  and the
  Sophists and
  Phenomenol-
  ogism[6] à la
  Mach
  NB



 




  “The world is consequently not only
  phenomenal in that it is for consciousness,
  and thus that its Being is only one rela-
  tive to consciousness, but it is likewise
  phenomenal in itself.” (35)






  not only
  relativism



 




  ...“This scepticism reached a much deep-
  er point in Gorgias....” (35)






  scepticism



 




  ...“His dialectic” ... that of Gor-
  gias, the Sophist [many times: p. 36, idem
  p. 37].






  NB



 




  Tiedemann said that Gorgias went fur-
  ther than the “common sense” of man. And
  Hegel makes fun of this: every philosophy
  goes further than “common sense” for
  common sense is not philosophy. Prior to
  Copernicus it was contrary to common
  sense to say that the earth goes round the
  sun. (36)






  Hegel
  on
  “common
  sense”



 




“It” (der gesunde Menschenverstand[7])
  “is the mode of thought of its time, con-
      (36)
    





  common
  sense = the
  prejudices of
  its time



 






Gorgias (p. 37):
  

    1)
     
    2)
     
    3)
  

    Nothing exists. Nothing
    is
    Assuming that Being
    is, it cannot be known.
    Even if it is knowable,
    no communication of
    what is known is pos-
    sible.
  







  ...“Gorgias is conscious that they” (Be-
  ing and not-Being, their mutual sublation)
  “are vanishing moments; the unconscious
  conception has this truth also, but knows
  nothing about it....” (40)
    



 







  “Vanishing moments” = Being
  and not-Being. That is a magnifi-
  cent definition of dialectics!!







 




  ...“Gorgias α) justly argues against abso-
  lute realism, which, because it has a no-
  tion, thinks it possesses the very thing
  itself, when actually it possesses only some-
  thing relative; β) falls into the bad ideal-
  ism of modern times: ‘what is thought
  is always subjective, and thus not the
  existent, since through thought an existent
  is transformed into what is thought....’” (41)






  Gorgias,
  “absolute
  realism”
  (and Kant)





  (and further below (p. 41 i.f.) Kant
  is again mentioned).










To be added on Gorgias[8]: He puts “either—






  or” to the fundamental questions. “But
  that is not true dialectics; it would be
  necessary to prove that the object must
be necessarily in one or another determi-
  nation, not in and for itself. The object
  resolves itself only into those determi-
  nations; but from that nothing follows
  regarding the nature of the object it-
  self.” (39)






  dialectics in
  the object
  itself








To be added further on Gorgias[9]:






  In the exposition of his view that the
  existent cannot be imparted, communi-
  cated:




 




  “Speech, by which the existent has to
  be expressed, is not the existent, what is
  imparted is thus not the existent, but only






  NB





  words.” (Sextus Empiricus, Adversus
  Mathematicos. VII. § 83-84)—p. 41—
  Hegel writes: “The existent is also compre-
  hended as non-existent, but the comprehen-
  sion of it is to make it universal.” (42)






  cf.
  Feuerbach[10]





  “This individual cannot be ex-
  pressed....” (42)




 








    Every word    
    (speech) already
universalises cf.
    Feuerbach.[11]








The senses show
  reality; thought
and word — the
      universal.
  








 




  Final words of the section on the Soph-
  ists: “The Sophists thus also made dia-
  lectic, universal Philosophy, their object,
  and they were profound thinkers....” (42)




 
THE PHILOSOPHY OF SOCRATES




  Socrates is a “world-famed personage”
  (42), the “most interesting” (ibid.) in the
  philosophy of antiquity—“subjectivity of
  thought”(42) [“freedom of self-conscious-
  ness” (44)].


“Herein lies the ambiguity of dia-
  lectics and sophistry; the objective
  disappears”: is the subjective contin-
  gent or is there in it (“an ihm selbst”[12])
  the objective and universal? (43)[13]


  “True thought thinks in such a way that
  its content is as truly objective as subjec-
  tive” (44)—and in Socrates and Plato we
  see, Hegel says, not only subjectivity (“the
  reference of any judgment to conscious-
  ness is held by him”—Socrates—”in common
  with the Sophists”)—but also objectivity.




 




  “Objectivity has here” (in Socrates) “the
  sense of the universal, existent in and for
  itself, and not external objectivity” (45)—








  idem 46: “not external objectivity but the
  spiritual universal.”






  NB





  And two lines further down:






  “Kant’s ideal is the phenomenon, not
  objective in itself....” (46)
      Socrates called his method Hebammen-
  kunst[14]—(p. 64) (derived from his mother,
  he said) ((Socrates’ mother = midwife))—
  to help in bringing thoughts to birth.






  Kant
   
   
   
  shrewd!



 




  Hegel’s example: everyone knows, he
  says, what Werden is, but it surprises us
  if we analyse (reflektierend) and find that it
  is “the identity of Being and not-Being”—
  “so great a distinction.” (67)






  Werden =
  Nichtsein
  und
  Sein.[15]



 




Meno (Plato’s “Meno”)[16] compared Socra-
  tes to an electric eel (Zitteraal), which makes
  anyone who touches it “narkotisch”[17]
(69): and I, too, am “narkotisch” and I
cannot answer you.[18]




 




  ...“That which is held by me as truth
  and right is spirit of my spirit. But what
  the spirit derives thus from itself, what
  it so holds, must come from it as the uni-
  versal, as from the spirit which acts in
  a universal manner, and not from its pas-
  sions, interests, likings, whims, aims, in-
  clinations, etc. These, too, certainly come
  from something inward which is ‘implanted
  in us by nature,’ but they are only in
  a natural way our own....” (74-75)






  très bien
dit!![19]



 









  Intelligent idealism is closer to intelligent ma-
  terialism than stupid materialism.
        Dialectical idealism instead of intelligent;
        metaphysical, undeveloped, dead, crude,
        rigid instead of stupid.
    











  To be elaborated:
      Plekhanov wrote on philosophy (dialec-
  tics) probably about 1,000 pages (Beltov +
  against Bogdanov + against the Kantians +






  NB





  fundamental questions, etc., etc.).[20] Among
  them, about the large Logic, in con-
  nection with it, its thought (i.e.,
  dialectics  proper, as philosophical sci-
  ence) nil!!





   





  Protagoras: “man is the measure of all
  things.” Socrates: “man, as thinking, is the
  measure of all things.” (75)







  Nuance!



 




  Xenophon in his Memorabilien described
  Socrates better, more accurately and more
  faithfully than Plato. (Pp. 80-81)




 
THE SOCRATICS




  In connection with the sophisms about
  the “heap” and “bald,” Hegel repeats the
  transition of quantity into quality and vice
  versa: dialectics. (Pp. 139-140)
  143-144: At length about the fact that






  “language in essence expresses only
  the universal; what is meant, however,
  is the special, the particular. Hence
  what is meant cannot be said in speech.”
  (“It”? The most universal word of all.)








  NB
  in language
  there is only
  the universal








  Who is it? I. Every person is an I.
Das Sinnliche?[21] It is a univer-
  sa1, etc., etc. “This”?? Everyone
      is “this.”







 







  Why can the particular not be
  named? One of the objects of a given
      kind (tables) is distinguished by some-
  thing from the rest.







 




  “That the universal should in philosophy
  be given a place of such importance that
  only the universal can be expressed, and
  the ‘it’ which is meant, cannot, indicates
  a state of consciousness and thought which
  the philosophical culture of our time has
  not yet reached.”


  Hegel includes here “the scepticism of
  our times” (143)— [Kant’s?] and those who
  assert that “sensuous certainty is the truth.”
  (143)


  For das Sinnliche “is a universal.” (143)




 







  Thereby Hegel hits every materialism
except dialectical materialism.      
    NB











  NB



 




To call by name?—but the name is a
  contingent symbol and does not express
Sache selbst[22] (how can the partic-
  ular be expressed?) (144)




 







  Hegel seriously “believed,” thought,
  that materialism as a philosophy was
  impossible, for philosophy is the science
  of thinking, of the universal, but the
  universal is a thought. Here he repeated
  the error of the same subjective ideal-
  ism that he always called “bad” ideal-
  ism. Objective (and still more, abso-
  lute) idealism came very close to ma-
  terialism by a zig-zag (and a somersault),
  even partially became transformed into it.











  Hegel
  and
  dialectical
  materialism
 


 




  The Cyrenaics[23] held sensation for the
  truth, “the truth is not what is in sensation,
  the content, but is itself sensation.” (151)








  sensation
  in the theory
  of knowledge
  of the
  Cyrenaics...





  “The main principle of the Cyrenaic
  school, therefore, is sensation, which
  should form the real criterion of the true
  and the good....” (153)


  “Sensation is the indeterminate unit”
  (154), but if thinking is added, then the
  universal appears and “simple subjectivity”
  disappears.




 







  (Phenomenologists à la Mach & Co.
inevitably become idealists on the
  question of the universal, “law,” “ne-
  cessity,” etc.)











  NB[24]
  the Cyrenaics
  and Mach
  and Co.



 




  Another Cyrenaic, Hegesias, “recognised”
  “this incongruity between sensation and
  universality....” (155)




 







They confuse sensation as a principle
  of the theory of knowledge and a prin-
  ciple of ethics. This NB. But Hegel
separated the theory of knowledge.  







 
THE PHILOSOPHY OF PLATO




  In regard to Plato’s plan by which
  philosophers ought to rule the state:






  ...“The territory of history is different
  from that of philosophy....”


  ...“We must recognise that action repre-
  sents at the same time the endeavours of
  the subject as such for particular ends....All
  those particular ends are really only means
  for bringing forth the Idea, because it
  is the absolute power.” (193)







  Particular
  ends in
  history create
  the “Idea”
  (the law of
  history)



 




  Concerning Plato’s doctrine on ideas:






  ...“because sensuous perception shows
  nothing purely, or as it is in itself” (Pha-
  edo)—p. 213—therefore the body is a
  hindrance to the soul.







  “purity”
  (= lifeless-
  ness?) of
  universal
  conceptions



 







  The significance of the universal is
  contradictory: it is dead, impure, in-
  complete, etc., etc., but it alone is
  a stage towards knowledge of the
concrete, for we can never know
  the concrete completely. The infinite
  sum of general conceptions, laws, etc.,
  gives the concrete in its completeness.










  NB
  the dialec-
  tics of
  cognition
  NB
  ↓



 







  The movement of cognition to the
  object can always only proceed dia-
  lectically: to retreat in order to hit










  ←








more surely—reculer pour mieux sauter
  (savoir?).[25] Converging and diverging
  lines: circles which touch one another.
  Knotenpunkt[26] = the practice of man-
  kind and of human history.
    

(Practice = the criterion of the coin-
  cidence of one of the infinite aspects
  of the real.)










  NB








  These Knotenpunkte represent
  a unity of contradictions, when Be-
  ing and not-Being, as vanishing
  moments, coincide for a moment,
  in the given moments of the move-
  ment (= of technique, of history,
  etc.)







 




  In analysing Plato’s dialectics, Hegel
  once again tries to show the difference
  between subjective, sophistic dialectics and
  objective dialectics:
      “That everything is one, we say of each
  thing: ‘it is one and at the same time we
  show also that it is many, its many parts








   
  “empty
  dialectics”
  in Hegel





  and properties’—but it is thereby said:






  ‘it is one in quite another respect from
  that in which it is many’—we do not
  bring these thoughts together. Thus the
  conception and the words merely go back-







  NB





  wards and forwards from the one to the






  other. If this passing to and fro is performed
      with consciousness, it is empty dialectics,
  which does not unite the opposites and
  does not come to unity.” (232)
  






  “empty
  dialectics”



 




P l a t o  in the “Sophistes”:


  “The point of difficulty, and what we
  ought to aim at, is to show that what
is other is the same, and what is the same
  is other, and indeed in the same regard
  and from the same point of view.” (233)







  NB



 




      “But we must be conscious of the fact
  that the Notion is neither merely the im-
  mediate in truth, although it is the sim
  ple—but it is of spiritual simplicity,
  essentially the thought which has re-
  turned into itself (immediately is only
  this red, etc.); nor that it is only that
  which reflects itself in itself, the thing
  of consciousness; but is also in itself, i.e.,
  it is objective essence....” (245)







   
   
  NB
  objectivism



 




  The concept is not something imme-
  diate (although the concept is a “simple”
  thing, but this simplicity is “spiritual,”
  the simplicity of the Idea)—what is im-
  mediate is only the sensation of “red”
  (“this is red”), etc. The concept is not
  “merely the thing of consciousness”; but
  is the essence of the object (ge-
  genständliches Wesen), it is something
  an sich, “in itself.”





 




  ...“This conviction of the nature of the
  Notion, Plato did not ixpress so defi-
  nitely....” (245)




 







   Hegel dilates at length on Plato’s
   “Philosophy of Nature,” the ultra-non-
   sensical mysticism of ideas, such as that
   “triangles form the essence of sensuous
   things” (265), and such mystical non-
   sense. That is highly characteristic! The
   mystic-idealist-spiritualist Hegel (like
   all official, clerical-idealist philosophy
   of our day) extols and expatiates on
   mysticism, idealism in the history of
   philosophy, while ignoring and slight-
ing materialism. Cf. Hegel on Democ-
   ritus—nil!! On Plato a huge mass
   of mystical slush.     










  idealism and
  mysticism in
Hegel (and
  in Plato)



 




      Speaking of Plato’s republic and of the
  current opinion that it is a chimera, Hegel
  repeats his favourite saying:






  ...“What is real is rational. But one must
  know, distinguish, exactly what is real;
  in common life all is real, but there is
  a difference between the phenomenal world
  and reality....” (274)







  what is real
  is rational



 
THE PHILOSOPHY OF ARISTOTLE




  Incorrect, says Hegel, is the generally
  held opinion that the philosophy of Aristotle
  is “realism” (299), (id. p. 311 “empiricism”)
  in contrast to the idealism of Plato. ((Here
  again, Hegel clearly squeezes in a great
  deal under idealism.))




 




  In presenting Aristotle’s polemic against
  Plato’s doctrine on ideas, Hegel sup-
  presses its materialistic features. (Cf.
322-323 and others.)








  NB
   
  NB



 




He has let the cat out of the bag: “The
  elevation of Alexander” (Alexander of Mac-








  ((merely





  edon, Aristotle’s pupil) “... into ... a god
  is ... not matter for surprise ... God and








  invert it))
  precisely!





  man are not at all so very wide asunder....”
  (305)


  Hegel perceives the idealism of Aris-
  totle in his idea of god. (326) ((Of
  course, it is idealism, but more ob-
  jective and further removed, more
  general than the idealism of Plato,
  hence in the philosophy of nature more
  frequently = materialism.))








  Hegel has
  made a com-
  plete mess of
  the critic-
  ism of Plato’s
  “ideas” in
  Aristotle



 










Aristotle’s criticism of
  Plato’s “ideas” is a criticism
  of idealism as ideal-
  ism in general: for
  whence concepts, abstrac-
  tions, are derived, thence
  come also “law” and “ne-
  cessity,” etc. The idealist
  Hegel in cowardly fashion
  fought shy of the under-
  mining of the foundations
  of idealism by Aristotle
  (in his criticism of Plato’s
  ideas).







   
   NB






  When one idealist
  criticises the founda-
  tions of idealism of
another idealist, ma-
  terialism is always the
  gainer thereby. Cf.
  Aristotle versus Plato,
  etc., Hegel versus
  Kant, etc.








 





  “Leucippus and Plato accordingly say
  that motion has always existed, but they
  give no reason for the assertion.” (Aristot-
  le, Metaphysik, XII, 6 and 7.) p. 328





 








  Aristotle thus pitifully brings
  forward god against the material-
  ist Leucippus and the idealist Plato.
  There is eclecticism in Aristotle
  here. But Hegel conceals the
  weakness for the sake of
mysticism!








 








  Hegel, the supporter of dialectics,
  could not understand the dialec-
  tical transition from matter to
  motion, from matter to con-
      sciousness—especially the second.
  Marx corrected the error (or weak-
  ness?) of the mystic.







   
  NB






  Not only is
  the transition
  from matter
  to conscious-
  ness dialecti-
  cal, but also
    that from
  sensation to
  thought, etc.








 









What distinguishes the dialectical tran-
  sition from the undialectical transition?
  The leap. The contradiction. The inter-
  ruption of gradualness. The unity (iden-
  tity) of Being and not-Being.







 




  The following passage shows especially
  clearly how Hegel conceals the weakness
  of Aristotle’s idealism:
      “Aristotle makes objects into thoughts;
  hence, in being thoughts, they exist in
  truth; that is their ούσία.[27]


  “The meaning of this is not, however,
  that natural objects have themselves the
  power of thinking, but as they are subjec-
  tively thought by me, my thought is thus
  also the Notion of the thing, which there-






  fore constitutes its substance. But in na-
  ture the Notion does not exist as thought
  in this freedom, but has flesh and blood;
  yet it has a soul, and this is its Notion.
  Aristotle recognises what things in and







  naïve!!





  for themselves are; and that is their ούσία.
  The Notion does not exist for itself, but it
  is stunted by externality. The ordinary def
  inition of truth is: ‘truth is the harmony
  of the conception with the object.’ But
  the conception itself is only a conception,
  I am still not at all in harmony with my
  conception (with its content); for when
  I represent to myself a house, a beam, and
  so on, I am by no means this content—
  ‘I’ is something other than the conception
  of house. It is only in thought that there is
  present a true harmony between objective
  and subjective; that constitutes me (Hegel’s
  italics). Aristotle therefore finds himself
  at the most advanced standpoint; nothing
  more profound can one desire to know.”
  (332-333)  




 







“In nature” concepts do not exist “in
  this freedom” (in the freedom of thought
  and the fantasy of man!!). “In nature”
  they (concepts) have “flesh and blood.”—
  That is excellent! But it is materialism.
  Human concepts are the soul of nature
  —this is only a mystical way of saying
  that in human concepts nature is reflect-
  ed in a distinctive way (this NB: in
  a distinctive and dialectical way!!).







 







  Pp. 318-337 solely on the Meta-
  physics of Aristotle!! Everything essen-
  tial that he has to say against Plato’s
      idealism is suppressed!! In particu-
  lar, there is suppressed the question of
  existence outside man and humani-
  ty!!! = the question of materialism!







 




  Aristotle is an empiricist, but a think-
  ing one. (340) “The empirical, comprehend-
  ed in its synthesis, is the speculative No-
  tion....” (341) (Hegel’s italics.)







  cf. Feuer-
  bach: To
  read the
  gospel of
  senses in
   interconnec- 
  tion = to
  think[28]



 







  The coincidence of concepts with
      “synthesis,” with the sum, summing up
    of empiricism, sensations, the senses,
    is indubitable for the philosophers of
all trends. Whence this coincidence?
    From God (I, the idea, thought, etc., etc.)
    or from (out of) nature? Engels was right
    in his formulation of the question.[29]










NB



 




  ...“The subjective form constitutes the
  essence of the Kantian philosophy....” (341)







  Kant



 




On the teleology of Aristotle.
      ...“Nature has its means in itself and
  these means are also end. This end in
  nature is its λόγοζ,[30] the truly rational.”
  (349)











  “end” and
  cause, law,
  connection,
     reason  







 




  ...“Understanding is not only thinking
  with consciousness. There is contained in
  it also the whole, true, profound Notion
  of nature, of life....” (348)






 







  Reason (understanding), thought,
  consciousness, without nature, not
  in correspondence with nature is
  falsity = materialism!  







 







  It is repulsive to read how Hegel extols
  Aristotle for his “true speculative notions”
  (373 of the “soul,” and much more besides),
  clearly spinning a tale of idealistic (= mys-
  tical) nonsense.
    

      Suppressed are all the points on which
  Aristotle wavers between idealism and ma-
  terialism!!!








 




  Regarding Aristotle’s views on the “soul,”
  Hegel writes:






  “All that is universal is in fact real,
  as particular, individual, existing for anoth-
  er” (375)—in other words, the soul.







  lets the cat
  out of the
  bag in regard
  to “realism”



 




  Aristotle. De anima, II, 5:






  “The difference” (between Empfinden and
  Erkennen[31]) “is: that which causes the
  sensation is external. The cause of this is
  that perceptive activity is directed on the
  particular, while knowledge has as its
  object the universal; but the universal is,
to a certain extent, in the soul itself as
  substance. Everyone can therefore think
  if he wishes but sense-perception does not
  depend on him, since the necessary con-
  dition is that the object perceived be pres-
  ent.” (377)







  sense-percep-
  tion and
  cognition
   
   
   
   
   
  Aristotle
  comes very
  close to
  materialism



 




  The crux here—“außen ist”[32]—
outside man, independent of him.
  That is materialism. And this founda-
  tion, basis, kernel of materialism,
  Hegel begins wegschwatzen[33]:






  “This is an entirely correct view of sense-
  perception,” writes Hegel, and he goes on
  to explain that there is undoubtedly “pas-






  sivity” in sense—perception: “it is a matter
  of indifference whether subjectively or
  objectively; in both there is contained
  the moment of passivity.... With this mo-
  ment of passivity, Aristotle does not fall







  NB!!





  short of idealism, sense-perception is al-






  ways in one aspect passive. That is, how-
  ever, a bad idealism which thinks that
  the passivity and spontaneity of the mind
  depend on whether the determination given
  is from within or from without, as if there







  the idealist
  is caught!





  were freedom in sense-perception; the lat-
  ter is a sphere of limitation”!!... (377-378)




 




      ((The idealist stops up the gap leading
  to materialism. No, it is not gleich-
  gültig[34] whether from without or
from within. This is precisely the
  point! “From without”—that is mat-
  terialism. “From within” = idealism.
  And with the word “passivity,” while
  keeping silent about the term (“from
  without”) in Aristotle, Hegel descri-
  bed in a different way the same
from without. Passivity means
  precisely from without!! Hegel re-
  places the idealism of sense-percep-
  tion by the idealism of thought, but
equally by idealism.))







NB
   
   
   



 




  ...“Subjective idealism declares that there
  are no external things, they are a determi-
  nation of our Self. This must be admitted
  in respect to sense-perception. I am passive






  in sense-perception, sense-perception is
  subjective; it is existence, a state, a deter-
  mination in me, not freedom. Whether
  the sense-perception is external or in me,
  is a matter of indifference, it exists....”(378)
    






  NB
  an evasion
  of  mate-
  rialism



 




  Then follows the famous analogy of the
  soul with wax, causing Hegel to twist and
  turn like the devil confronted with holy
  water, and to cry out about it having “so
  often occasioned misapprehension.” (378-
  379)
    

  Aristotle says (De anima, II, 12):






  "Sense-perception is the receiving of sen-
  sible forms without matter” ... “as wax
  receives only the impress of the golden
  signet ring, not the gold itself, but merely
  its form.”







  NB
  Soul = Wax
   
NB



 




Hegel writes: ...“In sense-perception






  only the form reaches us, without matter.
  It is otherwise in practical life—in eating
  and drinking. In the practical sphere in
  general we behave as single individuals,







  “otherwise”
  in practice





  and as single individuals in a determinate
  Being, even a material determinate Being,
  we behave towards matter in a material
  way. Only insofar as we are of a material







  a cowardly
  evasion of
  materialism





  nature, are we able to behave in such a






  way; the point is that our material exist-
  ence comes into play:” (379)






 




  ((A close approach to materialism—and
  equivocation.))


  Hegel gets angry and scolds on account
  of the “wax,” saying: “everyone can under-
stand it” (380), “we do not get beyond the
  crude aspect of the analogy,” (379) etc.




 




  “The soul should by no means be pas-
  sive wax or receive determinations from
  without....” (380)







  ha-ha!



 




  ...“It” (die Seele[35]) “changes the form of
  the external body into its own....” (381)


Aristotle, De anima, III, 2:






  ...“The effect of being perceived and of
  sense-perception is exactly one and the
  same; but their existence is not the same....”
  (381)







  Aristotle



 




  And Hegel comments:






  ...“There is a body which sounds and a
  subject which hears: their existence is
  twofold....” (382)







  Hegel con-
  ceals the
  weaknesses
  of idealism



 







  But he leaves aside the question of
  Being outside man!!! A sophistical dodge
from materialism!







 




  Speaking about thinking, and about rea-
  son (νουζ), Aristotle (De anima, III, 4) says:
      ...“There is no sense-perception inde-






  pendent of the body, but νουζ is separable
  from it....” (385) “νουζ is like a book upon
  whose pages nothing is actually written”







  tabula rasa





  (386)—and Hegel again becomes irate:






  “another much-decried illustration” (386),
  the very opposite of what he means is
  ascribed to Aristotle, etc., etc. ((and the







  ha-ha!





  question of Being independent of






  mind and of man is suppressed!!))—all that
  for the sake of proving “Aristotle is there-
  fore not a realist.” (389)







  ha-ha! he’s
  afraid!!



 




Aristotle:






  “In this way he who perceives nothing






  by his senses learns nothing and under-
  stands nothing when he discerns anything
(ΰεωρή[36]) he must necessarily discern it
  as a pictorial conception, for such con-
  ceptions are like sense-perceptions, only







  Aristotle
  and
material-
  ism





  without matter....” (389)




 




  ...“Whether the understanding
  thinks actual objects when it is abs-
  tracted from all matter requires spe-
  cial investigation....” (389) And Hegel








scrapes out of Aristotle that ostens-
  ibly “νουζ[37] 
  and νοητόν[38] are one
  and the same” (390), etc. A model






  example of the idealistic misrepresen-
  tations of an idealist!! Distorting Aris-
  totle into an idealist of the eighteenth-
  nineteenth century!!







  distortion
  of
  Aristotle



 
THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE STOICS[39]




    In regard to the “criterion of truth” of
the Stoics—“the conception that is laid
hold of” (444-446)—Hegel says that con-
sciousness only compares conception with
conception (not with the object—(446):
    “truth ... is the harmony of object and
consciousness” = “the celebrated definition
of the truth”) and, consequently, the whole
question is one of the “objective logos, the
rationality of the world.” (446)
  



 




    “Thought yields nothing but the form
of universality and identity with itself;
    ...hence everything may harmonise with
my thought.” (449)
  





    Hegel against
the Stoics
and their
criterion
  


 




    “Reasons, however, prove to be a hum-
  





bug; for there are good reasons for every-
thing....” (469) “Which reasons should be
esteemed as good thereby depends on the
end and interest....” (ibidem)
  





    there are
“reasons” for
everything
  


 
THE PHILOSOPHY OF EPICURUS




    Speaking of Epicurus (342-271 B. C.),
Hegel immediately (before describ-
ing his views) adopts a hostile attitude
to materialism and declares:
  





    “It is already (!!) self-evident (!!) that
if sense-perceived Being is regarded as
the truth, the necessity for the Notion is
    altogether abrogated, in the absence of
  







    Slander
against
materialism
Why??
  




speculative interest everything falls apart,
  





  and, on the contrary, the vulgar view
of things prevails; in point of fact it does
not go beyond the view of ordinary human
understanding, or rather, everything is
lowered to the level of ordinary human
understanding”!! (473-474)
  





 







Slander against materialism!! “Ne-
cessity for the Notion” is not in the
slightest “abrogated” by the theory
of the source of cognition and
the concept!! Disagreement with
“common sense” is the foul quirk
of an idealist.
  










    NB
  


 




    Epicurus gave the name of Canonic[40]
to the theory of knowledge and the crite-
rion of truth. After a brief exposition of
    it, Hegel writes:
  

    “It is so simple that nothing can well
be simpler—it is abstract, but also very
trivial; more or less on the level of ordi-
nary consciousness that begins to reflect.
It consists of ordinary psychological con-
ceptions; they are quite correct. Out of
  





sense-perceptions we make conceptions as
the universal; thanks to which it becomes
    lasting. The conceptions themselves (bei
  







!!!!





der δόξα, Meinung[41]) are tested by means
  





of sensations, as to whether they are last-
ing, whether they repeat themselves. That
is quite correct on the whole, but quite
superficial; it is the first beginning, the
  







!!!





mechanics of conception with respect to
the first sense-perceptions....” (483)
  



 







  The “first beginning” is forgotten
  and distorted by idealism. Dia-
  lectical materialism alone
linked the “beginning” with the
  continuation and the end.







 




    NB: p. 481—on the significance of
words according to Epicurus:
  





    “Everything has its evidence, energy,
distinctness, in the name first conferred
on it” (Epicurus: Diogenes Laertius, X,








    § 33). And Hegel: “The name is something
universal, belongs to thinking, makes the
manifold simple.” (481)
  

    “On the objective manner in general
  





    in which the images of external things
enter into us, and on our relation to exter-
nal things, by which conceptions arise—
  







    Epicurus:
objects
outside us
  



 
Epicurus has evolved the following met-
aphysical explanation:
  





    “From the surfaces of things there passes
off a constant stream, which cannot be
detected by our senses ... and this be-
cause, by reason of the counteracting re-
plenishment, the thing itself in its solid-
ity long preserves the same arrangement
and disposition of the atoms; and the mo-
tion through the air of these surfaces which
detach themselves is of the utmost rapidity,
because it is not necessary that what is
detached should have any thickness.” “The
sensation does not contradict such an idea,
when we consider” (zusehe) “how images
produce their effects; they bring us a cor-
respondence, a sympathetic link with ex-
ternal things. Therefore something passes
out from them which within us is like
something external.” “And since the ema-
nation passes into us, we know of the def-
initeness of a sensation; the definite lies
in the object and thus flows into us”
(pp. 484-485, Diogenes Laertius, X,
§ 48-49).
  







NB
theory of
knowledge of
Epicurus...
  


 




    The genius of Epicurus’ conjecture (300
B.C., i.e., more than 2,000 years before
Hegel), e.g., on light and its velocity.
  



 







  Hegel completely concealed (NB)
  the main thing: (NB) the existence
  of things outside the consciousness
  of man and independent of it







 




    —all that Hegel suppresses and merely
says:
  





    ...“This is a very trivial way of repre-
senting sense-perception. Epicurus elected
to take the easiest criterion of the truth—a
criterion still in use—inasmuch as it is not
    apprehended by sight, namely: that it does
not contradict what we see or hear. For in
truth such matters of thought as atoms, the
    detachment of surfaces, and so forth, are
beyond our powers of sight and hearing; [cer-
tainly we manage to see and to hear some-
thing different][42] but there is abundance of
room for what is seen and what is conceived
or imagined to exist alongside of one anoth-
er. If the two are allowed to fall apart, they
do not contradict each other; for it is not
until we relate them that the contradic-
tion becomes apparent....” (485-486)
  







    A model of
distortion
and slander
against
materialism
by an ideal-
ist
  


 







Hegel has avoided Epicurus’ theory
  of cognition and begun to speak of some-
  thing else, which Epicurus does not
  touch on here and which is com-
  patible with materialism!!







 




    P. (486):
    Error, according to Epicurus, proceeds
from an interruption in movement (in
the movement from the object to us, to
sense-perception or to conception?).
  

    “It is impossible,” Hegel writes, “to have a
more meagre (theory of knowledge).” (486)
  



 







  Everything becomes dürftig,[43]
  if it is distorted and despoiled.







 




    The soul, according to Epicurus, is a
“certain” arrangement of atoms. “This is
what Locke also (!!!) said.... These are
empty words ...“ (489) ((no, they are the
    guess-work of genius and signposts for
science, but not for clericalism)).
  







    This,
auch,[44] is
wonderful!!!!
Epicurus
(341-
270 B.C.),
Locke
(1632-
1704). Dif-
ferenz[45] = 
2,000 years
  


 




    NB. NB. (489), id. (490):
  





    Epicurus ascribes to the atoms a
“krummlinigte”
Bewegung,[46]
this according to Hegel is “most arbitrary
  







    and
electrons?
  




    and wearisome” (489) in Epicurus.—
    ((and the “God” of the idealists???)).
  



 




    “Or else Epicurus altogether denies No-
tion and the Universal as the essential...”
(490) although his atoms “themselves have
this very nature of thought”... “the incon-
sistency ... which all empiricists are guil-
ty of....” (491)
  







    nonsense!
lies!
slander!
 
NB
  


 







  This avoids the essence of
materialism and material-
  ist dialectics.







 




    “In Epicurus there is no ... final end in
the world, wisdom of a Creator; everything
consists of events, which are determined
by the chance (??) external (??) coming
together of configurations of atoms....” (491)
  







    he pities
God!! the
idealistic
scoundrel!!
  


 




    And Hegel simply hurls abuse at
Epicurus: “His thoughts on particular as-
pects of Nature are, however, in them-
    selves feeble....” (492)
  







    !!
  


 




    And immediately afterwards is a polemic
against the “Naturwissenschaft” heute,[47]
which, like Epicurus, allegedly judges “by
analogy,” and “explains” (492)—e.g., light
as “vibrations of the ether....” “This is an
analogy quite in the manner of Epicu-
rus....” (493)
  







    and the
“manner” of
natural
science!
and its
successes!!
  


 




    ((Modern natural science ver-
sus Epicurus,—against (NB) Hegel.))
  



 




    In Epicurus, “the kernel of the matter,
the principle, is nothing else than the
principle of our usual natural science....”
(495) ... “it is still the manner which lies
at the basis of our natural science....” (496)
  







    Epicurus and
modern na-
tural science
  


 







  Correct is only the reference to
  the ignorance of dialectics in gen-
  eral and of the dialectics of con-
  cepts. But the criticism of ma-
  terialism is schwach.[48]







 




    “Of this method (of Epicurean philosophy)
we may say in general that it likewise
has a side on which it possesses value.
  







!NB!





Aristotle and the more ancient philosophers
took their start in natural philosophy from
universal thought a priori, and from this
  





    developed the Notion. This is the one side.
The other side is the necessary one that
experience should be worked up into uni-
    versality, that laws should be determined;
that is to say, that the result which fol-
lows from the abstract Idea should coin-
cide with the general conception to which
experience and observation have led. The
  







     
NB!!
 
 
 
NB
NB





a priori is with Aristotle, for instance,
most excellent, but not sufficient, because
it lacks connection with and relation to
experience and observation. This develop-
  







NB





    ment of the particular to the general is
the discovery of laws, natural forces and
  





    so on. It may be said that Epicurus is the
    inventor of empirical natural science, of
empirical psychology. In contrast to the
  







NB





    Stoic ends, conceptions of the understand-
ing, is experience, the sensuous present.
There we have abstract, limited understand-
  





ing, without truth in itself, and therefore
without the presence and reality of nature;
here we have this sense of nature, which
is more true than these other hypotheses.”
(496-497)
  







NB



 




(THIS ALMOST COMPLETELY AP-
PROACHES DIALECTICAL MAT-
ERIALISM.)








NB



 




    The importance of Epicurus—the strug-
gle against Aberglauben[49] of the
Greeks and Romans (498)—and
    modern priests??
    all this nonsense about whether a hare ran
across the path, etc. (and the good Lord?).
  







    Hegel on
the pros of
materialism
  


 




“And from it” (the philosophy of Epi-
curus), “more than anything, those con-
ceptions which have altogether denied the
supersensuous have proceeded.” (498)
  







NB



 




|| But this is good only for “end-
lichen”[50] .... “With superstition there
also passed away self-dependent Con-
nection and the world of the Ideal.” (499)
  







    for what did
they (the
classics) val-
ue idealism??
  




This NOTA BENE.




 




P. 499: Epicurus on the soul: the
finer (NB) atoms, their more rapid
(NB) motion, their connection (NB)
etc., etc., with the body (Diogenes
Laertius, X, § 66; 63-64)—very naïve
and good!—but Hegel becomes irate, he
hurls abuse: “meaningless talk,” “empty
words,” “no thoughts.” (500)
  







    for Hegel
the “soul”
is also a
prejudice
  


 




    The Gods, according to Epicurus, are
“das Allgemeine”[51] (506) in general—“they
consist partly in number” as number,
i.e., abstraction from the sensuous....
  



 




    “In part, they” (the gods) “are the perfect-
ed type of man, which, owing to the simi-
larity of the images, arises from the con-
tinuous confluence of like images on one
and the same subject.” (507)
  







NB
Gods = the
perfected
type of man,
cf. Feuer-
bach[52]



 
THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE SCEPTICS[53]




    Speaking of Scepticism, Hegel points
to its apparent “invincibility” (Unbezwing-
lichkeit) (538):
  





NB





    “If anyone actually desires to be a Scep-
tic, he cannot be convinced, or be brought
to a positive philosophy, any more than he
who is paralysed can be made to stand.” (539)
  





    Bien dit!!
  


 




    “Positive philosophy in relation to it”
(den denkenden Skeptizismus[54]) “may
have this consciousness: it contains in itself
the negative of Scepticism; Scepticism is
not opposed to it, nor outside it, but is
    a moment of it; but it contains the negative
in its truth, as it is not present in Scepti-
cism.” (539)
  

    (The relation of philosophy to Scepti-
cism:)
    “Philosophy is dialectical, this dialectic
is change; the Idea, as abstract Idea, is
the inert and existent, but it is only true
    insofar as it grasps itself as living; this
is that it is dialectical in itself, in order
to transcend that quiescence and inertness.
Hence the philosophic idea is dialectical
in itself and not contingent; Scepticism,
  





    on the contrary, exercises its dialectic
    contingently—for just as the material, the 
    content comes before it, it shows that it
    is negative in itself....” (540)
  





    NB
dialectics of
Scepticism is
“contingent”
  


 




    The old (ancient) Sciepticism has to be
distinguished from the new (only Schulze
of Göttingen is named). (540)
  

    Ataraxie (imperturbability?) as the ideal
of the Sceptics:
  





    “Pyrrho once pointed out to his fellow-
passengers on board a ship, who were fright-
ened during a storm, a pig, which remained
    quite indifferent and peaceably ate on,
saying to them: in such imperturbahility
the wise man must also abide” (Diogenes
    Laertius, IX, 68)—pp. 551-552.
  





    not a bad
anecdote
about the
Sceptics
  


 




    “Scepticism is not doubt. Doubt is just
the opposite of the tranquillity that is
the result of scepticism.” (552)
  





    NB
Scepticism is
not doubt
  


 




    ...“Scepticism, on the contrary, is indif-
ferent to the one as well as to the other....”
(553)
  





 




    Schulze-Aenesidemus passes off for Scep-
ticism the statement that everything sen-
suous is truth (557), but the Sceptics did
not say so: one must sich danach richten,
  





orientate oneself by the sensuous, but that
is not the truth. The new Scepticism does
not doubt the reality of things. The old
Scepticism does doubt the reality of things.
  





    NB
  


 




    Tropes (turns of speech, arguments, etc.)
of the Sceptics:
  









  everything in
     Sextus
    Empiricus
  (second cen-
    tury A. D.)











a.  
  

    The diversity of animal organisation.
    (558)
    Differences in sensations: the jaun-
diced (dem Gelbsiichtigen) sees as
yellow what to others appears white,
etc.
  




b.  
  

    The diversity of mankind. “Idiosyn-
crasies.” (559)
Whom to believe? The majority? Fool-
ish, for all men cannot be interro-
gated. (560)
  





    Diversity of philosophies: Stupid re-
ference, Hegel waxes indignant: ...
    “such men see everything in a phi-
losophy excepting Philosophy itself,
  




    NB
  





and this is overlooked....” “However
different the philosophic systems may
  





be, they are not as different as white
    and sweet, green and rough, for they
agree in the fact that they are philos-
ophies and this is what is overlooked.”
    (561)
  




    NB
  





    ...“All tropes proceed against the
‘is,’ but the truth is all the same
not this dry ‘is,’ but essentially proc-
ess....” (562)
  




    NB
  




c.  
  

    The diversity in the constitution of
the organs of sense: the various sense
organs perceive differently (on a paint-
ed panel something appears erha-
ben[55] to the eye but not to the
touch).
  




d.  
  

    The diversity of circumstances in the
subject (rest, passion, etc.).
  




e.  
  

    The diversity of distances, etc.




  the earth going round
  the sun or vice versa, etc.









    f.  
  

    Intermixture (scents in strong sun-
shine and without it, etc.).
  




    g.  
  

The composition of things (pounded
glass is not transparent, etc.).
  




    h.  
  

The “relativity of things.”
  




    i.  
  

The frequency, rarity of happenings,
etc.; habit.
  




    k.  
  

    Customs, laws, etc., their diversity....
  



 





        |These (10) are all old tropes| and He-
gel: this is all “empirical”—“do not have
to do with the Notion....” (566) This is
“trivial”..., but ....
     
        “In fact, as against the dogmatism of
the common human understanding they
are quite valid....” (567)
     
        The five new tropes (are said by Hegel
to he much more advanced, they contain
dialectics, concern concepts)—also accord-
ing to Sextus:
  



 




a.  
 
b.  
 
 
c.  
d.  
 
 
e.  
  

    The diversity of the opinions ...
of philosophers...
The falling into an infinite pro-
gression (one thing depends on an-
other and so on without end).
Relativity (of premises).
Presupposition. The dogmatists put
forward unprovable presupposi-
tions.
Reciprocity. Circle (vicious)...
  




 




“These sceptical tropes, in fact, concern
that which is called a dogmatic philosophy
(and in accordance with its nature such
a philosophy must display itself in all
these forms) not in the sense of its having
a positive content, but as asserting some-
thing determinate as the absolute.” (575)
  





    NB
  


 







  Hegel  against the absolute!
  Here we have the germ of dialectical mat-
  erialism.









NB



 




    “To the criticism which knows nothing
in itself, nothing (not nichts) (sic!!)[56] ab-
solute, all knowledge of Being-in-itself,
as such, is held to be dogmatism, while
it is the worst dogmatism of all, because
it maintains that the ‘I,’ the unity of self-
consciousness, opposed to Being, is in and
for itself, and that what is ‘in itself’ in
the outside world is likewise so, and there-
fore that the two absolutely cannot come
together.” (576)
  





    “Criticism” is
the “worst
dogmatism”
  


 




    “These tropes hit dogmatic philosophy,
which has this manner of representing one
principle in a determinate proposition as
determinateness. Such a principle is always
conditioned; and consequently contains dia-
lectics, the destruction within it of itself.”
(577) “These tropes are a powerful weapon
against the philosophy of reason.” (ib.)
  









    Bien  
    dit!!!  




 
Dialectics =
“destruction
of itself”
  


 




    Sextus, for example, reveals the dialec-
tics of the concept of a point (der Punkt).
A point has no dimensions? That means
that it is outside space! It is the limit
of space in space, a negation of space, and
  





at the same time “it touches space”—“but
at the same time it is also in itself some-
thing dialectical.” (579)
  





    NB
  


 




“These tropes ... are powerless against
speculative ideas, because the latter contain
within themselves a dialectical moment
and the abrogation of the finite.” (580)
  





    NB
  


 




    End of Volume XIV (p. 586).
  




 


 

Notes
[1] Sophists 
  (from the Greek sophos—a
  wise man)—the designation (since the second half of the 5th century B.C.)
  for professional philosophers, teachers of philosophy and rhetoric. The Sophists
  did not constitute a single school. The most characteristic feature common
  to Sophists was their belief in the relativity of all human ideas, ethical
  standards and values, expressed by Protagoras in the following famous statement:
  “Man is the measure of all things, of what is, that it is, and of what
  is not, that it is not.” In the first half of the 4th century B.C.,
  sophism disintegrated and degenerated into a barren play with logical conceptions.

[2] counterproofs—Ed.

[3] Hegel, 
  Werke, Bd. XIV, Berlin, 1833.—Ed.

[4] the universal—Ed.

[5] this “relativity”—Ed.

[6] Phenomenologism—a branch of subjective
  idealism that considers phenomena to be only the totality of man’s sensations.
  The Machists were phenomenalists. An important role in the Marxist criticism
  of phenomenologism was played by Lenin’s book Materialism and Empirio-Criticism
  (Collected Works, Vol. 14).

[7] common sense—Ed.

[8] This excerpt was made by Lenin somewhat later in
  outlining the philosophy of Socrates
  (pp. 43-44 of Hegel; see
  p. 273 of this volume).—Ed.

[9] This excerpt was made by Lenin in outlining the
  philosophy of Socrates (p. 69 of Hegel; see p. 274 of this volume).—Ed.

[10] See § 27 of Feuerbach’s Principles
  of the Philosophy of the Future for his views on being and essence.

[11] The reference is to the following statement of
  Feuerbach: “At the beginning of phenomenology we immediately come across
  a contradiction between the word which represents the universal, and the thing,
  which is always a particular.” (See § 28 of Feuerbach’s Principles
  of the Philosophy of the Future.)

[12] “in it itself”—Ed.

[13] Following this paragraph in the MS. is an excerpt
  on Gorgias’ philosophy, beginning with the words: “To be added 
  on Gorgias....” (See p. 271 of this volume.)—Ed.

[14] the art of midwifery—Ed.

[15] Becoming = not-Being and Being.—Ed.

[16] Meno—Plato’s dialogue directed
  against the Sophists. It is considered to be one of Plato’s early works.

[17] “drugged”—Ed.

[18] Following this paragraph in the MS. is an excerpt
  on Gorgias’ philosophy, beginning with the words: “To be added
  further on Gorgias....” (See p. 272 of this 
  volume.)—Ed.

[19] very well put—Ed.

[20] Lenin is referring to the following philosophical
  works by Plekhanov:
  N. Beltov, The Development
  of the Monist View of History,
  published as a separate volume in 1895 in St. Petersburg (see Selected
  Philosophical Works, Vol. 1, Moscow, 1960, pp. 542-782); articles against
  Bogdanov appearing in Social-Democratic periodicals and published in the collection
  entitled “From Defence to Attack” (1910); articles against the Kantians E.
  Bernstein, C. Schmidt and others appearing in the journal Die Neue Zeit
  and published in the collection: N. Beltov, “Criticism of Our Critics,” St.
  Petersburg, 1906; and “Fundamental Questions of Marxism,” published as 
  a separate volume in 1908 in St. Petersburg.

[21] the sensuous—Ed.

[22] the very essence of the
  thing—Ed.

[23] Cyrenaics-adherents, of an ancient Greek
  school of philosophy, founded in the 5th century B.C. by Aristippus of Cyrene
  (North Africa). In the theory of knowledge, the Cyrenaics adhered to sensualism.
  They asserted that objective truth does not exist and that, with certainty,
  one can only speak of subjective sensations. In Cyrenaicism, the sensualist
  theory of knowledge is supplemented by sensualist ethics—the doctrine
  of sensual satisfaction as the basis of morality. The Cyrenaic school produced
  a number of representatives of ancient atheism.

[24] Cf. Überweg-Heinze, § 88, p. 122 (10th edition)—
  and also about them in Plato’s Theaetetus.[24a] Their (the Cyrenaics’) scepticism
  and subjectivism.—Ed.

[24a] The reference is to § 38 “The Aristippian
  and Cyrenaic or Hedonistic School” in Überweg’s book: Grundriss
  der Geschichte der Philosophie des Altertums. 10. Auflage, Berlin, 1909.
  (F. Überweg, Outline of the History of Ancient Philosophy, 10th
  edition, Berlin, 1909). In the dialogue Theaetetus, Plato expounds
  his mystical theory of knowledge, calling cognition the rise of reason into
  the realm of ideas; this rise is like recollection since, according to Plato,
  reason, the soul, by their origin, belong to this supersensual world of ideas.

[25] to fall back, the better to leap (to know?)—Ed.

[26] nodal point—Ed.

[27] substance—Ed.

[28] See L. Feuerbach, Against Dualism of Body
  and Soul, Flesh and Spirit.

[29] See F. Engels, Anti-Dühring, 
  Moscow, 1959, p. 54.

[30] logos—Ed.

[31] sense-perception (sensation) and cognition—Ed.

[32] “is external”—Ed.

[33] to talk out of existence—Ed.

[34] A matter of indifference—Ed.

[35] the soul—Ed.

[36] perceives—Ed.

[37] reason—Ed.

[38] what is apprehended by reason—Ed.

[39] Stoics—adherents 
  of an ancient Greek school of philosophy arising about the 3rd century B.C. and existing
  until the 6th century A.D. The Stoics recognised two elements in the universe:
  an enduring element—matter without quality; and an active one—reason,
  logos, god. In logic, the Stoics proceeded from the assumption that the source
  of all cognition is sensuous perception and that a conception can be true only
  if it is a faithful and full impression of the object. The Stoics taught,
  however, that perceptual judgment arises only as a result of agreement between
  the mind and a true conception. This the Stoics called “catalepsy”
  (or “seizure”) and viewed it as a criterion for truth.

[40] In the manuscript the word “Canonic”
  is linked by an arrow with the word “It” at the beginning of the
  following paragraph.—Ed.

[41] in opinion—Ed.

[42] The words in brackets are missing in Lenin’s
  manuscript.—Ed.

[43] meager—Ed.

[44] also—Ed.
[45] difference—Ed.

[46] “curvilinear”
  motion—Ed.

[47] “natural science” today—Ed.

[48] feeble—Ed.

[49] superstitions—Ed.

[50] “finite” things—Ed.

[51] “the universal”—Ed.

[52] See L. Feuerbach, Lectures 
  on the Essence of Religion: “the God of man is nothing but the deified being of
  man.” (L. Feuerbach, Werke, Bd. 6, Berlin, 1840, S. 21.)

[53] Sceptics—in this case,
  adherents of the ancient Greek philosophical school founded by Pyrrho (c. 365-275 B.C.).
  The best known of the ancient Sceptics were Aenesidemus and Sextus Empiricus
  (2nd century A.D.). [See also: “Scepticism and Dogmatism”]
       Tropes—the designation for the reasons
  for doubt advanced by the ancient Sceptics (ten tropes) and later supplemented
  (five tropes) by Agrippa. By means of these reasons the Sceptics tried to
  prove the impossibility of cognising things and the absolute relativity of
  all perceptions.

[54] thinking scepticism—Ed.

[55] raised—Ed.

[56] Lenin’s remark in parentheses was evoked
  by a misprint in the German text, which had nicht (not) instead of nichts
  (nothing) before the word “absolute.”—Ed.

 



<< Back to the Table of Contents



 





Works Index
    |   
  Volume 38

 | 

Collected Works
    |   L.I.A. Index




  < backward




  forward >




 



==========

## Volume III of The History of
Philosophy.  (The End of Greek Philosophy,
Medieval and Modern Philosophy up to Schelling,
pp. 1-692)











Conspectus of Hegel’s Book Lectures On the History of Philosophy: Introduction



Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Conspectus of Hegel’s Book
Lectures On the History
  of Philosophy:
Volume XV. Volume III Of The History Of Philosophy
    (The End Of Greek Philosophy, Medieval
and Modern Philosophy up to Schelling, pp. 1-692)

Written: 1915
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th Edition, Moscow, 1976,
  Volume 38, pp. 301-302
Publisher: Progress Publishers
First Published: 1930 in Lenin Miscellany XII
Translated: Clemence Dutt
Edited: Stewart Smith
Transcription & Markup: Kevin Goins
Public Domain: Lenin Internet Archive (2008).You may freely copy, distribute, display and 
  perform this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. 
  Please credit “Marxists Internet Archive” as your source.


Note that this document has undergone special formating to ensure that 
Lenin’s sidenotes fit on the page, marking as best as possible 
where they were located in the original manuscript. 
  

 
VOLUME XV. VOLUME III OF THE HISTORY
    OF PHILOSOPHY
(THE END OF GREEK PHILOSOPHY, MEDIEVAL AND
MODERN PHILOSOPHY UP TO SCHELLING, pp. 1--692)
BERLIN, 1836
THE NEO-PLATONISTS[1]




  ...“The return to God....” (5),[2] “self-
  consciousness is absolute Essence”..., “the
  world-spirit”... (7), “Christian religion”....
  (8)And a mass of thin porridge
  ladled out about God.... (8-18)




 







  But this philosophical idealism, open-
  ly, “seriously” leading to God, is more
  honest than modern agnosticism with
  its hypocrisy and cowardice.







 




A. Philo—(about the time of the birth









  of Christ), a Jewish savant, a mystic,
  “finds Plato present in Moses” (19),
  etc. The main point is “the knowl-
  edge of God” (21), etc. God is λόγοζ,[3]
  “the epitome of all Ideas,” “pure Be-
  ing” (22) (“according to Plato”)....
  (22) Ideas are “angels” (messengers
  of God).... (24) The sensuous world,
  however, “as with Plato” = ούχ όν[4] =
  = not-Being. (25)






   
   
   
  Ideas
  (of Plato)
  and the
  good Lord





B. Cabbala,[5] the Gnostics[6]——————






  idem...






C. Alexandrian philosophy[7]—(= eclectic






  ism) (=Platonists, Pythagoreans, Ari-
  stotelians). (33, 35)


  Eclectics are either uncultured men, or
  cunning (die klugen Leute[8] —they take the
  good from every system, but...






  —they collect every good but do not have
  “consistency of thought, and consequently
  thought itself.” (33)






  on the
  eclectics...





  They developed Plato....






  “The Platonic universal, which is in
  thought, accordingly receives the significa-
  tion of being as such absolute essence”(33)....






  Plato’s ideas
  and the good
  Lord



 


 
HEGEL ON PLATO’S DIALOGUES[9]



  (Timaeus)


     p.
  (230)[10]
  (238)
  (240)
  (248)


   
  Sophistes
  Philebus
Parmenides



 

 

Notes
[1] Neo-Platonists—followers of the mystical
  philosophical doctrine, the basis of which was Plato’s idealism. Neo-Platonism
  (Plotinus was the head of this school) developed during the period from the
  3rd to the 5th centuries and was a combination of the Stoic, Epicurean and
  Sceptical doctrines 
  with the philosophy of Plato and Aristotle. The influence
  of neo-Platonism was strong in the Middle Ages; it was expressed in the doctrines
  of the leading medieval theologians and is also to be seen in certain trends
  of modern bourgeois philosophy.

[2] Hegel, Werke,
  Rd. XV, Berlin, 1836.—Ed.

[3] logos—Ed.

[4] non-existent—Ed.

[5] Cabbala—a medieval mystical religious
  “doctrine” prevalent among the most fanatical followers of Judaism,
  as well as among adherents of Christianity and Islam. The basic thought of
  this doctrine is the symbolic interpretation of the Holy Scripture, whose
  every word and number acquires special mystical importance inthe eyes of 
  the Cabbalists.

[6] Gnostics—followers of mystical, 
  religious-philosophical doctrines during the early centuries of our era. They
  tried to unite Christian theology and various theses of Platonic, Pythagorean
  and Stoic philosophy.

[7] Alexandrian philosophy—several philosophical
  schools and trends that arose during the early centuries of our era in Alexandria,
  Egypt. Their distinguishing feature was their attempt to unite Plato’s
  and Aristotle’s philosophy and the mystical Eastern cults. 

[8] clever people—Ed.

[9] This entry was made by Lenin in German on the back
  cover of the notebook containing the conspectus of Hegel’s book Lectures
  on the Philosophy of History.—Ed.

[10] Hegel, Werke, Bd. XIV, Berlin, 1833.—Ed.

 



<< Back to the Table of Contents



 





Works Index
    |   
  Volume 38

 | 

Collected Works
    |   L.I.A. Index




  < backward




  forward >




 



==========

## Conspectus of Hegel’s Book Lectures on the
    Philosophy Of History











Conspectus of Hegel's Book Lectures On the Philosophy Of History



Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Conspectus of Hegel’s Book
Lectures On the
  Philosophy Of History

Written: 1915
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th Edition, Moscow, 1976,
  Volume 38, pp. 303-314
Publisher: Progress Publishers
First Published: 1930 in Lenin Miscellany XII
Translated: Clemence Dutt
Edited: Stewart Smith
Transcription & Markup: K. Goins
Public Domain: Lenin Internet Archive (2008).You may freely copy, distribute, display and 
  perform this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. 
  Please credit “Marxists Internet Archive” as your source.

Conspectus of Hegel’s book “Lectures on the Philosophy of 
    History” consists of a separate notebook on whose cover is written “Hegel.”
On the reverse side of the cover, in pencil, there is a list of Plato’s dialogues with
references to pages in Vol. XIV of Hegel, which contains the second book of Lectures on the
History of Philosophy.

 
Note that this document has undergone special formating to ensure that 
Lenin’s sidenotes fit on the page, marking as best as possible 
where they were located in the original manuscript. 
  

 
HEGEL. WORKS, VOL. IX (BERLIN, 1837).
LECTURES ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF HISTORY
(Edition of E. Gans)
  
   




    Materials: Notes of the lectures 1822-1831.
    Hegel’s manuscript  up to p. 73, etc.
  








    P. 5[1]

  
    ...“Speeches ... are transactions be-
tween people”... (hence these speeches
are not mere talk).
  




  
    7—
  

The French and English are more edu-






 
cated (“they have more ... national
culture”),—but we Germans rack our
brains to discover how history ought
to be written, rather than writing it.
  




    shrewd and
clever!
  




  
    9—
  

    History teaches “that peoples and gov-
  






 ernments of a people have never
 learned anything from history; each pe-
 riod is too individual for that.”
  




    very clever!
  














    “But what experience and history
teach is this—that peoples and gov-
ernments have never learned any-
thing from history, or acted accord-
ing to the lessons that could have
been drawn from it. Each period has
such peculiar circumstances, it is
a state of things so unique that one
must and can judge of it only on
the basis of itself.”





NB
 
 
 
NB
 
 
NB
  


















p. 12—“reason governs the world....”  









  
    20:  
  

    The substance of Matter is Gravity.
The substance of Spirit is Freedom.
  




    schwach![2]





  
    22.  
  

    “World history is the progress of the
consciousness of freedom—a progress
which we have to know in its ne-
cessity....”
  




  
    24—
  
    
    (approach to historical materialism).
What guides the actions of men? Above
all, “Selbstsucht”[3]—motives of love,
etc., are rarer and their sphere nar-
rower. What, then, is the outcome
of this interweaving of passions, etc.?
of needs, etc.?
  




  
    28  
  
  
    “Nothing great in the world has been
accomplished without passion....” Pas-
sion is the subjective and “therefore
    the formal side of energy....”
  




  
    28  
  

    i.f.[4]—History does not begin with
a conscious aim.... What is important
    is that which
  




  
    29  
  

    ...appears unconsciously for mankind as
the result of its action....
  




  
    29  
  

    ...In this sense “Reason governs the
world.”
  




    NB
  




  
    30  
  

    ...In history through human actions
“something else results in addition
    beyond that which they aim at and
obtain, beyond that which they direct-
ly know and desire.”
  




    30
  






  
    30  
  

    ...“They” (die Menschen[5]) “gratify
  






their own interest, but something fur-
ther is thereby brought about, which
was latent in their interest, but which
    was not in their consciousness or in-
cluded in their intention.”
  




    NB
(cf. Engels[6])
  




  
    32  
  

...“Such are the great men in history,
whose own particular aims contain
that substantial element which is the
will of the World Spirit....”
  




    “great men”
  




  
    36—
  

    the religiousness and virtue of a shep-
herd, a peasant, etc., is highly honour-
able (examples!! NB), but ...“the right
    of the World Spirit stands above all
special rights....”
  










      Here in Hegel is often to be
  found—about God, religion, moral-
      ity in general—extremely trite ideal-
  istic nonsense.
    

      97: “the gradual abolition of slav-
  ery is better than its sudden re-
  moval....”
    








  
    50.  
  

    The constitution of a state together
with its religion ... philosophy, thought,
culture, “external forces” (climate,
neighbours...) comprise “one substance,
one Spirit....”
  




  
    51  
  

    In nature movement takes place only
in a cycle (!!)—in history, something
new arises....
  




  
    62.  
  

    Language is richer among peoples in
an undeveloped, primitive state—lan-
guage becomes poorer with the advance
of civilisation and the development
of grammar.
  




?





  
    67:  
  
    
    “World history develops on a higher
ground than that on which morality
has its position (Stätte)....”
  




  
    73:  
  
    
    An excellent picture of history: the
  






sum of individual passions, actions,
etc. (“everywhere something akin to
ourselves, and therefore everywhere
something that excites our interest for
or against”), sometimes the mass of
some general interest, sometimes a
multitude of “minute forces”
(“an infinite exertion of minute forces
    which produce a tremendous result
from what appears insignificant”).
  




 
very good
 
 
Sehr wich-
tig![7] see
below this
passage
more







    The result? The result is “exhaustion.”
  




fully[8]







    P. 74. End of the “Introduction.”
  




  
    P. 75
  

    —“The Geographical Basis of World
History” (a characteristic heading):
(75-101).
  




  
    75—
  

    “Under the mild Ionic sky,” a Homer
could more easily arise—but this is
not the only cause.—“Not under Turk-
ish rule,” etc.
  




    NB
cf. Plekha-
nov[9]





  
    82—
  

    Emigration to America removes “dis-
content,” “and the continued exist-
ence of the contemporary civil order is
    guaranteed...” (but this Zustand[10]—
“riches and poverty” 81)....
  




!!!





  
    82.  
  

    In Europe there is no such outlet:
had the forests of Germany still been
in existence, the French Revolution
would not have occurred.
  




  
    102:  
  

    Three forms of world history: 1) des-
potism, 2) democracy and aristocracy,
3) monarchy.
  




  
    Subdiv
  

    isions: The Oriental World—The
Greek—The Roman—The German
World. Empty phrase-mongering about
morality, etc., etc.
  




  
    China.
  
  
    Chapter I (113 to 139). Description
of the Chinese character, institutions,
etc., etc. Nil, nil, nil!
  




  
    India
  
    
    —to 176—To...





  
    Persia
  
     
    (and Egypt)—to 231. Why did the
Persian Empire fall, but not China
or India? Dauer[11] is not as such
vortreffliches[12] (229)—“The imperish-
able mountains are not superior to
the rose that quickly loses its petals
in its fleeting existence.” (229) Persia
fell because the “spiritual view of
things” began here 230, but the Greeks
proved superior, “higher principle” of
organisation, “self-conscious freedom.”
    (231)
  




  
    232:  
  

    “The Greek World” ... the principle
of “pure individuality”—the period of
its development, flowering and decline,
“encounter with the succeeding organ
    of world history” (233)—Rome with
its “substance” (ibidem).
  




    world history
as a whole
and the
separate
peoples—its
“organs”
  




  
    234:  
  

    The geographical conditions of Greece:
    the diversity of its nature (in con-
trast to the monotony of the East).
  





242


    —The colonies in Greece. Amassing
of wealth. Want and poverty “always”
bound up with it....
  




    Wealth and
poverty
  




  
    246.  
  

    “The natural, as explained by men,
its internal, essential element, is the
beginning of the divine in general”
(in connection with the mythology of
the Greeks).
  




    Hegel and
Feuerbach[13]








251:  
  

    “Man with his requirements behaves
in a practical way in relation to ex-
ternal nature; in making it serve for
his satisfaction, he wears it away, there-
by setting to work as an intermediary.
For natural objects are powerful and
offer resistance in many different ways.
In order to subdue them, man intro-
duces other natural objects, thus turn-
ing nature against itself, and he in-
vents tools for this purpose. These hu-
man inventions belong to the spirit,
  




     
 
Germs of
historical
materialism
in Hegel
  






and such a tool must be regarded as
  






higher than a natural object.... The
honour of human invention for sub-
jugating nature is ascribed to the Gods”
(among the Greeks).
  




    Hegel
and
Marx
  




  
    264:  
  

    Democracy in Greece was bound up
with the small size of the states.
Speech, living speech, united the cit-
izens, created Erwärmung.[14]
    “Hence” in the French Revolution
there was never a republican consti-
tution.
  




??
 
  




  
   322-
  
    
    323. “He” (Caesar) “removed the in-
ternal contradiction” (by abolishing
the republic, which had become a
    “shadow”) “and created a new one. For
world rule had hitherto reached only
to the rim of the Alps, but Caesar open-
ed a new arena: he founded the theatre
which was now to become the centre
of world history.”
  




    Hegel and
“contradic-
tions” in
history
  






    And then on the murder of Caesar:
  






  ...“In general, a political revolu-
tion is, as it were, sanctioned in man’s
opinion if it is repeated” (Napoleon,
the Bourbons).... “By repetition that
which at first appeared merely a mat-
ter of chance and possibility becomes
something real and confirmed.” (323)
  




catego-
ries of the
possible and
contingent
versus act-
uality and
confirmation
in history
  






    “Christianity.” (328-346) Banal, cleric-
al, idealistic chatter about the greatness
of Christianity (with quotations from
    the Gospels!!). Disgusting, stinking!
  




  
    420-
  
    
    421: Why was the Reformation lim-
ited to a few nations? Among other
reasons—“the Slav nations were agri-
    cultural” (421) and this brings with
it “the relation of lords and serfs,”
less “Betriebsamkeit,[15]” etc. But why
 the Romanic nations? Their character
(Grundcharakter[16] 421 i.f.)
  





429: 
  

     ...“Polish freedom likewise was noth-
ing but the freedom of the barons
against the monarchs.... Hence the
people had the same interest against
the barons as the kings.... When free-
    dom is mentioned, one must always
be careful to see whether it is not really
private interests that are being spoken
of.” (430)
  




    NB
class
relations
  




  
    439:  
  

    On the French Revolution... Why did
the French pass “immediately from the
  






theoretical to the practical,” but not
the Germans? Among the Germans, the
Reformation had “schon Alles gebes-
sert,”[17] abolished “das unsägliche Un-
  




!!







    recht,”[18] etc.
  




  
    441:  
  
    
    For the first time (in the French
Revolution) humanity had arrived at
the conclusion “that man bases himself
on the head, i.e., on thought, and
builds reality accordingly....” “This
was ... a glorious dawn....”
    In considering further the “course of
the Revolution in France” (441) Hegel
stresses in freedom in general—freedom
of property, and of industry (ibid.).
  






    ...The promulgation of laws? The will
of all.... “The few should represent
the many, but they often merely re-
    press them....” (442) “The power of the
  




    cf. Marx and
Engels[19]







majority over the minority is to
no less degree a great inconsistency”
    (ibid.).
  




?





  
    444:  
  
    
    ...“In its content this event” (the French
    Revolution) “is world historical....”
  








“Liberalism,” (444) “liberal institu-
tions” (443) spread over Europe.




  p. 446—      










446:
  

    “World history is nothing but the
development of the notion of free-
dom....”
  




 






NB:
Most impor-
tant is Ein-
leitung,[20]
where there
is much that
is magni-
ficent in the
formulation
of the
question
  







  In general the philosophy of history
  yields very, very little—this is compre-
  hensible, for it is precisely here, in
  this field, in this science, that Marx
  and Engels made the greatest step for-
  ward. Here most of all, Hegel is obso-
  lete and antiquated.
             
  (see the next page[21])







 
HEGEL ON WORLD HISTORY

    “If then, finally, we regard world history from the
standpoint of the category through which it should be
considered, we have before us an endless picture of human life
and activity under the most varied circumstances, with all kinds
of aims and the most diverse events and destinies. In all these
occurrences and events we see human action and effort in the
forefront; everywhere something akin to ourselves, and therefore
everywhere something that excites our interest for or
against. Sometimes it attracts us by beauty, freedom and
richness, sometimes by energy, sometimes even vice succeeds in
making itself important. Often there is the comprehensive mass
of some general interest that cumbrously moves forward, but
still more often the infinite exertion of minute forces, which
produce a tremendous result from what appears insignificant;
every where the motleyest spectacle, and as soon as one vanishes
another takes its place.
  

“But the immediate result of this consideration, however
attractive it may be, is exhaustion, such as follows
after a very varied spectacle, a magic lantern show; and even if
we accord to each individual representation its true worth, 
the question nevertheless arises in our minds, what is the final
aim of all these particular events, is
each one exhausted by its special aim, or ought one not rather think
of a single ultimate aim of all these events; behind the
loud noises at the surface is there not going on the labour and
production of a work, an internal, quiet, secret work in which the
essential force of all those transitory phenomena is stored up? But
if one does not bring thought, rational cognition, to world history
from the beginning, one must at least approach it with the firm
unshakable faith that it has reason in it, or at least that the
world of the intellect and self-conscious will is not a victim of
chance but must reveal itself in the light of the self-knowing
idea.” (73-74)[22]


((NB. In the Preface, p. XVIII, the publisher,
i.e., the editor, Ed. Gans, states that up to p.73
the text was written by Hegel in 1830; the manuscript is an
“Ausarbeitung[23]))
  
 

 

Notes
[1] Hegel,
  Werke, Bd. IX, Berlin, 1837.—Ed.

[2] feeble—Ed.

[3] “self-interest”—Ed.

[4] in fine—at the end—Ed.

[5] human beings—Ed.

[6] See F. Engels,
  Ludwig Feuerbach and the End 
  of Classical German Philosophy, Chapter IV (see Marx and Engels, 
  Selected Works, Vol. II, Moscow, 1958, p. 391).

[7] very important!—Ed.

[8] See p. 313 of this volume.—Ed.

[9] Regarding the influence of geographical conditions
  on the development of society see G. V. Plekhanov, 
  “Fundamental Questions of Marxism,” Chapter VI, and “N. G. Chernyshevsky,” Chapter II.

[10] order—Ed.

[11] duration—Ed.

[12] something excellent—Ed.

[13] Lenin is evidently comparing the formulations of 
  Hegel and Feuerbach,
  who approach the question of the origin of religion from
  opposite standpoints. See, for example, Feuerbach’s thesis: “in
  a deified being, he (i.e., man-Ed.) objectifies solely his own being.” 
  [See Feuerbach’s Essence of 
  Christianity: Introduction §2, The Essence of Religion in General]

[14] ardour—Ed.

[15] “industriousness”—Ed.

[16] fundamental character—Ed.

[17] “already changed everything for the better”—Ed.

[18] “unspeakable injustice”—Ed.

[19] Lenin is probably referring to the following passage
  in Marx’s work The
  Civil War in France: “Instead of 
  deciding once in three or six years which member of the ruling class was 
  to misrepresent the people in Parliament, universal suffrage was to serve 
  the people, constituted in Communes....” (See Marx
   and Engels, Selected Works, Vol. I, Moscow, 1958, p. 520.)

[20] introduction—Ed.

[21] On the next page of the manuscript the excerpt
  “Hegel on World History” begins.—Ed.

[22] Hegel, Werke, Bd. IX, Berlin, 1837.—Ed.

[23] “elaboration”—Ed.

 






Works Index
    |   
  Volume 38

 | 

Collected Works
    |   L.I.A. Index




  < backward




  forward >





 




==========

## Plan of Hegel’s
  Dialectics (Logic). (Contents of
  the Small Logic (Encyclopaedia))











Lenin: Plan of Hegel's Dialectics (Logic)



Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Plan of Hegel’s Dialectics (Logic)

Written: 1915
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th Edition, Moscow, 1976,
  Volume 38, pp. 315-318
Publisher: Progress Publishers
First Published: 1930 in Lenin Miscellany XII. Published 
  according to the manuscript.
Translated: Clemence Dutt
Edited: Stewart Smith
Original Transcription & Markup: Andy Blunden & R. Cymbala (2003)
Re-Marked up & Proofread by: Kevin Goins (2008)
Public Domain: Lenin Internet Archive (2003). You may freely copy, distribute, display and 
  perform this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. 
  Please credit “Marxists Internet Archive” as your source.

Plan of Hegel’s Dialectics (Logic)-contained in a notebook directly
    following the conspectus of Georges Noel's book Hegel's Logic and a list of “writings 
on Hegelianism”; written in 1915.
     
Note that this document has undergone special formating to ensure that 
Lenin’s sidenotes fit on the page, marking as best as possible 
where they were located in the original manuscript. 
  

 
PLAN OF HEGEL’S DIALECTICS
(LOGIC)
[CONTENTS OF THE SMALL LOGIC (ENCYCLOPAEDIA)]






The Doctrine of Being.

Quality

Being;
Determinate
        Being;
Being-for-self.


Quantity

Pure Quantity;
Magnitude (Quantum);
Degree.


Measure


The Doctrine of Essence.

Essence as Ground of Existence.

Identity—Difference—Ground;
Existence;
The Thing.


Appearance.

The World of Appearance;
Content and Form;
Relation.


Actuality.

Relationship of Substantiality;
Relationship of Causality;
Reciprocal Action.




The Doctrine of the Notion.

The Subjective Notion;

The Notion;
The Judgement;
The Syllogism.


The Object.

Mechanism;
Chemism;
Teleology.


The Idea.

Life;
Cognition;
The Absolute Idea.








 




The concept (cognition) reveals the es-
  sence (the law of causality, identity,
  difference, etc) in Being (in immediate
  phenomena)—such is actually the gen-
  eral course of all human cogni-
  tion (of all science) in general. Such
  is the course also of natural sci-
  ence and political economy
  [and history]. Insofar Hegel’s dialectic is
  a generalisation of the history of thought.
  To trace this more concretely and in
  greater detail in the history of the sep-
  arate sciences seems an extraordinarily
  rewarding task. In logic, the history
  of thought must, by and large, coin-
  cide with the laws of thinking.
  






 




It is stikingly evident that Hegel some-
  times passes from the abstract to the con-
  crete (Sein[1] 
  (abstract)—Dasein[2] (con-
  crete)—Fürsichsein[3]) and sometimes the
  other way round (the Subjective Notion—
  the Object—Truth (the Absolute Idea)).
  Is not this inconsistency of an ideal-
  ist (what Marx called the “Ideenmystik”[4]
  in Hegel?) Or are there deeper reasons?
      (e.g., Being = Nothing—the idea of Be-






  coming, of development). First of all im-
  pressions flash by, then Something emerges,
  —afterwards the concepts of quality #
      (the determination of the thing or the phe-
  nomenon) and quantity are developed. After
  that study and reflection direct thought to







    abstract
“Sein” only
   as a mo-
ment in
πάντα ρεϊ[5]







  
  cognition of identity—of difference—of
      Ground—of the Essence versus the Pheno-
  menon—of causality, etc. All these mo-
  ments (steps, stages, processes) of cognition
      move in the direction from the subject
  to the object, being tested in practice and
  arriving through this test at truth (= the
  Absolute Idea).







# Quality and sensation (Empfindung)
  are one and the same, says Feuerbach. The
  very first and most familiar to us is sen-
  sation, and in it these is inevitably also
quality....









 




 If Marx did not leave behind him a
  “Logic” (with a capital letter), he did leave
      the logic of Capital, and this ought to be
      utilised to the full in this question. In
Capital, Marx applied to a single science
  logic, dialectics and the theory of knowl-
  edge of materialism [three words are not
  needed: it is one and the same thing]
  which has taken everything valuable in
  Hegel and developed it further.










 







The history of capitalism and the anal-
  ysis of the concepts summing it up.
  






 




The beginning—the most simple, ordi-
  nary, mass, immediate “Being”: the single
      commodity (“Sein” in political economy).
  The analysis of it as a social relation.
  A double analysis, deductive and inductive
  —logical and historical (forms of value).





      Testing by facts or by practice respec-
      tively, is to be found here in each step
      of the analysis.
      






 






  Cf. Concerning the quesiton of Essence versus Appearance
  





  — price and value
  — demand and supply versus Wert
                (= krystallisierte Arbeit[6])
  —wages and the price of labour power.
  



 

Notes
[1] Being—Ed.
[2] Determinate 
  Being—Ed.
[3] Being-for-self—Ed.
[4] mysticism of ideas—Ed.
[5] everything flows—Ed.
[6] value (= crystallised Labor)—Ed.
 






Works Index
    |   
  Volume 38

 | 

Collected Works
    |   L.I.A. Index




  < backward



forward >





 



==========

## Georges Noël: Hegel’s 
  Logic. Paris, 1897











Lenin on George NoÃ«l: Hegel's Logic. Paris 1897



Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
George Noël: Hegel’s Logic. Paris, 1897

Written: 1915
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th Edition, Moscow, 1976,
  Volume 38, pp. 319-324
Publisher: Progress Publishers
First Published: 1930 in Lenin Miscellany XII. Published 
  according to the manuscript.
Translated: Clemence Dutt
Edited: Stewart Smith
Transcription & Markup: K. Goins (2008)
Public Domain: Lenin Internet Archive (2003). You may freely copy, distribute, display and 
  perform this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. 
  Please credit “Marxists Internet Archive” as your source.

The remarks on Georges Noël’s book La logique de
      Hegel (Hegel’s Logic), Paris, 1897, are contained in a notebook 
    on whose cover Lenin wrote the word “Philosophy.” Probably written in 
    Geneva in 1915.
    
     
    Note that this document has undergone special formating to ensure that 
    Lenin’s sidenotes fit on the page, marking as best as possible 
    where they were located in the original manuscript. 
    

 
GEORGES NOËL: HEGEL’S LOGIC
PARIS, 1897
[Bibliothèque de Genève, Ca l219]







       Printed in installments in Revue de Mé-
   taphysique et de Morale; edited by Xavier
   Léon.
       




    The author is an idealist and a shallow
one. A re-writing of Hegel, a defence of
Hegel against “modern philosophers,” a com-
parison with Kant, etc. Nothing of interest.
Nothing profound. Not a word about ma-
erialist dialectics: the author evidently
has no notion of it.
  




Note the translations of He-
gel’s terms:
     Être [Being] 
—Essence—No-
tion (Mesure, etc. [Measure]).
Devenir (das Gewordene) [Becoming].
L’être déterminé (Dasein) [Determinate
     Being, Existent Being].
Être pour un autre (Sein-für-anderes)
     [Being-for-other].
Quelque chose (Etwas) [Something].
Limite (Grenze) [Limit].
Borne (Schranke) [Boundary].
Devoir Être (Sollen) [Ought].
Être pour soi (Für-sich-Sein) [Being-
     for-itself].
Existence hors de soi (Auβer-sich-Sein)
     [Being outside itself].
La connaissance (das Erkennen) [Cog-
     nition].
Actualité (Wirklichkeit) [Actuality].
Apparence (Schein) [Semblance].
Être posé (Das Gesetztsein) [Posited Be-
     ing].
    Position (Setzende Reflexion) [Positing
     reflection].
    Fondement ou raison d’étre (Grund)
     [Ground].
    L’universel (das Allgemeine) [The Uni-
     versal].
    Particulier (das Besondere) [The Par-
     ticular].
    Jugement (das Urteil) [Judgment].
    Raisonnement on Syllogisme (Schluβ)
[Reasoning or Syllogism (Conclu-
sion)].
    




    Note also the amusing attempts of the
author to justify Hegel as it were[1] against
accusations of “realism” (read: material-
    ism). According to Hegel “philosophy as
a whole is a syllogism. And in this syllo-
gism, logic is the universal, nature the par-
ticular, and spirit the individual” (p. 123).
The author “analyses” (= rehashes) the last
sentences of the Logic on the transition
from the Idea to Nature. It transpires that
through nature (in nature) the understand-
ing cognises the Idea = uniformity, ab-
stractions, etc.... Help! Almost material-
ism!!....
  



 




    “To treat nature by itself, abstracted
from mind, is that not to return implicitly
to the most naïve realism?” (p. 129)
  






NB!



 




    “True, by interposing a philosophy of
nature between Logic and the philosophy
of mind, Hegel adopts the standpoint of
realism, but in doing so he is not guilty
of any inconsistency.... Hegel’s realism
is only provisional. It is a point of view
that has to be superseded.” (129)
  






NB



 




    “That realism has its relative truth is
indisputable. A point of view so natural
and universal is not an aberration of the
human mind.... In order to supersede real-
ism, it” (dialectics) “will have to give it
first its full development and only thus
  






  NB
  




    will it demonstrate the necessity of ideal-
ism. Hence Hegel will put time and space
as the most general determinations of na-
  





ture and not as forms of the mind. On
this point he seems to disagree with Kant,
but this is only in appearance and in
  






??!!





    words....”
  

    ...“That is why he” (Hegel) “speaks of
sensuous qualities as if they were really
inherent in the body. It is surprising that
on this account Herr Wundt accuses him
of ignorance. Does the learned philosopher
believe that Hegel had never read Des-
  





cartes, Locke or even Kant? If he is a real-
ist, it is due neither to ignorance nor in-
consistency, but only tentatively and as a
  






NB
  Hegel = a
  “realist”
  




method of approach.” (130)
  






NB



 




    Comparing Hegel with Spinoza, the author
says: “In short, Hegel and Spinoza agree
in submitting nature to logic” (p. 140),
but in Hegel logic is not mathematical
logic but the logic of contradictions, of
the transition “from pure abstraction to
    reality” (etc.). Of Spinoza it is said “with
him” (Spinoza) “we are at the antipodes of
idealism” (138); for “the world of spirits” (in
Spinoza) “exists side by side with the world
of bodies; it does not stand above it....”
  

    ...“The idea of evolution so characteris-
tic of Hegelianism has no meaning for
Spinoza....” (138)
  

    Hegel develops the dialectics of Plato
(“he recognises with Plato the necessary
coexistence of opposites” 140)—Leibnitz is
close to Hegel. (141)
  

    Noël defends Hegel against the charge
of pantheism ... (here, he says, is the basis
of this charge):
  

    “Absolute spirit, the final point of
  





his” (Hegel’s) “dialectics, is it basically
other than the idealised and deified spirit
of man himself? Does his God exist any-
where but in nature and humanity?” (142)
  





 







    Noël’s “defence” consists in stress-
ing (chewing over) the fact that
    Hegel is an idealist.
    






 




    Is Hegel not a “dogmatist”? (Chapter VI:
    “The Dogmatism of Hegel”). Yes, in the
sense of non-scepticism, in the sense of
  






  Hegel not
  a “sceptic”
  




the ancients (p. 147). But according
to Kant that = cognisability of “Things-in-
themselves.” Hegel (just like Fichte) denies
Things-in-themselves.
  



 




    “Agnostic realism” according to
Kant (p. 148 i.f.).
  






NB



 




    ...“Kant defines dogmatism from the
  





    point of view of agnosticism. A dogmatist
is one who claims to determine the Thing-
    in-itself, to know the unknowable. More-
over, dogmatism can take two forms....”
(149) Either it is mysticism, or
  






  Kant
  an agnostic
  




    ...“it can also naïvely raise sensuous
reality to absolute reality, identify
  





the phenomenon with the noumenon.
  






  NB
  




It is then empirical dogmatism, that
of the common mass and of the savant
who is alien to philosophy. The ma-
terialists fall into this second error;
  






  material-
  ists = “dog-
  matists”
  




the first was that of Plato, Descartes
    and their disciples....”
  



 




    In Hegel, it is stated, there is not a
trace of dogmatism, for “he will certainly
not be accused of not recognising the rel-
ativity of things with respect to thought,
since his whole system rests on this prin-
    ciple. Nor will he be accused of applying
the categories undiscerningly and uncritical-
ly. Is not his logic precisely a critique of the
categories, a critique incontestably more
profound than the Kantian critique?” (150)
  

    ...“There is no doubt that by the very
rejection of noumena he” (Hegel) “puts
reality in the phenomenon,[2] but this real-
ity in the phenomenon as such is only
an immediate reality, consequently rela-
tive and intrinsically incomplete. It is
  





    true reality only implicitly and on condi-
tion of its further development....” (151)
  






  NB
  


 



  
    ...“Moreover, between the intelligible and
the sensuous there is no absolute opposi-
tion, no hiatus, no unbridgeable gulf. The
  





    sensuous is the intelligible in anticipation;
the intelligible is the sensuous under-
stood....” (152)
  






  not bad!
  


 




    (Even you, a shallow idealist, have de-
rived some benefit from Hegel!)
  

    ...“Sensuous being contains the abso-
lute implicitly and it is through a contin-
uous gradation that we raise ourselves from
    the one to the other.” (153)
  

    ...“Thus, whatever may have been said
about it, Kant’s philosophy retains the fun-
damental vice of mystical dogmatism. We
  





    find in it the two characteristic features
of this doctrine: absolute opposition be-
tween the sensuous and the supersensuous,
and an immediate transition from the one
  






to the other.” (156)
  



 




In Chapter VII: “Hegel and Modern
Thought,” Noël takes the positivism of
Auguste Comte and, analysing it, calls it
  






  positivism =
  agnosticism
  




“an agnostic system.” (166)
  

    (Idem 169: “positivist agnosticism”)
  

In criticising positivism as agnosticism,
the author sometimes castigates it not at
all badly for its half-heartedness,—saying,
for example, that the question of the
source of laws or of the “permanence” of
facts (“des faits permanents,”[3] 170) cannot
be evaded:
         ...“Depending on whether one regards
them” (les faits permanents) “as uncognis-
able or cognisable, one is brought back
either to agnosticism or to dogmatic philos-
ophy....” (170 i.f.)
  

    The neo-criticism of M. Renouvier is
described as eclecticism, something midway
between “positivist phenomenalism and
    Kantianism proper.” (175)
  




    Chattering about morality, freedom,
etc., Noël, the vulgariser of Hegel, has
not the slightest word to say about
freedom as the understanding of neces-
sity.
  






 






    French translations of Hegel: Véra: Logic, The Philos-
ophy of Mind, The Philosophy of Religion, The Philosophy
of Nature;


    Ch. Bénard: Aesthetics and Poetics


Works on Hegelianism:
  

    E. Beaussire: Antécédents de l’hégélianisme.
P. Janet: La dialectique dans Hégel et dans Platon. 1860.
Mariano: La Philosophie contemporaine en Italie.
Véra: Introduction à la Philosophie de Hégel.
  



 

Notes
[1] These three words are in English in the 
  original.—Ed.
[2] Noumena and phenomena—terms used 
  by Kant in his theory of knowledge. Noumenon means a thing-in-itself, while
  phenomenon means a thing as it appears to us. According to Kant, phenomena 
  are formed as a result of the action on man of something unknown (a 
  thing-in-itself). Noumena are supposed to lie beyond phenomena, and their 
  essence to be unknowable.
[3] “of permanent facts”—Ed.
 





Works Index
    |   
  Volume 38

 | 

Collected Works
    |   L.I.A. Index




  < backward




  forward >




 



==========

## J. Perrin. Treatise on Physical
    Chemistry. Principles. Paris, 1903











Lenin on J. Perrin. Treatise on Physical Chemistry. Principles. Paris, 1903



Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
J. Perrin. Treatise on Physical Chemistry.
  Principles. Paris, 1903

Written: December, 1914
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th Edition, Moscow, 1976,
  Volume 38, p. 325
Publisher: Progress Publishers
First Published: 1930, in Lenin Miscellany XII. 
  Published according to the manuscript
Translated: Clemence Dutt
Edited: Stewart Smith
Transcription & Markup: K. Goins (2008)
Public Domain: Lenin Internet Archive (2008). You may freely copy, distribute, display and 
  perform this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. 
  Please credit “Marxists Internet Archive” as your source.

Note on J. Perrin’s book “Traité de chimie
    physique: les principes” (Treatise on Physical Chemistry: Principles), 
Paris, 1903 is contained in a notebook following the conspectus of Hegel’s Science
of Logic and was written at the end of 1914. 
  

 
J. PERRIN.
TREATISE ON PHYSICAL CHEMISTRY.
PRINCIPLES
PARIS, 1903

  Note J. Perrin: Traité de chimie physique.
  Les principes (300 pp.). Paris, 1 9 0 3. Review by Abel
Rey in Revue Philosophique, 1904,1,
  entitled: “Philosophical Principles of Physical Chemistry.” (Perrin
  analyses the notions of force, etc., cause, etc., energy, 
  etc.—against “the view of energy 
  as a mysterious entity” (p. 401).... Abel Rey calls Perrin an opponent
  of “neo-sceptic systems.”)
    
 






Works Index
    |   
  Volume 38

 | 

Collected Works
    |   L.I.A. Index




  < backward




  forward >





 



==========

## Peter Genov. Feuerbachs Erkenntnistheorie Und 
  Metaphysik. Zürich, 1911 (Berner Dissertation)
  (S. 89)











Lenin on Peter Genov. Feuerbachs Erkenntnistheorie Und Metaphysik. ZÃ¼rich, 1911 (Berner Dissertation) (S. 89)



Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Peter Genov. Feuerbachs Erkenntnistheorie
Und Metaphysik. ZÃ¼rich, 1911
(Berner Dissertation) (S. 89)

Written: December 29-30, 1914
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th Edition, Moscow, 1976,
  Volume 38, pp. 326-327
Publisher: Progress Publishers
First Published: 1930 in Lenin Miscellany XII. 
  Published according to the manuscript
Translated: Clemence Dutt
Edited: Stewart Smith
Transcription & Markup: Kevin Goins (2008)
Public Domain: Lenin Internet Archive (2008). You may freely copy, distribute, display and 
  perform this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. 
  Please credit “Marxists Internet Archive” as your source.

Lenin’s remarks on Peter Genov’s book 
      “Feuerbachs Erkenntnistheorie und Metaphysik.” Zürich,
  1911 (Berner Dissertation) (S. 89) [Peter Genov, Feuerbach’s
  Theory of Knowledge and Metaphysics, Zürich, 1911 (Bern Dissertation)
  (p. 89)] were written December 29-30, 1914, in Bern.
   
  Note that this document has undergone special formating to ensure that 
  Lenin’s sidenotes fit on the page, marking as best as possible 
  where they were located in the original manuscript. 
    

 
PETER GENOV.
FEUERBACHS ERKENNTNISTHEORIE
UND METAPHYSIK
ZÜRICH, 1911 (BERNER DISSERTATION) (S. 89)



  Landesbibliothek              
  


 




    This purely amateurish work consists almost ex-
clusively of quotations from Feuerbach’s collected
works |Jodi edition|. It can be useful only
as a collection
of quotations, and incomplete at that.
  



the author has far from worked out his subject




    The author quotes mainly:
  

    Vol. II, especially “Thesen und Grundsätze,” and then
    “Wider den Dualismus.”[1]


    X, especially “Über Spiritualismus und Materialismus.”
NB VIII, Vorlesungen über das Wesen der Religion (Feu-
  








    erbach himself wrote in 1 8 48 that this was a
more mature work of his than The Essence of
Christianity, published in 1 8 41) |VIII, SS. 26,
    29; 102-109; 288; 329 and others|.
  


  
    VII.
  


Das Wesen der Religion (1 8 45: Feuerbach
regards it as important).
  



IV.



    “Leibnitz” with the notes of 1847 (NB) |IV,
SS. 261; 197; 190-191; 274|.
  


  
    VII.
  


    Addenda to Wesen des Christentums.
  


 






    The author quotes (in the spirit of Feuerbach):
Ebbinghaus: Experimentelle Psychologie, SS.
110 und 45.
     Fr. Jodl: Lehrbuch der Psychologie, S. 403.
A Forel: Gehirn und Seele, X. Auflage, S. 14.
  




 






    Lange[2] (II. Buch,
S. 104) against Feuerbach, he says, is obviously wrong (S. 83 and 88), distorting 
(and denying)
Feuerbach’s materialism.
  

    At the beginning the author gives a sketch of Feuer-
bach’s philosophical evolution,—Todesgedanken (1830)—
still a Hegelian; Der Schriftsteller und der Mensch[3] (1834)—
beginning of the rupture; Kritik des Antihegel (1835)—
against the enemies of Hegel, but not in favour of Hegel
(cf. de Grün,[4] Bd. II,
409; I, 390 and 398).—The Critique
of Hegelian Philosophy[5] (1839).—The Essence of Christian-
ity (1 8 41)—the rupture—Theses 
and Principles of the
Philosophy of the Future (1842 and 1843).—The Essence
of Religion (1845).—Lectures on the Essence of Religion
(1847).
  



 

Notes
[1] “Thesen und Grundsätze” (“Theses and Principles”)
    refers to two works by Feuerbach: 
Vorläufige Thesen zur Reform der Philosophie
    (Preliminary Theses on the Reform of Philosophy) and Grundsätze der 
    Philosophie der Zukunft (Principles 
of the Philosophy of the Future) 
    contained in Vol. II of Feuerbach’s works, published by Bolin and Jodl. 
    This volume also contains the work Wider den Dualismus von Leib und Seele, 
    Fleisch und Geist (Against Dualism of Body and Soul, Flesh and Spirit). The 
    phrase “particularly über Spiritualismus und Materialismus” refers
    to Über Spiritualismus und Materialismus in besonderer Beziehung auf die
    Willensfreiheit (On Spiritualism and Materialism with Particular Reference to Free
    Will) contained in Vol. X.
[2] The reference is to Fr. A. Lange’s book 
“Geschichte des Materialismus” (F. A. Lange, History of 
Materialism) in which the history of materialism is given in distorted form.
[3] Here the author was “not a pantheist, but a 
polytheist” (S. 15); “more a Leibnitzian than a Hegelian” (S. 
15).—Ed.
[4] The reference is to K. Grün’s book 
“Ludwig Feuerbachs Briefwechsel und Nachlass” (K. Grün, 
Ludwig Feuerbach’s Correspondence andLiterary Heritage).
[5] The German titles of Feuerbach’s works are: 
Kritik der Hegelschen Philosophie; Wesen des Christentums;
Vorläufige Thesen zur Reform der Philosophie; 
Grundsätze 
der Philosophie der Zukunft; Wesen der Religion; Vorlesungen 
über des Wesen der Religion.—Ed.
 






Works Index
    |   
  Volume 38

 | 

Collected Works
    |   L.I.A. Index




  < backward




  forward >





 



==========

## Paul Volkmann. Epistemological Foundations of the
  Natural Sciences (“Sciences and Hypothesis,”
  IX). Second Edition. Leipzig, 1910











Lenin on Paul Volkmann. Epistemological Foundations of the Natural Sciences 
(ÂSciences and Hypothesis,Â IX). Second Edition. Leipzig, 1910



Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Paul Volkmann. Epistemological Foundations
of the Natural Sciences
(ÂSciences and Hypothesis,Â IX).
Second Edition. Leipzig, 1910

Written: 1915
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th Edition, Moscow, 1976,
  Volume 38, p. 328
Publisher: Progress Publishers
First Published: 1930 in Lenin Miscellany. 
  Published according to the manuscript
Translated: Clemence Dutt
Edited: Stewart Smith
Transcription & Markup: K. Goins (2008)
Public Domain: Lenin Internet Archive (2008). You may freely copy, distribute, display and 
  perform this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. 
  Please credit “Marxists Internet Archive” as your source.

Note on Paul Volkmann’s book “Erkenntnistheoretische
    Grundzüge der Naturwissenschaften” (Wissenschaft und Hypothese.
IX) 2. Auflage, Leipzig, 1910 [Paul Volkmann, Epistemological Foundations
of the Natural Sciences (Science and Hypothesis. IX), 2nd ed., Leipzig, 1910]
is contained in a notebook following the comments on Genov’s dissertation.
  

 
PAUL VOLKMANN.
EPISTEMOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONS OF
  THE NATURAL SCIENCES
(“SCIENCES AND HYPOTHESIS,” IX) SECOND EDITION, LEIPZIG, 1910
(Nat. IV. 171 in Bern library)

    The author is an eclectic and vulgariser in philosophy, especially
    when speaking against Haeckel, about Buckle, etc.,
    etc. Nevertheless, the tendency is materialist, e.g., p. 35[1]—“The
    question whether we dictate concepts to nature, or nature to
    us” is, he says, a combination of both points of
    view. Mach, he says, is right (p. 38), but I
    counterpose to it (Mach’s point of view) the
    “objective” point of view:
  

    “Thus I hold that logic in us has its origin in the uniform
    course of things outside us, that the external necessity of natural
    events is our first and most real schoolmis tress” (p. 39).
  

    He rebels against phenomenology and modern monism,—but
    completely fails to understand the essence of materialist
    and idealist philosophy. In fact, he reduces the matter to
    “methods” of natural science in a general positivist
    sense. He is not even capable of raising the question of the
    objective reality of nature outside the consciousness (and
    sensations) of mankind.
  
 

Notes
[1] Volkmann, P., Erkenntnistheoretische Grundzüge
  der Naturwissenschaften, Leipzig-Berlin, 1910.—Ed.
 






Works Index
    |   
  Volume 38

 | 

Collected Works
    |   L.I.A. Index




  < backward




  forward >





 



==========

## Max Verworn. The Hypothesis of
    Biogenesis. Jena, 1903











Lenin on Max Verworn. The Hypothesis of Biogenesis. Jena, 1903



Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Max Verworn.
The Hypothesis of Biogenesis. Jena, 1903

Written: 1915
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th Edition, Moscow, 1976,
  Volume 38, pp. 329-330
Publisher: Progress Publishers
First Published: 1930 in Lenin Miscellany. 
  Published according to the manuscript
Translated: Clemence Dutt
Edited: Stewart Smith
Original Transcription & Markup: K. Goins (2008)
Public Domain: Lenin Internet Archive (2008). You may freely copy, distribute, display and 
  perform this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. 
  Please credit “Marxists Internet Archive” as your source.

The remarks on Max Verworn’s book “Die 
    Biogenhypothese”, Jena, 1903 (Max Verworn, The Hypothesis of 
Biogenesis, Jena, 1903) are contained in a notebook following the note 
on Volkmann’s book.
 
Note that this document has undergone special formating to ensure that 
Lenin’s sidenotes fit on the page, marking as best as possible 
where they were located in the original manuscript. 
  

 
MAX VERWORN.
THE HYPOTHESIS OF BIOGENESIS
JENA, 1903




      (Med. 5218)  
  


 




    The author expounds a special theme
concerning “living substance” and its chem-
ical metabolism. A special theme.
  





 cf. p. 9[1]
 definition of
 “Enzyme”[2]






 






    A bibliography is provided on this question.
  

    P. 112—a “working hypothesis,” this,
he says, is the essence. For example, he
says that materialism in the nineteenth
    century was of great benefit to the natural
sciences,—but now “no philosophical nat-
ural scientist any longer considers the ma-
terialist conception to be adequate” (112).
There are no eternal truths. The signifi-
cance of ideas, their Fruchtbarkeit,[3]
    their
role as a “ferment”—“which creates and
    acts.” (113)
  

|Characteristic here is the naïve ex-
pression of the view that “materialism”
hinders! Not the haziest conception of
    dialectical materialism and complete
inability to distinguish materialism as
a philosophy from the individ-
ual hide-bound views of the philistines
of the day who call themselves mate-
rialists|.
  

    The aim of the author is a “mechanical
analysis of the phenomena of life” (p. 1,
Preface)—a reference to the last chapter
of the Allegemeine Physiologie.
  

Instead of “living protein” (p. 25)—
said to be an unclear concept, and instead
        of the “living protein molecule” (“since
        a molecule cannot be alive”), the author
        proposes to speak of the “biogen-molecule.”
        (25)
  



     The conversion of the chemical
into the living—that, evidently,
is the crux. In order to move more
freely in this new, still obscure,
hypothetical, down with “material-
ism,” down with antiquated shackl-
ing” ideas (the “molecule”), let
us invent a new term (biogen), in
order to seek new knowledge more
freely! NB. Concerning the ques-
    tion of the sources and vital im-
pelling motives of modern “ideal-
ism” in physics and natural science
in general.
  





 

Notes
[1] Verworn, M., Die Biogenhypothese, Jena, 
  1903.—Ed.
[2] On page 9 of his book, M. Verworn defines “enzyme”
  as follows: “Enzymes are products of living substance distinguished by
  the fact that they can cause a large number of spesific chemical compounds 
  to decompose, without themselves being destroyed in the process.”
[3] fruitfulness—Ed.
 






Works Index
    |   
  Volume 38

 | 

Collected Works
    |   L.I.A. Index




  < backward




  forward >





 



==========

## Fr. Dannemann. How Did Our Picture of the World
    Arise? (Kosmos). Stuttgart, 1912











Lenin on Fr. Dannemann. How Did Our Picture of the World Arise? (Kosmos). Stuttgart, 1912



Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Fr. Dannemann.
How Did Our Picture of the World Arise?
(Kosmos). Stuttgart, 1912

Written: 1915
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th Edition, Moscow, 1976,
  Volume 38, pp. 331-332
Publisher: Progress Publishers
First Published: 1930 in Lenin Miscellany XII. 
  Published according to the manuscript
Translated: Clemence Dutt
Edited: Stewart Smith
Original Transcription & Markup: K. Goins (2008)
Public Domain: Lenin Internet Archive (2008). You may freely copy, distribute, display and 
  perform this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. 
  Please credit “Marxists Internet Archive” as your source.

The remarks on Fr. Dannemann’s book “Wie 
    unser Weltbild entstand” (Kosmos). Stuttgart, 1912 [F. Dannemann, 
How Did Our Picture of the World Arise (Cosmos), Stuttgart, 1912] were
written by Lenin in a notebook preceding the conspectus of G. Noël’s 
Hegel’s Logic.
 
Note that this document has undergone special formating to ensure that 
Lenin’s sidenotes fit on the page, marking as best as possible 
where they were located in the original manuscript. 
  

 
FR. DANNEMANN. HOW DID OUR PICTURE
      OF THE WORLD ARISE?
(KOSMOS). STUTTGART, 1912




  (Nat. XII. 456)
  

    In this pamphlet the author gives a kind of summary
of his four-volume work: “Naturwissenschaf-
ten in ihrer Entwicklung und in ihrem
Zusammenhange”...
  



 






    About 5,000 years of the development
of civilisation from ancient Egypt to our
time. According to Homer, the world was




    (((Much  pop-
ularisa-
tion...)))
  




only the Mediterranean Sea and surround-
ing countries. (P. 8)[1]


    In Egypt the clear nights facilitated
the pursuit of astronomy. They observed
the stars and their movement, the moon,
etc.
  



    The author
carelessly,
pompously,
vulgarly, in
feuilleton
style outlines
philosophical
questions,
banal.
  



 




    At first the month was reckoned as 30
days, and the year as 360 (p. 31). The an-
cient Egyptians already had 365 days.
(P. 32) Eratosthenes (276 B.C.) determined
the circumference of the earth as 250,000
“stadia” = 45,000 km. (instead of 40,000).
  

    Aristarchus guessed that the earth re-
volved round the sun, p. 37 (1,800 years
before Copernicus, 1473-1543). (Third cen-
tury B.C.) he considered the moon to be
3 0 (instead of 48) times smaller than
the earth, and the sun to be 300 (instead
of 1,300,000) times larger than the earth....
  



   
  The booklet
  is neither
  here nor
  there: for a
  philosophical
  work it is
  careless, sen-
  tentious, pet-
  ty, banal;—
  for a popular
  work it is
  pretentious.
  



 






    Ptolemy’s system (second
          
        century A.D.)
        fifteenth century: the
    revival of astronomy—con-
nection with navigation.
  

    Copernicus (1473-1543):
    heliocentric system. Circles
(not ellipses).
  

    ((Only in the middle of
the nineteenth century im-
proved measuring instru
ments showed alteration in
the appearance of the fixed
    stars))
  

    Galileo—(1564-1642).
    Kepler—(1571-1630).
    Newton—(1643-1727).
 




the telescope
and so forth
((discovery
of more than
20 million
stars, etc.))


flattening
of the earth
at the poles
— 1/229 dia-
meter |instead
of 1/299|

 







    Pythagoras (sixth centu-
ry B.C.) the world is gov-
erned by number: and mea-
sure....
  

    The four elements, sub-
stances, of the ancient phi-
losophers: earth, fire, water,
air....
  

    Democritus (fifth centu-
     
  ry B.C.): atoms...
seventeenth century:
chemical elements.
 
 
  

    Spectral analysis (1860)
    Electricity, etc.
    Law of conservation of
    force.
  



 

Notes
[1] Dannemann, Fr., Wie unser Weltbild entstand?
  Stuttgart, 1912.—Ed.
 






Works Index
    |   
  Volume 38

 | 

Collected Works
    |   L.I.A. Index




  < backward




  forward >





 



==========

## Ludwig Darmstaedter. Handbook on the History of
  the Natural Sciences and Technique. Berlin, 1908,
  2nd edition











Lenin on Ludwig Darmstaedter. Handbook On the History of the Natural Sciences and Technique Berlin, 1908, 2nd edition



Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Ludwig Darmstaedter.
Handbook On the History of the
Natural Sciences and Technique.
Berlin, 1908, 2nd edition

Written: 1915
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th Edition, Moscow, 1976,
  Volume 38, p. 333
Publisher: Progress Publishers
First Published: 1930 in Lenin Miscellany XII.
  Published according to the manuscript
Translated: Clemence Dutt
Edited: Stewart Smith
Original Transcription & Markup: K. Goins (2008)
Public Domain: Lenin Internet Archive (2008). You may freely copy, distribute, display and 
  perform this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. 
  Please credit “Marxists Internet Archive” as your source.

The excerpts from Ludwig Darmstaedter’s book 
    “Handbuch zur Geschichte der Naturwissenschaften und der Technik,”
Berlin, 1908 (Ludwig Darmstaedter, Handbook on the History of the 
Natural Sciences and Technique, Berlin, 1908) were entered in a notebook 
directly preceding the conspectus of G. Noël’s Hegel’s Logic.
  

 
LUDWIG DARMSTAEDTER.
HANDBOOK ON THE HISTORY
  OF THE NATURAL SCIENCES
  AND TECHINIQUE
BERLIN, 1908, 2nd EDITION
(Lesesaal in der Landesbibliothek)
   
Determination of the velocity of light:
   



1676:  
  

    Olaf Römer (from the
    eclipse of Jupiter): 40,000
       geographical miles (less than....
                       
           (less than....  
  

  300,000) km. per sec.
  298,000 km.)
  



1849:  
  

Fizeau (toothed wheel
   and mirror): 42,219 geo-
graphical miles . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  

= 313,000 km. per sec.
  



1854:  
  

Foucault (2 revolving
mirrors, etc.): 40,160 geo-
graphical miles . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  

= 298,000    ”    ”    ”
  



1874:  
  

    Alfred Cornu (à la
Fizeau) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  

      300,400     ”    ”    ”
      300,300     ”    ”    ”
  



1902:  
  

  Perrotin (idem) . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  

    299,900 (±80 m.)  ”  
  


 






Works Index
    |   
  Volume 38

 | 

Collected Works
    |   L.I.A. Index




  < backward




  forward >





 



==========

## Napoleon. Pensées. Paris,
  1913. Bibliothèque Miniature No. 14











Lenin on Napoleon. PensÃ©es. Paris, 1913. BibliothÃ¨que Miniature No. 14



Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Napoleon. Pensées. Paris, 1913.
Bibliothèque Miniature No. 14

Written: 1915
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th Edition, Moscow, 1976,
  Volume 38, p. 334
Publisher: Progress Publishers
First Published: 1930 in Lenin Miscellany XII.
  Published according to the manuscript
Translated: Clemence Dutt
Edited: Stewart Smith
Original Transcription & Markup: K. Goins (2008)
Public Domain: Lenin Internet Archive (2008). You may freely copy, distribute, display and 
  perform this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. 
  Please credit “Marxists Internet Archive” as your source.

The excerpts from Napoléon’s book “Pensees,”
      Paris, 1913, Bibliotheque miniature No. 14 (Napoleon, Thoughts, 
    Paris, 1913, Miniature Library No. 14) were made in Bern in 1915. They were 
    entered at the bottom of the first page of the notebook containing the conspectus
    of Noël’s Hegel’s Logic.
     
    Note that this document has undergone special formating to ensure that 
    Lenin’s sidenotes fit on the page, marking as best as possible 
    where they were located in the original manuscript. 
    

 
NAPOLÉON. PENSÉES 
PARIS, 1913. BIBLIOTHÈQUE MINIATURE No. 14
(Landesbibliothek)



NB  





  “Cannon killed feudalism. Ink will kill modern society
  (p. 43)....









  — — — “In every battle there comes a moment when
  the bravest soldiers, after the greatest tension, feel inclined
  to take to flight. This terror arises from a lack of confi-
  dence in their courage: it needs only an insignificant event,
  some pretext, to return this confidence to them: the great
  art consists in bringing this about” (pp. 79-80).




 






Works Index
    |   
  Volume 38

 | 

Collected Works
    |   L.I.A. Index




  < backward




  forward >





 



==========

## Artur Erich Haas. The Spirit of Hellenism in
  Modern Physics. Leipzig, 1914 (32 pp.) (Veit
  & Co.)











Lenin on Artur Erich Haas. The Spirit of Hellenism in Modern Physics. Leipzig, 1914 (32 pp.) (Veit and Co.)



Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Artur Erich Haas. The Spirit of Hellenism in Modern Physics. Leipzig, 1914 (32 pp.) (Veit & Co.)

Written: 1915
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th Edition, Moscow, 1976,
  Volume 38, p. 335
Publisher: Progress Publishers
First Published: 1915 in Lenin Miscellany XII.
  Published according to the manuscript

Translated: Clemence Dutt
Edited: Stewart Smith
Original Transcription & Markup: K. Goins (2008)
Public Domain: Lenin Internet Archive (2008). You may freely copy, distribute, display and 
  perform this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. 
  Please credit “Marxists Internet Archive” as your source.

The note on Artur Erich Haas’ book “Der Geist 
    des Hellenentums in der modernen Physik,” Leipzig, 1914 (32 SS.)
(Veit & Co.) [Artur Erich Haas, The Spirit of Hellenism in Modern Physics,
Leipzig, 1914 (32 pp.) (Veit and Co.)] is contained in a notebook following
“The Plan of Hegel's Dialectics (Logic).”
  

 
ARTUR ERICH HAAS.
THE SPIRIT OF HELLENISM
    IN MODERN PHYSICS
LEIPZIG, 1914 (32 pp.) (VEIT & CO.)

    Reviewed in Kantstudien, 1914, No. 3 (Vol. XIX),
    pp. 391--392, the author is described as a professor of the history
    of physics (P. Volkmann pays particular attention to this history),
    is said to emphasise the special connection between Heraclitus and
    Thomson, etc., etc.
  
 






Works Index
    |   
  Volume 38

 | 

Collected Works
    |   L.I.A. Index




  < backward




  forward >





 



==========

## Theodor Lipps. Natural Science and World
  Outlook. (Speech at the 78th Congress of German
  Natural Scientists in Stuttgart). Heidelberg, 1906











Lenin on Theodor Lipps. Natural Science and World Outlook. (Speech at the 78th Congress of German Natural Scientists in Stuttgart). Heidelberg, 1906



Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Theodor Lipps.
Natural Science and World Outlook.
(Speech at the 78th Congress of German
Natural Scientists in Stuttgart). 
Heidelberg, 1906

Written: 1915
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th Edition, Moscow, 1976,
  Volume 38, p. 336
Publisher: Progress Publishers
First Published: 1930 in Lenin Miscellany XII.
  Published according to the manuscript
Translated: Clemence Dutt
Edited: Stewart Smith
Original Transcription & Markup: K. Goins (2008)
Public Domain: Lenin Internet Archive (2008). You may freely copy, distribute, display and 
  perform this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. 
  Please credit “Marxists Internet Archive” as your source.

The note on Th. Lipps’ book “Naturwissenschaft 
    und Weltanschauung” (T. Lipps, Natural Science and World Outlook)
follows the note on Haas’ book, The Spirit of Hellenism in Modern Physics.
 
  

 
THEODOR LIPPS.
NATURAL SCIENCE
    AND WORLD OUTLOOK
(SPEECH AT THE 78TH CONGRESS OF GERMAN NATURAL
    SCIENTISTS IN STUTTGART), HEIDELBERG, 1906
(Bern Library. Nat. Varia. 160)

  An idealist of the Kant-Fichte persuasion, who emphasises that both phenomenology
  (modern—“only phenomena.” P. 40) and energetics and vitalism
  (ibidem) work in the spirit of idealism.

Matter—x

      “Materiality”—“a conventional mode of expression”...
      (p. 35)


  “Nature is a product of the mind” (37), etc.


      “In short, materialism is primarily nothing but a new
      name for the task of natural science.” (32)

 






Works Index
    |   
  Volume 38

 | 

Collected Works
    |   L.I.A. Index




  < backward



 
  forward >





 



==========

## Conspectus of Lassalle’s Book 
  The Philosophy of Heraclitus the Obscure of Ephesus











Lenin’s Conspectus of LassalleÂs Book The Philospohy of Heraclitus the Obscure of Ephesus



Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Conspectus of Lassalle’s Book
The Philospohy of Heraclitus the Obscure
of Ephesus


Written: 1915
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th Edition, Moscow, 1976,
  Volume 38, pp. 337-353
Publisher: Progress Publishers
First Published: 1930 in Lenin Miscellany XII 
  Published according to the manuscript
Translated: Clemence Dutt
Edited: Stewart Smith
Original Transcription & Markup: K. Goins (2008)
Public Domain: Lenin Internet Archive (2008). You may freely copy, distribute, display and 
  perform this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. 
  Please credit “Marxists Internet Archive” as your source.

Conspectus of Lassalle’s book “Die Philosophie 
    Herakleitos des Dunklen von Ephesos.” Berlin, 1858 (The Philosophy 
of Heraclitus the Obscure of Ephesus, Berlin, 1858) is contained in a notebook
following the note on Lipps’ book Natural Science and World Outlook.
Following the conspectus of Lassalle’s book, there is a fragment in the note
book entitled “On the Question of Dialectics.”

 
Note that this document has undergone special formating to ensure that 
Lenin’s sidenotes fit on the page, marking as best as possible 
where they were located in the original manuscript. 
  

 
F. LASSALLE.
THE PHILOSOPHY OF HERACLITUS
THE OBSCURE OF EPHESUS,
TWO VOLUMES,
        BERLIN, 1858 (pp. 379 + 479)



(Bern: Log. 119. 1)

        In the epigraph, inter alia,
from Hegel—from his History
of Philosophy—that there is not
a single proposition of Heraclitus
that he would not have adopted
in his Logic.
      



Hegel. 
Collected Works, Vol.
        XIII, p. 328.[1]
        My quotation from Vorlesun-
gen über die Geschichte
der Philosophie.[2]






 








        One can understand why Marx called
this work of Lassalle’s “schoolboyish” (see
the letter to Engels of...[3]): Lassalle simply
repeats Hegel, copies from him, re-echo-
ing him a million times with regard to
isolated passages from Heraclitus, furnish-
ing his opus with an incredible heap of
learned ultra-pedantic ballast.
  

        The difference with respect to Marx:
        In Marx there is a mass of new material,
    and what interests him is only the move-
ment forward from Hegel and Feuer-
bach further, from idealistic to mate-
rialistic dialectics. In Lassalle there is
a rehash of Hegel on the particular theme
    selected: essentially transcribing from He-
gel with respect to quotations from Hera-
clitus and about Heraclitus.
  

    Lassafle divided his work into two parts:
    “General Part. Introduction” (Vol. I,
pp. 1-68), and “Historical Part. Fragments
and Evidence” (the remainder). Chapter III
in the general part: “Short Logical
    Development of the System of Heraclitus”
    (pp. 45-68)—gives the quintessence of
the method, of Lassalle’s conclusions. This
chapter is sheer plagiarism, slavish repe-
tition of Hegel concerning Heraclitus! Here
    too (and still more in the historical part)
there is a mass of erudition, but it is eru-
dition of the lowest kind: the exercise set
    was to seek out the Hegelian element in
Heraclitus. The Strebsamer[4] pupil per-
forms it “brilliantly,” reading through
everything about Heraclitus in all the
ancient (and modern) authors, and putting
a Hegelian construction on everything.
  

    Marx in 1844-47 went from Hegel to
Feuerbach, and further beyond Feuer-
bach to historical (and dialectical) mate-
    rialism. Lassalle in 1846 began (Preface,
    p. III), in 1855 resumed, and in August
1857 (Preface, p. XV) finished a work of
sheer, empty, useless, “learned” rehash-
ing of Hegelianism!!
  

    Some chapters of the second part are
interesting and not without use solely for
the translations of fragments from Her-
aclitus and for the popularisation of He-
        gel, but that does not do away with all
the above-mentioned defects.
  

        The philosophy of the ancients and of
Heraclitus is often quite delightful in its
childish naïveté, e.g., p. 162—“how is it
to be explained that the urine of persons
who have eaten garlic[5] smells of garlic?”
  

        and the answer:
             “is it not that, as some of the fol-
lowers of Heraclitus say, one and the
same fiery process of transformation
takes place both in the universe and
in (organic) bodies, and then after
cooling appears there (in the universe)
as moisture, and here takes the form
of urine, but the transformation
(άνδανμίδσις[6]) from the food causes
the smell of that from which it has
arisen by mixing with it?...” (162-163)
  

        On p. 221 ff.[7] Lassalle quotes Plu-
tarch, who says with regard to Heraclitus:
  







        “in the same way as everything is created
by transformation out of fire, so also fire
out of everything, just as we obtain things
  





  Heraclitus on
  gold and
  commodities
  






for gold and gold for things....”
  

        In this connection, Lassalle writes about
value (Wert) (p. 223 
N B) |and about
Function des Geldes|[8], expounding it
in the Hegelian manner (as “separated
  







abstract unity”) and adding: ...“that this
unity, money, is not something actual, but
something merely ideal (Lassalle’s italics)
is evident from the fact,” etc.
  





  incorrect
(Lassalle’s
  idealism)





 






        (But all the same NB that this was
written in a book that appeared in 1858,
the preface being dated August 1857.)
  

    In note 3 on p. 224 (pp. 224-225) Las-
salle speaks in still greater detail about
money, saying that Heraclitus was no “po-
litical economist,” that money is ((only(??)))
a Wertzeichen,[9] etc., etc. (“all money is
merely the ideal unity or expression of
    value of all real products in circulation”)
(224), etc.
  




    Since Lassalle here speaks vaguely
of moderne Entdeckungen auf diesem
Gebiet[10]—the theory of value and
money, it can be assumed that he has
precisely in mind conversations with
Marx and letters from him.
  




    On pp. 225-228. Lassalle reproduces
a long passage from Plutarch, proving
further (convincingly) that it is indeed
    Heraclitus who is referred to, and that Plu-
tarch here expounds “the basic features
of the speculative theology of Heraclitus”
(p. 228).
  

    The passage is a good one: it conveys
the spirit of Greek philosophy, the na-
ïveté, profundity, the flowing transitions.
  




    Lassalle reads into Heraclitus even
a whole system of theology and “objec-   
tive logic” (sic!!), etc.—in short, Hegel
    “apropos of” Heraclitus!!
  



  
   




    An infinite number of times (truly
wearisomely) Lassalle emphasises and
rehashes the idea that Heraclitus not only
recognises motion in everything, that his
principle is motion or becoming (Wer-
den), but that the whole point lies in
understanding “the processing identity of
    absolute (schlechthin) opposites” (p. 289
and many others); Lassalle, so to speak,
hammers into the reader’s head
    the Hegelian thought that in abstract con-
cepts (and in the system of them) the
principle of motion cannot be expressed
    otherwise than as the principle of the
identity of opposites. Motion and
Werden, generally speaking, can be with-
out repetition, without return to the
point of departure, and then  such
motion would not be an “identity of
opposites.” But astronomical and me-
chanical (terrestrial) motion, and the
life of plants, animals and man—all this
has hammered into the heads of man-
kind not merely the idea of motion,
but motion precisely with a return to
the point of departure, i.e., dialectical
motion.
  




    This is naïvely and delightfully expressed
in the famous formula (or aphorism)
of Heraclitus: “it is impossible to bathe
twice in the same river”—actually, how-
ever (as had already been said by Cratylus,
a disciple of Heraclitus), it cannot be done
even once (for before the whole body has
entered the water, the latter is already
not the same as before).
  

    (NB:) This Cratylus reduced Heraclitus’
dialectics to sophistry, pp. 294-295 and
many others, by saying: nothing is true,
nothing can be said about anything. A neg-
ative (and merely negative) conclusion
from dialectics. Heraclitus, on the other
hand, had the principle: “everything is true,”
there is (a part of) truth in everything. Cra-
tylus merely “wagged his finger” in answer to
everything, thereby showing that everything
moves, that nothing can be said of anything.
  




    Lassalle in this work has no
sense of moderation, absolutely
drowning Heraclitus in He-
gel. It is a pity. Heraclitus in
moderation, as one of the
founders of dialectics, would be
extremely useful: the 850 pages
of Lassalle should be compressed
into 85 pages of quintessence and
translated into Russian: “Hera-
clitus as one of the founders of dia-
    lectics (according to Lassalle).”
Something useful could result!
  




    The basic law of the world, according
to Heraclitus (λόγος,[11] sometimes είμαρ-
μένη[12]), is “the law of transformation into
the opposite” (p. 327) (=  ένγντιοτροπή,
έναντιοδρομία).
  

    Lassalle expounded the meaning of
είμαρμένη as the “law of development”
(p. 333), quoting, inter alia,
       the words of Nemesius: “Democritus, Her-
aclitus and Epicurus assume that neither
for the universal nor for the particular
does foresight exist” (ibidem).
  





 






    And the words of Heraclitus: “The world
was created by none of the Gods or men,
but is eternally living fire and will al-
ways be so” (ibidem).
  








 









    It is strange that, in rehashing the
religious philosophy of Heraclitus, Las-
salle does not once quote or mention
Feuerbach! What was Lassalle’s atti-
tude in general to Feuerbach? That
of an idealist Hegelian?
  




    Hence Philo said of Heraclitus’ doctrine,
  







    ...“that it” (die Lehre[13]), “like that
of the Stoics, derives everything from
the world, and brings it into the
world, but does not believe that any-
thing came from God.” (334) An exam-
  





  NB
  






ple of “touching up” as Hegelian:
  

    Lassalle translates the famous passage
of Heraclitus (according to Stobaeus) on
“Das Eine Weise”[14] (έν 
σοφόν) as follows:
  







    “However many discourses I have
heard, no one has succeeded in recog-
nising that the wise is that which
is separated from all (i.e., from all
that exists)” (344)
—considering that the words “beast
or god” are an insertion, and rejecting
the translations of Ritter (“wisdom
is remote from all”) (344) and Schleier-
macher “the wise is separated from
all,” in the sense of “cognition” dis-
tinct from the knowledge of partic-
ulars.
  

    According to Lassalle the meaning
of this passage is as follows:
that “the absolute (the wise) is alien
to all sensuous determinate being, that
it is the negative” (349)—i.e., Nega-
tive = the principle of negation, the
principle of motion. A clear misrep-
resentation as Hegelian! Reading He-
gel into Heraclitus.
  




    A mass of details on the (exter-
nal) connection between Heracli-
tus and Persian theology, Ormazd-
Ahriman,[15] 
and the theory of mag-
ic, etc., etc., etc.
  




    Heraclitus said: “time is a body” (p.
358)... this, Lassalle says, is in the sense
of the unity of being and nothing. Time
is the pure unity of Being and not-Be-
ing, etc.!
  

Fire for Heraclitus, it is said = the
principle of motion |and not simply fire|,
something similar is fire in the teaching
of Persian philosophy (and religion)! (362)
  

    If Heraclitus was the first to use the
term λόγος (“word”) in the objective sense
(law), this, too, is said to be taken from
the Persian religion.... (364)
  

    — A quotation from the Zend-Avesta.[16]
(367)
  

    In § 17 on the relation between Δίχη[17]
    and είμαρμένη, Lassalle interprets these
    ideas of Heraclitus in the sense of “ne-
    cessity,” “connection.” (376)
  




    NB: “the bond of all things” (δεσός
    άπάντων) (p. 379)
  




    Plato (in the Theaetetus) is al-
leged to express the Heraclitean philosophy
when he says:
  

    “Necessity binds together the essential-
ity of Being....”
  

    “Heraclitus is ... the source of the con-
ception, common among the Stoics, that
    είμαρμένη rerum omnium necessitas,[18] ex-
presses bond and ligation, illigatio....”
(376)
  

    Cicero:
     “I, however, call fate what the Greeks
call είμαρμένη, i.e., the order and sequence
of causes, when one cause linked with
    another produces the phenomenon out of
itself” (p. 377).
  




    Thousands of years have passed
since the time when the idea was
born of “the connection of all
things,” “the chain of causes.” A
comparison of how these causes
have been understood in the his-
tory of human thought would give
an indisputably conclusive theory
of knowledge.
  




    Volume II.
  

    Speaking of “fire,” Lassalle proves,
by repeating himself a thousand times over,
that this is a “principle” for Heraclitus.
He insists especially on the idealism of
    Heraclitus (p. 2 5—that the principle of
development, des Werdens,[19] in Heracli-
tus is logisch-präexistent,[20] that his phi-
losophy = Idealphilosophie.[21] Sic!!)
(p. 25).
  

    ((Squeezing into Hegelian!))
  

    Heraclitus accepted “pure and absolute-
ly immaterial fire” (p. 28 Timaeus, on
Heraclitus)....
  

    On p. 56 (Vol. II) Lassalle introduces
  







a quotation |from Clemens Al.,[22] Stro-
mata V; Chapter 14| about Heraclitus,
    which, translated literally, reads:
  








    “The world, an entity out of everything,
was created by none of the gods or men,
but was, is and will be eternally living
fire, regularly becoming ignited and reg-
ularly becoming extinguished....”
  





   
NB





 






    A very good exposition of the principles
of dialectical materialism. But on p. 58
    Lassalle provides the following “freie Über-
setzung”[23] of this passage:
  

    “The world — — was, is and will be con-
tinuous becoming, being constantly, but in
varying measure, transformed from Being
into (proceeding) not-Being, and from the
latter into (proceeding) Being.”
  

    An excellent example how Lassalle
verballhornt[24] Heraclitus, representing
him as Hegelian, spoiling the liveliness,
freshness, naïveté and historical integ-
rity of Heraclitus by misrepresenting
    him as Hegelian (and in order to achieve
this misrepresentation Lassalle presents
a rehash of Hegel for dozens of pages).
  

    The second section of the second part
(“Physics,” pp. 1 - 262!!!, Vol. II) is ab-
solutely intolerable. A farthingsworth of
Heraclitus, and a shillingsworth of
rehash of Hegel and of misrepresentation.
One can only leaf through the pages—in
order to say that it should not be read!
  

From Section III (“The Doctrine of Cog-
nition”) a quotation from Philo:
  







    “For the One is that which consists of
two opposites, so that when cut into two
  





  NB
  






    the opposites are revealed. Is not this the
proposition which the Greeks say their
great and famous Heraclitus placed at the
    head of his philosophy and gloried in as
a new discovery....” ((265))
  





  NB
   
  




 






    And the following quotation also from
Philo:
      







    ...“In the same way, too, the parts of
the world are divided into two and mutual-
ly counterposed: the earth—into moun-
  








tains and plains, water—into fresh and
salt.... In the same way, too, the atmos-
    phere into winter and summer, and like-
  







wise spring and autumn. And this served
Heraclitus as the material for his books
on nature: borrowing from our theologian
  





NB







the aphorism about opposites, he added
  










    to it innumerable and laboriously worked-
out examples (Belege)” (p. 267).
  









    According to Heraclitus the criterion
of truth is not the consensus omnium, not
the agreement of all (p. 285)—in that case
he would be a subjectiver Empiriker[25]
(p. 284). No, he is an objectiver Idealist[26]
(285). For him, the criterion of truth,
independent of the subjective opinion of
all men, is agreement with the ideal law
of the identity of Being and not-Being
    (285).
  



      Cf. Marx 1845
in his theses on
Feuerbach![27]
    Lassalle is here
reactionary.
  



        Here it is clear-
ly seen that Lassal-
le is a Hegelian of
the old type, an
idealist.
  



    On p. 337, quoting, inter alia, Büch-
ner (note 1), Lassalle says that Her-
aclitus expressed a priori “the very
same thought” as “modern physiology”
(“thought is a movement of matter”).
  




    An obvious exaggeration. In the
quotations about Heraclitus it is
    merely said that the soul is also
a process of transformation—that
which moves is known by that which
moves.
  




    A quotation from Chalcidius (in Ti-
maeus):
     ...“Heraclitus, however, links our rea-
son with the divine reason that guides
and rules the world, and says that, on
account of inseparable accompaniment, it,
too, possesses knowledge of the governing
decree of reason and, when the mind rests
from the activity of the senses, it predicts
the future” (p. 342).
  

    From Clemens (Stromata V.):
         ...“owing to its incredibility it—namely,
the truth—escapes from becoming cog-
nised....” (347)
  

    Heraclitus, Lassalle says, is “the father
of objective logic” (p. 351), for in him
“natural philosophy” umschlägt[28] into the
philosophy of thought, “thought is recognised
as the principle of existence” (350), etc., etc.
à la Hegel.... The moment of subjectivity
is said to be lacking in Heraclitus....
  



  § 36. “Plato’s Cratylus”,[29]
  pp. 373-396
  



    In the § on “Cratylus,” Lassalle proves
that in this dialogue of Plato’s Cratylus
is represented (not yet as a sophist and
subjectivist as he subsequently became,
but) as a true disciple of Heraclitus, who
really expounded his, Heraclitus’, theory
of the essence and origin of words and
language as an imitation of nature
(“imitation of the essence of things,” p. 388),
the essence of things, “the imitation and
copy of God,” “imitation of God and the
    universe” (ibidem).
 
  





Ergo:
T h e   h i s t o r y  o f  
  p h i l o s o p h y            



Greek
Philos-
ophy
indicated
all
these
moments
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



  ”      ”   the separate sciences
  ”      ”   the mental development
              of the child
  ”      ”   the mental development 
              of animals
  ”      ”   l a n g u a g e  NB:
   

  + psychology   
  + physiology   
  of the sense    
  o r g a n s       



   
  these are
  the fields of
  knowlege
  from which
  the theory
  of knowl-
  edge and
  dialectics
  should be
  built
   
  


kurz,[30] the
history of
cognition
in general
    



   



the whole
field of
knowledge
    






   




    ...“We have shown—says Lassalle—that
the” (above-mentioned) “conceptual iden-
tity (precisely identity, and not merely
analogy) between word, name and law is
in every respect a principled view of the
Heraclitean philosophy and of fundamental
importance and significance in it....” (393)
  



 




    ...“Names are for him” (Heraclitus) “laws
of being, they are for him the common
element of things, just as for him laws
    are the ‘common element of all’”.... (394)
  





  NB
  


 




    And it is precisely Heraclilean ideas
that Hippocrates expresses when he
says:
         “Names are the laws of nature.”
  





  very
  important!
   
  NB
  


 




    “For both laws and names are for the
Ephesian ... equally merely products and
realisations of the universal, both are for
    him the achieved, purely universal, ideal
being, freed from the stain of sensuous
reality....” (394)
  

    Plato analyses and refutes the philos-
ophy of Heraclitus in his “Cratylus”
and “Theaetetus,” and in so doing
(especially in the latter) he confuses Heracli-
tus (the objective idealist and dialectician)
with the subjective idealist and sophist
Protagoras (man is the measure of all
things). And Lassalle proves that in the
    development of ideas there has actually
stemmed from Heraclitus 1) sophistry (Pro-
tagoras) and 2) Platonism, the “ideas”
    (objective idealism).
  




    One gets the impression that Las-
salle, the idealist, left in the shade
the materialism or materialistic
tendencies of Heraclitus, misrepre-
senting him as Hegelian.
  




    (IV. Ethik, pp. 427-462.)
    In the section on ethics—nil.
  

    On pp. 458-459 Lassalle writes that Ne-
mesios said that Heraclitus and Demo-
critus denied prevision (προνοίαν), whereas
Cicero (De Fato) said that Heraclitus, as
also Democritus and others (including Aris-
totle), recognised fatum—necessity.
  



 




    ...“This fatum is intended to signify only
the immanent natural necessity belonging
to the object, its natural law....” (459)
  





  Naturnot-
  wendigkeit[31]
  in Lassalle
  


 




    (The Stoics, according to Lassalle, took
everything from Heraclitus, making
him banal and one-sided, p. 461.)
  




    The index to Lassalle’s book is
compiled in a learned, pedantic
manner, but senselessly; a heap of
names of the ancients, etc., etc.
  




    In general, ΣΣ,[32] Marx’s judgment is
correct, Lassalle’s book is not worth read-
ing.
  




 


Notes
[1] Hegel,
  Werke, Bd. XIII, Berlin, 1833.—Ed.
[2] Reference is being made to the conspectus of Hegel’s
  work Lectures 
  on the History Of Philosophy, in which Lenin makes 
  this quotation. (See p. 259 of this volume.)—Ed.
[3] Lenin is referring to a 
  letter from Marx to Engels dated February 1, 1858 (see Marx and Engels, 
  Selected Correspondence,
  Moscow, 1955, pp. 121-123).
[4] industrious—Ed.
[5] V. I. Lenin wrote the word “garlic” 
  above the word “Knoblauch.”—Ed.
[6] evaporation—Ed.
[7] et. seq.—Ed.
[8] function of money—Ed.
[9] token of value—Ed.
[10] modern discoveries in this field—Ed.
[11] logos—Ed.
[12] necessity—Ed.
[13] the doctrine—Ed.
[14] “the One Wise”—Ed.
[15] Ahriman—the Greek name for the 
  ancient Persian God personifying the source of evil, an eternal and irreconcilable
  enemy of his brother Ormazd, the Good Spirit.
[16] Zend-Avesta—the designation for the ancient 
  Persian religious books expounding the Zoroastrian religion founded, according 
  to legend, by the prophet Zarathustra (Zoroaster).
[17] justice—Ed.
[18] necessity of all things—Ed.
[19] of becoming—Ed.
[20] logically pre-existent—Ed.
[21] idealistic philosophy—Ed.
[22] Clement of Alexandria—Ed.
[23] free translation—Ed.
[24] corrects (ironic)—Ed.
[25] subjective empiricist—Ed.
[26] objective idealist—Ed.
[27] Lenin is referring to Theses on Feuerbach
  by Marx written in 1845 (see Marx and Engels, Selected Works, Vol. II,
  Moscow, 1958, pp. 403-405).
[28] is transformed—Ed.
[29] Cratylus—Plato’s dialogue, 
  directed against the Sophists.
[30] briefly—Ed.
[31] natural necessity—Ed.
[32] summa summarum—Ed.
 






Works Index
    |   
  Volume 38

 | 

Collected Works
    |   L.I.A. Index




  < backward




  forward >





 



==========

## On the Question of Dialectics











On the Question of Dialectics



Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
On the Question of Dialectics


Written: 1915
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th Edition, Moscow, 1976,
  Volume 38, pp. 357-361
Publisher: Progress Publishers
First Published: 1925 in Bolshevik, No. 5-6
Translated: Clemence Dutt
Edited: Stewart Smith
Original Transcription & Markup: R. Cymbala & 
  Marc Szewczyk
Re-Marked up & Proofread by: K. Goins (2007)
Public Domain: Lenin Internet Archive (2003). 
  You may freely copy, distribute, display and 
  perform this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. 
  Please credit “Marxists Internet
  Archive” as your source.

The fragment On the Question of Dialectics 
  is contained in a notebook between the conspectus of Lassalle’s book
  on Heraclitus and the conspectus of Aristotle’s Metaphysics.
  Written in 1915 in Bern.
   
  Note that this document has undergone special formating to ensure that 
  Lenin’s sidenotes fit on the page, marking as best as possible 
  where they were located in the original manuscript. 


 

The splitting of a single whole and the cognition 
  of its contradictory parts (see the quotation from Philo on Heraclitus 
  at the beginning of Section III, “On Cognition,” in Lasalle’s 
  book on Heraclitus[1]) 
  is the essence (one of the “essentials,” 
  one of the principal, if not the principal, characteristics or features) 
  of dialectics. That is precisely how Hegel, 
  too, puts the matter (Aristotle in 
  his Metaphysics continually grapples with
  it and combats Heraclitus and Heraclitean ideas).
    

  The correctness of this aspect of the content of dialectics
  must be tested by the history of science. This aspect of dialectics
  (e.g. in Plekhanov)
  usually receives inadequate attention: the
  identity of opposites is taken as the sum-total of
  examples [“for example, a 
  seed,” “for example, primitive
  communism.” The same is true of Engels. But it is
  “in the interests of popularisation...”] and not
  as a law of cognition (and as a law of the
  objective world).
    




  In mathematics: + and —. Differential and integral.
  In mechanics: action and reaction.
  In physics: positive and negative electricity.
  In chemistry: the combination and dissociation of atoms.
  In social science: the class struggle.




      The identity of
  opposites (it would be more correct, perhaps, to say their 
  “unity,”—although
  the difference between the terms identity and unity is not
      particularly important here. In a certain sense both are
      correct) is the recognition (discovery) of the contradictory,
      mutually exclusive,
  opposite tendencies 
  in all phenomena
      and processes of nature (including mind and society). The
      condition for the knowledge of all processes of the world in 
  their “self-movement,” in their
  spontaneous development, in their real life, is the knowledge of them as a
      unity of opposites. Development is the “struggle” of
      opposites. The two basic (or two possible? Or two historically
      observable?) conceptions of development (evolution) are:
      development as decrease and increase, as repetition, and
      development as a unity of opposites (the division of a unity
      into mutually exclusive opposites and their reciprocal
      relation).


  In the first conception of motion,
      self - movement, its driving force, its source, its motive, remains 
  in the shade (or this source is made external—God, subject,
  etc.). In the second conception the chief attention is directed precisely
  to knowledge of the source of “self”
  - movement.


      The first conception is lifeless, pale and dry. The second is
      living. The second alone furnishes the key to
  the “self-movement” of everything existing; it alone furnishes
  the key to “leaps,” to the “break in continuity,”
  to the “transformation into the opposite,” to the destruction 
  of the old and the emergence of the new.


      The unity (coincidence, identity, equal action) of opposites is
      conditional, temporary, transitory, relative. The struggle of
      mutually exclusive opposites is absolute, just as development
      and motion are absolute.






NB: The distinction between subjectivism (scepticism, sophistry,
      etc.) and dialectics, incidentally, is that in (objective)
      dialectics the difference between the relative and the absolute is itself
      relative. For objective dialectics there is an
      absolute within the relative. For subjectivism and sophistry 
  the relative is only relative and excludes the absolute.
    




  In his Capital, 
  Marx first analyses the simplest, most
  ordinary and fundamental, most common and everyday relation
  of bourgeois (commodity) society, a relation encountered billions
  of times, viz., the exchange of commodities. In this very simple
  phenomenon (in this “cell” of bourgeois society) analysis
  reveals all the contradictions (or 
  the germs of all
  contradictions) of modern society. The subsequent exposition
  shows us the development (both growth and movement) of
  these contradictions and of this society in the Σ[2] of its
  individual parts. From its beginning to its end.


      Such must also be the method of exposition (i.e., study) of dialectics
      in general (for with Marx the dialectics of bourgeois society
      is only a particular case of dialectics). To begin with what is
      the simplest, most ordinary, common, etc., with any proposition:
      the leaves of a tree are green; John is a man: Fido is a dog,
      etc. Here already we have dialectics (as Hegel’s genius
      recognised): the individual is the universal.
  (cf. Aristoteles, Metaphisik, translation by Schegler, Bd. II, S. 40, 3.
  Buch, 4. Kapitel, 8-9: “denn natürlich kann man nicht der Meinung sin, 
  daß es ein Haus (a house in general) gebe außer den sichtbaren 
  Häusern,” “ού γρ άν 
  ΰείημεν είναί
  τινα οίχίαν παρα
  τχς τινάς 
  οίχίας”).[3] Consequently, the opposites (the individual 
  is opposed to the universal) are identical: the individual exists only in the 
  connection that leads to the universal. The universal exists only in the
      individual and through the individual. Every individual is (in
      one way or another) a universal. Every universal is (a fragment,
      or an aspect, or the essence of) an individual. Every universal
      only approximately embraces all the individual objects. Every
      individual enters incompletely into the universal, etc., etc.
      Every individual is connected by thousands of transitions with
      other kinds of individuals (things, phenomena, processes) etc.
  Here already we have the elements, the germs, the
      concepts of necessity, of objective connection in nature,
      etc. Here already we have the contingent and the necessary, the phenomenon
      and the essence; for when we say: John is a man, Fido is a dog,
      this is a leaf of a tree, etc., we disregard a
      number of attributes as contingent; we separate the essence from
      the appearance, and counterpose the one to the other.


  Thus in any proposition we can (and must) disclose as in a “nucleus”
  (“cell”) the germs of all the elements of dialectics,
  and thereby
  show that dialectics is a property of all human knowledge in general.
      And natural science shows us (and here again it must be
      demonstrated in any simple instance) objective nature
      with the same qualities, the transformation of the individual
      into the universal, of the contingent into the necessary,
      transitions, modulations, and the reciprocal connection of
      opposites. Dialectics is the theory of knowledge of
      (Hegel and) Marxism. This is the “aspect” of the
      matter (it is not “an aspect” but the essence
      of the matter) to which Plekhanov, not to speak of other
      Marxists, paid no attention.
    
*  *  *

      Knowledge is represented in the form of a series of circles both
      by Hegel (see Logic) 
  and by the modern “epistemologist”
  of natural science, the eclectic and foe of Hegelianism (which he did not
  understand!), Paul Volkmann (see his Erkenntnistheorische Grundzüge,[4] S.)
    





      “Circles” in philosophy: [is a chronology of persons
  essential? No!]

      Ancient: from Democritus to Plato and the dialectics
  of Heraclitus.
      
      Renaissance: Descartes 
  versus Gassendi (Spinoza?)
      Modern:   Holbach—Hegel   (via   Berkeley,   Hume, 
  Kant). Hegel—Feuerbach—Marx





      Dialectics as living, many-sided knowledge (with the number
      of sides eternally increasing), with an infinite number of shades
      of every approach and approximation to reality (with a philosophical
      system growing into a whole out of each shade)—here we have
      an immeasurably rich content as compared with “metaphysical”
  materialism, 
  the fundamental misfortune of which is its inability to
      apply dialectics to the Bildertheorie,[5] to the process and
      development of knowledge.





Philosophical idealism
  is only nonsense from the stand-
  point of crude, simple, metaphysical materialism. From
  the standpoint of dialectical materialism, on the other
  hand, philosophical idealism is a one-sided, exaggerated,
  überschwengliches (Dietzgen)[6] development (inflation,
  distension) of one of the features, aspects, facets of  knowl-
  edge, into an absolute, divorced from matter, from nature,







  apotheosised. Idealism is clerical obscurantism. True. But
  philosophical idealism is (“more 
  correctly” and
  “in addition”) a road to
  clerical obscurantism
through one of the shades of the infinitely com-
  plex knowledge (dialectical) of man.





  NB
  this
   aphor-
  ism




Human knowledge is not (or does not follow) a 
  straight line, but a curve, which endlessly approximates a series of 
  circles, a spiral.  Any fragment, segment, section of this curve can be
      transformed (transformed one-sidedly) into an independent,
      complete, straight line, which then (if one does not see the
      wood for the trees) leads into the quagmire, into clerical
      obscurantism (where it is anchored by 
  the class interests of the ruling classes).  Rectilinearity and one-sidedness,
      woodenness and petrification, subjectivism and subjective
      blindness—voilà the epistemological roots of idealism. And
      clerical obscrutantism (= philosophical idealism), of course,
      has epistemological roots, it is not groundless; it is a
      sterile flower undoubtedly, but a sterile flower that
      grows on the living tree of living, fertile, genuine, powerful,
      omnipotent, objective, absolute human knowledge.

 

Notes
[1] See p. 348 
  of this volume—Ed.
[2] summation—Ed.
[3] “for, of course, one cannot hold the opinion 
  that there can be a house (in general) apart from visible houses.”—Ed.
[4] P. Volkmann, Erkenntnistheorische Grundzüge der 
  Naturwissenschaften, Leipzig-Berlin, 1910, p. 35.—Ed.
[5] theory of reflection—Ed.
[6] The reference to the use by Josef Dietzgen of the term
  “überschwenglich,” which means: exaggerated, excessive, infinite;
  for example, in the book Kleinere philosophische Schriften (Minor Philosophical
  Writings), Stuttgart, 1903, p. 204, Dietzgen uses this term as follows: 
  “absolute and relative are not infinitely separated.”
 






Works Index
    |   
  Volume 38

 | 

Collected Works
    |   L.I.A. Index





  < backward




  forward >





 




==========

## Conspectus of Aristotle’s Book Metaphysics











Lenin's Conspectus of Aristotle's Book ÂMetaphysicsÂ



Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Conspectus of Aristotle’s Book Metaphysics

Written: 1915
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th Edition, Moscow, 1976,
  Volume 38, pp. 363-372
Publisher: Progress Publishers
First Published: 1930 in Lenin Miscellany XII.
  Published according to the manuscript
Translated: Clemence Dutt
Edited: Stewart Smith
Original Transcription & Markup: Kevin Goins (2008)
Public Domain: Lenin Internet Archive (2008). You may freely copy, distribute, display and 
  perform this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. 
  Please credit “Marxists Internet Archive” as your source.

Conspectus of Aristotle’s book “Metaphysics”
      is contained in a notebook directly following the fragment “On the 
  Question of Dialectics.” The book was published by Schwegler in Greek 
  with a Germantranslation.
   
  Note that this document has undergone special formating to ensure that 
  Lenin’s sidenotes fit on the page, marking as best as possible 
  where they were located in the original manuscript. 
  

 

ARISTOTLE. THE METAPHYSICS
        TRANSLATED BY A. SCHWEGLER.
        TWO VOLUMES
TÜBINGEN, 1847




        See above, quotation about “house.”[1]


A mass of extremely interesting, lively,
naïve (fresh) matter which introduces
philosophy and is replaced in the exposi-
tions by scholasticism, by the result without
movement, etc.
  

        Clericalism killed what was living in
Aristotle and perpetuated what was dead.
  

         “But man and horse, etc., exist as individ-
 uals, a universal for itself does not exist
        as an individual substance, but only as
        a whole composed of a definite concept and
  





        definite matter” (p. 125, Book 7, Chapter 
10, 27-28).
  

    Ibidem, p. 126, §§ 32-33:
  

    ...“Matter is in itself unknowable. Some
matter is sensible and some intelligible;
sensible, such as bronze and wood, in a
word, all movable matter; intelligible, that 
which is present in sensible things not
qua sensible, e.g., the objects of mathe-
  








Philosophy is
        often divert-
ed by the
definition of
words, etc.
Every-
thing, all
categories are
affected
    







    matics....”
  

    Highly characteristic and profoundly in-
teresting (in the beginning of the Meta-
physics) are the polemic with Plato and
        the “puzzling” questions, delightful for
their naïveté, and Bedenken[2] regarding
the nonsense of idealism. And all this
along with the most helpless confusion
about the fundamental, the concept and
the particular.
  

NB: At the beginning of The Metaphysics
the stubborn struggle against Her-
aclitus, against his idea of the identity of
Being and not-Being (the Greek philos-
ophers approached close to dialectics but
could not cope with it). Highly character-
istic in general, throughout the whole
book, passim,[3] are the living germs of
dialectics and inquiries about it....
  

    In Aristotle, objective logic is every-
where confused with subjective logic and,
moreover, in such a way that everywhere
    objective logic is visible. There is no
doubt as to the objectivity of cognition.
There is a naïve faith in the power of
    reason, in the force, power, objective truth
of cognition. And a naïve confusion, a
helplessly pitiful confusion in the dia-
lectics of the universal and the par-
    ticular—of the concept and the sensuously
perceptible reality of individual objects,
things, phenomena.
  

    Scholasticism and clericalism took what
was dead in Aristotle, but not what was
living; the inquiries, the search-
    ings, the labyrinth, in which man lost
his way.
  

    Aristotle’s logic is an inquiry, a search-
ing, an approach to the logic of Hegel—
and it, the logic of Aristotle (who every-
where, at every step, raises precisely
the question of dialectics), has been
made into a dead scholasticism by reject-
ing all the searchings, waverings and modes
of framing questions. What the Greeks
had was precisely modes of framing ques-
tions, as it were tentative systems, a naïve
discordance of views, excellently reflected
in Aristotle.
  



 




...“Hence it is clear that no universal
exists next to and in separation from its
particulars. The exponents of the Forms are
partly right in their account when they
make the Forms separate; for the Forms
are particular substances, but they are
  






wrong in considering the one-over-many
  





as form. The reason for this is that they
cannot explain what are the imperishable
substances of this kind which exist beside
and outside particular sensible substances;
so they make the forms the same in kind as
  





   
!





perishable things (for these we know); i.e.,
  





they make Ideal Man and Ideal Horse, add-
ing the word ‘Ideal’ to the names of sensible
things # (p. 136, Book 7, Ch. 16, § 8-12) 
#.
  





!





However, I presume that even if we had
never seen the stars, nonetheless there
would be eternal substances besides those
  





which we knew; and so in the present case
even if we cannot apprehend what they
are, still they must be in existence. It is
  






clear, then, both that no universal term
is particular substance and that no par-
ticular substance is composed of particular
substances (ούσία)” (— § 13 at the end of
the chapter).
  




    Delightful! There are no doubts of the
reality of the external world. The man
gets into a muddle precisely over the
dialectics of the universal and the par-
ticular, of concept and sensation, etc.,
    of essence and phenomenon, etc.
  




    (P. 146, Book 8—can it have been
inserted afterwards?—Chapter 5, § 2-3).
  

    ...“There is a difficulty in the question
(άπορία) how the matter of the individual
  





is related to the contraries. For example,
    if the body is potentially (δυνάμει) healthy,
    and the contrary of health is disease, is
not the body potentially both healthy and
diseased?...
  





   
  NB
  


 




    ...“Further, is not the living man poten-
tially (δυνάμει) dead?”
  

    (P. 481), Book 11, Chapter 1, § 12-14:
  

    ...“They” (the philosophers) “posit the
    objects of mathematics as intermediate be-
  





tween the Forms and sensible things, as
a third class besides the Forms and the
things of our world. But there is no third
man or horse besides the Ideal one and
the particulars. If on the other hand it is
not as they make out, what sort of ob-
jects are we to suppose to be the concern
of the mathematician? Not surely the things
of our world; for none of these is of the
kind which the mathematical sciences in-
    vestigate....”
  




 




    Ibidem, Chapter 2, § 21-23:
  

    ...“Again, is there anything besides the
concrete whole (I mean by this matter
and the material) or not? If not, all things
are perishable, at least everything mate-
rial is perishable; but if there is something,
it must be the form or shape. It is hard
to determine in what cases this is possible
and in what it is not....”
  

    Pp. 185-186, Book 11, Chapter 3, § 12—
mathematics sets aside heat, weight and
other “sensible contrarieties,” and has in
mind “only quantity”... “it is the same
    with regard to Being.”
  




    Here we have the point of view of
dialectical materialism, but accidental-
ly, not consistently, not elaborated, in
passing.
  




    Windelband in his sketch of the history
of ancient philosophy (Müller’s Handbuch
der klassisehen Altertums-wissensehaft,
V, I, S. 265) (Reading room of the Bern Li-
brary) stresses that in Aristotle’s logic
(die Logik) “has as its most general pre-
mise the identity of the forms of thought
with those of Being,” and he quotes Metaph-
    ysik, V, 7: “δσαχώς
λέγεται τοσαχώς
τό εϊναι 
σημαίνει.” That is § 4. Schwegler
translates it: “Denn so vielfach die Ka-
tegorien ausgesagt werden, so vielfach be-
zeichnen sie em Sein.”[4] A bad translation.
  

    An approach to God:
  

Book 12, Chapter 6, § 10-11:


    ...“For how can there be motion if there
is no actual cause? Wood will not move
itself—carpentry must act upon it; nor
will the menses or the earth move them-
selves—the seeds must act upon the earth,
and the semen on the menses....”
  

    Leucippus (idem, § 14) accepts eternal
motion, but he does not explain why
    (§ 11).
  

    Chapter 7, § 11-19—God (p. 213).
    ...“Eternal motion must be excited by
something ... eternal” (Chapter 8, § 4)...
  

Book 12, Chapter 10—again a
    “re-examination” of the fundamental ques-
tions of philosophy; “interrogation marks,”
so to speak. A very fresh, naïve, doubting
exposition (often hints) of various points
of view.
  

In Book 13 Aristotle again returns
to a criticism of Pythagoras’ theory of
numbers (and Plato’s theory of ideas),
independent of sensible things.
  



 




[[ Primitive idealism: the universal (con-
cept, idea) is a particular being.
This appears wild, monstrously (more accu-
    rately, childishly) stupid. But is not
modern idealism, Kant, Hegel, the idea
of God, of the same nature. (absolutely
of the same nature)? Tables, chairs and
the ideas of table and chair; the world
and the idea of the world (God); thing
and “noumen,” the unknowable “Thing-
in-itself”; the connection of the earth and
the sun, nature in general—and law, λόγος,[5]
God. The dichotomy of human knowledge
and the possibility of idealism (= religion)
are given already in the first, elemen-
tary abstraction
  



        “house” in general and particular houses
      







   
   
   
   
NB
   
NB



 




    The approach of the (human) mind to
a particular thing, the taking of a copy
    (= a concept) of it is not a simple,
immediate act, a dead mirroring, but one
which is complex, split into two, zig-zag-
like, which includes in it the possibility
of the flight of fantasy from life; more
than that: the possibility of the transfor-
    mation (moreover, an unnoticeable trans-
formation, of which man is unaware) of
the abstract concept, idea, into a fantasy
(in letzter Instanz[6] = God). For even in
the simplest generalisation, in the most
elementary general idea (“table” in gen-
eral), there is a certain bit of fantasy.
    (Vice versa: it would be stupid to deny
the role of fantasy, even in the strictest
science: cf. Pisarev on useful dreaming,
as an impulse to work, and on empty day-
dreaming.)[7]


    Naïve expression of the “difficulties” of
the “philosophy of mathematics” (to use
modern language): Book 13, Chapter 2, § 23:
         ...“Further, body is a kind of substance,
since it already in some sense possesses
completeness; but in what sense are lines
    substances? They could not be that, neither
as form or shape as, for instance, the soul,
nor as matter, like the body; for it does
not appear that anything can be composed
either of lines or of planes or of points....”
(p. 224)
  




Book 13, Chapter 3 solves these dif-
    ficulties excellently, distinctly, clearly,
materialistically (mathematics and other
    sciences abstract one of the aspects of
    a body, phenomenon, life). But the au-
    thor does not consistently maintain this
    point of view.
      




    Schwegler in his commentary (Vol. IV,
p. 303) says: Aristotle gives here a positive
  





exposition of “his view of the mathemat-
ical: the mathematical is the abstraction
from the sensuous.”
  





NB



 




    Book 13, Chapter 10 touches on the ques-
tion, which is better expounded by Schweg-
ler in the commentary (in connection with
Metaphysik VII, 13, 5): science is con-
cerned only with the universal (cf. Book 13,
Chapter 10, § 6), but only the particular
is actual (substantial). Does that mean that
there is a gulf between science and real-
ity? Does it mean that Being and thought
are incommensurable? “Is true knowledge
    of reality impossible?” (Schwegler, Vol. IV,
p. 338.) Aristotle answers: potentially
knowledge is directed to the universal,
actually it is directed to the particular.
  

Schwegler (ibidem) describes as höchst
  





    beachtenswert[8] F. Fischer’s work: Die
Metaphysik, von empirischem Standpunkte
aus dargestellt [year of publication (1847)],
    who speaks of Aristotle’s “realism.”
  





#
   



 NB? 






 




    Book 14, Chapter 3, § 7: ...“why is it that
while the mathematical is in no way present
in sensible things, its attributes are pres-
ent in sensible things?”... (p. 254)
  

    (The last sentence of the book, Book 14,
Chapter 6, § 21, has the same meaning.)
  




   
End of The Metaphysics.

   






    Friedrich Fischer (1801-1853), Professor
of philosophy in Basle. An article about
him by Prantl (Allgemeine Deutsche Bio-
    graphie, Vol. 7, p. 67) gives a disparag-
  





#




  
ing account of him and says that “through
    a complete rejection of subjective idealism
he nearly fell into the opposite extreme
of an un-ideal empiricism.”
  





  ha-ha!!!
  


 

Notes
[1] See p. 359 of this 
  volume.—Ed.
[2] doubts—Ed.
[3] everywhere—Ed.
[4] “In as many ways as categories are stated, 
  in so many ways do they denote being.”—Ed.
[5] logos—Ed.
[6] in the final analysis—Ed.
[7] Lenin is referring to the article “Blunders 
  of Immature Thought” by D. I. Pisarev, 
  well-known democratic writer and literary critic.
[8] most valuable—Ed.
 






Works Index
    |   
  Volume 38

 | 

Collected Works
    |   L.I.A. Index




  < backward




  forward >





 



==========

## Note on The Collected Works of Feuerbach and
    Hegel











Note On the Collected Works of Feuerbach and Hegel



Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Note On the Collected Works of
Feuerbach and Hegel

Written: September, 1914
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th Edition, Moscow, 1976,
  Volume 38, p. 373
Publisher: Progress Publishers
First Published: 1930 in Lenin Miscellany XII, p. 24.
  Published according to the manuscript
Translated: Clemence Dutt
Edited: Stewart Smith
Original Transcription & Markup: Kevin Goins (2008)
Public Domain: Lenin Internet Archive (2008). You may freely copy, distribute, display and 
  perform this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. 
  Please credit “Marxists Internet Archive” as your source.

Lenin wrote the list in German on a separate sheet.—Ed.

 




LOG. 536 
  



  Collected
  

  Works of Feuerbach, Bolin’s edition
  



  Vol.       I.
  

  Thoughts on Death and Immortality
  



    ”         II.
  

  Critical Philosophical Notes and Basic Propositions
  



    ”        III.
  

  The History of Modern Philosophy
  



    ”        IV.
  

  The Philosophy of Leibnitz
  



    ”         V.
  

  Pierre Bayle
  



    ”        VI.
  

  The Essence of Christianity
  



    ”       VII.
  

  Notes and Supplements to this book
  



    ”      VIII.
  

  Lectures on the Essence of Religion
  



    ”         IX.
  

  Theogony
  



    ”          X.
  

  Letters on Ethics and Posthumous Aphorisms.
  



     


      



  Log. I. 175
  



  Collected Works of Hegel
  III, IV and V. Logic
  XIX, 1 and 2—Hegel’s Correspondence.
  


 






Works Index
    |   
  Volume 38

 | 

Collected Works
    |   L.I.A. Index




  < backward




  forward >





 



==========

## Conspectus of Feuerbach’s Book Exposition,
  Analysis and Critique of the Philosophy of
    Leibnitz











Conspectus of Feuerbach's Book ÂExposition, Analysis and Critique of the Philosophy of LeibnitzÂ



Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Conspectus of Feuerbach’s Book
Exposition, Analysis and Critique
of the Philosophy of Leibnitz

Written: 
      between September and November 4 (17), 1914
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th Edition, Moscow, 1976,
  Volume 38, pp. 375-387
Publisher: Progress Publishers
First Published: 1930 in Lenin Miscellany XII.
  Published according to the manuscript
Translated: Clemence Dutt
Edited: Stewart Smith
Original Transcription & Markup: Kevin Goins (2008)
Public Domain: Lenin Internet Archive (2008). You may freely copy, distribute, display and 
  perform this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. 
  Please credit “Marxists Internet Archive” as your source.

Conspectus of L. Feuerbach’s book “Darstellung,
    Entwicklung und Kritik der Leibnizschen Philosophie.” Sämtliche 
Werke. Bd. IV, Stuttgart, 1910 (Exposition, Analysis and Critique of the 
Philosophy of Leibnitz, Collected Works, Vol. IV, Stuttgart, 1910) is contained 
in a separate notebook on whose cover is written: “Feuerbach.” The 
conspectus was made in Bern at the end of 1914 or the beginning of 1915.

 
Note that this document has undergone special formating to ensure that 
Lenin’s sidenotes fit on the page, marking as best as possible 
where they were located in the original manuscript. 
  

 
L. FEUERBACH. COLLECTED WORKS, VOL. IV, 1910.
LEIBNITZ
etc.




    In the brilliant exposition of Leibnitz
some especially outstanding passages should
be mentioned (this is not easy, for the
    whole—i.e., the first part (§ 1-13) is out-
standing), and then the supplements
of 1847.









    The book on Leibnitz was
written by Feuerbach in
1836, when he was still
an idealist
  

 



    § 20
§ 21                   
      1847
and separate passages
      





 






P. 27—The feature that distinguishes Leib-
  





nitz from Spinoza: in Leibnitz there
is, in addition to the concept of sub-
stance, the concept of force
“and indeed of active force...” the prin-
ciple of “self-activity” (29)—
  




Ergo, Leibnitz through theology
arrived at the principle of the in-
separable (and universal, absolute)
connection of matter and motion.
So, it seems to me, Feuerbach is
to be understood?
  




p. 32: “Spinoza’s essence is unity, that of






Leibnitz is difference, distinction.”
      

    p. 34: The philosophy of Spinoza is a tele-






scope, that of Leibnitz a micro-
scope.[1]


    “Spinoza’s world is an achromatic lens
of divinity, a medium through which we
see nothing but the colourless celestial
    light of the single substance; Leibnitz’s
world is a many-faceted crystal, a dia-
mond, which by its specific nature mul-
    tiplies the simple light of the substance
into an infinitely varied wealth of colours
and darkens it.” (Sic!)
  

    p. 40: “Consequently, for Leibnitz, corpo-
  





real substance is no longer, as for Des-
cartes, a merely extended dead mass
brought into motion from outside, but
as substance it has within it an active
force, a never-resting, principle of activ-
ity.”
  




    For this, to be sure, Marx valued
Leibnitz,[2] despite his, Leibnitz’s,
“Lassallean” features and his con-
    ciliatory tendencies in politics and
religion.
  




    The monad is the principle of Leibnitz’s
philosophy. Individuality, movement, soul
(of a special kind). Not dead atoms, but
the living, mobile monads, reflecting the
whole world in themselves, possessing (va-
guely) the capacity of sensuous representa-
tion (souls of a certain kind)—such are
the “ultimate elements” (p. 45).
  

    Each monad is different from the others.
 
  





        ...“It would be ... quite contradictory
to the beauty, order and reason of nature
if the principle of life or of its own internal
actions were to be linked only with a small
or special part of matter” (Leibnitz—
p. 45).
  






   
   
NB



 




    “Hence the whole of nature is full of
souls, as the ancient philosophers already
correctly recognised, or at any rate of
beings analogous to souls. For, by means
of the microscope, one finds that there are
a multitude of living beings not visible
to the naked eye, and that there are more
souls than grains of sand and atoms” (Leib-
nitz—p. 45).
  



      cf. electrons!  
      



    Qualities of monads: Vorstellung,[3] Re-
präsentation.
  

    “Sensuous representation itself, however,
is nothing more than the representation
(reproduction in the mind and presenta-
tion) of the complex or the external, i.e.,
of multiplicity in the simple”... or ...
    “the transitory state, which contains and
reproduces multiplicity in unity or simple
substance” (p. 49, Leibnitz)—verworrene[4]
(p. 50) (confuse,[5] p. 52) Vorstellung in
the monads (man also has many uncon-
scious, verworrene, feelings, etc.).
  

    Every monad is “a world for itself, each
    is a self-sufficient unity” (Leibnitz,
    p. 55).
  

    “A mixture of vague conceptions, the
senses are no more than that, matter is no
more than that” (Leibnitz, p. 58).... “Hence
matter is the bond of the monads” (ibi-
    dem)....
  




            My free interpretation:
   Monads = souls of a certain kind.
    Leibnitz = idealist. And matter is
    something in the nature of an other-
    being of soul, or a jelly linking them
by a worldly, fleshly connection.
  




    “Absolute reality, lies only in the mo-
nads and their conceptions” (Leibnitz,
p. 60). Matter is only a phenomenon.
  

    “Clarity is only spirit” (p. 62)... matter,
however, is “unclearness and unfreedom.”
    (64)
  

    Space “in itself is something ideal”
(Leibnitz, pp. 70-71).
  

    ...“The material principle of the diver-
sity of matter is motion....” (72)
  

    “Similarly— Newton and his adherents
to the contrary—there is no empty space
in material nature. The air pump by no
means proves the presence of a vacuum
for the glass has pores through which
all kinds of fine matter can penetrate”
    (Leibnitz, 76-77)....
  

    “Matter is a phenomenon” (Leibnitz, 78).
“The Being-for-itself of the monads is
their soul, their Being-for-others is
matter” (Feuerbach, 78). The human
soul—the central, higher monad, en-
telechy,[6] etc., etc.
  

    “Hence every body is affected by every-
thing that goes on in the universe” (Leib-
nitz, 83).
  

    “The monad represents the whole uni-
verse” (Leibnitz, 83).
  

    “The monad, despite its indivisibility,
possesses a complex impulse, i.e., a mul-
tiplicity of sensuous representations, which
  





    individually strive for their special changes
and which, by virtue of their essential
connection with all other things, at the
same time are found within it....” “Individ-
uality contains the infinite within it, as
it were, in the germ” (Leibnitz, 84).
  









NB
Leibnitz
lived
1646-1716






 







        Here is dialectics of a kind, and very
    profound, despite the idealism and
    clericalism.
      




    “Everything in nature is analogical”
(Leibnitz, 86).
  

    “In general, there is nothing absolutely
  






  ‍
  |
  |
  |
  |
  ↓
  




discrete in nature; all opposites, all bound-
aries of space and time, and kind, vanish
in the face of the absolute continuity, the
infinite interconnection of the universe“
(Feuerbach, 87).
  





 
  NB
   
  


 




    “Owing to its peculiar nature, consisting
solely of nerves and not of flesh and blood,
the monad is influenced and affected by
everything that takes place in the world....”
Nevertheless “it is only a spectator of the
world drama, not an actor. Therein lies
the chief defect of the monads” (Feuer-
    bach, 90).
  

    The conformity of soul and body is a
harmonie préétablie[7] by God.
  




    “The weak side of Leibnitz” (Feuer-
bach, 95).”[8]





    “The soul is a kind of spiritual automa-
ton” (Leibnitz, 98). (And Leibnitz himself
said once that the transition from Occa-
    sionalism[9] to his philosophy is an easy
one, Feuerbach, 100.) But in Leibnitz this
is deduced from the “nature of the soul”....
    (101)
  

    In his Theodicée[10] (§ 17) Leibnitz
essentially repeats the ontological argu-
ment[11] for the existence of God.
  

    In his Nouveaux essais sur l’entend-
ement,[12]
Leibnitz criticised Locke’s emp-
iricism,— saying nihil est in intellectu, etc.,
nisi intellectus ipse[13] (!) (152).
  

    (Feuerbach in the first edition also ideal-
istically criticises Locke.[14])
  

    The principle of “necessary truths” lies
“within us” (Leibnitz, 148).
  



    Cf.  Kant  likewise  
  



    The ideas of substance, change, etc., lie
within us (Leibnitz, 150).
  

    “To be determined towards the best
through reason is the highest degree of free-
dom” (Leibnitz, 154).
  

    “The philosophy of Leibnitz is idealism”
    (Feuerbach, 160), etc., etc.
  





    ...“The cheerful, lively polytheism of
Leibnitz’s monadology passed into the se-
vere, but for that reason more spiritual
    and intense monotheism of ‘transcendental
idealism’” (Feuerbach, 188).
  






  transition
  to
  Kant
  


 




|Pp. 188-220: supplements of 1847|


    P. 188: “Idealistic, a priori philosophy....”
  



 




    “But, of course, what for man is a pos-
teriori is for a philosopher a priori; for
when man has gathered experiences and
has embraced them in general concepts,
then he is, of course, in a position to make
  






  ridiculing
  Kant
  




    ‘synthetic judgments a priori.’ Hence what
for an earlier time is a matter of experience
is for a later time a matter of reason....
Thus, earlier, electricity and magnetism
were only empirical, i.e., here accidental,
properties perceived only in particular
bodies, whereas now, as the result of compre-
hensive observations, they are recognised
to be properties of all bodies, essential
properties of a body.... Hence the history
of mankind is the sole standpoint that
    yields a positive answer to the problem
of the origin of ideas....” (191-192)
  

    The soul is not wax, it is no tabula
rasa[15].... “The creation
    of a sensuous re-
presentation requires the addition of some-
thing distinct from the object, hence it
would be sheer folly for me to seek to
derive this distinct element, which is the
basis of the real essence of the sensuous
representation, from the object. But what
is this then? The form of universality; for
even the individual idea or sensuous re-
presentation is, as Leibnitz remarked, at
least in comparison with the real individual
object, originally universal, i.e., in this
case undetermined, wiping out differences,
    destructive. Sensuousness is massive, uncrit-
ical, luxurious; but the idea, the sensuous
representation, is restricted solely to the
    universal and necessary.” (192)
  



 




    “The basic thought, therefore, of the Nou-
veaux essais sur l’entendement humain is
  






  Leibnitz
  and Kant
  




already, as in Der Kritik der reinen Ver-
nunft, that universality, and the ne-






cessity which is inseparable from it,
express the essence belonging to the under-
standing or apperceiving being, and there-
fore cannot come from the senses, or
from experience, i.e., from outside....”
(193)
  






   necessity
insepar-
   able from
   the universal
    
NB



 




    This idea occurs already among the Car-
tesians—Feuerbach quotes Clauberg,
1652.[16]







  Kantianism
  = old
  lumber
  


 




    “Undoubtedly this axiom” (that the whole
is greater than the part) “owes its certainty
not to induction, but to the understand-
ing, for the latter has no other aim and
vocation than to generalise the data of
the senses, in order to save us the tedious
    trouble of repetition, to anticipate, replace,
spare, sensuous experience and perception.
But does the understanding do this by
    itself, without a basis for it being pres-
ent in sense-perception? Is then the individ-
ual case shown me by the senses an individ-
ual case in abstracto? Is it not a qualita-
tively determined case? But does not
  




 
this quality, however, contain so much
    as an identity of the individual cases that
is perceptible by the senses?... Do the
  






  NB
  




senses show me only leaves and not also
    trees?... Is there no feeling of identity,
likeness and difference? Is there no differ-
ence for my senses between black and
    white, day and night, wood and iron?...
Are not the senses the unconditional affir-
mation of what is? Consequently, is not
the highest law of thought, the law of
identity, also a law of sensuousness; indeed,
does not this law of thought rest on the
truth of sense-perception?”... (193-194)
  

    Leibnitz in Nouveaux essais: “Generality
consists in the resemblance to each other
of individual things, and this resemblance
is a reality” (Book III, Chapter 3, § 12).
“But is this resemblance then not sensuous
truth? Do not the beings which the un-
derstanding refers to a single class, a single
genus, affect also my senses in an identical,
equal manner?... Is there for my sexual
sense—a sense which theoretically also
is of the greatest importance, although
in the theory of the senses it is usually
left out of account—no difference between
an animal and a human female? What
    then is the difference between the faculty
of understanding and that of sensuous per-
  






  bien dit!
  




ception or sensation? The senses present
    the thing, but the understanding adds the
name to it. There is nothing in the under-
  






  NB
  




    standing that is not in sensuous perception,
but what is found in the sensuous perception
in fact is in the understanding only in
  





    name. The understanding is the highest 
being, the ruler of the world, but only in
name, not in fact. What, however, is a
name? It is a mark of difference, a striking
  






  bien dit!
  




characteristic, which I make the character,
the representative, of the object in order
thereby to represent it to myself in its
totality” (195).
  

    ...“The senses tell me just as well as
the understanding that the whole is greater
than the part; but they tell me so not by
words, but by examples, for instance, that
the finger is smaller than the hand....
    (196-197)
  

    ...“Hence the certainty that the whole
is greater than the part indubitably does
not depend on the senses. But on what
then? On the word: the whole. The state-
ment that the whole is greater than the
part says absolutely nothing more than
the word ‘whole’ itself says.... (497)
  

    ...“Leibnitz, on the other hand, as an
idealist or spiritualist, makes the means
into an end, the denial of sensuousness
into the essence of the mind.... (198)
  

    ...“That which is conscious of itself exists
and is, and is called soul. We are, there-
fore, certain of the existence of our soul
before we are certain of the existence of
our body. Of course, consciousness is pri-
mary, but it is only primary for me, it is
not primary in itself. In the sense of my con-
sciousness, I am, because I am conscious;
but in the sense of my life I am conscious,
because I am. Which of these two is right?
The body, i.e., nature, or consciousness,
i.e., I? I, of course, for how could I admit
myself wrong? But can I then in fact sepa-
    rate consciousness from my body and think
by myself?... (201)
  

    ...“The world is the object of the senses
and the object of thought. (204)
  

    “In a sensuous object, man distinguishes
the essence as it really is, as an object
of sense-perception, from the essence of
it in thought, abstracted from sensuous-
ness. The former he calls the existence
or also the individual, the latter the es-
sence or the genus. The latter is defined
by him as necessary and eternal—because,
although a sensuous object may have van-
ished from the sensible world, it still
remains as an object of thought or sensuous
representation—but existence as accidental
and transitory.... (205)
  

    ...“Leibnitz is half-Christian, he is a
theist, or Christian and a naturalist. He
  





limits the goodness and power of God by
    wisdom, by the understanding; but this
understanding is nothing but a cabinet
  






  NB
  




of natural objects, it is only the idea of
the interconnection of nature, of the uni-
verse; hence he limits his theism by na-
turalism; he affirms and defends theism
by that which abolishes it....“ (215)
  

    P. 274 (from the supplement of 1847):
         “How much has been said of the decep-
tion of the senses, how little of the decep-
tion of speech, from which, however, thought
is inseparable! Yet how clumsy is the
betrayal of the senses, how subtle that
of language! How long have I been led by
the nose by the universality of reason, the
universality of Fichte’s and Hegel’s Ego,
until finally, with the support of my
five senses, I recognised for the salvation
of my soul that all the difficulties and
mysteries of the logos, in the sense of rea-
son, find their solution in the meaning of
    the word! For that reason Haym’s state-
ment ‘the critique of reason must become
the criticism of language’ is for me in a theo-
retical respect a soul-inspired statement.—
As regards, however, the contradiction be-
tween me as a perceiving, personal being
and me as a thinking being, it reduces
itself in the sense of this note and the dis-
sertation quoted” (of Feuerbach himself)[17]
“to the sharp contradiction: in sensation
I am individual, in thinking I am univer-
sal. However, in sensation I am not less
universal than I am individual in thinking.
Concordance in thinking is based only on
concordance in sensation.” (274)
  

    ...“All human communion rests on the
assumption of the likeness of sensation
in human beings.” (274)
  

    Spinoza and Herbart (1836).[18] P. 400
ff.[19]
A defence of Spinoza against the
banal attacks of the “moralist” Herbart.
  

    The objectivism of Spinoza, etc., is
stressed. NB.
  

    Verhältnis zu Hegel (1840 and später).
S. 417 ff.[20]





    Not very clear, intermittently
emphasised that he was a disciple 
of Hegel.
  



From the notes:
         “What is a dialectic that is in contradic-
    tion to natural origin and development?
    What is its necessity?...” (431)
  

Herr von Schelling (1843). Letter to
Marx (434 ff.). According to the rough
draft. Castigation of Schelling.[21]


End of Volume IV.





 

Notes
[1] In the passage referred to by Lenin, Feuerbach states:
  “Spinoza’s 
  philosophy is like a telescope which makes objects 
  visible to the human eye that are otherwise invisible owing to their remoteness;
  Leibnitz’ 
  philosophy is like a microscope which makes objects visible
  that are unnoticeable owing to their minuteness and fineness.” (See 
  L. Feuerbach, Sämtliche Werke, Bd. IV, 1910, S. 34.)
[2] See Marx’s 
  letter to Engels dated May 10, 
  1870.
[3] sensuous representation—Ed.
[4] confused—Ed.
[5] vague—Ed.
[6] Entelechy—a term in idealist philosophy, 
  used by Aristotle 
  to denote the aim inherent in an object—an aim which 
  through its activity is transformed from the possible to the actual. According
  to Leibnitz, entelechy is the urge of the monad towards realisation of the 
  perfection potentially contained in it.
[7] harmony pre-established—Ed.
[8] Lenin is referring to the following statement by 
  Feuerbach: “Pre-established harmony is Leibnitz’ weak point, 
  despite the fact thatit is his pet creation....Pre-established harmony, 
  understood in a purely external sense in relation to the monad, basically 
  contradicts the spirit of Leibnitz’ philosophy.” (See L. Feuerbach,
  Sämtliche Werke, Bd. IV, 1910, S. 95.)
[9] Occasionalism—an idealist, religious
  trend in 17th-century philosophy which distorted the teachings of Descartes 
  in the spirit of clericalism and mysticism. The Occasionalists held the 
  reactionary view that all physical and mental activity and the reciprocal 
  action between them, is due to the intervention of God.
[10] Theodicée (a vindication of the 
  justice of God)—an abbreviated title of G. W. Leibnitz’ book: 
  Essais de Theodicée sur la bonté de Dieu, la liberté l’homme
  et l’origine du mal (Theodician Essays on the Goodness of God, the Freedom
  of Man, and the Origin of Evil).
[11] The ontological argument for the existence
  of God was first advanced by Anselm, Bishop of Canterbury and medieval 
  scholastic. It can be summarised as follows: God is the totality of perfection. 
  Perfection includes existence. Therefore God exists.
      On the essence of the ontological argument see F. Engels, 
  Anti-Dühring, 
  Part I, Chapter IV.
[12] Nouveaux essais sur l’entendement humain
  (New Essays on Human Understanding) by Leibnitz (written 1700-05 and 
  published in 1765)—directed against the materialist trend of Locke’s
  sensualist theory of knowledge.
[13] there is nothing in the intellect except the
  intellect itself.—Ed.
[14] The first edition of L. Feuerbach’s book 
  Darstellung, Entwtcklung und Kritik der Leibniz’schen Philosophie 
  (Exposition, Analysis and Critique of the Philosophy of Leibnitz) was
  published in 1837.
[15] smoothed tablet—Ed.
[16] The reference is to the work by Clauberg, German 
  Cartesian philosopher: Defensio Cartesiana, Amsterdam, 1652 (Defence
  of Cartesianism).
[17] Feuerbach’s dissertation in Latin, published
  in Erlangen in 1828 under the title “De Ratione una, universali, infinita,” 
  appeared in German translation under the title “Über die Vernunft; 
  ihre Einheit, Allgemeinheit, Unbegrenztheit” (“On Reason; Its Unity,
  Universality and Infiniteness”) in Vol. IV of Feuerbach’s works
  in German; Bolin and Jodl edition, Stuttgart, 1910.
[18] Lenin is referring to Feuerbach’s work Spinoza
  and Herbart (1836), appearing in Vol. IV (1910) of Feuerbach’s
  works in German; Bolin and Jodl edition.
[19] et seq.—Ed.
[20] Relation to Hegel (1840 and 
  later), p. 417 et seq.—Ed.
[21] The reference is to Feuerbach’s letter to
  Marx in 1843 in which Feuerbach sharply criticises Schelling’s philosophy
  (see L. Feuerbach, Sämtliche Werke, Bd. IV, 1910, S. 434-440).
  Feuerbach’s letter was written in answer to Marx’s letter of 
  October 20, 1843.
 






Works Index
    |   
  Volume 38

 | 

Collected Works
    |   L.I.A. Index




  < backward




  forward >





 



==========

## Remarks On Dr. Johann Plenge’s Marx and
    Hegel. Tübingen, 1911











Lenin’s Remarks On Dr. Johann Plenge's ÂMarx and HegelÂ. TÃ¼bingen, 1911



Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Remarks On Dr. Johann Plenge’s
“Marx and Hegel”. Tübingen, 1911

Written: No
    later than June 1916
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th Edition, Moscow, 1976,
  Volume 38, pp. 388-391
Publisher: Progress Publishers
First Published: 1933 in Lenin Miscellany XXII.
  Published according to the manuscript
Translated: Clemence Dutt
Edited: Stewart Smith
Original Transcription & Markup: K. Goins (2008)
Public Domain: Lenin Internet Archive (2003). You may freely copy, distribute, display and 
  perform this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. 
  Please credit “Marxists Internet Archive” as your source.

The remarks on Johann Plenge’s book “Marx 
    und Hegel.” Tübingen, 1911 (J. Plenge, Marx and Hegel,
Tübingen, 1911) are contained in the second notebook on imperialism
(notebook “β”).
   
  Note that this document has undergone special formating to ensure that 
  Lenin’s sidenotes fit on the page, marking as best as possible 
  where they were located in the original manuscript. 
  

 
DR. JOHANN PLENGE
 UND HEGEL
TÜBINGEN, 1911







        Plenge fails to understand how “ma-
    terialism” can coincide with revolu-
    tionism (calling the latter “ideal-
    ism,” etc.) and waxes angry over
    his lack of understanding!!!
      










  extremely
    vulgar!
  


 







    A good example of how bourgeois
        professors vulgarise the fundamentals of
    Marxism, its theoretical fundamentals!!
    Ad notam of the imperialist economists[1]
    and Co.!!
      






 




    After a pretentious introduction (How I,
I, I “read” Hegel and Marx) follows an
essay of the Hegelian “doctrine” that is
extremely shallow (idealism is not distin-
guished from “speculation,” very, very few
things have been grasped; still there is
some good in this essay as compared with
Kantianism, etc.). Then, comes a critic-
ism of Marx which is altogether nonsens-
    ical.
  










Theo-
      retical
      aspect of
      dialectics
      has been
      over-
      looked!!
      





 




    Marx is being accused of “pure ideology,”
when by “actual” proletarian he means
a representative of a class. (82)
  







      Marx =
  “ideologist”...
  


 




    “Now the strong language of the apos-
tate, who decisively renounced any sort
of idealism ... now the ideal demand of
the political enthusiast—such is the actual-
ity of Karl Marx.” (81-82)
  







!



 




    “It is passing strange that this Jewish
    radical healer should have known all his
    life just one universal remedy for all social
    conditions that are in need of cure; critic-
ism and political struggle.” (56)
  







  “nur”!![2]



 




    ...Marx’s historical materialism is ac-
tually “nothing but ... a pathetical gesture,”
“an extremely rationalistic doctrine,” “in
its most profound basis an idealist examina-
tion of society,” etc., etc. ... (83)
  










  Marx!!
  “did not
  understand”
  Hegel
97 et al.






 




    ...“agitational motives”... (84) (id. 86,
92 et al.) (115 et al.)
  

    Marx borrowed “this natural-scientific
empiricism” (88), “Marx naturalises social
science (ibid.).
  

    ...“His” (Marx’s) “path is not that of the
thinker, but ... of the prophet of free-
dom....”!!! (94-95)
  



 




    Socialist revolution = subjectivist hope
to present it as “an objectively scientific
cognition” is an illusion of an ecstatic
    dreamer, an illusion which degenerated into
charlatanry” (p. 110).
  







!!



 







        ...“Marx ... was dominated by the passion-
    ate will of a radical apostle of freedom....”
        (111)
      










!!



 




    Marx “agitationally whipping up all the
instincts of hatred....” (115)
  







  inde ira!![3]



 




    “Marxism ... becomes ethics of abstract
negative, fanatical enthusiasm” (just like
Mohammedanism according to Hegel!)....
    (120)
  





 




    ...“Temperament of a fanatic” of
Marx (and his “hot head”)—that’s the point.
(120)
  

    And more of such vulgar gibberish!
  

Whence this quotation? The author did
not give chapter and verse.[4]




 







        “Without revolution socialism cannot
    be realised. It stands in need of a polit-
    ical act, inasmuch as it stands in need
    of destruction and dissolution. But wher-
    ever its organic activity begins and its
    end-in-itself bares its soul, socialism casts
    off its political integument.”
      










  NB
   
   
  NB
  


 




    —After quoting this passage without
giving its source Plenge continues: “‘The
political integument’ that will be hurled
    aside is of course the whole of Marxism.”
    (129)
  



 







        How Plenge seeks out “contradictions”:
        Marx, he says, wrote in Rheinisehe Zei-
tung[5]: “‘The same spirit which con-
structs railways with the help of industry,
constructs philosophical systems in the
minds of philosophers’ (p. 143). And
then these means of production are eman-
        cipated from the spirit which created
them and begin, in turn, sovereignly,
to determine the spirit.”
      










  “Clever-r-r”
  


 




    Example of how Plenge criticises
Mehrwertstheorie[6]:
           ↓
  





    “By its gross exaggeration it brings to
  





    a white heat the hard fact of capitalism
    that the urge for profit lowers wages and
  







      !!





worsens working conditions. But then it
suffers from the elementary mistake of du-
    plication of concepts veiled by the termin-
ology used....” (157)
  

    ...“Agitational requirements dictate that
the inflammatory theory of surplus-value
be given the most prominent place in the
entire system....” (164)
  



 




    ...“Marx is a revolutionary Jew of the
nineteenth century who has re-tailored the
garment borrowed from our great philos-
ophy to suit his ends.” (171)
  







  a pearl!!
  


 






      This Plenge is an extreme vulgar-
      iser; the scientific value of his
      trashy book is zero.
      





 

Notes
[1] Imperialist economists—Lenin’s
  designation for the opportunists Bukharin, 
  Pyatakov 
  and Bosh in the Russian 
  Social-Democratic Labour Party (Bolsheviks) during the First World War. The
  “imperialist economists” demanded that the Party delete the programmatic
      statement on the right of nations to self-determination. They also came out
  against the entire minimum programme of the R.S.D.L.P., which envisaged a 
  struggle for democratic reforms that would facilitate the preparation and
  transition to the socialist revolution. Lenin laid bare the opportunistic 
  essence of the position of Bukharin and those sharing his views, its kinship
  with “economism”—the 
  opportunistic trend in Russian Social-Democracy
  at the end of the 19th century and the beginning of the 20th. Like the old 
  “economists,” who could not understand the need for the political
  struggle of the working class under conditions of capitalism, the “imperialist
  economists” did not understand the significance of the struggle for 
  democratic reforms under conditions of imperialism.

  Certain views of the “imperialist economists” were
  shared by Left Social-Democrats of Holland, America, Poland, etc. That is 
  why Lenin called “imperialist economism” an “international
  disease” (Vol. 35, letter to Inessa Armand of November 30, 1916).

  A number of articles by Lenin are devoted to a criticism of
  “imperialist economism”: “On the 
  Incipient Trend of ‘Imperialist
  Economism’” (pres. ed., Vol. 23,
  pp. 10-15); “A Caricature of Marxism 
  and Imperialist Economism” (pres. ed., Vol. 23, pp. 16-64).
[2] “just”!!—Ed.
[3] hence the ire!!—Ed.
[4] See Critical Notes on the Article “The King
  of Prussia and Social Reform. By a Prussian”, the ¶ beginning:
  The “Prussian” 
  must choose between....—KCG.
[5] The reference is to the Rheinische Zeitung für
  Politik, Handel und Gewerbe (Rhine Gazette on Problems of Politics, Trade 
  and Industry)—a daily newspaper that appeared in Cologne from 
  January 1, 1842 to March 31, 1843. It was founded by representatives of the
  Rhineland bourgeoisie who were opposed to Prussian 
  absolutism. Marx joined
  its staff in April 1842 and became one of its editors in October of the same 
  year. During Marx’s editorship, the revolutionary-democratic character
  of the newspaper became more and more marked. The newspaper was ultimately 
  banned by the Prussian Government.
[6] theory of surplus-value—Ed.
 






Works Index
    |   
  Volume 38

 | 

Collected Works
    |   L.I.A. Index




  < backward




  forward >





 



==========

## Notes on Books











Notes on Books



Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Notes on Books

Written: 1912-1916 
      (See each Note for publishing information)
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th Edition, Moscow, 1976,
  Volume 38, pp. 392-400
Publisher: Progress Publishers
First Published: 1933-1938 (See each Note for publishing 
  information)
Translated: Clemence Dutt
Edited: Stewart Smith
Transcription & Markup: K. Goins (2008)
Public Domain: Lenin Internet Archive (2008). You may freely copy, distribute, display and 
  perform this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. 
  Please credit “Marxists Internet Archive” as your source.

Note that this document has undergone special formating to ensure that 
  Lenin’s sidenotes fit on the page, marking as best as possible 
  where they were located in the original manuscript. 
  

 
NOTES ON BOOKS




F. Raab, Die Philosophie von R. Avenarius. Systematische
      Darstellung und immanente Kritik, Leipzig, 1912 (164 p.).
      5 Mk.
      

Perrin, Les atomes, Paris (Alcan).[1]


      Written not earlier than 1912
      First Published in 1938 in Lenin Miscellany XXXI
      Published according to the manuscript
      
 

 
From books on philosophy 
  in the Zürich
Cantonal Library[2]
Gideon Spicker, Über das Verhältnis der Naturwissenschaft 
  zur Philosophie (especially versus Kant and Lange’s His-
  tory of Materialism). Octavo. Berlin, 1874. IV. W. 57 K.


Hegel, Phänomenologie (hrs. Bolland, 1907). IV. W. 165 g.


      Written in 1915
      First published in 1933 in Lenin Miscellany XXII
  Published according to the manuscript
  
 

 
(Cantonal Library in Zürich[3]
  (Signatur: K. b i.)

Flugschriften des deutschen Monistenbundes. Heft 3:
Albrecht Rau. “Fr. Paulsen über E. Haeckel.”
      2-te Aufl. Brackwede, 1907, (48 SS.)
  



 






      A very sharp criticism of Paulsen from the stand-
      point of Feuerbach. A “Mohican” of the bourgeois
      enlightenment!
          







  NB
  


 




  Written in 1915
      First published in 1933 In Lenin Miscellany XXII
      Published according to the manuscript
  
 

 

Section III. (“Works of informative and scientific
  content”)[4]:

      Theories of Origin... 1914.
      (Present-day Culture III, IV).
F. Haeckel, Gott-Natur, Leipzig, 1914... Sch. 480 N 24.
  

Uhde, Feuerbach, Leipzig, 1914 ... XVI. 906.
  

A. Zart, Bausteine des Weltalls: Atome, Moleküle..
      Stuttgart, 1913.
  

      Written in 1916
    First published in 1934 in Lenin Miscellany XXVII
      Published according to the manuscript
  
 

 

Ruttmann, Die Hauptergebnisse der modernen Psycholo-
  gie, Pe. VII. 3551.
  

Suter, Die Philosophie von Richard Avenarius, 1910 (Diss).
  St. Bro. 11.341


      Written in 1916
      First published in 1936 in Lenin Miscellany XXIX
  Published according to the manuscript
  
 

 
ON THE REVIEW OF JOH. PLENGE’S BOOK
 AND HEGEL[5]

Joh. Plenge, Marx and Hegel, Tübingen, 1911.
      (184 SS.) (Mk. 4).
  



 






      An unfavourable review by 0. Bauer in Vol. 111, 3rd
  number of Archiv für Geschichte des Sozialismus.
          





 




      Written in 1913
  First published in 1938 in Lenin Miscellany XXXI
  Published according to the manuscript
  
 

 
ON THE REVIEW OF R. B. PERRY’S BOOK
PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL
      TENDENCIES[6]

    Mind. 1913. April. Review by F. C. S. Sculler of Ralph
    Barton Perry’s Present Philosophical Tendencies: a Critical
    Survey of Naturalism, Idealism, Pragmatism and Realism,
    together with a Synopsis of the Philosophy of William
    James, London and New York. (Longmans & Co.). 1912.
    383 pages.
  

    Schiller is against Perry’s “realism” and makes the charge
that “his mind is so preoccupied with the metaphysical
antithesis between realism and idealism that he is always
trying to reduce all other issues to this.”
  

    It is to be noted that Schiller quotes the following pas-
sage from Perry: “The organism is correlated with an en-
vironment, from which it evolved and on which it acts.
Consciousness is a selective response to a pre-existing and
independently existing environment. There must be some-
thing to be responded to, if there is to be any response”
(p. 323 in Perry’s book). And Schiller raises the objection:
  



 




    “Unless the question is begged in the ‘independently exist-
ing environment’” (Schiller’s italics), “nothing is here
proved except the correlation of the mind and its ‘environ-
ment’”... (p. 284).
  





  [illegible]
  


 




  Written later than April 1913
  First published in 1938 in Lenin Miscellany XXXI
  Published according to the manuscript
  
 

 
ON THE REVIEW OF A. ALIOTTA’S BOOK
THE IDEALIST REACTION AGAINST
  SCIENCE[7]

  Antonio Aliotta: La reazione idealistica contro la sciensa.
  1 vol. 8°. XVI + 526 pages. Palerme. Casa editrice Optima,
  1912.
  

  Review in Revue Philosophique (Ribot). Paris, 1912, 
  No. 12, pp. 644--646, by J. Segond, who states:
  

  “He” (Aliotta) “shows us in agnosticism all the latest
  sources of contemporary reaction; he shows how it de-
  velops through German (Riehi) and French (Renouvier)
  neo-criticism, the empirio-criticism of Mach and Avenarius,
  and English neo-Hegelianism; he describes and exposes the
  intuitionism of Bergson and Schmitt, the Anglo-American
  pragmatism of W. James, Dewey and Schiller, the philos-
  ophy of values and the historicism of Rickert, Croce, Mün-
  sterberg and Royce,” etc. (645), and so on up to Schuppe,
  Cohen and others.
  

  In the second part the author examines the energetics
  of Ostwald and “the new physics des qualités”[8] of Duhem
  and the “theory of models” of Hertz, Maxwell and Pastore.
  The author particularly dislikes, he says, mysticism (includ-
  ing that of Bergson), etc.
  

  The point of view of the author is stated to be “the spir-
  it of the happy mean of truly rational intellectualism,
  that of M. Aliotta and of M. Chiapelli.” (645)
  

  Written in 1913
  First published in 1938 in Lenin Miscellany XXXI
  Published according to the manuscript
  
 

 
REMARKS ON HILFERDING’S VIEWS ON MACH
  (IN FINANCE CAPITAL)[9]

Hilferding: Finance Capital. (“The Latest
  Phase in the Development of Capitalism”). Moscow, 1912
  



  Published in German in 1910 (III Band Marx-Studien)
  





 





  muddle...
  



 

  p. 13—“According to E. Mach” “the ‘ego’
  is only the focus in which the infinite
  



   
  incorrect
      not “in the
      same way”
   
  incorrect
  



 

     threads of sensation meet most closely....
  In exactly the same way money is the focal
  point in the network of social connec-
  tions....”
p. 71, note. “Only our perception gives
  things the form of space” (a Kantian).
  


  
     




  Written not later than June 1916
  First published in 1934
  in Lenin Miscellany XXVII
  Published according to the manuscript
  



 
 


Notes
[1] The entry on the books by Raab and Perrin was made 
in a notebook entitled “Austrian Agricultural Statistics, etc.” 
not earlier than 1912.
[2] The entry on the books under the heading From 
Books on Philosophy in the Zürich Cantonal Library was made in the 
first notebook (notebook “α”) on imperialism in 1915.
[3] The entry under the heading Cantonal Library in 
Zürich was made in the first notebook on imperialism (notebook 
“α”) in 1915.
[4] The entry under the general heading Section III. 
(Works of informative and scientific content), containing reference to 
the books by Haeckel, Uhde and Zart, was made in a notebook on imperialism 
(notebook “ε”) in 1916.
[5] Note on the Review of Johann Plenge’s book
“Marx and Hegel” was written in 1913, amidst bibliographical 
excerpts on various questions, in the notebook “Austrian Agricultural 
Statistics, etc.”
[6] Remarks on the Review of R. B. Perry’s book
“Present Philosophical Tendencies”—written after April 
1913 in the notebook “Austrian Agricultural Statistics, etc.”
[7] Remarks on the Review of A. Aliotta’s book
“The Idealist Reaction Against Science”—written in 1913 at 
the end of the notebook “Austrian Agricultural Statistics, etc.”
[8] of qualities—Ed.
[9] Remarks on Hilferding’s Views on Mach (in 
“Finance Capital”)—contained in notebook “θ”on imperialism.
 






Works Index
    |   
  Volume 38

 | 

Collected Works
    |   L.I.A. Index




  < backward




  forward >





 



==========

## Remarks In Books











Remarks On Books



Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Remarks On Books


Written: 1908-1911
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th Edition, Moscow, 1976,
  Volume 38, pp. 401-557
Publisher: Progress Publishers
First Published: 1930-1937
Translated: Clemence Dutt
Edited: Stewart Smith
Transcription & Markup: Kevin Goins (2008)
Public Domain: Lenin Internet Archive (2008). You may freely copy, distribute, display and 
  perform this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. 
  Please credit “Marxists Internet Archive” as your source.


    Note that these documents have undergone special formating to ensure that 
Lenin’s sidenotes fit on the page, marking as best as possible 
where they were located in the original manuscript.
  

Unless otherwise noted, text sections underscored and bold denote 
Lenin’s double underscores, and sections underscored, bold and 
italicized denote his triple underscores.  Italics on their 
own represent the original text.
  

 
 

G. V. Plekhanov. Fundamental Questions of Marxism. 
  St. Ptsbrg, 1908


Abel Rey. Modern Philosophy. Paris, 1908 — 
  Part One (pp. 407-440) — Part 
  Two (pp. 440-474)


A. Deborin. Dialectical Materialism


V. Shulyatikov. The Justification of Capitalism in 
  West-European Philosophy. (From Descartes to E. Mach). Moscow, 1908


G. V. Plekhanov. N. G. Chernyshevsky. Shipovnik
  Publishing House. St. Petersburg, 1910 —
  Part One (pp. 501-528) — Part 
  Two (pp. 529-557)

 






Works Index
    |   
  Volume 38

 | 

Collected Works
    |   L.I.A. Index




  < backward




  forward >





 



==========

## G. V. Plekhanov. Fundamental Questions of
Marxism. St. Ptsbrg, 1908











G. V. Plekhanov. Fundamental Questions of Marxism. St. Ptsbrg, 1908



Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Remarks on Books:
G. V. Plekhanov.
Fundamental Questions of Marxism. 
St. Ptsbrg, 1908
 


    Written not earlier than May 1908.
Published in part in 1933
in Lenin Miscellany XXV.
Published in full for the
first time.
Published according
to the original.
  

 

G. V. PLEKHANOV.
FUNDAMENTAL QUESTIONS OF
  ISM
ST. PTSBRG; 1908




        [23]... The idealists first convert thought into
an independent essence, independent of man
(“subject for itself”), and then declare that in it,
in this essence, the contradiction between being
and thought is resolved; precisely because it,
essence independent of matter, possesses a separate,
independent being. And the contradiction is in
fact resolved in it, for what is this essence after
all? Thought. And this thought exists—is—in-
dependently of anything else. But this solution of
the contradiction is a purely formal solution.
It is attained only because,—as we have already
  





stated above—one of its elements is eliminated:
        that is, being independent of thought. Being proves






  NB
  




        to be a simple property of thought, and when we
say that a given object exists, it means only that
it exists in thought....
  



 




[24]...To be does not mean to exist in thought.
In this respect Feuerbach’s philosophy is far clearer
than the philosophy of Dietzgen. “The proof that
  







something exists,” Feuerbach remarks, “has no
other meaning than that something exists not
in thought alone.”[1]


        [28-29]...The materialist explanation of history
was primarily of methodological
significance. Engels understood this per-
  





fectly when he wrote: “we need not so much bare
results as study (das Studium); results are nothing
without the development leading up to them....”[2]





 




    [29-30]...Generally speaking, one of the greatest
  





    services rendered by Marx and Engels to material-
ism is their elaboration of a correct meth-
od. Concentrating on the struggle against the
  






speculative element in Hegelian philo-
sophy, Feuerbach did not appreciate its dialec-
tical method and made little use of it. He says:
    “True dialectics is by no means a monologue of
a solitary thinker with himself; it is a dialogue
between I and You.”[3] But, first, in Hegel, too,
dialectics does not signify “a monologue of a solitary
thinker with himself”; secondly, Feuerbach’s re-
mark correctly defines the starting-point
of philosophy, but not its meth-
od. This deficiency was made good by Marx
and Engels, who understood that it would be
wrong, in combating Hegel’s speculative philos-
ophy, to ignore its dialectics....
  



 




    [31]...Many people confuse dialectics with the
theory of development, and it is in fact such
    a theory. But dialectics differs substantially from
  








    the vulgar “theory” of evolution, which is wholly
    constructed on the principle that neither
nature nor history makes leaps,
and that all changes in the world






take place only gradually. Hegel
  





→ NB





    had already pointed out that the theory of develop-
ment understood in this way is ridiculous and
untenable....
  

    [33]...In general, the right to dialectical






thought is confirmed by him[4] from the
dialectical properties of being.
    Here too being determines thought....
  





 




    [39]...Thus, the features of the geographical
environment determine the development of the
productive forces; the development of the produc-
tive forces in turn determines the development of
economic relations and, then, all other social
    relations....
  




 




    [42]...Each given stage of development of the
productive forces has its corresponding definite
type of weapons, military art, and,
    finally, of international—more exactly:
inter-social, i.e., also, incidentally, inter-
tribal—law. Hunting tribes cannot
create large-scale political organisations precisely
because the low level of their productive forces
compels them, in the ancient Russian
expression, to wander separately, in
small social groups, in search of the means of
    subsistence....
  

    [46-47]...According to Marx, the geographical
environment influences man through the
production relations arising in
    the given locality on the basis
of the given productive forces,
the primary condition for the
development of which is this
    environment’s features....
  




 




    [65-66]...The character of the “economic struc-
ture” and the direction in which it changes do not
depend on man’s will, but on the state of the pro-
ductive forces and on the changes that arise in
production relations and become necessary to
society due to the continued development of these
forces. Engels explains this as follows: “Men make
their history themselves, but not as yet with
a collective will according to a collective plan or
even in a definite, delimited given society. Their
aspirations clash, and for that very reason all
such societies are governed by necessity,
the complement and form of appearance of which
  





is accident.” Here human activity itself is
determined not as free, but as necessary,
i.e., as in accordance with law, i.e.,
as being capable of becoming
an object of scientific investi-







gation. Thus, historical materialism, while
not ceasing to point out that circumstances are
changed by people, also gives us an opportunity
    for the first time of looking upon the
process of this change from the
standpoint of science. And that is
why we are fully entitled to say that the material-
  





ist explanation of history provides the necessary
prolegomena for any theory of
human society that desires to
come forward as science....
  

    [68].. .In primitive society which knew no divi-
sion into classes, man’s productive activity
directly influences his outlook on the world
and his aesthetic taste....
  




 




    [81-82]...If we were to state briefly the view
of Marx and Engels on the relation between the
now famous “basis” and the no less famous
  





“superstructure,” the result would be
the following:
  

    1) The state of the productive
forces;
  

    2)The economic relations deter-
mined by it;
  

    3) The socio - political system which
has grown up on the economic “basis” in question;
  

    4) The psychology of social man
as determined in part directly by the economy and
in part by the socio-political system which has
grown up on it;
  

    5) Different ideologies reflecting
the properties of this psychology....
  

    [98]...Let us take as an example our agrarian
problem as it stands today. To the intelligent
Constitutional Democratic landowner, “the
compulsory alienation of land” may seem to be
    more or less, i.e., in inverse proportion to the
amount of “fair compensation,” a sad historical
necessity. But to the peasant, who is eager
to come by “a bit of land,” it is only this “fair
compensation” that will seem to be a more or less
sad necessity, while “compulsory alienation” is
bound to appear to him to be an expression of his
  






  free will and the most valuable guarantee of his
freedom.
  

    In saying this, we touch perhaps on the most
important point in the doctrine of freedom, a point
not mentioned by Engels, of course, only because
it is self-explanatory to one who has passed through
    the Hegelian school....
  

    Feuerbach and Dietzgen. 24[5]





 

Notes
[1] Werke. X, 187.—Lenin
[2] Nachlass, I, 477.—Lenin
[3] Werke, II, 345.—Lenin
[4] Engels—Ed.
[5] The reference is to page 24 of Plekhanov’s book
  (see p. 403 of this volume).—Ed.
 



<< Back to the Table of Contents


 





Works Index
    |   
  Volume 38

 | 

Collected Works
    |   L.I.A. Index




  < backward




  forward >





 



==========

## Abel Rey. Modern Philosophy. Paris,
      1908











Abel Rey. Modern Philosophy. Paris, 1908 (Part One)



Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Remarks on Books:
Abel Rey.
Modern Philosophy.
Paris, 1908
(Part One)
 


    Written in 1909.
First published in 1933
in Philosophical Notebooks.
Published according
to the original.
  

Lenin’s Remarks and Notations in Abel Rey’s book “La Philosophie
Moderne,” Paris, 1908 (Abel Rey, Modern Philosophy, Paris, 1908)
constitute a sequel to the sharp criticism in Materialism and Empirio-Criticism 
of Rey’s views as expounded in his book La théorie de la physique 
chez les physiciens contemporains (Modern Physicists, Theory of Physics), Paris, 1907.
  

 



ABEL REY.
MODERN PHILOSOPHY
PARIS, 1908
 
PREFACE

      [6][1]...Science, the creation of the intellect and
        reason, serves only to ensure our effective power
  





        over nature. It only teaches us how to utilise
        things, but tells us nothing about their essence....
  

[7]...Thus my essential task in this study has








been to contrast two points of view: the positive,
“scientific” and the “pragmatic”. I have tried to
be as impartial as possible in outlining these two
  







  NB
  




points of view, since I am well aware of a third
and serious danger in this kind of work: that of
not giving one’s adversaries their due. I do not
flatter myself that I have fully achieved my aim.
Such perfect “neutrality” is impossible....
  
 
C H A P T E R   I
  THE MODERN CENTRE
  OF PHILOSOPHIC DISCUSSIONS
§ 5. BASIC CONTRADICTION OF MODERN
  PHILOSOPHIC THOUGHT

    [28-29]...But contemporary systems of philos-
ophy still oppose one another, battling over a fun-
damental contradiction that arises from the manner
in which the philosophical problem is posed in our
epoch. The form of the antithesis is therefore si-
multaneously the form taken by the succession of
philosophical views at different times and the form
taken by the views existing at the same time.
  

        What, in the present position of the philoso-
        phical problem in general, are the possible alterna-
        tives? There can be only one, for it is a matter of
        keeping science and practice in the closest possible
        unity, without sacrificing one to the other, without
        opposing one to the other. This means either that
        practice will be the consequence of science or, on
        the other hand, science will be the consequence
        of practice. In the first case, science covers prac-
        tice; in the second, practice covers science. It is
        a question of preserving a logical connection be-
        tween the two terms, and it can only be varied by
        reversing them, making the first dependent on the
  





        second, or the second on the first. In the one case
        we get rationalistic, intellectualist, and positivist
        systems: the dogmatism of science. In the other,
        we get systems of pragmatism, fideism or active
        intuition (like that of Bergson): the dogmatism
  







  NB
  




        of action. According to the first systems, one has
        to know in order to act: cognition produces action.
        According to the second, knowledge follows the
        requirements of action: action produces cognition.
  

    It should not be thought that these lattet systems
resurrect contempt for science and the philosophy
 of ignorance. It is after serious investigation,
scientific erudition often of the most excellent
kind, after profound critical thinking about sci-
ence, and even through thoroughly “thinking out
this science,” as certain of these philosophers like
to put it, that they arrive at the derivation of
  




  
science from practice. If in so doing they belittle
science, it is only indirectly; for many of them, on
  







  NB
  




the contrary, believe that they are revealing its
full value....
  
 
§ 6. THE INTEREST OF CONTEMPORARY
  PHILOSOPHICAL DISCUSSIONS

    [33-35]...Let us, however, allow for a moment
  




  
that the thesis of pragmatism is correct and that
science is only a particular art, an appropriate
technique for satisfying certain requirements.
What results from that?
  

    First of all, truth is reduced to an empty word.
A true affirmation appears as the recipe for an
artifice that will prove successful. And since there
  













are several artifices capable of ensuring our success
    in the same circumstances, since different individ-
uals have extremely different requirements, we
shall have to accept the pragmatist thesis: all
propositions and arguments which lead us to the
same practical results are of equal value and are
equally true, all ideas which yield practical results
are equally legitimate. From this new meaning
of the word “truth,” it follows that our sciences are
purely contingent and fortuitous structures, that
    they could have been totally different and yet
just as true, that is to say, just as suitable as
means of action.
  



 




The bankruptcy of science, as a real form of
    knowledge, as a source of truth, there you have
    the first conclusion. The legitimacy of other
  







  (1)
  




    methods differing considerably from the methods
  





of intellect and reason, such as mystical feeling,
there you have the second conclusion. It is for
  







  (2)
  




the sake of these conclusions that this entire
philosophy, which to all appearance is crowned
by them, was actually constructed....
  

    What a good argument it is, therefore, to pay
back these powerful thinkers in their own coin!
  





Scientific truths! But they are only truths in name.
They, too, are beliefs, and beliefs of a lower order,
beliefs that can be utilised only for material action;
they have only the value of a technical instrument.
Belief for the sake of belief, religious dogma,
metaphysical or moral ideology, are far superior.








   
  NB
   
  NB
  


 




    In any case, they need not be embarrassed
before science, because its privileged position has
crumbled.
  



 




    Indeed, the bulk of the pragmatist army, in the
face of scientific experience, hastens to rehabilitate
moral experience, metaphysical experience and,
particularly, religious experience. All these types
  







  NB
  




of experience develop side by side with one another
and can in no way hinder one another, because
they are directed towards different needs, quite
distinct aspects of practice (satisfaction of mate-
rial needs, of moral consciousness or religious
sentiments), and create different values....
  

    [37]...The metaphysicians would not be slow
  





to take advantage of such a windfall. Besides
restoring religion, pragmatism helps to restore
metaphysics. Since Kant and Comte positivism
  







during the nineteenth century has invaded almost
the entire sphere of cognition....
  



 




    [39-40]...Thus, the pragmatist attitude, and
those others which, while not being so philosophi-
cal, original and interesting, lead to similar con-
clusions, always have as their consequence the
rehabilitation of obsolete guiding forms of human
thought which since the middle of the eighteenth
century had been victoriously displaced by scien-
tific positivism: religion, metaphysics, moral dog-
matism  i.e., basically social authoritarianism.
    That is why it is one of the two poles, between which
  






all contemporary thinking, all contemporary phi-
losophy, vacillates. It is the pole of dogmatic
reaction, of the spirit of authority in all its forms.
This attitude is the more dangerous since it is at
    first presented, by its greatest adherents too, as
the boldest and latest revolt of the free spirit,
a revolt against the only barrier still remaining
and which hitherto served as a lever for overthrow-
ing all the rest: science and scientific truth.
  

    On the other hand, the opposite pole of modern
philosophical thought, the purely scientific atti-
tude—since in making practice the consequence
of knowledge it subordinates everything to sci-
ence—is characterised above all by an endeavour
towards emancipation and liberation. It is here
that one finds the innovators. They are the inheri-
tors of the Renaissance spirit; their fathers and
direct teachers are especially the philosophers and
scientists of the eighteenth century, the great
century of liberation, of which Mach so truly said:
    “He who, if only through books, has had the
opportunity of participating in this upsurge and
liberation, will throughout his life preserve a
  





feeling of melancholy regret for the eighteenth
    century.” For thinkers of this type a truth exists
  







  ?!!
  




    which, if not immutable, is one that can continual-
ly be approached. It cannot be reached except by
scientific methods, and it cannot be found any-
where outside science; truth, science are the neces-
sary and sufficient conditions for all human activ-
ity....
  
 
§ 8. THE METHOD.—RÉSUMÉ AND 
  CONCLUSIONS





    [48-49]...It is a matter of its [science’s] objective
    significance. Some will think that it is insufficient
  







to exhaust the reality which comprises its object,
even though they admit, from a certain viewpoint,
that it is necessary....
  
 
C H A P T E R   II
  
  THE PROBLEM OF NUMBER AND EXTENSION.
  QUANTITATIVE PROPERTIES OF MATTER
§ 2. THE OLD ARGUMENT BETWEEN EMPIRICISM
  AND APRIORISM

    [55]...But is not the elimination of all empirical
element also an unattainable limit? The mathema-
tician, the rationalists note, could continue to
increase the wealth of his science even if the ma-
  





terial world were suddenly annihilated. Yes,
undoubtedly, if it were annihilated now, but
    could he create mathematics if the material world
had never existed?...






 



§ 3. THE CONTEMPORARY FORM
  OF THE PHILOSOPHICAL PROBLEM OF NUMBER
  AND EXTENSION. THE “NOMINALIST”
  AND “PRAGMATIST” ATTITUDE

    [61]...Bergson, who perhaps more than any
    other helped to propagate these ideas in philoso-
phical literature, would not accept without reserva-
tion the word “artifice”. He believes that science
is greater and higher than merely an artifice, in
  





relation to matter. But for him matter is not true
    reality it is reality that is diminished, regressive
and dead. And in relation to true reality, which
is living, spiritual and creative, mathematics and
science as a whole can hardly have more than an
artificial and symbolical character. In any case,
  













the fact remains that it was for action on matter,
and not for cognition of its essence, that mathema-
tics was created by the intellect, that first instru-
ment forged under the pressure of practical require-
ments in relation to matter....
  



 




    [62]...ls it not mathematics which, of all the
sciences, has in our day most strongly inclined
certain minds towards pragmatism, and towards
that sophistry of pragmatism, namely scientific
    agnosticism? In point of fact, it is in mathematics
  







that we feel furthest from the concrete and real,
nearest to the arbitrary playing with formulas
and symbols, so abstract that it appears empty....
  

    [62-63]...All the truths, more relative and less
exact, which other sciences try to express mathe-
matically and with which they endeavour to
supplement mathematics, gravitate towards this
absolute, as planets to the sun.
  
 
§ 4. RATIONALISM, LOGICISM AND
  INTELLECTUALISM

    [65]...The rigid and homogeneous space of
geometry is not sufficient; the mobile and hetero-
geneous space of physics is required. The universal
mechanism of nature does not signify that matter
contains nothing but geometry; According to
  





modern hypotheses, it can signify that there also
exists the release or transformation of energy or
the movement of electrical masses....








  NB
  


 



§ 5. GENERAL IMPORTANCE OF THE PROBLEM
  OF QUANTITY: BASICALLY IT IS A PROBLEM OF
  REASON

    [74]...It is, in the first place, incontestable that
        reason, no matter how disinterested, has a utilitar-
        ian function. Scientists are neither mandarins nor
        dilettantes. And pragmatism is not wrong in em-
        phasising the usefulness of reason, its pre-eminent
        usefulness. Only, has it the right to assert that
        reason has only a utilitarian function? Cannot
        the rationalists reply very plausibly that the use-
        fulness of reason results only from the fact that,
  





in deducing propositions from propositions, it
        simultaneously deduces from one another the
        relations between the facts of nature? It thus allows
  







  NB
  




        us to act on these facts; not that this is its aim,
        but this follows from it. Logic and the science of
        quantity created by the mind, insofar as it simply
        analyses the relations it perceives, extend their
        power to things themselves because quantitative
        relations are simultaneously the laws of things,
        and of the mind. If to know is to be able, then it
        is not, as the pragmatists think, because science
        was created by our practical requirements and for
        their sake, so that reason is of no value apart from
      





        its usefulness, but because our reason, in learning
        to cognise things, provides us with the means for
acting on them....








  NB
  


 



§ 6. IDEAS OF POINCARÉ, THE MATHEMATICIAN

        [75-76]...The great mathematician, Poincaré,[2]






insists particularly on this arbitrary nature of
mathematics.
  







  NB
  


 



  
        Of course, our mathematics fully corresponds
to reality, in the sense that it is adapted to the
symbolic expression of certain relations of the
real; strictly speaking, it was not prompted by
experience; experience merely gave the mind the
occasion for creating it. But, our mathematics,
as it gradually became constituted for conveniently
expressing what we needed to express, is only one
of the infinitely numerous possible mathematics or,
rather, a particular case of some much more general
mathematics which the mathematicians of the
nineteenth century have tried to attain. Having
got this clearly in mind, we at once realised that
mathematics, by its essence and nature, is abso-
lutely independent of its application in experience
  





and, consequently, absolutely independent of
experience. It is the free creation of the mind, the
most striking manifestation of its own creative
power.
  

Axioms, postulates, definitions, conventions are,
in essence, synonymous terms. Therefore, every
  







  Poincaré
  




imaginable mathematics can lead to conclusions
which, when properly expressed by a suitable
system of conventions, would permit us to discover
absolutely identical applications to. the real....
  

        [77-79]...This theory is a good criticism of
absolute rationalism and even of the attenuated
rationalism of Kant. it shows us that it was not
inevitably necessary for the mind to have elaborat-
ed just that mathematics which is so well adapted
for describing our experience; in other words,
mathematics is not the expression of a universal
law of reality, whether our conception of reality
(of the kind that is given us, of course) is the Carte-
sian, Kantian or some other. But Poincaré pre-
  





sents this conclusion in quite a different way from
        that of pragmatism.
  





 



   
    Some pragmatists, and even all the commenta-
    tors on Poincaré that I have had occasion to read,
    seem to me to have very largely failed to under-
    stand his theory. We have here an excellent exam-
    ple of distortion by interpretation. They have
    made of Poincaré—on this point as also on others,
    where their error is still greater—a pragmatist
    without the name. But who can fail to see that
true pragmatism makes mathematics indirectly
dependent upon experience? It is a decree of the
mind, as with Poincaré, but a decree of the mind
directed towards practical action, the free will
    of active thought, as the new philosophy conceives
it. For the pragmatist there is no purely contem-
plative and disinterested thought; there is no
pure reason. There is only thought which desires
to understand things and to this end alters the
    representation that it makes of them, for its great-
est convenience. Science and reason are the ser-
  





vants of practice. For Poincaré, on the other hand,
    thought has to he taken to a certain degree in the
    Aristotelian sense of the word. Thought thinks,
reason reasons, for its own satisfaction; and then,
over and above this, it turns out that certain
results of its inexhaustible creative power can be
    useful to us for other ends than purely spiritual
satisfaction.
  




 




    But, in that case, practice is the servant of
science and reason, which go far beyond the bounds
of usefulness. “Thought is only lightning, but this
lightning is everything.”[3]


    One may not fully accept Poincaré’s theory;
but it should not be distorted in order to invoke
  





its authority. Insufficient attention has been paid
to its connection with Kantianism, from which it
  







  Poincaré and
  Kant
  




    fully borrows the theory of synthetic judgements
a priori, with the proviso (and it is here that
Kant’s rationalism seems to Poincaré too rigid)
that these synthetic judgements a priori, on which
our mathematics (Euclidean) rests, are not to be
considered the only possible and necessary postu-
lates of rational mathematics....
  
 
§ 7. THE RELATION BETWEEN THE MATHEMATICAL
  SCIENCES AND THE OTHER NATURAL SCIENCES

    [80]...Does Poincaré’s theory assign to expe-
rience the role which seems to be its due? Strange!
  





I would like to tell the pragmatists, who have con-
stantly enlisted it for their own ends and used
  







  NB
  




    its author’s name like an artillery piece, that
I find very little of the pragmatic in it....
  
 
§ 8. INDICATIONS RELATIVE TO THE GENERAL
  EVOLUTION OF SCIENTIFIC METHOD AND
  KNOWLEDGE

    [87]...And if science then develops thanks to its
material usefulness, it should not be forgotten that
only owing to its intellectual usefulness and the
disinterested satisfaction of the mind that desires
to cognise things did it free itself at the outset
    from a crude empiricism in order to become true
  





science. It first enables us to cognise reality, prior
    to allowing us to act on it. And it is necessary that
it should first enable us to cognise in order later
to allow us to act....
  





 



§ 9. MACH’S IDEAS, REASON
    AND THE ADAPTATION OF THOUGHT

    [90-91]...Does this not give us a valuable indica-
tion of the nature and scope of logic and rational
thought, of which mathematics has always been
considered the pure emanation? And perhaps, also,
of the nature and scope of reason? Here we are
  





  not far from the thought of Mach, who was also
frequently made out to be a pragmatist without
    the name.








  NB
  


 




He seems to us to be much closer to rationalism,
in the sense which,in our opinion, should henceforth
be put into that term—a rationalism which by
  







no means excludes a psychological history of reason
with its opportunities and temporary contingencies
and, above all, does not in any way belittle the
role of experience; reason being only codified ex-
perience and, reciprocally, the necessary and uni-
versal code of every kind of experience, taking into
account simultaneously both the moment of evolu-
tion and the psychological organisation of man....
  

[93-94]...Hence one sees that reason, subjected
to abstract analysis in the consciousness of the
rational being, is capable, with the help of the
principles discovered in it and the ideal develop-
ment of these principles, of agreeing with the
laws of the environment and expressing them.
One sees, further, that, given what we are and
    what the environment is, reason cannot be different
from what it is: it is then, as the rationalists claim,
necessary and universal. In a certain sense, it is
  





even absolute, but not in the sense that this word
is understood by traditional rationalism. For this
latter it means that things exist as reason conceives







them. From our point of view, on the contrary,
we do not know how things exist in themselves,
and to this extent Kantian or positivist relativism
has its raison d’être. But we have the right to say
  







!!
   
   
!!





    that if, in a being of a totally different constitu-
tion, the needs of evolution had established a con-
formity with the environment different from our
own (since one of the two factors of which it is
    the product would be different), one would always
be able to establish a system of translation that
would make these two kinds of conformity coincide
with each other. There is nothing absurd in this
    hypothesis, because to a certain degree this should
occur between domestic animals and ourselves....
  



 




    [95-96]...Number and extension, despite their
    abstractness, arise from the nature of the real








NB





because reality is multiplicity and extension, and
because relations in space are real relations arising
from the nature of things.
  







  Compare
93-94
  !
  


 




    In that case, does it not appear that extremely
important conclusions could be deduced from these
initial propositions? Scientific abstraction was
often considered synonymous with non-reality.
Increased abstractness would then signify con-
tinual movement beyond the limits of the real,
further and further removal from it. Is that cor-
rect?
  

    Mathematics, in progressively moving away
from sensuous space in order to rise to geometrical
space, does not become removed from real space,
i.e., from the real relations between things. Rather
does it come closer to them. According to the data
of modern psychology, each of our senses seems
to give us extension and duration (i.e., definite
connections and relations of the real) in its own
fashion. Perception begins to eliminate this subjec-
tivity which depends on the individual or on
    accidental peculiarities of the structure of the
species: it builds up a homogeneous and uniform
    space, as well as a uniform duration—those syn-
theses of all our various sensuous notions of space. 
  





    Why should not scientific work pursue this progress
towards objectivity? In any case, its strictness, its
  







  NB
  




    exactitude, its universality (or its necessity, they
are one and the same) are so many arguments in
favour of the objectivity of its results. Consequently
    number, order and extension, in spite of our critical
and subjective habits of thought, can he regarded
as properties of things, i.e., real relations;—the
more real because science has gradually freed them
from the individual and subjective distortions,
with which they were originally presented to us
in concrete and immediate sensations. Should
we not, therefore, rightly consider that what re-
    mains after all these abstractions is the real and
permanent content, which imposes itself on every
  





species with equal necessity, for it depends neither
on the individual nor the moment of time, nor
the point of view?...
  







  NB
  


 



§ 10. WHAT DOES MATHEMATICS TEACH US?





    [97]...Psychology, for its part, teaches that all our
sensations (which are the direct and ultimate data
of experience) possess one property: extensiveness
  







  sensation =
  the ultimate
  




or extension. This property is totally unlike
geometrical extension, particularly if we consider
the sensations that affect us most....
  

    [98]...Geometrical space is the result of an
abstract interpretation of optical space, which
de-individualises, generalises, and makes more
manageable for the mind the relations implied by
  





this optical space. We would willingly supplement








))





    Mach’s thought by saying that the aim of this
operation has been to give these relations their
most exact and precise expression, a universal
  







  Mach +
  objectivity
  




  and necessary expression, hence their objective
expression. Thus geometrical space is the outcome
  







))





      of an evolution, which has made our thought
    increasingly better adapted to certain properties
of the environment. This was a prolonged and con-
tinuous experience, the success of which has cons-
tantly strengthened certain habits of thought that
have become the principles of our geometry....
  

    [100]...Thus, what mathematics teaches us are
the relations between things from the point of view
of order, number and extension.
  

    By analysing the real relations that exist be-
tween things, our mind naturally acquires the
capacity to form similar relations from them,
thanks to associations by resemblance. It can,
therefore, also imagine combinations which are
not found in reality; basing itself on those which
  





are found in it. After having formed conceptions
    that are copies of the real, we can form ideas
that are models, as Taine says, in a slightly different
  







  !!!
  




    sense.
  
§ 11. RÉSUMÉ AND CONCLUSIONS

    [103-105]...Absolute rationalism would seem
to have sufficiently good grounds for asserting, by
a kind of idealist realism, that the laws of reason
coincide with the laws of things. But is it not at
    all wrong in separating reason from things, and
in thinking that reason by itself alone, in splendid






isolation, obtains cognition of the laws that govern
    things? It would have to be admitted, then, that
  







  NB
  




by virtue of some sort of agreement or miraculous
grace, we possess intuitive knowledge of these
laws or at least a germ of it. Revived in this way,
the Platonic myth of reminiscence seems to be an
extremely gratuitous and extremely uneconomical
hypothesis.
  



 




Yes, the analysis of reason becomes co-extens-
    ive with the analysis of nature. Yes, mathematics,
in being concerned with the former, is at the same
    time concerned with the latter, or, if you prefer,
  







  NB
  




provides some of the elements necessary for the
latter. But is it not simpler to suppose that this
is because our psychological activity is gradually
formed through adaptation to the environment and
to the practical conditions in which it has to be
exercised?...
  

    Hence, despite very great differences between
absolute rationalism and the theory outlined here
on the question of genesis and history, we reach,
on the other hand, very similar conclusions on the
  





    question of the value and scope of mathematics: this
    value and this scope are absolute, in the human
sense of the word. As regards the superhuman sense
  













    and a transcendental point of view, I confess that
    I have not yet unearthed the secret of it, and am
  








very little concerned to do so. The possibility
of attaining human understanding of things and
of translating them truthfully into human language
is enough for me....
  

    Is not this conclusion superficial and too petty?
  





In my view, pragmatism goes to the other extreme,
diametrically opposed to that of traditional ration-
alism. The latter took the end point for the point
  







  golden
  mean!!
  




of departure and transferred the properties of the
result to the beginning. Pragmatism, on the con-
trary, approximates the end point to the point of
departure to the extent of confusing the two and
ascribes to the result the properties of the beginning.
Is it not more rational to think that mathematics,
after emerging from a utilitarian anthropomor-
phism, gradually burst through the subjective
limits of this initial horizon? By constantly improv-
  





ing its analysis, it arrived at certain real, objective
universal and necessary relations of things.






 




    [107]...It has its foundation in the nature of
    things, just like our reason and our logic, of which
  







))





it is a particular application and which are
    basically formed in a similar fashion.
  

    It does not matter what path has been taken
to arrive at reality if, by investigating it more
    and more closely, we finally envelop it from all
sides.
  
C H A P T E R   III
  THE PROBLEM OF MATTER
§ I. THE HISTORY AND PRESENT STATUS
  OF THE PRODLEM OF MATTER

    [l09-110]...First of all, after the failures of the
    “physicist” philosophers, the great philosophical
  





    tradition of the Greeks, headed by the Eleatics
    and Plato throws doubt on the very existence of








  NB
  




matter. Matter is only appearance or, at any
rate, the barest minimum of existence; the science
of material things, in its turn, can only be a purely
relative science, and there is no true science but
that of spiritual things. Thus the problem of matter
begins to be solved by suppressing the problem
itself. Matter can only exist as the indefinable
boundary of the mind and as a function of the
  





mind, and everything relating to matter is of
a lower order....
  







NB



 




    [111]...Thus disputes about the reality of the
external world, idealism, spiritualism, material-
ism, mechanism, dynamism, increasingly appear
  













    to be an outdated and sterile game which must
be left to classic philosophy, understanding this
expression in the sense in which Taine did, philos-
ophy for the classroom....












 




    [113]...Vulgar materialism borrows from it
[physics] all that is basic, as well as all that is
exaggerated and monstrous in it. What a lucky
chance for the religious spirit, if it can show that
  







  NB
  




    physics knows nothing about the things on which
it allows us to act, and that its explanations are
not explanations at all!
  







))



 



§ 2. THE CRISIS IN PHYSICS AT THE END
  OF THE NINETEENTH CENTURY:
  ENERGETISTIC PHYSICS

    In point of fact, at the time when this philo-
sophical hope was horn and growing strong in the
minds of educated and sincere believers, every-






thing in physics seemed destined to justify and
realise it.
  







  NB
  


 




    [114]...The new physics, energetistic physics,
come into opposition with this traditional mecha-









nistic physics. “Come into opposition”—is this
phrase quite correct? As regards a large number of
physicists, one would be tempted to say, rather:
“is used interchangeably” (according to the case
in hand) with the mechanistic method.
  



 




    [115-116] Indeed, energy is nothing but the
    ability to perform work, it is a mechanical concept
    and can always be measured mechanically, i.e.,
  







))





        with the aid of motion and the science of motion.
        Helmholtz, Gibbs and many others by no means
        broke with the mechanistic tradition when they
        added to mechanics the next chapter, generalising
        it in its application to physical realities. They
  




  
        wished for nothing more, and in fact they did
        nothing more than correct and further develop
        mechanical conception in line with the progress
  







  NB
  




    of physics, as had always been done since the time
of Galileo and Descartes. Side by side with the
principles of mechanics and within the mechanical
interpretation of reality, they put forward the
    principle of the conservation of force or of energy,
the principle of Carnot and the principle of least
action, one which had already played an important
role since the time of Maupertuis.
  

    Thus, the word “energetics” has primarily the
meaning which makes it part of the science of
physics, as recognised by all scientists. Let us add
that in France this part of physics is more usually
called thermodynamics, and although, etymological-
    ly, this word has too restricted a meaning for the
  





    content implied by it, it has the advantage of elim-
     inating all the misunderstandings caused by the
other uses of the word “energetics.”








  !
  




    The second use of this word relates not to a part
    of physics, but to a general theory of physics as
a whole....


    [117]...This law was not incompatible with
the mechanical conception. The latter had good
reasons for claiming that the different manifesta-
tions of energy were basically only different
  





    appearances caused by one and the same basic
    reality—motion....
  





 




    [120-122]...But if everything can be reduced to
the principles of classical mechanics, then, in the
opinion of the energeticists there was no explana-
tion for this increasing waste of force, this diminu-
    tion of usable energy. Nature ought to be capable
of going back, as it were, and endlessly recommenc-
ing the same cycle of transformations; for classical
mechanics is essentially the science of reversible
transformations, for which time is of no account,
and which, like happy peoples, have no history.
In reality, however, the systems would be no hap-
pier than peoples. They would all the same have
a history. That is why certain physicists have
refused to regard physics simply as the continua-
tion of classical mechanics. They have wanted to
throw off the yoke of tradition, finding it, like all
good revolutionaries, too narrow and too tyranni-
cal. Hence the trivial criticism and later the revi-
sion of the basic principles of mechanics. From
these efforts there arose a new conception of physics,
perhaps not so much in opposition to the former,
as was sometimes asserted, but in any case con-
taining profound modifications.
  

    In general it can be said that, finding classical
mechanics to he an insufficient basis for physics,
  





the latter has ceased to see in physical phenomena
    that which until then was always seen in them:
    the various kinds of motion, forming precisely
the science of classical mechanics. Until then, to
  







  NB
  




explain a physical phenomenon, to study it, meant
reducing it to forms of motion: the motion of
  





    material masses, of atoms, or vibrations of the
    universal transmitting medium—the ether. Thus,
  







  NB
  




    every physical explanation could be represented
diagrammatically with the aid of the geometry
of motion.
  



 




The new conception, which, it was proposed,
should replace the former, consisted in the first
place in the absolute rejection of all the figurative
    representations, of those “mechanical models,”
as the English say, without which at one time there
  













    was no real physics. Mach severely accuses them
of being nothing but “mythology.” Like all mythol-
ogy, it is childish; it could be useful when we did
not know how to look at things directly; but he
who can walk without crutches is not likely to
  





make use of them. Let us throw away the crutches
    of atomism and vortices in the ether. Having
  







!!





    reached the age of maturity, physics no longer
has need of crude images for worshipping its gods.
The ahstract language of mathematics is alone
capable of suitably expressing the results of expe-
rience. It alone will be able to tell us what actually
is, without adding and concealing anything, with
the strictest accuracy. Magnitudes, defined algeb-
raically and not geometrically, and even less
mechanically, numerical variations measured with
the aid of a conventional scale, and no longer
perceptible changes measured by displacements
in space in relation to a local origin—there you
have the materials of the new physics: conceptual






physics in opposition to mechanistic or figurative
    physics....








NB



 




    [123]...This new general theory of physics,
which Rankin already had in mind in 1855, was






elaborated particularly by Mach, Ostwald and








NB





Duhem. “The aim of every science is to replace 
experience by the shortest possible operations
  




 
    of the mind,” says Mach; this formula could be
the motto of scientific energetics....





 



§ 3. THE PHILOSOPHICAL INTERPRETATION
  OF ENERGETICS

    [127]...It is clear how philosophy, desiring to






silence the arguments drawn from science against
certain particular dogmas and against the religious
    standpoint in general, could use this ingenious
    interpretation. Do you put forward certain physical
  







  NB
  




truths in opposition to certain beliefs? Well, the
new physics desires only one thing, to return to the
ideas of the great epoch of faith. After the stormy
onslaught of three centuries, it returns, like a new
prodigal son, to the paternal bosom of the most
    orthodox Thomism.
  

    What is the most serious of all is that a scientist
renowned for the mathematical precision and ele-
gance of his works, particularly known for his
active propagation of the new physics, for the
limpid, admirably French form in which he has
expounded it, and for his splendid generalisations
in the sphere of energetistic mechanics—this scien-
  





tist himself considered it possible to align himself
    with this philosophical interpretation of the new
scientific theories. We refer to Duhem. Of course,
  







!!





in doing so he has tried carefully to draw a strict
line between his scientific and his metaphysical
conceptions....
  

    [130]...Developing this point of view, the new
philosophy could almost immediately deduce from
the contemporary attempts at reforming physics
the purely descriptive character of this physics,
    which made no pretence of explaining anything.
  





And this played into the hands of “fideism.” Science
  







  NB
  




    is powerless to go beyond the limit of qualities;
therefore it has to restrict itself to describing them.
It has to be a simple analysis of sensations, to use
Mach’s expression which, however, our new philos-
ophy fears to borrow from him in its true sense,
    which is of a completely “scientific-like” character.


    [131-134]...In contemporary literature, one can
quite often encounter ideas of this kind in exposi-
  





    tions varying considerably in quality: |the sciences
of matter tell us nothing about the real, for matter,
as they understand it, matter itself, in the popular
    sense of the word, does not exist. Simple, everyday
  







  NB
  




    perception already distorts external reality. It
builds it up wholly according to the requirements
of our activity. Science then further processes
these raw materials. What it shows us under the
name of matter is only a rough scheme in which
all the living wealth of the real is lost through the
sieve of scientific laws, or a heterogeneous mixture
of abstract elements, arbitrarily isolated or com-
bined, and entirely fabricated by us. Thus the
    road lies open for justifying the most mystical
forms of idealism....


    Without dwelling on these extreme misconcep-
tions one can nevertheless note that even among
serious and well-informed thinkers there remains
  





a tendency to apply to the physical sciences a crit-
    icism analogous to that which Poincaré applied
  







  NB
  




to the mathematical sciences, despite the energetic
protestations of Poincaré himself. From this point
of view physics, like mathematics, is a symbolic
    language, intended simply to make things more
intelligible, by making them simpler and clearer,
more communicable and, above all, more flexible
in practice. To make something intelligible evi-
dently means systematically to distort and alter
the ideas we obtain directly from reality, in order
to be able to make better use of the latter for
satisfying our needs.
  



 




Intelligibility, rationality have nothing to do
    with the nature of things. They are merely instru-
  







  NB
  




ments of action. Moreover, every new discovery
    seems to directly contradict our reason, for it
upsets our old habits. The mind has to adapt itself
to it (just as the body first has to learn to ride
a bicycle), for the new law in its turn to appear
to us as rational, arising from our apparent need
of intelligibility. We grossly deceive ourselves
when we think that this arbitrary symbolism
teaches us anything that could satisfy our pure
curiosity, our need for disinterested knowledge.
For knowledge, for cognition in the full sense of
the word, it is necessary to turn elsewhere....
  
§ 4. CRITIQUE OF CONTEMPORARY CRITICISM
  OF PHYSICS





    Although the attitude of the vast majority of
physicists to this interpretation of physical science
has been one of silence or contempt, it cannot be
  







  NB
  




disregarded by philosophical criticism. Though
scientists have the right to say: the dogs bark,
the caravan goes on, philosophical criticism which
is necessarily interested in the social and educa-
tional significance of doctrines, is compelled to
stop and take notice.
  



 




[136-138]...The majority of the adherents of the
new philosophy have addressed themselves exclu-
sively to the scientists, supporters of energetistic
physics and resolute opponents of mechanistic
physics. But among physicists, the extreme sup-
  







  NB
  




porters of energetistic physics are altogether a small
minority. In the main, physicists continue to be
mechanistic; of course, they are changing their
mechanical conceptions in order to bring them
into accord with the nexv discoveries, for they are
  













not scholastics. But they always seek to depict
and explain physical phenomena with the aid of
movements open to sensuous perception.
  

    On the other hand, it should not be forgotten
that, while energetics has produced a number of
  





elegant theories and expositions, almost all the
great discoveries of recent times are due to mecha-
nistic physicists and are connected with attempts
to present a picture of the material structure of
phenomena. It is worth giving some thought to
this circumstance.






 




    In order to provide theoretical physics with
geometrical rigour, energetics decided to make it
  





  simply a more concise and economically-worded
exposition of experimental data; but can the
theory of physics be reduced to a mere instrument
of economically-worded exposition? Can it totally
  













ban hypotheses from a science that has always been
made fertile by hypotheses? Should it not con-
stantly orientate itself for the discovery of the real
with the help of theories which, like the mechanis-
    tic theories, are always anticipations of experience,
attempts to obtain a clear idea of the real?
  

    Does it not follow then that to construct the
philosophy of physics by relying exclusively on
purely energetistic physics amounts to a peculiar
narrowing of the basis on which this philosophy
  





should be built? The new philosophy in essence
turns for confirmation of its ideas only to those
who can be well disposed towards it, and tbey are
only a small minority. This is a convenient ruse,
but a ruse nevertheless.






 




    Besides, are they a vourably inclined towards
    it as it imagines?
  

    This is more than doubtful. Almost all the
    scientists appealed to by pragmatism or so-called
nominalism have made serious reservations, includ-
ing Poincaré. Let us now turn to them.
  
§ 5. WHAT CONTEMPORARY PHYSICISTS THINK

    [138]...Thus, physics is a science of the real,
and even if it seeks to express this reality in a “con-
venient” fashion, it is nevertheless always reality
that it expresses. The “convenience” is only in the
means of expression. What is concealed behind
these means of expression which the mind can
    vary in searching always for the most convenient,
is the “necessity” of the laws of nature. This neces-
  





sity is not arbitrarily decreed by the mind. On the
contrary, it constrains the mind, confines its
means of expression within narrow limits. Within
the limits close to the approximations of experi-
  








    ence, and the small differences which physical phe-
nomena, governed by one and the same law, retain
because they are never identical, but only very
  





similar—within these limits the law of nature is
dictated to us from outside and by things them-
    selves: it expresses a real relation between things.
  

    [139]...Duhem will say, too, that one should








not take the experience of the physicist as a copy
of reality. Every physical experiment consists of
measurements, and these measurements presuppose
  













    a multitude of conventions and theories....
  

    [140]...Duhem will never deny this truth to the
propositions of physics: they are the description of
reality. Moreover, physical theory is not only an
exact description of the real, it is a well-arranged
description, for it always strives for a natural
classification of physical phenomena—a natural






classification, hence one which reproduces the
    order of nature. No dogmatist, whether Descartes,
Newton or Hegel, has ever demanded more....








  ha-ha!!
  


 




    [141]...Moreover, even if the latter [Dubem]






believes in the necessity for metaphysics side by
side with science, then why does be adhere to
Thomist metaphysics? Because it seems to him
  







that it is in better agreement with the results of
    physical science....
  



 




    [142-143]...Ostwald’s “scientism” is very close
    to that of the great Viennese mechanist, Mach,
    who on these grounds even refuses to be called
  













    a philosopher.
  



 




    Sensation is absolute. Through our sensations
    we cognise reality. But science is the analysis of our
  







  NB
  




sensations. To analyse sensations is to discover
    the exact relations between them, in short, to
  





    discover the order of nature, giving this expression
    its most objective sense, for the order of nature is








  NB
  




   nothing but the order of our sensations....
  





    [144]...In the criticisms of Mach by the rational-
    ists, he was sometimes reproached for a tendency
    towards pragmatism. He was accused of sceptical
    relativism. Is it because this brilliant historian
    of science often traces for us its humble beginnings








  NB
  




in the primitive arts of our ancestors? After all,
these were only a first attempt at adaptation. To
give it a precise evaluation, it is necessary to take
a look at the result, at the final point reached.
Or is it because his biological theory of science
makes truth into human truth? But human truth
remains truth; moreover, it is the only truth for
man. Sensation is evidently something human.
  





Nevertheless it is the absolute, and human truth
  






    is absolute truth, because for man it is the whole
truth and the only truth, the necessary truth. The
properties of man and the universe being what they
are, it is based on the nature of things. It is, in
    human terms, the cognition of everything that
exists....
  

    [147]...It is possible to imagine the existence of
microbes even though they were invisible up to
  





the moment when some reagent reveals them. Why
then should we not have the right to imagine
    matter as having a certain structure, which expe-
rience will some day reveal?
  




 



§ 6. MATTER ACCORDING TO CONTEMPORARY
  PHYSICS: GENERAL REVIEW

    [148]...In that case what is the sense of the cam-
paign begun by Brunetière and continued by reli-
gious-minded people, who were certainly sincere
but who desired to destroy everything that could
    be a stumbling-block; a campaign which, if it
did not lead to pragmatism, at any rate led to some
definite form of pragmatism?...
  

    [149-150]...Just as in mathematics we use terms
of order, number and extension to denote certain
groups of relations on which our sensations depend,
and just as mathematics takes these relations for
  





    its subject, so, further, we denote by the extremely
general name of “matter” a very large number of
    relations—far more complex—on which our sensa-
    tions also depend. Physics makes a study of these
  







  NB
  




    relations. This is all we wish to express when we
say that physics is the science of matter....
  

    [152]...To many people it might seem natural
that physics should have as its subject the elements
capable of entering into these relations and giving
them a real content, and filling them up as it were.
This was Spencer’s idea in his classification of the
sciences. However, this idea cannot be considered
a happy one. We register the elements of reality
directly, immediately, just as they are, and as they
cannot help being.
  

    Their existence requires no justification. One
cannot ask whether it is possible for them to be
  





other than they are. To assert that would mean
restoring the old metaphysical idol of the thing-in-
itself, i.e., in essence, idle verbalism in one form
or another. Experience should be simply accepted.
It is its own justification, because in the scientific
sphere it is for the positive mind the justification
    of every proposition.
  







  NB
The es-
  sence of
  Rey’s
  agnosti-
  cism



 




    [154-155]...Is then agnostic criticism of science
  





correct? And is there a thing-in-itself which is out
of the reach of science? etc., etc. Here, surely, we
have metaphysics and its inevitable playing with
words! Let us try to see clearly into this matter.
  

    If the relative signifies something that deals with
relations, then physics is relative. But if the relative
means something that has not penetrated to the
  







   
  NB
  




basis of things, then physics, as we understand it,
is not relative, but absolute, because the basis
of things, that at which analysis inevitably ar-
rives in order to explain them, consists of relations
    or, rather, the system of relations on which our






sensations depend. Sensations, the given, are
    permeated with subjectivity: these fleeting, lightn-
ing flashes are what they are made by a system
of relations which will probably never be repeated
in exactly the same form and which determines
my state and the state of the environment at the
    moment under consideration. But here the scientist
steps in to separate out the universal which is part
of the composition of the individual moment,














those laws of which it is the complex expression,
those relations which made it what it is.
  

    All scientific laws in effect tell us why and how
the given thing is what it is, by what it was condi-
tioned and created, because they analyse the rela-
tions on which it depends. And they will reveal
  




  
to us absolute human truth,[4] when this analysis
  







  ha-ha!
  




    has been completed, if ever it can be.
  
§ 7. THE CONCRETE DATA OF CONTEMPORARY
  PHYSICS

    [156-157]...All the relations on which the trans-
formation and reduction, the diffusion or dispersion
of energy, depend are grouped in the general
physical theory called energetics.
  





This theory tells us nothing about the nature of
the energies considered and, consequently, about
the nature of physico-chemical phenomena. It
simply describes how, at the expense of what, and
  







  NB
  




in what direction, physical or chemical changes
    of the state of a given body take place.
  

    The energeticists claim that it is not possible
to go further, that energetics gives us the complete,
necessary and sufficient explanation of material
phenomena, that is to say, the sum-total of the
  





relations on which they depend. In order to give
more objectivity to their view, some even raise
energy to a sort of substance which is alleged to be
the true material substance, the real and acting
cause of all our sensations, the model according
to which we should build our idea of nature.
  







  an amusing
  fellow, this
  “positivist”
  


 




    Here energy takes the, place of the corpuscles
of the atomic theories. It plays the same role and
has the same kind of existence: it is the basis
of things, their final nature, the absolute. Accord-
ing to Ostwald, for example, the description of the
transformations of energy gives us absolute knowl-
edge of the material universe. “When you are
struck with a stick, what do you feel: the stick
or its energy?” Energy—that is the substantial
reality which lurks beneath all material phenom-
ena...
  



 




    [158]...The mechanists claim, on the other hand,
that it is possible to proceed further. Energetics,
in their opinion, remains as it were on the surface
of things, but its laws should either be reduceable
to other, more profound, laws or, at any rate,
supplement them, by presuming their existence.
  







  Mechanists
  versus ener-
  getics. NB.
  Plus loin[5]
  than mate-
  rialistically
  interpreted
  (p. 157) ener-
  getics!
  


 




As already said, the vast majority of physicists,
and particularly the experimental physicists to
whom physics owes its latest successes, belong to
the mechanistic school.






 




    The supporters of this school criticise in the
first place the conception of energy and show that
one cannot raise it, as some people do, to a physical
or metaphysical entity.
  

    The energy of a system signifies only the capa-
city of the system to perform work: potential
when it does not result in detectable work, actual
or kinetic in the opposite case. Consequently, the
concept of energy is co-relative with the concept






of work, which is a mechanical concept. Hence,
it does not seem possible to represent energy exper-
imentally without turning to mechanics and
motion. But, in that case, to provide an intelligible
  







    explanation of physico-chemical phenomena, should
not energetics be joined with mechanics, be estab-
lished as its continuation and, consequently, be
reconciled with the consideration of mechanical
    ideas?...
  

    [159-161]...From this point of view, mechanics,
physics and chemistry form a vast theoretical
system, and mechanics represents the fundamental
  





basis of this system, just as motion is the ultimate
    essence of physico-chemical phenomena.






 




    Of course, modern mechanists no longer claim
that the mechanics of today, any more than the
laws governing transformations of energy, have
reached their final form, that science has found
its unshakable foundation. Having encountered
  





the criticism of the energeticists—and that is one
of the advances which modern physics certainly
owes to it—they abandoned the rather narrow
dogmatism of the old mechanistic and atomic
views. They think that the new discoveries should
  






 
    broaden the scientific horizon and introduce cons-
tant changes in the idea of the external world.
Have we not been witnessing during the last fifty
years the reconstruction, almost the overthrow,
of classical mechanics? The old framework was
smashed first of all by the principle of the conserva-
tion of energy (Helmholtz) and Carnot’s principle.
The phenomena of radioactivity, which allowed
us to penetrate more deeply into the nature of the
atom, led to the idea of the possibility of an electri-
  





cal structure of matter and of the necessity of sup-
plementing the principles of classical mechanics by
those of electro-magnetism.








  NB
  


 




    Indeed, the mechanistic viewpoint now tends
  




  
    to adopt the form which is termed the electron
theory. Electrons are the ultimate elements of
    all physical reality. Simple electrical charges,
or else modifications of the ether, symmetrically
  







  The electron
  theory =
  “mechanism”
  




distributed around one point, by virtue of the laws
of the electro-magnetic field, perfectly represent
inertia, i.e., the basic property of matter. The
    latter, therefore, is nothing but a system of elec-
trons. Depending on the nature of the modifica-
tions of the ether (modifications as yet unknown)
electrons are positive or negative; a material atom
consists of an equal quantity of each of them, or
at least possesses positive and negative charges
of equal size, the positive charge apparently
occupying the centre of the system. The negative
  





    electrons, or perhaps only part of them, revolve
round the remainder like planets round the sun.
  






Thus, molecular and atomic forces are only mani-
festations of the movement of electrons, just like
the various forms of energy (light, electricity,
heat).
  





 




    Hence, the remarkable conclusion: the concept
of the conservation of mass (or of the quantity
of matter), which, together with the concept of
inertia, formed the basis of mechanics, cannot,
apparently, be retained in electro-magnetic mechan-
  





ics: gravitational mass remains constant only
at moderate velocities, less than one-tenth of that
  






  
of light; but, being a function of velocity, it
increases together with it, and the more rapidly









the closer we approach the velocity of light.
This hypothesis presupposes either the existence
of various electrical charges and the ether, or the
ether alone, of which the electron is only a modifi-
cation.


    Finally, at the present time, the works of
Dr. Le Bon[6] and certain English physicists lead
us, apparently, to the conclusion that neither
the quantity of matter nor even the quantity of
energy remains constant. They are both only
relations depending on the state of the ether and on
its motion.[7]


    [163-171]...Today nothing remains, nor should
anything remain, of this idea. We have arrived
  





at the diametrically opposite viewpoint. All
physicists are prepared to revise the fundamental
principles of their science or to restrict their
application as soon as new experimental data
  







provide the necessary motive for doing so.
  

    The experimental method consists in rising
from particular facts to general laws, and from
the latter to still more general laws, constantly
deepening the nature of the given thing by this
ascending movement. It deduces particular laws
from general laws in its systematising theories only
to the extent that it encounters these general laws
on its path; and it encounters them by means of
particular experiments and by hypotheses which
these experiments are called upon to ver-
ify.
  

    But should it be concluded from this that
  





physicists thereby abandon the hope of arriving
at basic principles and increasingly deep-seated
    elements that will explain and embrace an ever 
  













greater part of the given thing? Such a conclusion,
even though it opposes the mistake of the ancient
mechanists, would he a no less dangerous error.
The present-day spirit of the physico-chemical
sciences, the scientific modern spirit, is not such
as to retreat before the unknown. It advances
more and more boldly towards conquest of it,
but by increasingly reliable methods. The stability
of the principles of physics will be assured only
at the end of the task. That is why we are witness-
ing today, and will witness more than once
again, so many revolutions produced in former,
or in future, ideas by the unforeseen discoveries
which have already thrown light on the path or
  





are destined to do so in the future. Progressive
physicists, as we have seen, are no longer frightened
by doubt being cast on the principles of the
conservation of mass or of gravitational







matter.




 




    Truth is not given ready-made; every day
    something more is added to it. That is the con-
    clusion which should be constantly repeated.
    Thanks to scientific work, our mind daily becomes
  







  Agnosticism =
  shamefaced
  materialism[8]





    adapted more closely to its subject, penetrating
more deeply into it. The assertions which we
  








    believed we could put forward after studying the
mathematical sciences present themselves here,
too, in an almost necessary way, and at least
in a very natural way. Every moment scientific
progress establishes between things and ourselves
    a conformity which is at once closer and deeper.
    We are comprehending more and better. And we
invariably see that a result established by scien-
tific experiment, i.e., carried through methodically,
may no longer, in the light of new results, have
the same degree of importance but yet continues
to exist by itself, intact and indelible, eternal
as truth, for it is a truth. He who would claim
that this effort is fruitless, or that it will always
be only strictly limited, is very daring and is
refuted in advance by everything that the history
of science reveals to us.
  

The dispute between energeticists and mecha-
    nists, a dispute often extremely lively, particularly
on the part of the energeticists, is properly only
a moment of the progress of the physico-chemical
    sciences and, moreover, a necessary moment.
Far from breaking the unity of development which
all historians have noted in these sciences, it
would rather seem to have its natural place there,
like the old disputes between Cartesians and
atomists, between Cartesians and Newtonians or
Leibnitzians, between the kineticists and the
    dynamists. And just as in the case of the old
theoretical disputes, the encounter between the
two great contemporary theories or, better still,
their parallel development, has rather had fruitful
    results. It has promoted the forward movement
of science.
  

    In the first place, energetics has put us on our
guard against certain abuses of mechanist models,
  





against the temptation of taking these models for
objective reality. Further, it has deepened thermo-
  








dynamics and shown very well the universal
    significance of its basic laws which, instead of being
restricted to researches relating to heat, have
a legitimate and necessary application to the
whole field of the physico-chemical sciences.
By extending the scope of these laws, energetics
has greatly contributed to making their formulas
more exact. More than this, while energetics has
    shown itself to be less fruitful than mechanism,
from the viewpoint of discoveries, it nevertheless
always represents a splendid instrument of exposi-
tion—sober, elegant and logical. Finally, and
  





    this is particularly notable in such chemists as
    Van’t Hoff, Van der Waals and Nernst, but is
  







more and more frequently encountered also among
the pbysicists, both theories are readily accepted;
in each case that theory which best lends itself
to the investigation is selected. They are used
concurrently; scientists start out from the general
equations of mechanics or from the general equa-
tions of thermodynamics, depending on whether
the path thus followed appears simpler or more
successful. The point is that physical theories are
essentially hypotheses, instruments of investiga-
tion and exposition, or organisation. They are
forms, frameworks, which have to be filled in by
the results of experiment. And it is these results
alone that constitute the true, real content of the
physical sciences.
  

    It is on these that all physicists agree, and their
constantly increasing quantity, ever more con-
current and harmonious, characterises the prog-
ress of physics, its unity and its lasting nature.
They are the touchstone of the theories and hypo-
theses which served to discover them and which
endeavour to organise them, while respecting
  





their real affinities, reproducing as closely as
    possible the order of nature. And these theories,
although they are always hypothetical and, it
follows, are always losing something—at times
  







a great deal—to the extent that experience brings
us new discoveries, never, however, die completely.
They become integrated by becoming transformed
into more comprehensive, more adequate, new
theories. It was so with the Cartesian theory and
with the atomic theory and, from the latter,
with Newton’s theory. Evidently it will be so
with energetics and the old mechanism. And are
not the kinetic hypotheses of the present day
preparing for this integration and this reconcilia-
tion?
  

    “The chronicler should note the fact that the
majority of modern results in the field of physical
chemistry were achieved by means of a successful
combination of thermodynamic methods and the
views of the molecular theory, in exactly the
same way as the creators of the modern theory of
heat simultaneously devoted their best efforts
to the development of atomistics, in particular
the kinetic theory.
  
 
“...We should regard, as an outstanding result
  





of the latter, the transference of atomistics to the
science of electricity.... Through this marvellous
widening of its horizon, atomistics threw a totally
  







  NB
  




    new light on a number of physical and chemical
processes....”[9]

§ 8. RÉSUMÉ AND CONCLUSIONS

    If the unknown is boundless, it would neverthe-
less be wrong in our day to call it incognisable,
as was done a few years ago.
  

    The repeated and irreparable setbacks of
metaphysical attempts led physics to constitute
  





    itself as a science by resolutely eliminating the








?





problem of matter. Thereafter it sought only the
laws of individual phenomena. This was “physics
    without matter.” But the growing successes due to
  







this new method permit us, it seems, to assert
today, contrary to the too narrow positivism of
the Auguste Comte kind, that it changed only
the method and not the subject or significance of
physics. Instead of approaching the problem of
matter in all its generality and from its most
difficult and basic sides, it approached it, on the
    contrary, through superficial details and from the
most accessible side. This was putting common
sense before audacious pride. Common sense was
rewarded, for nowadays, as a result of so much
work in approaching, we are beginning to compre-
hend the problem in all its generality and in all its
depth.
  

    In conformity with history, invariably repeated
by the human mind ever since it has been striving
to know things, science has taken a new subject
of study from the world of metaphysical chimeras.
  





The nature of matter is no longer a metaphysical
    problem because it is becoming a problem of an
experimental and positive order. True, this problem
  







  NB
  




has not been solved scientifically; there is still
room for many surprises; but one thing now seems
    certain: it is science and not metaphysics that will
solve it.
  

    Furthermore, I think, and I have tried in
another place to demonstrate it, that kinetic
ideas will always be closely linked with the progress
of physics, because they constitute an eminently
    useful, if not indispensable instrument of discovery,
and because they are best adapted to the conditions
  





of our knowledge. That is why I see the future of
physics in the continuation of mechanistic theories.








  NB
  




That is why I have just said that the energetics
theory will probably be absorbed, as was the old
mechanism, into a kinetic theory which is more
flexible and stricter from the viewpoint of the
admission of hypotheses. But mechanistic hypo-
theses, despite the repugnance felt for them by
abstract minds too preoccupied with mathematical
rigour, will probably always remain necessary for
the progress of physics, because they are hypotheses,
while the deliberate aim of the energetics theory
is to exclude hypotheses. More than this: they
are hypotheses that above all appear capable of
becoming the object of experiments, because they
are expressed in objective terms, in terms of per-
ceptions, which if not real are at any rate possible.
Indeed, science cannot do without guiding hypo-
theses.
  
C H A P T E R   IV
  THE PROBLEM OF LIFE
§ 1. HISTORICAL INTRODUCTION

    [173-174]...With the problem of life we come
to the basic differences which can separate philos-
ophy from science. Up to now the argument has
been, one might say, above all theoretical. The
    majority of the philosophers worthy of the name
admit that, practically speaking, scientific results
are valid for matter. If from the speculative point
of view they were able to raise some objections to
this validity, they nevertheless recognise that
everything takes place as though the conclusions
of science were, if not based on right, at least
  





applicable in fact to material reality. To some
  







  NB
  




    extent this reality can be expressed by mathematic-
al, mechanical and physico-chemical relations.
For matter, therefore, geometrism and mechanism
remain a good formula for study....
  

    [177] Animism, which was in former times
partly supported by Plato and Aristotle, considers
that all the phenomena of life are due to a rational
force, hence to the soul. In contradistinction to
    the Greek physicians who sought the causes of
health or sickness (the theory of humours) in
the data of observation, in contradistinction to
Descartes who absolutely separates the thinking
soul from organic and material facts, Leibnitz
and particularly Stahl support the view that
the inner life processes, although they have
nothing in common with conscious and rational
actions, are nonetheless manifestations of the
soul.
  

    Barthez and the Montpellier school, persisting
in the belief that the phenomena of life can be due
  





only to a special cause, refer them to a vital force
distinct both from material forces and the soul:
    hence the name vitalism[10] given to this theory....







 



§ 3. THE DEMARCATION LINE BETWEEN
  MECHANISM AND NEO-VITALISM

    [189-190] If we try in some way to synthesise
neo-vitalism according to its chief representatives,
scientists or philosophers, it seems we arrive at
  





    the following: the criticism which the neo-vitalists
make of biological mechanism is closely linked
with that which the pragmatist, anti-intellectual-
ist or agnostic philosophies made of the mathe-
matical and physico-chemical sciences. It appears
  







NB





    to us that we change the problem when we pass
from matter to life. Essentially, we are once more
faced, as we surmised at the outset, with the same
basic problem, and that problem is again the
problem of the value of science insofar as it is
knowledge. Only the particular terms in which it is
    essentially raised are changed.


    With what, in fact, did the new philosophy
reproach the mathematical or physico-chemical
sciences? With being an arbitrary and utilitarian
symbolism created for the practical requirements
of our mind, our reason, which are faculties of
action and not of cognition. Thus, when we extend
the physico-chemical method to biological facts we
naturally also transfer in the results that it allows
us to attain the consequences it implies, as regards
the value of these results. Hence the physico-
chemical mechanism will be an excellent formula
for giving us a practical grasp of living things;
  





it will be totally powerless to enlighten us as
to what life itself is. As with the physico-chemical
sciences in the sphere of matter, physico-chemical
  







  NB
  




mechanism in the sphere of life will allow us to
act, but never to know....
  



 




     [192-194]...The neo-Thomists restore force, aspi-
ration, desire in matter, re-animate it with the
  







spirit, although heathen, of hylozoism, from
which the Greeks, and in particular Aristotle,
seem never to have fully departed. Incidentally
they distort the Hellenic doctrine. For them matter
has no other activity but the force which the
creator put into it: the memory, so to speak,
of its creation and the indelible impression of it
which it bears. Hence its activity is not essential
but borrowed, it is creative only by authorisation.
But precisely thanks to that, it does not escape
at all from the complete grasp of mechanism.
  

    Moreover, the nominalists, who have a close
affinity to this neo-scholastic movement,[11] and
the pragmatists, pursuing a regular flirtation with
    these philosophies of belief (all too often one has
rather to call them philosophies of believers),
considered that they had the right to say that the
content of their subject is not exhausted by the
    sciences of matter. In order truly to know, it is
necessary “to proceed further.” A fortiori, will
they support the view that when we approach
life the limits of science become still more re-
stricted? Physico-chemical mechanism will be
applicable only to the material conditions of life,
but not to life itself.
  

    To sum up, for the pure disciples of Bergson it
will be all the material conditions of life, only
these, but all of them, that mechanism will be
able to attain. For the others, it will not even be
all the material conditions of life, but, insofar as
matter is already to a certain degree living and
stamped with finality, only that which is mechani-
cal and inert that we can abstract from it, only
that which we can adapt from it for our practical
needs. And these formulas can already serve for
answering the question that has been raised and
for fixing exactly the part of vitalism in mechan-
    ism.
  

    Is it not possible to find a more expressive
formula of demarcation? For the vitalist life
plays the part of a creative force; but precisely
because it depends besides on material conditions,
it is not at all a creation ex nihilo. As a result
of its operation it will certainly give something
new and unpredictable, hut in order to arrive at
that, it will operate on pre-existing elements which
it will have combined, and above all starting from
  





pre-existing elements to which it will have added.
The mutations observed by the botanist De Vries
    who, as a mechanist, interprets them differently
would here be the manifestation itself and the
    proof of these creative additions.
  







  NB
  


 


On to Part Two >>




Notes
[1] Rey A., La Philosophie Moderne, Paris, 
  1908,—Ed.
[2] Poincaré, La Science et l'Hypothèse,
  livre I (Paris, Flammarion).—Rey.
[3] Poincaré, La Valeur de La Science 
  (conclusion).—Rey.
[4] In the text, the phrase “absolute human truth” is 
  italicized as well as underlined three times.—KCG.
[5] further—Ed.



[6] Gustave Le Bon: L’Évolution de In Matière.—
      L’Evolution des Forces. (Flammarion, éditeur.)—Rey.

[7] Apparently, matter is converted into energy
  





  and energy into matter. By matter, of course, one
  should understand only gravitational matter, and by
  





  NB
  




  energy—only the capacity to perform detectable work.
  If by matter is meant the unknown basis of things,
  from which everything originates and into which every-
  thing returns, the ether, for example, or some other
  primordial entity, then Le Bon’s conclusions by no
  means refute its eternal nature and constancy; they
  lead neither to creation out of nothing nor to absolute
  destruction.—Rey.
  



[8] Lenin is referring to the well-known characterisation 
  of agnosticism given by Engels in Ludwig 
  Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy (see Marx and 
  Engels, Selected Works, Vol. II, p. 371).—Lenin.

[9] W. Nernst, Revue générale 
  des Sciences, 15 mars 1908.—Rey.

[10] “vitalism” is italicized in the 
  text.—KCG.



[11] The neo-scholastics or neo-Thomists seek above
  all to rehabilitate the scholastic interpretations of Aris-
  totelianism and therefore the philosophical doctrines of
  Saint Thomas.—The nominalists insist on the symbolic,
  artificial and abstract nature of science, on the huge abyss
  between reality and its formulas.—The pragmatists have
  a similar doctrine, but one which rests on a more general
  metaphysics. All cognition is directed towards action;
  consequently we know only what interests our way of
  acting. All these philosophies are agnosticin the sense






that they deny that we can reach, with the help of our
  intellectual faculties, an adequate and precise knowledge
  of reality. Despite the fact that Bergson formulated a
  metaphysics close to pragmatism—and prior to it—he
  






NB





  arrived at much less agnostic conclusions. Science, reason,
  attains part of the real, that which lends itself to being
  reduced to complete determinism and to being fully repre-
  sented in the form of spatial multiplicity, in a word,
  that which is the object of the mathematical and physico-
  chemical sciences. It is only for the remainder that rea-
  son and science are inadequate and have to he supple-
  mented by intuition and philosophy. Incidentally, all
  these doctrines are very shadowy and it is very difficult
  to define them.—Rey.




 



On to Part Two >>
<< Back to the Table of Contents


 





Works Index
    |   
  Volume 38

 | 

Collected Works
    |   L.I.A. Index




  < backward




  forward >





 



==========

## Part Two (pp. 440-474)











Abel Rey. Modern Philosophy. Paris, 1908 (Part Two)



Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Remarks on Books:
Abel Rey.
Modern Philosophy.
Paris, 1908
(Part Two)


<< Back to Part One


 



§ 4. NEO-VITALISM AND MECHANISM DIFFER
  ONLY IN PHILOSOPHICAL HYPOTHESES
  WHICH SUPPLEMENT SCIENCE

    [204]...But in the vitalist method the entelechies
    and dominants have nothing in common with
  





    described elements: the ends cannot be described
because they do not exist materially—at any
  







  letting the
  cat out of
  




rate they do not yet exist, for they are in the
  







    the bag!
  




process of becoming, of a progressive realisa-
tion.
  

    Their influence is not perceptible to the senses.
That is why it is more dangerous to turn to them
in science than to turn to mechanical models—and
the history of all the sciences proves it. The teleo-
logical hypotheses by their very nature escape
experimental control and can only be harmful if
they are chimerical.
  
§ 6. MECHANISM, TOO,
  IS ONLY A HYPOTHESIS

    [216-218]...But it would be contrary to all the
lessons of experience to assert that in the phenome-
na of life everything can be reduced to physico-
chemical laws and that mechanism in its whole
scope has been verified experimentally. On the
contrary, we know very little about life. Experi-
mental biology has to its credit a number of im-
portant results, if they are taken in themselves,
but they are very insignificant when compared with
all the results that we still have to obtain.
  

    Why, then, concern ourselves with mechanist
theories, one is led to think? Should not these
very general hypotheses, the verification of which
  





presupposes the complete achievement of science,
be banned from science? Here again we find an
opinion that we have already seen expressed by
a number of physicists regarding physics and, in
particular, mechanistic theories in physics. Let us
    recall that some energeticists were in favour of
  








banning mechanist hypotheses from physics as






being unverifiable, useless and even dangerous
generalisations. Among biologists, too, we find
some scientists who adopt the same attitude and
align themselves directly with these energetics
    physicists. In their opinion biology should be re-
  







  NB
  




stricted to a description of the phenomena of life,
without going beyond what experience allows us
to affirm. While using the energetistic scheme,
    it will restrict itself, when seeking general formulas
for systematising its laws, to measuring exchanges
of energy between the organism and its environ-
ment in the performance of various organic func-
tions, and to the enunciation of the laws governing
these exchanges.
  

    But is not this already an admission that there
is a basic analogy between the physico-chemical
sciences and biology, at any rate from the stand-
point of the description of facts and experimental
  





    verification? The energetics school in biology
is less clearly differentiated from the mechanistic
school than in physics. It is rather only a timid








  un aspect
  timide du
  méchanisme[1]





aspect of mechanism, for it opposes teleology and
  







NB





postulates a conformity between the phenomena of
    life and inorganic phenomena.
  

    And this again brings us to our previous con-
clusions: every time it is possible to make a scien-
tific analysis of a biological phenomenon, we
again find ourselves up against the relations be-
    tween biological activity and physico-chemical
activity. Hence everything takes place as though,
in connection with these facts, the mechanical
hypothesis, or at least the physico-chemical theory
    of life, had been partially verified....
  
§ 7. GENERAL CONCLUSIONS: BIOLOGICAL 
  INDICATIONS

    [223-224]...Living matter is clearly conditioned
by habit and heredity: everything takes place
as though it remembered all its preceding states.
It is said, however, that inanimate matter never
    manifests this property. It would even be a con-
tradiction to imagine anything of the kind. All
material phenomena are reversible. All biological
phenomena are irreversible.
  

    In these conclusions one forgets that the second
principle of thermodynamics could have been called
the principle of evolution or heredity.[2] One forgets
about all the phenomena of “residual” electricity
 and hysteresis. One forgets that physics will not
retreat even in the face of this conclusion: no
    phenomenon of reality is absolutely reversible,
which, however, does not prevent this irreversibili-
ty of partial systems, when transposed in the
infinity of time and space, i.e., in the total uni-
    verse, from being conditioned by reversible phenome-
na—just as chance and coincidence are, probably,
only a sign of our ignorance of necessary, very
    complex laws. However that may be, and no
matter which way one looks at irreversibility,
heredity cannot be an insurmountable obstacle
    for mechanist biology.
  

    [227]...Scientific discipline tries primarily to
find, beneath the appearances which our direct
sensations of objects and living beings give us,
the relations which link them together, the bonds
of dependence which explain their appearance or
disappearance, or their variations. The mechanistic
theory of evolution is nothing but the effort to
determine these relations of dependence as regards
the aspects, forms and characters in which life
and living beings appear to us.
  

    Scientific discipline further tries to link every
particular sphere it studies with the other spheres
in which it is applied. Science cannot resolve to
  





consider as isolated for all time the various orders
of facts for whose sake it is divided into particular
    sciences. This division has entirely subjective and
anthropomorphic causes. It proceeds solely from
the requirements of research which compel the
  







  An approach
  to dialectical
  materialism
  




serialisation of questions, the concentration of
attention on each of them separately, starting with
the particular in order to arrive at the general.
  





Nature is of itself one whole.








  NB
  


 



C H A P T E R   V
   THE PROBLEM OF MIND
§ 2. ANCIENT EMPIRICISM AND ANCIENT ANTI-
   METAPHYSICAL CONCEPTIONS: PSYCHO-
   PHYSIOLOGICAL PARALLELISM

    [242-243] Although metaphysical rationalism
constituted the great philosophical tradition, its
ancient affirmations a priori could not fail to evoke
objections from critical minds. Indeed, in all
times we see philosophers trying to resist the
  





    rationalist and metaphysical trends. These were
in the first place the sensualists and materialists,
then the associationists and phenomenists.  In
a general sense they may be called empiricists.












 




    Instead of opposing mind to nature, they try
anew to put mind in nature. Only they continue
to understand mind in the same simplified and
    intellectualist manner as those whom they are
combating....
  



 




    [244]...The empiricist theory regarded mind
    in approximately the same way as atomism regards
matter. This is the psychological atomism in
  







which atoms are replaced by states of consciousness:
    sensations, ideas, feelings, emotions, sensations
of pleasure and pain, movements, volitions, etc. ...
  

    [245-246]...Thus our psychological states are
only the sum-total of elementary consciousnesses,
corresponding to the atoms of which our nerve
centres are composed. Mind is parallel to matter.
It expresses in its own form, in its own language,
what matter, in turn, expresses in its own form,
  





and in a different language. Mind, on the one
hand, matter on the other, are two mutually-
    reversible translations of one and the same text.


For the idealists, the original text is mind; for
    the materialists, it is matter; for the dualist-
  







spiritualists both texts are equally the original,
since nature is written simultaneously in both
languages; for the pure monists, we are concerned
with two translations of an original text that
eludes us....
  
§ 3. THE MODERN CRITICISM
  OF PARALLELISM

    [248-249]...When it is said that consciousness
is one and continuous, one must beware of thinking
that the theory of the unity and identity of the
“Ego,” the corner-stone of ancient rationalism,
is being revived. Consciousness is one, but it does
not always remain identical with itself, as is the
case, moreover, with all living beings. It is con-
stantly changing; not as something created once
and for all, which remains what it is, but as a being
that is being constantly created: evolution is
    creative. There would only be a need for the
notion of identity and permanence if it were neces-
sary, in order to discover the real appearances, to
impose the link of synthesis and unity on the
    multiple states which seem to be revealed behind
these appearances. But if one supposes that reality
is essentially continuous, and that the gaps in it
are artificial, then there is no longer any need
to appeal to the principle of unity and per-
manence.
  



 




The theories of Anglo—American pragmatism are
extremely close to these. These theories are very
  







    diverse, particularly in the moral and logical
applications that it has been sought to deduce
from them. But what gives them their unity and
allows us to group them together are precisely the
general features of the solution they have given
  





to the problem of consciousness. William James,
the great psychologist of pragmatism, gave this
  






solution its clearest and most complete form.
His conception opposes at one and the same time,
and for almost the same reasons, both the concep-
tion of metaphysical rationalism and that of
    empiricism.


    [251-252]...William James claims also that to
arrive at this theory he needed only to follow
  





with the utmost rigour the teaching of experience:
hence he calls it “the theory of radical empiricism”
or of “pure experience.” For him the old empiricism
  







  James’
  “theory of
  experience”
  




    remained impregnated with metaphysical and
rationalist illusions. He tried to free it from them
completely.
  

    Indubitably, these new theories of consciousness
won very great favour in a very short space of time:
    the Englishmen—Schiller and Peirce, the Ameri-
  





cans—Dewey and Royce, scientists like Poincaré,
Hertz, Mach and Ostwald in France and Germany,
and, on the other hand, almost everyone who want-
ed to reform Catholicism, while remaining faith-
ful to it, could be associated with the trend of
    ideas which have been most systematically pre-
sented by Bergson and James. It is also inconte-
  







  NB
  James, Mach
  and the
  priests
  




stable that this favour seems to be largely
merited.
  

    [254-255]...True, rationalism claimed that
empiricism, i.e., the explanation of the progress of
the mind by experience alone, destroys all science
or, if you prefer, all truth. The theory of innate
or a priori reason was, above all, a legitimisation
of the rights of science. We shall see, in connection
  





with the problem of knowledge and truth, that
    pragmatism has in fact often led to sceptical
    conclusions, but these conclusions are by no means
necessary. James himself, who at times seems to









stand extremely close to sceptical irrationalism,








has pointed out that in a strict interpretation of
experience it should not be considered as giving
us only an idea of isolated facts, but as giving us
in addition, and in particular, an idea of the
relations existing between the facts.
  

    But does it not then become impossible to say
with the rationalists that the empiricists have no
guarantee that tomorrow’s experience will be
identical with yesterday’s or, in other words, that
phenomena always follow one another in the
same order since it is precisely the order of phenom-
ena that is the subject of experience? When we
come into contact with nature, the mind actually
    perceives not isolated phenomena, the terms
between which it will later establish some relation
or other, but the relations themselves, a definite
continuity in which we then arbitrarily mark out
the terms themselves, rather as we mark points
on a line.
  



 




    Thus, it seems that the new orientation which
has appeared in philosophy and which has been
given the name of pragmatism marks an indispu-
table advance in the scientific and philosophical
conceptions of the mind.







 



§ 4. GENERAL CONCEPTION OF PSYCHOLOGICAL
  ACTIVITY

    [256-258]...One would now have to establish
accurately what constitutes the relations which
form the psychological world and how they differ
from the relations which comprise the rest of nature
and experience. Perhaps the Viennese physicist,
Mach, has made the clearest points on this sub-
ject.[3] In every experience that which is given
depends on a multitude of relations which in the
first place are divisible into two groups: those
which have been verified in an identical way by
all organisms externally analogous to our own,
    i.e., by all witnesses, and those which differ
according to the witness. It is all the latter that
are the subject of psychology and together they
form what we call psychological activity. More
  





    exactly, the former are independent of our orga-
    nism and biological activity. The latter do depend
  







    on them, intimately and inevitably.
  

    If we take a piece of sulphur, then the geometri-
cal, mechanical, physical and chemical properties
are relations which are independent of our orga-
nism. Psychology has nothing to do with them.
If a living being is concerned new relations are
added to the previous ones: biological properties
which, too, are independent of our organism.
If it is a matter of our own organism itself, it also
    possesses properties which to a certain extent
are independent of the conditions in which it
is given to us in the experience; these are physico-
chemical and biological properties. Mathematics,
mechanics, physics, chemistry and biology are so
many sciences, each of which takes a group of re-
lations from the sum-total of relations included
in the given thing, and which are independent
and should be examined independently of our
  





    organisation. These are objective relations, the
    subject of the natural science, the ideal of which
is to exclude from what is given all relations
which make this given dependent on our organ-







ism....
  

    [259-261] Experience shows us the reciprocal
influence of the biological and the psychological,
the system of relations between them. Why should
not each of these two orders of facts be regarded
    as two orders of facts of nature, which act and
react on each other, like all the other orders of
natural facts: heat, electrical, optical, chemical and
other phenomena? There is no more and no less
difference between all these orders than between
the biological order and the psychological. All
phenomena should be regarded on one and
the same plane and as able to condition one
another.
  

    Against this conception the objection will
  





no doubt be raised that it fails to explain why
there is experience, and knowledge by the organism
of this experience. But does it not seem that one
could and should reply that this question, like
  






all metaphysical questions, is badly framed,
non-existent? It arises from an anthropomorphical
illusion which always opposes mind to the universe.
  





One cannot say why there is experience, for expe-
    rience is a fact and as such imposes itself.








  “experience
  is a fact”
  


 



 
    So as to depart from abstractions and generali- 
ties, let us try to develop in a more concrete form
the definition of psychology that we have just
given—and which appears to us the simplest and
        most scientific. Let us try to imagine the general
conception of psychological activity to which it
leads us.
  



 




Experience or, to use a less ambiguous term,
the given, has up to now seemed to us to be de-
  







    pendent on mathematical, mechanical, physical
and other relations. When we analyse these condi-
tions, it appears to us, in addition, to he dependent
on certain relations concerning which one can say,
in general, that they distort it according, to the
    individual to whom it is given: these distortions
constitute the subjective, the psychological. Can
we establish—of course very roughly and prelimi-
narily—the general meaning of these new relations,
of these distortions, i.e., the direction in which
    scientific analysis, in its progress through the
centuries, dares to reveal the most general relations
(principles) which they imply?
  

    Why, in other words, is the given subjectively
distorted, instead of being identical for all individ-
uals, instead of being a direct datum, forming
a single unity with the knowledge that we have of
it? It is distorted to such a degree that a fairly
large number of philosophers and common sense
have gone so far as to smash the unity of experi-
ence, and to advance the irreducible dualism of
  





    things and the mind, which is nothing but the
    dualism of experience as had by all, to the extent
    that the sciences correct it, and experience as dis-
    torted in the individual consciousness....








  experience of
  socially
  organised
  individuals
  


 




    [271-272]...Images are not identical with sensa-
tions, as subjectivism has maintained, if this
word, ambiguous in the scope of its meaning, is
given the sense of immediate experiences. On this
point Bergson’s analysis has been by no means
fruitless. The image is the result of certain rela-
tions already involved in immediate experience,
i.e., in sensations. Only the latter involve quite
a number of others. Let there be given only the
relations which form the system of the “image”
(a partial system, if compared with the whole
system of sensations and immediate experience)—
more exactly, let there be given only those rela-
    tions of the whole system which involve the de-
pendence of what is given on the organism, and
then we have precisely the image, the recollec-
tion.
  

    In defining recollection in this way we have
done no more than express the latest results of
experimental psychology as well as the older ideas
of common sense: recollection is an organic habit.
All that is common to recollection and primitive
sensation are the organic conditions. The former
  





lacks all the extra-organic relations with what we
    call the external environment involved in sensa-
tion.
  







))   NB



 




    This complete dependence of the image and
partial dependence of sensations on organic condi-
tions also enables one to understand illusions,
errors of the senses, dreams and hallucinations,
when relations with the external environment
  





are to some degree abnormally cut off, and expe-
    rience becomes reduced for the individual to that
  







))   NB





    which is taking place in his organism, i.e., to
the relations which depend on the latter, hence
    to the purely psychological, the purely subjec-
tive....








))



 



§ 5. THE PROBLEM OF THE UNCONSCIOUS

    [280]...Our life, fully conscious, is only an
extremely limited part of the sum-total of our
psychological activity. It is as it were the centre
of an illuminated area, around which extends
a much larger semi-shaded region that gradually
passes into absolute darkness. Ancient psychology
made a very serious mistake in regarding fully
conscious activity alone as psychological activity.
  

    Although it is difficult to exaggerate the extent
of the unconscious in our organisation, one should
  





not, as is very frequently done by a certain kind
of pragmatist psychology, exaggerate the qualita-
    tive importance of this unconscious.






 




    According to some pragmatists, clear conscious-
ness, intellectual and rational consciousness, is
the most superficial and insignificant part of our
activity....
  





 



§ 6. PSYCHOLOGY AND THE CONCEPT OF FINAL
  CAUSE

    [285-286]...To immediate and superficial obser-
vation, the higher psychological life, of course,
seems heavily stamped with final cause. In generalis-
ing by a familiar procedure from the known to the
    unknown, one sees that from the earliest times
attempts have equally been made at interpreting
in a teleological way the entire lower psychological
life. The simplest reflex, like blinking an eye
when the light is too strong, the simplest physical
pleasures and sufferings, the primitive emotions—
do not all these facts appear to be required to
maintain and advance the species, or to maintain
and advance the individual? Beginning with the
amoeba, that embryonic blob of protoplasm
which stretches out to some light irradiations and tries
to avoid others, has not all activity which can
    becalled conscious always belonged to the category
    of tendency, and is not tendency purpose in action?
  



 




    Nor should one be surprised that James, Tarde
    and many others conclude from these facts that
psychological laws have a totally different charac-
ter from the other laws of nature. They are teleologi-
laws....








NB



 




    The teleological conception of psychological
law is in essence nothing but a scientific facing
for metaphysical conceptions, which make ten-
  







dency, the will to live, instinct, the will, and
    action, the basis of everything that exists. Moreov-
er, it has been accepted, elucidated and developed
  





by the pragmatists, the adherents of the primacy
of action. For them functional psychology and
teleological psychology are synonymous terms....








  NB
  


 



§ 7. THE PROBLEM OF IMMORTALITY

    [294-296]...The antithesis of activity, reality,
which cannot be analysed, on the one hand, and
of relation on the other, disappears and, both as
regards mind and niatter, should be left on the
    dump-heap of obsolete metaphysics. All the given
is merely a synthesis, whose analysis is the concern
of science, which traces it to its conditions and,
further, resolves it into relations.
  



 




But in that case what becomes of the immortal-
ity of the soul, particularly its personal immortal-
    ity, since for two thousand years now we have
  







valued this above everything. Not to follow the
law of things, not to follow the law of everything
living, not to disappear, not to be superseded by
    something else! To run this fine risk, belatedly
invented by the bad gambler, that is man, the bad
gambler who wants to win the prize and demands
that the dice be loaded in his favour!
  

    To be sure a system of relations can hardly seem
  





eternal or immortal. However, there is no absolute
impossibility about it. Improbable—yes! Impos-
sible—no! Only, on the ground on which we now
  







stand, it would be necessary for experience to de-
stroy the improbability or, at any rate, to convert
it into probability.
  

    It would be necessary for experience to force
us to discover, beyond the subjective, the condi-
tions which would exist after the disappearance
of the organism, the relations which would make
it partially dependent on something other than
that organism. It is for experience to decide. It
alone is capable of dispelling doubts. A priori there
is nothing to stop certain conditions, certain rela-
tions, from being discovered which would involve—
at least partially—the indestructibility of one part
of what is given, for example, consciousness.
  



 




But need this be said? Experience has so far
never shown us anything of the kind. I am aware
that spiritualists claim the opposite. But that is
mere assertion. Their experiments, at least those
  






that are not based on trickery or deception (and
are not these a minority?), in the present state of
things can at most induce us to think that there
exist some forces of nature, some kinds of mechani-
cal motion, of whose manifestations we know very
little, and the conditions and laws—still less.
It even seems probable that they depend on the
human organism and are simply related to the
unconscious psychological and biological activity.
  



 




    Moreover, in the face of the poverty of the sham
experimental verifications of the life beyond the
grave, the theory of the immortality of the soul
can only retain the form which Socrates and
  





 
    Plato already gave it: it is a risk one has to take—
it is an appeal to the unknown, and an appeal
    to which there hardly seems any chance of get-
ting a reply....








  immortality
  and Rey’s
  agnosticism
  


 



C H A P T E R   VI
  THE PROBLEM OF MORALITY
§ 1. IRRATIONAL MORALITY:
  MYSTICISM OR TRADITIONALISM

    [304-302]...The new philosophies are, therefore,
primarily moral doctrines. And it appears that
  





     these doctrines can be defined as: a mysticism
of action. This attitude is not new. It was the
    attitude adopted by the sophists, for whom there
was also neither truth nor error, but only success.








  NB
  




It was the attitude adopted by the post-Aristotelian
probabilists and sceptics, the attitude of some
nominalists at the time of scholasticism, the
  





attitude of the subjectivists of the eighteenth
century, notably Berkeley.








  NB
  


 




    The doctrines of the intellectual anarchists like
Stirner and Nietzsche rest on these same premises.
  



 




Thus, in the stock of modern nominalism and
pragmatism, the words are newer than the things....






 




    [303]...When some modernlsts, llke Le Roy,
derive from pragmatism a justification for Catholi-
cism, they perhaps do not derive from it what some
philosophers—the founders of pragmatism—want-
ed to obtain. But they draw from it conclusions
which can legitimately he drawn and which, inci-
    dentally, were drawn or almost so, by outstanding
pragmatists like William James and the philoso-
phers of the Chicago school. I think I can say
  






    even more than this. I believe that Le Roy draws
the only conclusions that should legitimately be
drawn from this way of thinking....






 




    [304]...It is characteristic of pragmatism that
everything is true that succeeds and, in one way
or another, is adapted to the moment: science,
religion, morality, tradition, custom, routine.
Everything must be taken seriously, and that
  







which realises an aim and permits one to act
must he taken just as seriously....
  

    [305-306]...What has caused the downfall of
traditions and dogmas up to now? Science, or if
one prefers to consider the instrument rather than
the product—reason. Science lives by freedom;
    reason in the final analysis is nothing but free
    examination. Moreover, science and reason are,
above all, revolutionary, and the Greco-Western
civilisation founded on them was, is and will re-
main a civilisation of men in revolt. Revolt has
so far been our only means of liberation and the
only form in which we have been able to get to
know liberty. I have in mind the spiritual revolt
of reason that is master of itself, and not the
brutal revolt that has been only the covering—
often useful, sometimes necessary—for the precious
metal constituting the former.
  

    Thus, the chief aid that can be given to tradi-
tion, to the preservation of the ancient moral values,
to use a fashionable term, is the depreciation of
science. That is why pragmatism, nominalism,
should have had as logical consequence—as was
very well seen by the majority of those who adhered
to it, with a rational understanding of the cause—
the justification of certain motives of action: reli-
gious, sentimental, instinctive, traditional. On the
same plane as the motives of action borrowed from
  





scientific cognition or, still more logically, on a
higher plane, for science aims only at industrial
action, the new philosophy should have led to
the legitimisation of an irrational morality:
passionate impulses or submission to authority,
mysticism or traditionalism. Traditionalism some-
  







NB





times even goes so far that some (William James,
for example) do not hesitate in regard to morality
to return to the absolute of rationalist doctrines
of morality....
  
§ 4. THE SCIENCE OF MORALS

    [344]...For this conception of morality as
a rational art to be possible, it is clearly necessary
that a science of morals should be possible. Here
metaphysics renews its high hopes. In fact, so-
ciology, of which this science of morals is only
a section, has hardly come into being. Like psychol-
ogy, only much less advanced than this, it is still
in the period where it is necessary to argue against
the metaphysicians concerning the method, the
subject of science and its right to exist. It seems,
however, that here as elsewhere the question
will finally be decided in favour of scientific
effort. One cannot prevent the metaphysicians from
    chattering, but one can allow them freedom of
    speech and action. And so sociology, thanks to the






work of Durkheim and his school, has been working
and acting....
  











 



C H A P T E R   VII
  THE PROBLEM OF COGNITION AND TRUTH
§ 1. TRADITIONAL SOLUTIONS

    [325-326]...Actually, scientists, pure scientists,
concern themselves very little with this question
of truth. For them it is enough to arrive at state-
ments which receive universal assent and which,
therefore, appear to be necessary. For them every
experiment methodically carried out and properly
  





     controlled is true. Experimental verification—
that, they say, is the criterion of truth. And the
scientists are perfectly right, for practice has
    always justified this attitude. To suppose that
  







  NB
  




it will not always justify it would be to imagine
the absurd, to doubt for the pleasure of doubt-
ing....
  

    [328-332]...The modern rationalists energeti-
cally defended themselves against the attacks of
  





pragmatism, when the latter claimed that the
    reason of the rationalists amounted, in the final
analysis, to guaranteeing to our mind a true copy
    of reality. And, indeed, pragmatism reproached
  







  NB
  




rationalism for dividing cognition into two syn-
chronised parts: the objects or things-in-themselves
and the ideas which the mind makes of them....







 



§ 2. THE PRAGMATIST CRITICISM

    In the rationalism of the nineteenth century,
as in evolutionary empiricism and also among the
modern rationalists, we, of course, already find
this idea that the mind is not a mirror, nor truth
a faithful image of things. Usually it is claimed
that truth is the result of the work of the mind on
things. But this again means putting things in
opposition to mind. Pragmatism goes further.
  

    All experience, all knowledge, is at the same
time action: to live means to act, and only to act.
From which it follows—and it is this that caused
the name of pragmatism to he given to this system,
    which essentially defines it in the general view—
that truth is defined as a function of action, i.e.,
    a function of its practical results. This is success.
Every experiment that is successful, i.e., that
allows the expected result to be achieved, determines
a truth. In order to get away from philosophical
abstractions, let us note that in the final analysis
    this conclusion is merely a generalised expression
of the faith of scientists in experimentation.
At what moment does the scientist say that the
hypothesis advanced by him is true? The moment
the result he expected to see in the operation
undertaken by him is actually apparent. Since
this operation corresponds to the hypothesis or,
    more correctly, to the chain of hypotheses which
he had in his mind, and the result obtained cor-
responds to the conclusion from this chain of
hypotheses, his idea was successful; it has been
verified by experiment.
  

    To be sure, if one identifies success with experi-
mental verification, then the pragmatist proposi-
tion appears to be true; it merely conveys the
essence of the experimental method. But the
trouble is that the word success is used sometimes
in this limited sense and sometimes in its broad,
popular sense, depending on the occasion and the
philosopher. This is particularly noticeable in the
    case of William James. He claims that truth ap-
plies to everything that is verified experimentally,
and, at other times, to everything that ensures any
sort of success for our activity. Hence, if one
adopts this latter proposition, one is almost neces-
sarily brought to the conclusion that truth no longer
exists. For what is successful today may not be
successful tomorrow—a thing that often happens
in practice, as proved by changes in laws and
    jurisprudence, moral rules and religious faiths,
and scientific opinions. The truth of today is
the error of tomorrow, truth on this side of the
Pyrenees is error on the other side. The theme is
    commonplace. And these conclusions, which
Peirce—the founder of pragmatism—firmly set
  





aside and combated, and from which the great
pragmatist philosophers, William James in partic-
ular, tried to escape by means of the most subtle
  







evasions, are in general accepted by the majority
of the epigones. Moreover, in regard to the problem






of truth, pragmatism has become synonymous with
scepticism, just as, in regard to morality or faith,
it has become synonymous with irrational tradi-
  






    tionalism.
  

    And yet, as in all criticism, there is, of course,
an element of truth in the pragmatist criticism
of rationalism. One can say of it what frequently
has to be said of critical theories: the destructive
part is excellent, but the constructive part leaves
  





     much to be desired. Certainly the theory of mind
as a mirror of things, and of truth as a copy, is
crudely superficial. The evolution of scientific
  







  sic!
  




truths through all the mistakes which strew the
    path of science proves this.








      ha!
  


 




    On the other hand, when we regard ourselves
as an organism operating in the environment of the
universe, it is true that we cannot separate the
realm of practice from that of truth for, in ac-
    cordance with all that we have said above, and
in accordance with all the lessons of science, we
cannot separate truth from experimental verifica-
tion. Only those concepts that succeed are true.
  





But one has yet to discover whether they are true
because they succeed or whether they succeed
because they are true. Pragmatism is always
  






inclined to choose between these alternatives in
favour of the first. Common sense, apparently,
can only choose the second....
  
§ 3. AN INDIRECT INDICATION OP A SOLUTION
  TO THE PROBLEM OF TRUTH

    [332-334]... The given, the experience, is evi-
dently that which is known. Consequently, it is
necessary to assume complete unity between the
given and the means by which it is cognised, to
make a determined break with all dualism at the
point of departure—but only at the point of
departure. This is an important limitation. Does
it not in itself already contain the key to the
solution of the problem of truth?
  

    At the point of departure the only possible
method of cognition, i.e., the only method of
discovery, is the experimental method, the elimina-
tion of all a priori methods, all dialectical reason-
ing.
  

    Modern science fully confirms this proposition
and thereby postulates the first statement which
we have just advanced. The mathematical sciences
themselves have experience for their point of
departure; reasoning comes later, as we have seen,
and always remains to a certain extent subordinate
to experience.
  

    But experience is not merely the immediate
experience of the given; it includes also—and this
in our view is James’ great philosophical innova-
tion—the relations implied by the given, and
which form a rigid fabric between all immediate
experience and past or future experience. If expe-
rience consisted only of immediate experience, we
would have only sensations and not science; we
would not even have perception in the full sense
of the word. The object of science, and even of
perception, is precisely to analyse immediate
experience in order to arrive at the experience
which has prepared it, or which prolongs it. To
perceive and above all to note, to draw attention
and to reflect—this is the beginning of this pro-
tracted experience.
  

    From this second remark we can draw the
following conclusion: all knowledge that expe-
rience gives us is interconnected and becomes
    systematised. But it does not become systematised,
as in rationalism, as the result of an activity
that is superior to it and which would impose its
forms on it. While seeking to guarantee the stabil-
ity of science, this concept on the contrary leads
to scepticism, for it makes cognition a creation of
the mind, and this dualism inevitably raises the
question as to whether or not this creation of the
  





mind, cognition, distorts the given. Here, on the
    other hand, our knowledge becomes systematised in
exactly the same way as it is given to us, and the
relations of the given have the same value as the
  







given itself. In reality, the immediately given and
the relations it involves form a unity and are
    indivisible. The acts of cognition are all of the
same kind and of the same value....
  
§ 4. THE PROBLEM OF ERROR





    [336-347]... In the |absolute realism| in
    which we have thus far been moving there is
apparently no place for error. But let us recall
that we made experience and cognition identical
only at the point of departure. The time has come
to show what this limitation implies.
  









  réalisme
  absolu[4]
( = histor-
  ical ma-
  terialism )



 




    It is a fact established by experience that cogni-
tion by different individuals is not exactly the
    same. This can be explained in two ways: either
there exist as many different realities as there are
individuals (which is absurd: we should be falling
into subjectivism), or—and we are consequently
  





forced to adopt this alternative since the given
    is unique and the same for all—the difference be-
  







ⅹ





tween the cognitions which individuals obtain
about the given arises from the conditions in
which they were and are situated, in other words,
from certain individual relations which exist
between them and the given, and which scientific
analysis can reveal. This is the conclusion to which
we were led by other considerations in connection
  




  
with the problem of consciousness. We saw that
the given involved relations independent of the
cognising individual— objective relations—and re-
  







!





lations in which the given depends on the cognising
organism—subjective relations.
  

    Once this is admitted, we see that in experience,
and not now at the point of departure but in the
  





    measure that we analyse it, bifurcation takes
    place between the cognising agent and the object
    of cognition. This relation, in accordance with
  







  NB
  




what we have said, has the same value as the
given itself. It imposes itself on us with the same
justification as does the given; from which
it follows that the difference between the mind
and the object should not be regarded as something
primary, but as the product of analysis, as two
very common relations which analysis discovers
in the given (W. James); and this distinction
derives its value from the value given at the outset
to experience taken as a whole, single and indivi-
sible experience.


    But in that case mistakes and errors have
a very natural explanation: they are the changes,
the distortions, which depend on the individual
and subjective conditions of cognition. While
science, thanks to experience, makes an increas-
ingly complete analysis of the given, it should,
no matter how prolonged and arduous the task,
gradually exclude all these “personal equations”
which are far more complex than those which
astronomers assign to the visual perceptions of the
individual observer. It should draw a dividing
line between objective and subjective relations.
It was for just this purpose that it was created.
  




   

    Do these considerations not lead us to a con-
venient and practical definition of truth? Truth
is the objective. The objective is the sum-total
of the relations which are independent of the
    observer. In practice, it is that which everyone










  Rey’s theo-
  ry of cogni-
  tion =
  shamefaced
  materialism
  




admits, that which is the subject of universal
    experience, universal agreement, using these words
    in a scientific sense. In analysing the conditions
  









of this universal agreement, in seeking behind
    this fact the law it conceals, its cause, we arrive
at this conclusion: scientific work aims to “de-
subjectivise,” de-personalise, experience, methodi-
cally prolonging and continuing it. Hence scientific
experience is the continuation of crude experience,
and there is no difference in character between
a scientific fact and a crude fact.
  

    It has sometimes been said that scientific truth
is nothing but an abstraction. Of course it is only
an abstraction if one is considering crude expe-
rience, i.e., subjective and individual experience,
for it excludes from this experience everything
that depends solely on the individual who cognises
through experience. But, on the other hand, this
abstraction aims at discovering the given as it
really is, independent of the individuals and circ-
  





umstances which change it; it aims at discover-
    ing the objective,[5] the concrete par excellence,
the real.








  NB
  


 




    It would be interesting to try to verify this
general theory by analysing some famous errors.
Ptolemy’s system, for instance, shows us experience
encumbered with individual ideas which depend
on the terrestrial conditions of astronomical obser-
vation: it is the stellar system as seen from the
earth. The system of Copernicus and Galileo is
much more objective, since it does away with the
    conditions which depend on the fact that the
observer is situated on the earth. In a more general
sense, Painlevé has pointed out that causality
in mechanics, in the science of the Renaissance
and in the science of our day, embraced the condi-
tions of the appearance of phenomenon independent
of space and time. But the point is that the condi-
tions of the situation in space and time embrace,
particularly in mechanics, almost the totality of
    the subjective conditions which are no longer
sufficiently crude to be eliminated by summary
consideration.
  



 




An important conclusion: error is not the abso-
lute antithesis of truth. As very many philosophers
have already claimed, it is not positive; on the
contrary, it is negative and partial, it is in a sense
a lesser truth. In ridding it—thanks to experi-
  







  truth and
  error (ap-
  proach to dia-
  lectical mate-
  rialism)
  




    ence—of the subjective that it involves, we pro-
gressively approach the truth. Once the truth has
  




  
been reached, it is in the full sense of the word
absolute and a limit, for it is objective, necessary
and universal. However, this limit is far removed
  










from us in almost all cases. It appears to us almost
like a mathematical limit, which one approaches
closer and closer without ever being able to reach.
The history of science, moreover, shows us the
    truth in the becoming of development; the truth is






not yet formed, but is rather in the process of
formation. |Perhaps| it never will be formed, but it
    will always be more and more formed.
  











 




    A final question may perhaps be raised: Instead
of being satisfied with what is, are we not still
obsessed by the old metaphysical illusion of trying
to discover why things exist? Why does experience
  





    have subjective conditions? Why is its cognition
not immediately one and the same for all? It
would appear that we have the right to refuse
  







  phrase-mon-
  gering with
  “experience”
  




to reply; but here thanks to psychology it seems
one could indicate in the positive. If full experience
had to any degree knowledge of itself, like the god
of the pantheists, this knowledge would indeed
be immediately one and the same. But in expe-
  





rience, as it presents itself to us, the cognition of
    experience is given in a fragmentary way and it is
only to those fragments of experience that we are
ourselves.
  







  “experience”
  


 




    Biology and psychology tell us that we are
what we are, or rather have been shaped into
(what we are, by adaptation, a continuous equilib-
rium with the environment. From which, in)
    general, it can be concluded that our cognition
should above all correspond to the requirements
of organic life. Moreover, it is at first restricted,
vague, extremely subjective, as in instinctive life.
    But once consciousness appears in the play of
universal energies, it is preserved and strengthened
because of its practical utility. Increasingly complex
beings are evolved and develop. Consciousness
becomes more exact, more precise. It becomes
intelligence and reason. And at the same time
  





(adaptation, adequacy in relation to experience,)
    becomes more complete. Science is merely the
  







  l’expérience =
  le milieu?[6]





highest form of this process. Even if it never
attains it, science has the right to hope for a cogni-
  





tion which will rather be at one with the given,
which will be absolutely adequate to the object:
    objective, necessary and universal. Theoretically
  







its claim is justified, because it is in line with
the evolution that has taken place up to now.
In practice this claim will most probably never
be satisfied, for it marks the limit of evolution,
and to attain it would require a state of the universe
quite different from that at present, and a kind
of identification between the universe and the
experience of cognition.
  

    In any case, one conclusion impresses itself:
    scepticism in relation to science conceals the most
complete and clearest metaphysical illusion that
ever deceived philosophical thought. It consists
in raising non-existent problems, in seeking a non-
existent reality beyond reality in order to explain
the latter. It is the result of the dualistic abstrac-
tions in which philosophy has always been only
too willing to engage.
  

    In particular, is it not overthrowing all expe-
rience to see in the embryonic, instinctive, vague,
almost wholly subjective and instantaneous cogni-
tion of awakening consciousness, original and real
experience, as Bergson, Le Roy and some pragma-
tists are inclined to do. Primitive experience,
wholly stamped with subjectivity—yes, but also
wholly stamped with error and unreality. This
vague, nebulous experience is only the covering
of experience. True experience of the real, on the
contrary, is in the increasingly lucid limit towards
which the human mind makes its way, and towards
the increasingly rational form which it tends to
adopt, towards reason. The most artificial of all
abstractions is that which excludes from experience
the results of rational labour and the progress of
evolution.
  

    This evolution has been definitely guided by
practice and towards practice, for it is transmitted
and realised owing to the constant adaptation
of the being to its environment. Who would at-
tempt to deny this today? That is one of the most
decisive victories of pragmatism over a now fos-
  





silised rationalism. But it does not mean that truth
is defined as a function of utility and success.
On the contrary, it means that the utility and
        success are a consequence of the acquisition of
truth. Why and how did cognition appear in
  






nature? Because some beings were incapable of
acting blindly. They bad to know the circumstances
of their action. And that is why, having taken
from pragmatism everything that seemed to us to
be excellent in its criticism of the old metaphysics,
we resolutely turn our backs on it in the name
of absolute positivism.
  

    To express sensibly and accurately the relations
between practice and truth, it seems, therefore,
that one should not say that what is successful
is true, but rather that which is true is successful,
  





    i.e., what is in conformity with reality, insofar
    as it concerns attempted action. Direct action is the
result of exact knowledge of realities, in the en-








  shamefaced
  materialism
  




vironment of which it takes place. We act cor-
rectly in the measure that we know truly.
  
§ 5. THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE

    Everyone will agree, I think, that we affirm as
true and objective that which is independent of the
individual coefficient which is to be found in every
individual in the act of cognition. But when diver-
gencies appear it is a matter of saying at what
moment the individual coefficient disappears.
Confronted by any kind of experimental confirma-
tion, can I draw a line between that which has been
universally noted and that which has been noted
only by me?
  

    We said, in a general way, that the effort of
science is in all cases directed precisely toward
drawing this line. Basically, science has no other
aim. It could be defined by this characteristic.
In practice, then, we already have a primary
  





means of distinguishing what is true and objective
from what is subjective and illusory. That which
  






    has been acquired by means of rigorously applied
scientific methods will be true. Scientists have
the duty of elaborating, perfecting and defining
these methods. This primary criterion is more
  





strict than the very vague rule given thus far:
universal agreement. For universal agreement may








  confuses the
  issue
  




be only universal prejudice. And a priori there
is nothing to bar the hypothesis that such preju-
dices may exist in a truly universal manner during
    a particular period, although one could hardly
cite any of them. But if we replace the expres-
sion “universal agreement” by the expression
scientific control, then the objection collapses, for,
insofar as it is a question of prejudice, it is impos-
sible to indicate the reasons for it, whereas scien-
tific control only exists when these reasons are
manifest. Obviously, we see scientific control only
where hypotheses are excluded, and we admit
that it can just as well establish the limits of an
    approximation as a strictly exact truth.
  

    However, scientists will not engage in a search
for any other criterion. And from the practical
point of view they are perfectly right. But from
the speculative and theoretical point of view one
may find—and this is the opinion of all meta-
physicians who have been engaged in creating a
theory of knowledge—that the indicated criterion
is unsufficient. Let us summarise in their crudest
form all the objections that can be raised from
this new point of view: is not all science, in its
turn, with its methods and its control, a universal
prejudice and, to use Bacon’s expression, an
idola tribus?[7] Indeed, one can imagine that no
matter what efforts we make to draw a line be-
tween the subjective and the objective, we always
remain enclosed, at least to a certain extent, in the
subjective. Our cognition would always depend
on our individual structure and, consequently,
would also always distort its object. Taking the
psychological hypothesis which we advanced in
    connection with consciousness, can it not be said
that since cognition is the result of the adaptation
of our being to the actions which it has to carry
out in its environment, all cognition will always be,
without our being able to take this into account,
a distortion of the environment in accordance with
the structure and the requirements of the human
race?
  

    It seems one could certainly reply: yes. But
precisely because we cannot take this into account,
the problem is insoluble and futile. It must be
  





    granted: the truth that man can attain is human
    truth. By this we do not mean to say that it is
  













relative in the sceptical sense of the word. But
    we do mean to say that it depends on the structure
  







  realtive in
  the sceptical
  




of the human species, and is valid only for that








  sense!!!
  




species. Here, with some correction, one must
repeat the famous words of Gorgias: we know
nothing that is not human. If by chance we were
to know something that had nothing of the human
in it, we would be unable to take account of it;
and if, which is impossible, we were able to take
    account of it, then we would be unable to inform
others of it. Consequently, in looking for a sign
and definition of truth, it is not a question of
finding a sign and definition that would be valid
for anything other than the human race, but
simply a sign and definition that would be abso-
lutely and identically valid for all representatives
of the human race. It is in this sense that the
criterion already referred to—scientific control—is
    sufficient.
  



 




    Moreover, once and for all an end must be put to
certain sophisms: truth, valid for the whole human
  







)   ha!
  




race, human truth, is absolute truth for man, be-
  








cause if it is supposed, as the adherents of an
  





extra-human absolute suppose, that it is not
    a copy of the real, it is still, at any rate for man,
the only possible exact translation, the absolute
equivalent....
  











 




    [351]...Perhaps, those who try to find reasons
for doubting scientific results may still say: we
are ready to allow that properly controlled ex-
perience gives us effectively and fully the trans-
formation of a cause into a given effect and, it
follows, an indubitable relation between the condi-
tion and the conditioned. But what can prove to us
that this relation will manifest itself identically in
a second experience? Leibnitz claimed that all
facts differ, if only a little, from one another be-
cause we can distinguish them from one another
(the principle of the indiscernible: in all the
forests of the earth no two identical leaves are to
be found). A modern scientist, Poincaré, claimed
    also that physics never deals with identical facts,
but simply with facts that closely resemble one
another. In that case, what use is science to us;
for if it wants to be strictly exact, then every new
    fact requires a new law.
  



 




This objection is of the same character as the
following: every fact embraces infinity. Conse-
  







quently, we would have to have complete science
in order to have the very minimum exact knowl-
    edge of the smallest object. It is overcome in the
same way and almost of itself....
  

    [352]...To sum up, the given is the subject of
science, because it is analysable, and because this
analysis reveals to us the conditions of its existence.
Science is certain because every analysis it makes
gradually brings us to experimental intuitions
    which have the same value as the given; hence
    science has the same degree of certainty as the






existence of the universe, which it explains, and
my own existence, which is likewise known to me
 through experimental intuition.
  







  finale =
  shamefaced
  materialism
  


 



C H A P T E R   VIII
    GENERAL CONCLUSIONS:
    THE PHILOSOPHY OF EXPERIENCE

    [353-357]...Up to now philosophy has been
above all a system of values, to use an expression
now in vogue. It sought to establish a hierarchy
of things and to make laws about the good, the
    true and the beautiful in the name of this hierarchy.
In general, one can say that it never conceived
natural facts on one and the same plane, impar-
tially and objectively; on the contrary it arranged
them on different planes in the name of wholly
subjective personal preferences or collective preju-
dices, human of course but equally subjective for
that very reason.
  

    All Greek philosophy and scholasticism, the heir
of Aristotelianism, present us with typical scales
by which the value of things is measured. Both the
philosophy of the Renaissance and all modern
    philosophy, despite the isolated efforts of a Spino-
za, were crystallised in one and the same mould.
Moreover, leaving aside Spinoza’s system, since
it represents an excellent attempt to conceive
things from a viewpoint as little human and
    subjective as possible, we always find, from the
very beginnings of Greek philosophical thought,
the same two or three general orientations along
  





metaphysical lines. These are the orientations
    according to which all the textbooks still usually
classify philosophical systems under the names
of materialism, spiritualism and idealism.







 




    In essence—considering things from the very
general standpoint that we adopt here, i.e., the
standpoint of the “particular scale of values”
offered by each of these orientations—since spirit-
ualism and idealism often present the closest
  





analogies, it can be said that metaphysics has
always confronted us with two great scales of
    value: the materialist scale and the idealist-
spiritualist scale. These two scales oppose each oth-
  







  NB
  




er and each is almost the reverse image of the other.
  



 




    In the idealist-spiritualist scale, mind occupies
    the topmost position; it gives all the rest its sense
and value either because, as in the case of idealism,
  







  judgement of
  idealism and
  materialism
  




    it represents the sole reality, material appearances
being created by it or existing only through it or
because, as in the case of spiritualism, it offers
above material reality which is merely its support
or its environment, the higher reality in which
nature culminates and through which nature is
  





explained.—In the materialist scale, on the
other hand, everything derives from matter and
everything returns to it. It is the eternal and
  








|immutable| creator of all the spectacles of the
    universe, including the spectacle of life and of
consciousness. Life is only one particular variety—
among an infinite number of others—of the combi-
nations which blind chance has evoked from the
original matter. Consciousness, thought are only
phenomena of life; the brain secretes them as the
liver secretes bile. Basically, all the phenomena
that we can observe—amber which electrifies,
iron which heats, steam which vapourises, liquid
    which solidifies, light or sound, life or thought—
are all nothing but the appearances embellished
by the various combinations of vortices of a homo-
geneous field which fills all space, or of the atoms
which collide in the infinite void.
  

    It seems to me that one could represent the
manner in which spiritualism and idealism argue
    approximately in the same way: motion is incon-
ceivable without a force to animate the moving
body. Force is unintelligible except in relation
to the effort we ourselves feel in muscular move-
ment, in the tendency of life; it follows that effort
presupposes life. But vital effort, in turn, is always
directed to an end; bearing the stamp of purpose,
it is conceivable only by the consciousness which
    directs it. Consequently, thought or, at least,
something of the order of immaterial and free
spirit is necessary both as the supreme principle
of explanation and as the essential principle of
existence and creation. Allow the spirit, and
everything in nature becomes clear. Suppress it,
and nature becomes incomprehensible. It vanishes
into nothingness.
  

Materialism, on the other hand, claims—if
    I may use the same summary procedure—that every
experiment that explains a psychological fact
for us reduces it to organic facts. Organic matter
comes closer and closer to inorganic matter. Force
    is nothing but a shock impulse; it is motion com-
  





bined with something else. Hence at the basis of
    things we find only sheer, blind motion.
 
  






 
  3,000 years
  of idealism and
  materialism
  




And soon it will be three thousand years during






which these systems of value have been taken up
by generation after generation, elaborated, some-
times made more precise, and very often obscured
by the subtleties of thought which is never ready
to admit itself conquered. And we are hardly any
further advanced than we were at the beginning.












 




    Does this not mean, then, that the questions
these conflicting systems are debating are idle ques-
tions and badly formulated? Is not the desire to
establish an explanatory hierarchy between things
    a purely anthropomorphic prejudice? And is not
this prejudice derived much more from the aspira-
tions of individual sentiment than from rational
  





discussion? Basically, it is for ends totally dif-
    ferent from objective cognition that these systems
    are put forward and opposed to one another, and
    concern for them has nothing in common with
the impartial search for truth. Thus, since they
    are incompatible with a positive discussion, we
shall not consider them any further.








  ha!!
  


 




    Either I am greatly mistaken or modern philos-
  





ophy in its vital and powerful trends—positivism
    and pragmatism—is tending towards this conclu-
sion[8]....
  







))



 




    [358-362]...Thus, all the preceding seems to
show not only that contempomry philosophy is
coming closer and closer to science and becoming
an increasingly elegant part of it, but also that it
is possible to arrive at a scientific conception of
philosophy: it would be no more than the neces-
sary complement to science. By setting aside the
metaphysical poems of the individual imagina-
tion, it would initiate the collective collaboration
of scientists, historians and critics.
  

    All facts are subject to scientific explanation;
none of them can be cognised objectively, that is
in truth, otherwise than through the sciences.
Evidently, science is still very limited and very
superficial, but it can only be developed by those
who seek to know; without it all speculation is
barren.
  

    Is philosophy therefore condemned? Is it noth-
ing but a word devoid of sense and content?
A few years ago many scientists would have said
so. And it is true to say that if we mean by philos-
ophy those speculations which, beyond experience
or on this side of it, seek the origin, end, and
nature of things, the useless foundations of science
or action, burdening everything immediately
known by an unknowable, which ought to justify
  





it, if, in a word, we mean by it the old dialectics,
whether rational or sceptical, idealist or material-
ist, individualist or pantheist, then those scientists
have apparently scored a victory. All this meta-
physics has only an aesthetic interest which,
  







incidentally, can be a passionate one for those
who have a predilection for it: it represents the
individual dreams of lofty but hardly practical
    minds.
  

    But as this philosophy began to find fewer
and fewer adherents, scientists created from it
something else or other, and in the past few years
    the most outstanding fact in the field of philo-
sophical knowledge has been the appearance of
a large number of philosophies drafted by scientists
in connection with their science, with it and for it.
It is true that there have been learned philosophers
before. Almost all great systems of philosophy
are their work. But particularly in their methods
and conclusions these systems lagged considerably
    behind and stand apart from the scientific works
of their authors. Contemporary scientists, on the
contrary, instead of seeking a general conception
of the world, simply seek to supplement and
clarify scientific experience by partial hypotheses
that are much more exact and closely linked with
this experience.
  

    So, in a different way but to achieve almost
identical results, Comte’s idea is being vindicated:
    a section of scientific work is being collectively
organised with the object of scientific generalisa-
tion and the synthesis of the sciences.
  

    The manner in which scientific work is con-
ducted makes this conception of philosophy clearer
and more exact. Science is composed at once of
the totality of experimental results and of the
theories of this totality which are always hypo-
theses in one respect or another. But these hypo-
theses are indispensable to science, because it is
precisely by their anticipation of future experience
and the unknown that science advances. They
systematise all that is known in such a way as to
  





throw light on the unknown. Why should not phil-
    osophy, therefore, in the same way, be a gen-
eral synthesis of all scientific knowledge, an
effort to represent the unknown as a function of
the known, in order to aid in discovering it and to
    keep the scientific spirit in its true orientation? It 
  







  blaguer!
  




would differ from science only in the greater general-
ity of the hypothesis; instead of being the theory of
a group of isolated and very circumscribed facts,
philosophical theory would be the theory of






the totality of the facts that nature presents








  fool!
  




us with, the system of nature, as it used to be
    called in the eighteenth century, or at any rate
a direct contribution to a theory of this kind.

  



 




    The philosophical standpoint is not opposed
  







  bim, bam!
  



 
    to the scientific standpoint; it stands side by side
    with it. Even when a scientist is making every
effort to attain positivity he is a philosopher, for
positivity is itself a philosophy....
  

    Science should not differ from philosophy either
in subject (it is the same: to give an account of
experience), or in method (it should be the same,
for the scientific discipline is by its very defini-
    tion the only discipline which can satisfy our
intelligence). No, the only difference between
them is one of standpoint, and what distinguishes,
and is the only thing that should distinguish, the
    scientific from the philosophical standpoint is that
the latter is far more general and always appears






somewhat of an adventure....
  







  phew!
  


 




    [364-369]... History shows us that when science
becomes too far removed from the most common
human concerns, forming the basis of most philo-
sophical questions, when it leaves the burden of
replying to these concerns to various speculations
or traditional beliefs, out of necessity or excessive
prudence, it vegetates or begins to decline. It is
necessary, absolutely necessary, therefore, for the
  





gains of science and the scientific spirit to be
defended, in case of need in spite of themselves,
    against excessive presumption or adventurism,
  







  defence
  against
  materialism
  




    when they overstep their rights. For excessive
    temerity—seen, for instance, in some materialist
    generalisations —is no less dangerous for science
    in the case of sane and straightforward minds, than is
  













timidity and lack of spirit in the case of ordinary
people. Hence, one of the essential tasks of philos-
ophy is to maintain the general atmosphere re-
quired for the development of science, for the
normal maintenance and dissemination of the
scientific spirit....
  

    But philosophy, of course, will only be able to
fulfil the dual mission which we feel it is called upon
to fulfil—to co-ordinate the efforts of scientists,
to provide hypotheses which inspire discoveries,
on the one hand, and, on the other, to create the
necessary atmosphere for scientific advance—if
it seeks to be nothing but the organising synthesis
of the sciences, regarded and understood in the
way scientists regard and understand them, in 
    short, a synthesis established in an exclusively
scientific spirit.
  

    It is gratifying to see—to a lesser extent, of
course, in pragmatism, but all the same to a suf-
  





ficiently great extent—that philosophical re-
    search today, having decisively broken away from
  







)





    the metaphysical errors of the preceding period, is
  





    extremely well informed regarding scientific works,
seeks to conform to them and derives its inspiration
  







)





from them.
  

    Without doubt, a very vital and pronounced
scientific sentiment is taking shape today which,
in some people, is developing parallel with religious
and moral sentiments and, as it were, on a different
plane where conflict is impossible, while in others
it has replaced the religious sentiment and fully
satisfies their needs. For these, as Renan has beauti-
fully expressed it, science has provided a symbol
and a law. They have adopted a truly positive
attitude which retains from ancient rationalism
  





its unshakable faith in human reason, while at
the same time acquiring from the incontestable
triumph of the experimental method the incon-
  













    testable conclusion that reason is nothing but the
constant effort of the mind to adapt itself to
experience and to cognise it more and more deeply,
  





the reciprocal penetration of objective reality
and subjective thought.
  

I believe that the future of philosophy lies on
this side, because it is on this side that truth is
to be found. As in all prophecies, this is nothing
but an act of faith. It is for the future to say
  







whether it will be justified or not. And as this is
an act of faith, I consider legitimate all other acts
of faith, on condition that the attitude of those
who perform them is the same towards me. I even
consider that it is fortunate that one ideological
trend is confronted by trends of opposing ideas;
it is by the criticism of its opponents that it is
refined, developed, corrected and made precise.
  



 




The philosophical attitude which has been
outlined in these brief studies could be called ra-
tionalist positivism, absolute positivism or scien-
tism. To avoid any ambiguity it would, perhaps,
be better to call it experimentalism; this would
indicate simultaneously that it rests wholly on
  







  !!
  positivism,
  experimental-
  ism, realism
  = “absolute
  or rationalist
  




experience—but, contrary to the old empiricism, 
  







  positivism”
  




on controlled experience, the fruit of scientific
experiment—and that it refuses in its absolute
realism and its experimental monism to go beyond
the bounds of experience.
  



 




Experience is primarily and immediately the
totality of our sensations, what we call phenomena.
  







  experience =
  Σ[9] sensations
  




    But it begins with analysis of itself as soon as
attention, thought is applied to it, for this totality
of sensations is nothing but a crude and very
superficial view of the given. Almost immediately
    there is to be discerned in it and beneath it some of
the relations that it involves and which form its
true basis. Science strives to carry this analysis
progressively forward, penetrating ever more
  





    deeply into the nature of the given. If the immedi-
ate given is represented by a point then, in order
to obtain a picture of the real given, one has to
imagine that this point is merely a projection of the
    straight line extending beyond it. This straight
  







)   “chose en soi”?[10]





line can be broken up into several segments, each
    of which will embrace, without there being any
impenetrable partitions between them, families
of relations on which the immediate given depends.
Each of these famines will be formed by virtue of
a definition which will be based on the natural
    affinities by which these relations are joined
    together. These will be relations of number and
position, mechanical, physical relations, etc.,
and, finally, psychological relations determined by
their dependence on the organism to which the
given is related. There will be as many particular
sciences as there are such groups of relations.
  

    Philosophy, on the other hand, tries to conceive
the straight line in its entire length and continuity.
But the line in its totality, just as much as the
point which is the projection of it, the immediate
  













given, as also the relations which supplement it
to the extent of its analysis, are of one and the
same character.
  

    These are the data of experience. And their
  





totality comprises a single experience: human
    experience. It is our psychological constitution,
and not the nature of things, which distinguishes
  












  
the world from perception, the universe from
science; and this distinction is temporary and
    contingent.
  

    Experience, therefore, needs only to be explained.
To explain it means simply to formulate the relations
it involves, and which it itself brings to our attention
if we know how to grasp its lessons. And science is
  





    beginning to concern itself with them. But, being
all reality, experience[11] is not in
    need of justifi-
cation: it exists.






 
End
 

 
CONTENTS[12]
 




. . . . .


  —§ 6. Ideas of Poincaré, the mathematician. Poin-
  caré.


. . . . .


  Pp. 6--7; 28-9=two lines
  33=truth=? for pragmatism and 35
  49=the objective value of science=oentre
  Mathematics and pragmatism — 62
  80 : the pragmatists laid claim to Poincaré,
  and Mach 90
  Rey=a pure agnostic 94 (93)
  98 : Mach+objectivity=Rey?!
  100 : Concepts—copies of reality
  Objectivity 105
  113 : vulgar materialism




 
 


 

<< Back to Part One



Notes
[1] timid aspect of mechanism—Ed.
[2] Clausius called it the principle of entropy 
  which exactly corresponds to the word “evolution,” though
      derived from Greek rather than from Latin.—Rey.
[3] Année psychologique 1906, XIIe année. 
  (Paris, Schleicher.)—Rey.
[4] absolute realism—Ed.
[5] Lenin underlined the phrase “discovering this
  objective” four times.—KCG.
[6] experience = environment?—Ed.
[7] idol of the tribe—Ed.



[8] In defining pragmatism, William James insists on
  the idea that it is a system which turns away from a
  priori explanations, from dialectics and metaphysics, in
  order constantly to turn to the facts and experiment.—Rey.

 

)

W. James on
  pragmatism
  


[9] summation—Ed.
[10] “Thing-in-itself”?—Ed.
[11] Lenin underlined the word “experience”
  five times.—KCG.
[12] Written by Lenin on the cover of Rey’s 
  book.—Ed.
 



<< Back to Part One
<< Back to the Table of Contents


 





Works Index
    |   
  Volume 38

 | 

Collected Works
    |   L.I.A. Index




  < backward




  forward >





 



==========

## A. Deborin. Dialectical
Materialism











A. Deborin. Dialectical Materialism



Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Remarks on Books:
A. Deborin.
Dialectical Materialism
 


    Written not earlier than 1909.
Published in part in 1930
in Lenin Miscellany XII.
Published in full for the
first time.
Published according
to the original.
  

    A. Deborin’s article “Dialectical Materialism” is contained 
in the collection Na Rubezhe, St. Petersburg, 1909.
  

 
A. DEBORIN.
DIALECTICAL MATERIALISM




    [39]...As a world outlook, dialectical material-
ism provides an answer—not an absolute one, of
  





    course—to the question of the structure of matter,
  






    inexact
  




    of the world; it serves as the basis of a most brilliant
historical theory; on the basis of dialectical ma-
  





terialism, politics and morality become in a certain
sense exact sciences. Being foreign to all dogmatism,
dialectical materialism—correctly understood, of
course—introduces everywhere a fresh stream of
theoretico—cognitive criticism.







    there is no
point in using
“foreign”
words!
  


 



  
        [40]...In this article we intend to call the read-
    er’s attention only to the theoretico-cognitive
aspect of dialectical materialism, which in this
case does not, as a method, as a guiding principle
of investigation, provide absolute solutions
to problems, but primarily assists in their proper
framing. As a theory of knowledge, dialectical
  





    materialism falls into a formal, or logical, part
    and a real, or material, one.
  






    (1)
(2)
  


 




    In the case of primeval, primitive cognition,
experience is identical with the object of experience,
and the phenomenon, with being, with the thing-
in-itself. For primitive man, the world of inner
experiences also constitutes the world of things.
He knows no distinction between the internal
    and the external world. At a certain stage of
cultural development, this primitive form of
cognition comes into conflict with the social man’s
desire to subdue the forces of nature, with the
new, higher stage of culture. The contrast between
perceptions and things, between the world of inner
experiences and the world of things, becomes more
and more marked as man’s requirements multiply,
experimental evidence grows and accumulates,
and clashes between perceptions and the external
world become more frequent. That is when the
necessity arises for new forms of cognition.
  

    ...What we are interested in directly is the
logical process which in modern philosophy has led
  





    to dialectical materialism.— The psychologism







    ?
  




of Hume, Berkeley and others operates chiefly
psychically, in the sensuous world. Sensuous images
are the objects of cognition. The result of the
development of |British empiricism| is, Esse=per-
cipi, i.e., that exists which is given in perception,
and all that is given in perception, has an objective
being, exists.
  

    [41]...Kant understood that genuinely scien-
tific cognition is possible only through the medium
of “mathematical contemplation.” Sense-perception
does not contain the conditions necessary for
universally obligatory cognition. Sensuous images
are not capable of embracing the totality of phenom-
ena to be cognised. And Kant passes from psycholo-






gism to transcendentalism....







    ?
  


 




    [43]...Hegelian philosophy represents the last
    and closing link of this chain. We have seen that
  





Hume, Kant, and Fichte placed the subject above
the object, which they declared to be something













inseparable from the subject....


    [48]...Categories, i.e., pure universal concepts,
such as time, space, or causality, are, from the
  





    point of view of dialectical materialism, logical
    definitions, on the one hand, and real forms of
things, on the other....











 




    [49]...The limitation of transcendentalism con-
sists in the fact that it does not extend its rights
to the real sphere of things and considers that
categories are merely subjective, and furthermore
a priori, forms of consciousness. Transcendentalism
embraces phenomena in categorical, i.e., logically-
universal forms, making it possible to formulate
strictly mathematical laws of nature, and to give
them a universal character. But transcendentalism,
  





as also sensualistic phenomenalism, is concerned
  






    listen to him!
  




    only with phenomena. For them, being, things-in-
themselves, are inaccessible....
  

    [50]...Dialectical materialism attains the “abso-
    luteness” and universality of cognition by declar-
    ing the forms to be universal, objectively real
“perceptions.” On this rests the possibility of
mathematical, or “geometrical” if you will, i.e.,
exact, cognition of reality. “Geometrical” space
and “pure time” are universally real perceptions,
    and constitute the premise for the “mathematical”
    cognition of the sensuous world....
  

    [51]...But at the same time dialectical conscious-
ness shows an ability to rise to the “conception” of
nature as a “whole,” to the conception of the neces-
    sity, of the inherency, of the universal order of
nature....




 




    [52]...Man cognises to the extent that he acts on,
and he himself is subject to the action of, the external
world. Dialectical materialism teaches that man
is impelled to reflect chiefly by the sensations he
experiences as he acts on the external world....
Proceeding from the consideration that it is pos-
  








sible to dominate nature only by submitting to her,
    dialectical materialism calls upon us to coordinate
our activity with the universal laws of nature,
with the necessary order of things, with the univer-
sal laws of development of the world....
  

    [53]...Thus Parmenides saw the true essence of
things (“the One”) in that which can be cognised
by thought or reason and which lies behind fluctuat-
ing and mutable phenomena. Thereby, he divorced
sense-perceptions from their basis, the phenomenal






world from the meta-phenomenalistic....
  






    ooph!
  


 




    [54]...Whereas for the rationalistic metaphysi-
cists true reality is given in the concept, for the
sensualists the real is that which is given in
sense-perception or perception. That which lies
beyond the senses is inaccessible to cognition.
The objects of cognition are phenomena, which
are raised to the level of absolute reality. The
content of empirical consciousness is changeable
and fluctuating. Phenomenalism denies the
real substratum of qualities. Given is diversity,
the multiplicity of phenomena, but no unity of
substance....
  

    [55]...Kant contrived to combine the phenomen-






alistic doctrine of incognisability of things in and
  











  
for themselves with the rationalistic metaphys-






icists’ doctrine of the existence of absolutely real













    being, of “things-in-themselves”.
  

    [56]...The French materialists, headed by Hol-
bach, counterposed nature, as the metaphysical
essence of a thing, to its properties. This antithesis
  





in a certain sense denotes the same dualism as







    rot!
  




that between Kant’s “thing-in-itself” and “phe-
    nomena....”




 




    [57]...However, we would be unjust to French
materialism if we identified it with Kantianism.







    Clumsy to nec
plus ultra![1]





After all, eighteenth-century materialism
recognises the relative cognisability even of the
essence of things....
  

    French materialism, taking as its point of

  





departure the same consideration, that matter
    acts on our external senses, admits, however, that
certain properties of things in and for themselves
are cognisable. But French materialism is insuffic-
iently consistent, since it teaches that only certain
properties of things are cognisable, while the
    “essence” itself or the “nature” of them is concealed
from us and is not fully cognisable.
  







     
 
This is
    a muddle
  


 




    [58]...Kant borrowed this counterposing of the
  





properties of the things to their “nature” from the
agnostics, from the sensualistic phenomenalists
(directly from Hume)....
  










 




    In contrast to phenomenalism and sensualism,
materialism regards the impressions which we
receive from things in and for themselves as having






objective significance. Whereas phenomenalism (and
  






ⅹ





    Kantianism) sees no points of contact between the
    properties of things and their “nature”, i.e., the
    external world, the French materialists emphasise
  





specifically that things in and for themselves,
at least in part, are cognisable precisely through
the impressions they produce upon us, that the
properties of things are, to a certain extent,
  












objectively real....
  

    [60]...Dialectical materialism puts material
substance, the real substratum, at the basis of
  





being. It has looked upon the world “as a process,
as a substance, which is developing continuously”
(Engels). The metaphysicists’ immutable and
    absolute being becomes mutable being. Substantial













reality is recognised to be mutable, and changes and
    movements are recognised to be real forms of being.
Dialectical materialism overcomes the dualism of
“being” and “not-being,” the metaphysically
absolute antithesis of the “immanent” to the








   
   
  NB
  




“transcendental,” of the properties of things to the
things themselves. On the basis of dialectical
materialism, it becomes possible scientifically
to connect the thing-in-itself with phenomena,
and the immanent with the transcendental, and
to surmount the incognisability of things-in-them-
selves, on the one hand, and the “subjectivism”
of qualities, on the other, for “the nature of the
thing,” as Plekhanov observes with very good
reason, manifests itself precisely in its prop-
erties.” It is the impressions which we receive
from things in and for themselves that enable us
to judge of the properties of things in and
for themselves, of objectively real being....
  

    [60-61]...The “immanent” acquires an objective-
  





ly real character; the “transcendental,” which
    lies beyond phenomena in the sphere of the “in-
    cognisable,” is transformed from a mysterious 
    essence that is inaccessible to our senses into
    an “immanent” content of our consciousness, into
    object of sensuous perception. The “immanent”
    becomes “transcendental” insofar as it acquires
objectively real significance, insofar as it makes
  






  NB
  Correct truths
  are outlined
  in a diaboli-
  cally preten-
  tious, abtruse
  




    it possible to judge of the properties of things
    by impressions; the “transcendental” becomes
    “immanent” insofar as it is declared to lie in the
    sphere of the cognisable, even though beyond the
    subject. Beltov expresses himself in the same sense.







  form. Why
  did Engels
  not write such
  gibberish?
NB





“According to this theory,” he says, “nature is
primarily a totality of phenomena. But since
    things-in-themselves are a necessary condition for
phenomena, or, in other words, since phenomena
are caused by the action of the object on the sub-
ject, we are compelled to admit that the laws of
nature have not only subjective, but also objective
    significance, i.e., that the mutual relations of
ideas in the subject correspond, when man is not
in error, to the mutual relations of things outside
it.”[2] This 
answers in the only correct and scientific
form the question of the mutual relations of phe-
nomena and things-in-themselves—that most im-
portant question of cognition, over which Kant,
    the metaphysicists and the phenomenalists racked
their brains so much....
  

    [62]...The unity of being and not-being is be-
  





coming, dialectics teaches. Put into concrete ma-
terialist language, this thesis implies that at the
    basis of all that exists is substance, matter, which







    NB
  




is developing continuously....
  

    [64]...Hence the body does not consist only in its
    perceptibility, as the sensualistic |||phenomenal-






ists||| believe, but exists quite independently of our
    perceptions, exists “for itself,” as a “subject.”
  









But while the body exists |independently| of our
        perceptions, our perceptions, on the other hand,
        fully depend on the body acting on us. Without the
        latter, there are no perceptions, no notions, con-
        cepts or ideas. Our thinking is determined by
        being, i.e., by the impressions we receive from
        the external world. That being so, our ideas and
concepts, too, have objectively real significance.
  

        [65]...The body, acting on our senses, is re-
        garded as the cause of the action it produces—i.e.,
        perception. The phenomenalists dispute the very
  





    possibility of framing the question in this way.
The |immanentists| hold that the external world
  






!





is not only inaccessible to perception, but also
inconceivable, even if such a world existed....
  

    [67]...it has to be assumed also that our per-
ceptions, as a result of the action of two factors—
the external world and our “sensuousness”—are
  





    not identical in content as well with the objects
    of the external world, which is |immediately| in-
tuitively|[3] inaccessible to us....







  NB
∞
  ?)
  


 




    [69]...From the point of view of dialectical ma-
terialism, the thing-in-itself is an object such as
it exists in itself, and “for itself.” It is in this
sense that Plekhanov defines matter “as the totality
of things-in-themselves, since these things are the
source of our sensations.”[4] This thing-in-itself,
    or matter, is not an abstract concept, which lies
behind the concrete properties of things, hut a
“concrete” concept. The being of matter is not
divorced from its essence, or, vice versa, its essence
is not divorced from its being.
  

    [70]...An object, devoid of all qualities or pro-
perties, cannot even be conceived by us, cannot
exist, cannot have any being. The external world
  





    is ||constructed|| by us out of our perceptions,
  






  ??
  




    on the basis of those impressions evoked in us
by the external world, by things in and for them-
selves.... Between the external and internal world
there exists a certain distinction, and at the same
time a definite similarity, so that we arrive at the
    cognition of the external world through impres-
sions, but they are precisely impressions produced
by objects of the external world. On the strength
of the impressions produced upon us by the action
of an object, we attribute definite properties to
  





the latter. An impression is the resultant of two
factors, and as such it is inevitably conditioned
  








by the nature of these two factors and includes
something which constitutes the nature of one
and the other factor, something which is common
to both...
  

    [71]...Only on the basis of dialectical material-
ism, with its recognition of the external world,
is the possibility presented of building a purely
scientific theory of knowledge. He who rejects
the external world also rejects the cause of our
  





sensations and arrives at idealism. But the external
world is also the ||principle|| of uniformity. And
  






  a clumsy,
  absurd word!
  




if, in our perceptions, we are confronted with
a definite, regular connection between them, this
only occurs because the cause of our sensations,
i.e., the external world, constitutes the basis of
this uniform connection....
  

    [72]...Without the possibility of provision, it is
impossible scientifically to cognise the phenomena
of nature and human life. ...But the objects of the
external world are in causal relation not only to
us, but also to one another, i.e., between the
    objects of the external world themselves there
exists a definite interaction, a knowledge of whose
    conditions, for its part, makes it possible to foresee
and predict not only the action to be exercised
upon us by objects, but also their objective rela-
tions and actions, which are independent of us,
    i.e., the objective properties of things....
  



 




    [73]...Dialectical materialism by no means
predetermines the question of the structure of
matter in the sense of an obligatory recognition of
the atomistic or corpuscular theory, or of any
  






third hypothesis. And if the new theories of the
structure of atoms are triumphant, dialectical
materialism will not only not be confuted but, on
  





the contrary, will be most brilliantly confirmed.
 What, indeed, is the essence of the new trend in
    the sphere of natural science? It is, above all, the
fact that the atom, which physicists used to regard
as immutable and most simple, i.e., an elemen-
tary and indivisible “body,” is found to consist
of still more elementary units or particles. It is
assumed that the electrons constitute the ultimate
elements of being. But does dialectical materialism
  






  Aha!
      Plekhanov is
  silent on this
  “new trend,”
does not know
  it. Deborin
  does not view
      it clearly.
      Correct!
  




assert that the atom is the absolute limit of being?...


    [74]...It would be erroneous to think, as our
Machists do, that with the recognition of the
electron theory matter disappears as a reality,
    and hence, together with matter, also dialectical
materialism, which considers matter as the sole
  





    reality and the only suitable ||tool|| for systema-
tising experience.... Whether all atoms consist
  






stupid
term!





    of electrons is an undecided question; it is a hypo-
thesis that may not be confirmed. But apart
from this, does the electron theory eliminate
the atom? It only proves that the atom is relatively
stable, indivisible and immutable.... But the
atom, as the real substratum, is not eliminated
by the electron theory....
  

    [75]...To sum up. From the formal aspect,
dialectical materialism, as we have seen, makes
universally obligatory and objective cognition
possible thanks to the fact that, from its point
  





    of view, the forms of being are also forms of
    thinking, that to every change in the objective
  







world there corresponds a change in the sphere of
    perceptions. As for the material aspect, dialectical
materialism proceeds from the recognition of
    things-in-themselves or the external world or
mailer. “Things-in-themselves” are cognisable. The
unconditional and absolute is rejected by dialecti-
    cal materialism. Everything in nature is in the
process of change and motion, which are based on
definite combinations of matter. According to
dialectics, one “form” of being changes into another
through leaps. Modern theories of physics, far from
    disproving, fully confirm the correctness of dialec-
tical materialism.




 

Notes
[1] the highest degree.—Ed.
[2] N. Beltoy, Criticism of Our Critics, p. 199.—Lenin
[3] The sign ∞ indicates that the words 
  “immediately intuitively” should he transposed.—Ed.
[4] Das Bild dieses Seins auβer dem Denken ist die
  Materie, das Substrat der Reslität!” L. Feuerbach, Werke,
  Bd. 2, S. 289.—Lenin
 



<< Back to the Table of Contents


 





Works Index
    |   
  Volume 38

 | 

Collected Works
    |   L.I.A. Index




  < backward




  forward >





 



==========

## V. Shulyatikov. The Justification of
    Capitalism in West-European Philosophy. (From
      Descartes to E. Mach). Moscow, 1908











V. Shulyatikov. The Justification of Capitalism in West-European Philosophy. (From Descartes to E. Mach). Moscow, 1908



Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Remarks on Books:
V. Shulyatikov.
The Justification of Capitalism
in West-European Philosophy.
(From Descartes to E. Mach).
Moscow, 1908
 


    Written not earlier than 1908.
Published in 1937 in
the magazine Proletarskaya
Revolyutsia, No. 8
Published according
to the original.
  

 
V. SHULYATIKOV.
THE JUSTIFICATION OF CAPITALISM
  IN WEST-EUROPEAN PHILOSOPHY
  ( DESCARTES TO B. MACH)
MOSCOW, 1908




    [5][1]...In intellectual circles a traditional atti-
  






  sic!
  




tude has been established towards philosophy....
Philosophical ideas are presented with too little
and too feeble connection with any sort of class
substratum....
  

Very many Marxists adhere to the same view.
They are convinced that a variegated medley of
philosophical views is permissible in the ranks
of the proletarian vanguard, that it has no great
significance whether ideologists of the proletariat
profess materialism or energeticism, neo-Kantian-
ism or Machism....
  

    [6]...To maintain such a viewpoint means falling
into a naïve, most grievous error.... Without
exception, all philosophical terms and formulas
  





        used by it[2] ... serve |it|
to denote social classes,
groups, sections and their mutual relations. When
  






  incorrect   ⅴ





        dealing with the philosophical system of this or
  





        that bourgeois thinker, we are dealing with a pic-
        ture of the class structure of society, depicted by
  






    incorrect!
  




    means of conventional symbols and reproducing
the social profession de foi of a definite bourgeois
group....
  

    [7]...These pictures must not be accepted as
being something that could he utilised and brought
    into line with the proletarian world outlook. That
would mean falling into opportunism, trying to
combine what cannot be combined....
  



 




    ... the first brilliant attempt at this sort of re-
  






  sic!
  




appraisal took place as far back as several years
ago. Comrade A. Bogdanov’s article “Authoritarian
  





Thought”[3] undoubtedly opens up a new era







  !!
  




in the history of philosophy: after the appearance
of this article, speculative philosophy lost the right
to employ its two fundamental concepts of “mind”
and “body”; it was established that these concepts
  





were formed against the background of authoritar-
ian relations and the antithesis between them
  






  what
  nonsense!
  




    reflected a social antithesis—the antithesis of the
organising “top strata” and the executive “lower
    strata.” With amazing consistency bourgeois critics
ignored the work of the Russian Marxist....
  



 




    [8]...In these circumstances, a social and genet-
ic analysis of philosophical concepts and system









is not only desirable, but definitely necessary.
  





    It is a task which is extremely difficult and com-
    plicated.... Contemporary fashionable systems, e.g.,
  









neo-Kantianism or Machism....
  





 




    [9-10]...Our essay is not intended for a limited






circle of experts.... Demos is revealing an interest
  







in philosophy... our exposition is of a somewhat
elementary character.... The viewpoint we are
  





defending .... can be more easily mastered if illustrat-
ed not by unwieldy, but by economically selected
    material....
  











 
 




I
  THE ORGANISING
  AND ORGANISED “PRINCIPLES”

    [11]...Economic inequality arose; the organis-
ers were gradually transformed into the owners of
the instruments of production,[4] which had once
belonged to society....
  



 




    [11-12]...Production relations of |“authoritar-







|  ??  |





ian”| society... The primitive ||savage|| every-
where begins to see the manifestation of organisa-
tory will “...the executor is accessible to external
  






  now the
  nonsense is
  clear!!
  




    senses—this is the physiological organism, the bo-
dy; the organiser is not accessible to them, he is
presumed inside the body; this is the spiritual
    personality...”
  













    Fiction and
empty
    phrases.
    Indeed,
    very “gen-
eral” !! Words.
    The savage
and primitive
communism
    are slurred
over. Mate-
rialism and
idealism in
    Greece as well.
  




    [13]...The concept of the mind acquires an in-
creasingly abstract character.
  






      nothing but
  idealism!
  


 




    [14]...When in the history of Greek philosophy
    the famous question was raised: How is it possible
for the multifarious transient phenomena of the
material world to have been derived from pure,
immutable, non-material substance? What is the
    relation of “being” to “becoming”?—it was not,
contrary to the assertions of all kinds of historians
of philosophy, the highest flight of noble human
thought, a most altruistic effort aimed at solving
    the greatest mystery of the universe and thereby
giving joy to the human race for all time. The
matter was much simpler! To frame the question
in that manner merely pointed to the fact that
in the Greek towns the process of social stratifica-






tion had gone a long way, that the gulf between
the “upper” and the “lower” strata of society had
become deeper, and the old ideology of the organis-
ers, corresponding to less differentiated social
  






  So, indeed!
  And Greek
  materialism?
  




relations, had lost its right to existence. Earlier,
in spite of all the distinctions between substance
  





and the world of phenomena, the direct connection
    between them had not been doubted. Now, the
  






  and the
  sceptics?
  




existence of this connection is denied. Substance
    and the world of phenomena are declared to be
incommensurable magnitudes. Relations between
them are only possible through a series of inter-
mediary links. Or, in more philosophical language,
    we cannot establish their reciprocal relations
either by means of the senses or by means of
ordinary thought: to do so requires the assistance
of some special “idea,” some special intuition.
  
  
   
II
  ORGANISING AND ORGANISED
  “PRINCIPLES” IN THE PERIOD
  OF MANUFACTURING PRODUCTION

    [15]...This very question—the question of the
incommensurability of the mental and material
“principles,” of the absence of a direct connection
between them, was put forward and solved by the
originators of the new philosophy....
  

       [16]...The spiritualistic sympathies of the Re-
    naissance and subsequent epoch are usually men-
    tioned in passing, but they are very character-
    istic.[5]


    [17]...The medieval artisan, while being an
organiser, at the same time fulfilled executive
functions—he worked together with his appren-
tices. The bourgeois manufacturer knows only one
type of function: he is purely an organiser. In the
first case, it is true, a basis is provided for that
      





dualistic “mode of presenting the facts” explained
by Comrade Bogdanov; nevertheless, the anti-
  






  what nonsense!
  




thesis of organiser and executor is somewhat
veiled. Hence the corresponding antithesis of
mental and corporeal, active and passive, prin-
ciples, in the sphere of ideology, could not take
a sharp form....
  

        [17]...In the worskhop of the medieval artisan
        there was no place for representatives of so-called
  





   untrained, unskilled labour. Work is found for
        them in the manufacturing workshop. They consti-
tute the “lower stratum.” Above them are other
strata, other groups of workers, each differing
according to the degree of skill. Among them
        certain organising layers are already formed. Going
  






  e.g., trained
  workers and
  trainees un-
  der them
  




further up the ascending scale, we see groups of
administrators and technical managers of the
enterprises. The owner of the enterprise is thus
  






  to page 19
  




“freed” not only from every kind of physical labour,
but also from many purely organisational duties....
  



 




        {19]...In contrast to the medieval thinkers, the
  





        “fathers” of the new philosophy devote very much
attention in their systems to the world of transient
phenomena, make a detailed study of its structure
  








and development, the laws governing the relations
between its parts; they create a natural philosophy.
The very same “elevated” position of the leaders
of the manufacturing enterprises which inspired in
the fathers of the new philosophy the “pure” idea
  





  of organising will, suggested to them, similarly,
        a mechanical explanation of the processes of mate-
rial reality, i.e., the processes taking place among
    the organised mass.
  










 




        The point is that the leader of the manufactur-
ing enterprise is merely the final link in a fairly
  





        long chain of organising links. In relation to him,
the other organisers are subordinate and, in turn,
  






  Who? See
  page 17
  




        stand in opposition to him as organised persons.
        ...But insofar as their role differs from that of the
chief leader, insofar as it consists in taking part
in the technical work from which the chief leader
is “freed,” to that extent their “mental” character
is blurred and their activity is appraised as activity
  





        of “matter”....
  






  nonsense!
  


 




    [21-22]...The bourgeois system in general is
a two-faced Janus.... True, we find a definite
formulation of dualism only in Cartesianism,—
in the system created just at the dawn of the new
economic era; true, subsequent philosophical
systems, beginning with that of Spinoza, declare
that the Cartesian counterposing of God and the
world, of mind and body, is contradictory. ...The
materialist and positivist systems of bourgeois
philosophy, in turn, by no means testify to a
triumph over the dualistic viewpoint. The differ-
  





ence between bourgeois metaphysics and the
bourgeois “positive world outlook” is not as great
as it may appear at first glance. ...The attack







  NB
  




made by materialism is not directed against the
fundamental premise put forward by metaphysics;
the concept of the organising will is not done away
with by materialism. It merely figures under
another name: for example, “force” takes the place
of “spirit”....
  





 




    [22-23]...In the seventeenth century, at the time
of its “storm and stress,” the English bourgeoisie
preached the doctrine that everything in the
    world should be explained as a motion of material
particles taking place from mechanical necessity.
The English bourgeoisie were laying the founda-







  In this vulgar-
  isation of the
  history of
  philosophy,
  the struggle of
  the bourgeoi-
  




tions for large-scale capitalist economy.... They
imagined the whole world in the form of an organisa-
    tion of material particles united in accordance
with immanent laws....
  






  sie against
  feudalism
  is completely
  forgotten.
  


 




    [23-24]...In the second half of the eighteenth
century, the French bourgeoisie flooded the book
market with similar treatises.... But we know
what is meant by the internal structure of enter-
prises: it is the realm of matter and mechanical
  





  processes. Hence the generalisation: man is a ma-
chine, nature is a machine....
  






not hence
  


 




    ...The motion of matter is conditioned by itself,
or rather by its own force (Holbach). The organisa-
tory will, it is seen, has again become extremely
transformed, but its presence is noted and is
    admitted to be absolutely essential.
  



 




The manufacturers did not act as revolution-
ary representatives of “Sturm und Drang”....
  






  ←?    and what
  about their
  struggle
  against clerica-
  lism? Shulya-
  tikov has dis-
  torted history!
  



   
   
  



III
  CARTESIANISM





    [25]...The organised require an organiser....
  

[26]...The intermediary organisatory links—
  







    “individual minds” can only fulfil their organising
  





role if there exists a superior organisatory centre.
Only the latter brings them into contact with the
proletariat—“matter”—within the framework of
an organised whole, a manufacturing workshop....
  






  NB
  what non-
  sense! the
proletar-
  iat = mat-
  ter





    [27]...The Cartesian concept of man is nothing
but the further propagation of a definite form of
thinking, “a definite mode of presenting the facts,
a definite type of their union in the psyche.“






    We have seen that the world in Descartes’ system
is organised on the lines of a manufacturing enter-
  






  nonsense
  




prise....
  

    ...We are dealing with the cult of mental labour.




 




     [28]...I am an organiser and, as such, can exist
only by fulfilling organisatory and not executive
functions: this is the meaning of the Cartesian
  












    assertion, if it is translated into the language of
class relations....
  



 




    ...The common, naïve viewpoint sees the external
world as it appears through the prism of the
senses....
  






 



    
    [29]...The concept of the worker as merely
a saddler or merely a paper-hanger gives way to the
  





concept of the worker in general. Trade no longer
constitutes the “essence” of labour-power....
  






  and what about
  Plato’s “ideas”?
  


 




    [31]...Time, Descartes explains, must not be
a property of matter: it is “a mode of
considered thinking,” a generic concept created by the latter....
  





 




[32-33]...Henceforth philosophy is the faithful
servant of capital. ...The revaluation of philo-
  





  sophical values was determined by changes in the
organising upper strata and organised lower strata.
  









New organisers, new organised—new concepts of
God and spirit, new concepts of matter....
  








   
   
  



IV
  SPINOZA





    [37]...All relations between mind and body are
only through God. All relations between the
intermediary organisatory links and the organised
mass are only with the sanction of the supreme
organiser!...
  







    ...The motion of matter and the activity of the
mind are only two aspects of one and the same
process. There can be no question of any interaction
  






between mind and matter.
  

    [41]...Experience, sensuous perception, is for
him an imperative condition for cognising things....
  



 




    [42]...But ... when Spinoza died, as is well
known, the fine fleur of the Dutch bourgeoisie
with great pomp accompanied the hearse that
carried his remains. And if we become more closely
    acquainted with his circle of acquaintances and
    correspondents, we again meet with the fine fleur
  






of the bourgeoisie—and not only of Holland but
of the entire world. ...The bourgeoisie revered
Spinoza, their bard.
  



 




    Spinoza’s conception of the world is the song
of triumphant capital, of all-consuming, all-cen-
tralising capital. There is no being, there are no
  






  infantile
  




things, apart from the single substance; there can
be no existence for producers apart from the large-
scale manufacturing enterprise....
  
  
   
V  
  LEIBNITZ

    [45] Leibnitz’s God is the owner of an exemplar-






ily organised enterprise and is himself the supreme
organiser....
  






  phrase-mon-
  gering
  



   
VI
  BERKELEY

    [51]...Hobbes’ materialism corresponded to the
Sturm-und-Drang period of the English capitalist
bourgeoisie. The way was paved for manufacture,     1)
  





quieter times began for the manufacturers: Hobbes’
materialism gave place to the half-hearted system
of Locke. The further consolidation of the position     2)
of manufacture determined the possibility of anti-
materialist utterances.             
                        
          3)
  






  a fine expla-
  nation! prim-
  itive mate-
  rialism à la
Loria



 




     [56]...“The attraction and repulsion of workers
should take place without any obstacles”: in
perceptual complexes there are decidedly no
absolute elements. Everything is relative.







  what about
  the relativ-
  ism of the
  Greeks?
  



   
   
  



VII
  HUME

    [61]...His kinship to all the thinkers who appear






in the foregoing chapters is beyond doubt....
  

    The position of philosophical scepticism adopted







  vague and
  inexact
  




by Hume corresponds precisely to such a conception
of the capitalist organism.
  









  Go ahead,
  lump every-
  thing togeth-
  er! idealism
  as well as
  scepticism,
  everything
  “corresponds”
  to manufac-
  ture! Comrade
  Shulyatikov
  is simple,
  very simple.







   
   
  



IX
  FICHTE, SCHELLING, HEGEL
 





    [81]...There arise systems of so-called objective
idealism....
  

ⅹ  [88]...objective idealists....
  






  ?What about
  Fichte?
   
  Fichte?
  


 




    [94]...But we know that in all the systems of
bourgeois philosophy “matter” is regarded as the
    subordinate principle (even by the materialists
  






  Nonsense.
  




who, we repeat, note its subordinate position by
introducing the concept of “force”)....
  






  What about
  the concept
  of “motion”?
  




    [98]...It is merely one step from Fichte’s anti-
thetical method and Schelling’s potentialising
theory to Hegel’s dialectics. And in regard to
the latter, after all that has been said in this
chapter about the antithetical method, it only
remains for us to make a few supplementary re-
  





    marks. We have already made clear the “real
    background” of dialectics.







  what nonsense!
  


 




    Hegel merely more fully substantiated the
theory of development through “contradictions,”
  





which had been outlined by two other objective
idealists....
  






Fichte—an
  objective
  idealist!!!




  
    [98-99]...The innovation made by Hegel em-
phasises the following fact from the sphere of
  





“real” relations. The differentiation of functions
    and roles in manufacture reaches its maximum.
A |stratification| takes place of each separate
executive group and each separate organising
group. The functions belonging to any one definite
group are distributed among various, newly-formed
  











  
    groups. Each group breaks up and new groups are
formed from it. And the ideologist of the manufac-
turers considers this breaking-up process to be the
  





process of the internal development of this or that
“principle”....
  






(     what non-
  sense!
  



   
   
  



X
  THE REVIVAL OF THE “MANUFACTURING”
  PHILOSOPHY





     [100]...Speculative philosophy loses prestige in
  






#





bourgeois society. True, this does not occur all
at once. But neither did the machine conquer
the territory of industry all at once....
  







  what nonsense!
  




    [101]...How can the positive nature of the
new ideological systems be explained? By the
  





|||simple||| law of contrasts, the simple endeavour
       “to do the opposite” of what constituted the “symbol
       of faith” of yesterday?...
  











  
    Individualised “complexes”—Ivan, Peter, Jacob
vanish. In their place there appears in the work-
  





        the worker in general. “Matter” is given back
the qualities that were expropriated from it....
  






)



 




        [102]...Matter is rehabilitated. Bourgeois so-
ciety introduces the cult of the new idol—“environ-
ment. True, in doing so, the fact is not lost sight
  












        of that nevertheless matter remains matter, i.e.,
        the organised mass, and, as such, cannot exist
without a “manager.” And “force,” as a specialist
        in organisatory duties, is assigned to matter. Trea-
tises about Stoff und Kraft (“matter and force”) are
        written....
  






          what
   nonsense!
   
   




 



      
        [104] A comparison between the most recent
organisation of the factories and the internal
        structure of manufacture already a priori dictates
        the reply: the new variety of bourgeois philosophy
should reproduce substantial features of the philos-
ophy of the manufacturing epoch....
  







     what
  nonsense!
  


 




    [106] Neo-Kantianism gives way to a “turn”
towards systems of “pre-Kantian” thought.
  
  
   
XI
  W. WUNDT





[108]...“the object can never be separated from the
idea, or the idea from the object....”
  






  NB
  


 




[113]...The considerations that have been given
are already sufficient to define Wundt clearly
as a philosopher who sets himself the task of
combating materialism or, to use the fashionable
term, of “Überwindung des Materialismus,” “over-
coming materialism,” and who, in so doing, does
  






not declare himself to be on the side of the school
which is regarded as the traditional opponent of
materialism....
  

    [114]...Such an equalisation of the intermediary
organising links and representatives of “physical”
labour, the “lower executives,” is indicated in the
  




 
sphere of philosophy precisely by the endeavour
to characterise “subject” and “object,” “psychical”
and “physical,” as comprising an “indivisible”
whole, the endeavour to reduce the antithesis
between the phenomena mentioned to a cognitive
  







  nonsense
  



    
fiction. Avenarius’ theory on principal coordina-
  




  
tion, Ernst Mach’s theory on the relation of the
psychical and physical, Wundt’s theory on ideas-
objects—these are all theories of the same order....
  






  this is true,
  but not as
stated



 




    [116]...Hitherto, Wundt’s |monist| views
could not be denied a certain consistency. Nor
can he any more be suspected of idealist sym-
pathies....
  






  ←
  ha-ha!
  eclectic
  not true
  


 




    [118]...Wundt takes just such a leap when, on
the heels of his theory on “ideas-objects”, he puts
forward his views on “psycho-physical parallel-
ism”....
  



 




     [121]...“Attributes” are transformed into “se-
ries,” but this reform, in essence, is more of a verbal
character....
  





 




    [123]...Primacy is asserted for the spiritual
principle....
  

    [123-124]...Everything corporeal has necessarily
  












its psychical correlation. No single worker, however
simple the function he fulfils, can produce any
products, can find any application for his labour-
power, can exist, without his being under the
direct, detailed “guidance” of a definite organiser....
  












    ...But the psychical series constitutes the “orga-
nisers,” and the “concomitance” of the latter signi-
fies for the “physical series”—for the workers—
nothing but dependence....
  












    [128]...Thus, according to Wundt, philosophy
should transcend the bounds of experience, “supple-
ment” the latter. The philosophical analysis needs
to be continued until we obtain the idea of a unity
which embraces both series that are independent
of each other. Having expressed this view, Wundt
immediately hastens to make an important reserva-
tion for himself: he declares that we can conceive
of the unity of the world either as a material unity
  





    or as a mental unity: a third solution of the
problem does not exist....
  












    [129]...Wundt refuses to give the name substance
to his idea of universal unity. He defines it as
the idea of pure reason, i.e., in the Kantian sense.
Just as Kant’s God is the idea of the supreme
“forming,” non-substantial principle, so also
Wundt’s universal unity is the idea of non-sub-
    stantial unity, thanks to which all phenomena
acquire vital meaning, indisputable value. In the
light of this idea, there disappears the “empty and
cheerless” philosophy which sees in the outward
order of phenomena, in their mechanical connec-
tion, the true essence of the latter. In its place
we obtain the view of the cosmic mechanism as
the external covering of spiritual activity and
creation....
  



 




    [130]...In this connection, Wundt strongly
emphasises the element of actuality. He reduces
the idea of universal unity, of the “foundation of
the world,” to the idea of a universal will....
  










 




    [131]...We shall not enter on an analysis of
  





his proposed formulation, nor shall we explain
his theory of “voluntarism”....
  

    ...Consequently, the ideologists of the modern
vanguard of the capitalist bourgeoisie cannot
  






  nonsense!
  What about
  




speak of any “permanent” organised principles
but, on the contrary, have to describe the latter as
  






  Schopen-
  hauer ?
  




something extremely changeable, something that
is eternally in a state of motion....
  
 
XII
  EMPIRIO-CRITICISM

    [133]...Wundt’s criticism had no crushing
  





force; it struck at an imaginary target. Wundt’s
  






Ⅴ    inexact
  




    appearance on the scene and the subsequent reac-
  





     tion from the camp of Avenarius’[6] disciples did







  true!
  




not signify a conflict between the philosophies
of two different classes or two large groups of one
and the same class. The socio-economic background
of the philosophical contest in question was, in
  





    this case, the comparatively insignificant difference







  correct
  




    between the most advanced and the somewhat less
advanced types of modern capitalist organisa-
tions....
  

    [134]...We should say more: the empirio-critic-
  





al philosophy should be understood primarily as
an apologia for the idea in question. The concept
of functional dependence is a denial of causal
dependence....
  






  that is so
  really??
  


 




    [135-136]...Heffding’s conclusion must, in gen-
eral, be considered correct. Only his reference to
“motives of expediency” is unfortunate: these
motives are vague and indefinite.
  






  Of course, but
  it does not
  follow from
  this that func-
  tionality
  cannot be a
variety of
  causality.
  




    Avenarius, in this case, was merely making
a concession to materialist phraseology, a conces-
  






  really?
  




sion determined by his social position. ...To many






people the views of the “parallelists” might appear
to be materialist in comparison with vulgar spiri-








tualism. The same applies to the views of empirio-






criticism. The possibility of their coming close
to materialism is particularly strong.... And wide
sections of the reading public have formed the
opinion that empirio-criticism is a materialist
school of thought. More than that, even expert
    philosophers judge it erroneously: Wilhelm Wundt
himself, the patriarch of modern philosophy, called
it “materialism”. Finally, what is most interesting
of all, the empirio-critics, too, while dissociating
themselves from materialism, at the same time
sometimes use its terminology, and sometimes
even begin as it were to waver in their anti-material-
ist views....
  






  Hm?
   
  a lie!
   
   
  why? You
  have not
  understood
  this!
   
  aha!
  


 




    [137]...Such is the real background that inspired
empirio-criticism with the idea of classifying
human cognition on the basis of the principle of
“biological” classification. But this sort of “biol-
ogy,” we repeat, has nothing in common with
materialism...


    [138-139]...dualism—according to Avenarius—
is the fruit of a certain process of our abstracting
    thought—“introjection”....
  

    But the antithesis of the “external” and “inter-
    nal” world is the purest fiction.
  

    An analysis of this antithesis is extremely
important; it should lead to substantiating the
monist world outlook. Commentators of Avenarius’
system of philosophy strongly stress this point.
“By exposing the impermissibility of introjection,”
one of them says,[7] “two aims are achieved....”
  



 




    [140]... the subordinate organiser, if his “abso-
lute” viewpoint is adopted, i.e., if he is regarded
as an organiser independent of the “will” controll-
ing him, is confronted also merely by a “thing,”
or “body,” in the shape of the workers. But let us
take another case: for the supreme “will,” the
subordinate organiser is not only one who is orga-
    nised, but one who organises.... The former “object,”
  






      oh, this is
  suspicious!
      A cheap
      explanation
  with no ana-
  lysis of the
  substance!
  




    now converted into “subject,” “organises” matter:
    man assimilates a tree, but a tree transformed, the
    “notion” of tree....
  

    [141-142]...“the fullness of human experience”
is also proved in Avenarius’ theory of principal
co-ordination....
  

    ...In Avenarius, like in Wundt, the “series”
turn out, in essence, to be “incommensurable.”
And instead of the materialist world outlook
    that one would expect after the categorical state-
ments about “the fullness of experience,” views
are expressed testifying to the idealist sympathies
    of empirio-criticism...
  

    But Wundt and Avenarius part company on
the road of idealist constructions. The author of
The System of Philosophy reveals a fancy for
“Kantian” motives. The author of The Human






Concept of the World proclaims views which bring
him close to the position once taken by Berkeley.







  true?
  


 




    Let us hasten to make a reservation. We do not
at all intend to assert that the works of the Bishop
of Cloyne determined Avenarius’ viewpoint, that
they had a direct influence on him. But the simi-
larity of the idealist positions of both philosophers
is indubitable. The afore mentioned theory of






principal co-ordination, taken as a whole, is evi-
dence of this similarity.
  






  true!
  


 




    With the same straightforwardness as Berkeley,
Avenarius presents the thesis that there are no
objects outside the subject. Each “thing” must
necessarily “be related” to the central nervous system,
which plays the role of functional centre....
  

    [144]...The supreme “leader” does not figure,
  






  Here Shulya-
  tikov is un-
  der a misap-
  prehension,
  




not even in the shape of the Kantian idea of reason,
Kant’s “form,” or in the shape of Wundt’s “univer-
    sal unity.” Nevertheless, he is there, and is moreover
the chief element of the philosophical system.
All phenomena are regarded precisely from his






point of view. His “invisible” presence is postulated
  






  bien!
  




by the unusually high appraisal of the organisatory
principle, presented parallel with the conception
of organised organisers. And in the general picture
of the world resulting from Avenarius’ philosophic-
al discourses, it is precisely the organisatory
  





    character of the organising factors that comes
  






  hm? hm?
  




    into the forefront....
  



 



  
    For Avenarius the world represents an agglom-
erate of central nervous systems. “Matter” is
absolutely deprived of all “qualities,” whether
a “primary” or “secondary,” which at one time were
considered its inalienable property. Absolutely
everything in matter is determined by the “spirit”
or, to use the terminology of the author of the
  






  a misappre-
  hension
  




Critique of Pure Experience, by the central nerv-
ous system....
  



 




    [145] The viewpoint of idealism in the style
    of Berkeley is put forward with great consistency
  






  NB
  




by the author of the Critique of Pure Experience....
  

    [146]...Mach’s theory of the “ego” as a logical
symbol....
  

    Mach, like Avenarius, knows two “series”—the
psychical and the physical (two kinds of combina-
tions of elements). As with Avenarius, these
series are incommensurable and at the same time
represent nothing but a fiction of our thought.
Alternately, the monist and the dualist viewpoint
is put forward: alternately the intermediary orga-
nisatory links are described as the organised, and
  




  
as the organising principle. And, as with Avena-
rius, in the final analysis the dictatorship of “the
organisatory will” is proclaimed. An idealistic
    picture of the world is drawn: the world is a com-
plex of “sensations.”






  
  a misappre-
  hension
  aha!
  


 




    [147]...Mach’s objection cannot be called valid.
The central concept of his philosophical system,
the famous “sensation,” is by no means a denial
  






  a misappre-
  hension
  




    either of the organisatory principle or of the
supreme organisatory principle.... Mach was prompt-
ed in his criticism of the conception of the “ego”
  





    by the view of the subordinate organisers as the
    organised “mass”....
  






      nonsense!
  





    [148-149]...Besides dealing with the specula-
tive constructions of Wundt, Avenarius and
Mach, we could, for example, subject to analysis
the views of such prominent representatives of
  





    modern West-European philosophy as Renouvier,
Bradley and Bergson.
  






  NB
  


 




    The sphere of philosophy is a veritable “Bastil-
    le” of bourgeois ideology.... It is necessary to bear
  











  
in mind that, for their part, the bourgeous ideolo-
gists are not sleeping, but are strengthening their
position. At the present time, they, are even im-
bued with the conviction that their position is
absolutely impregnable. The “idealist” sympathies
    of certain literary writers who take their stand
under the banner of Marxism, in turn, create
particularly favourable soil for such a convic-
tion....
  
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS

    XI. Wundt |Ostwald| . . . .107 |not in the book

    The entire book is an example of extreme vul-
garisation of materialism. Instead of a concrete analysis
of periods, formations, ideologies —empty phrases about
“organisers” and ridiculously strained, absurdly false
comparisons.
        A caricature of materialism in history.
        And it is a pity, for there is an attempt made in
the direction of materialism.



 

Notes
[1] The page references are to Shulyatikov’s 
  book.—Ed.
[2] philosophy.—Ed.
[3] Included in the symposium of his articles “From 
  the Psychology of Society.”—Lenin
[4] In the present case, we disagree somewhat with the 
  explanations proposed by comrade Bogdanov. He does not attach to this last 
  circumstance the importance it undoubtedly had; he does not even advance it. 
  We had occasion to speak about this question elsewhere “From the
  History and Practice of the Class Struggle” (in the chapters devoted 
  to the genesis of the ruling classes). Edition of S. Dorovatsky and A. 
  Charushnikov.—Lenin



[5] It will be recalled that Marx in Vol. I of Capital




and K. Kautsky note the dependence between ab-  
stract religious views and the development of com-  
modity production.—Lenin




  not in the
  same sense
  as yours  
  


 



[6] Carstanjen was the first to reply.—Lenin




  Then Willy,
  Petzoldt
  (twice),
  Kleinpeter.
  


[7] Rudolph Wlassak; quoted by Mach in The Analysis 
  of Sensation, p. 52.—Lenin
 



<< Back to the Table of Contents


 





Works Index
    |   
  Volume 38

 | 

Collected Works
    |   L.I.A. Index




  < backward




  forward >





 



==========

## G. V.
    Plekhanov. N. G. Chernyshevsky. Shipovnik
      Publishing House. St. Petersburg, 1910











G. V. Plekhanov. N. G. Chernyshevsky. Shipovnik Publishing House. St. Petersburg, 1910. (Part One)



Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Remarks on Books:
G. V. Plekhanov.
N. G. Chernyshevsky.
Shipovnik Publishing House.
St. Petersburg, 1910
(Part One)
 


    Written not earlier than October 1909
and not later than April 1911.
Published in part in 1933
in Lenin Miscellany XXV.
Published in full for the
first time.
Published according
to the original.
  

Lenin’s Remarks in G. V. Plekhanov’s book “N. G. Chernyshevsky,”
St. Petersburg, 1910—-written not earlier than October 1909 (the
actual date of the book’s appearance) and not later than April 1911.
They were first published in 1933 in Lenin Miscellany XXV.
  

    Many of Lenin’s comments are devoted to a comparison of statements by Plekhanov
in his book published in 1910 with his articles on Chernyshevsky 
published in 1890 and 1892 in Sotsial-Demokrat, a literary and political 
review (see Sotsial-Demokrat, Book 1, London, 1890; Book 2, Geneva, 1890; 
Book 3, Geneva, 1890; Book 4, Geneva, 1892).
  

  These four articles by Plekhanov were brought together in the book N. G. Chernyshevsky
appearing in Germany in 1894 in German. Plekhanov’s book, which gave, in 
the main, a correct characterisation of Chernyshevsky’s views and which 
sharply attacked the Narodniks, was favourably commented upon by Lenin in the 
article “A Retrograde Trend in Russian Social-Democracy” 
(see pres. ed., Vol. 4, Moscow, 1961, p. 271).
  

    Plekhanov’s book N. G. Chernyshevsky published in 1910 was written 
at a time when he had already gone over to Menshevism. It was 
in effect directed against Bolshevism 
against the Bolshevist evaluation of the world outlook and activity of Chernyshevsky 
and the revolutionary democrats of the 19th century. In this book, Plekhanov abandons 
a number of basic propositions in his earlier evaluation of Chernyshevsky, obscuring 
his revolutionary democratism, his resolute struggle against liberalism and his 
backing of the peasant revolution.
  

    Lenin carefully collates the text of the book published in 1910 with Plekhanov’s
articles in Sotsial-Demokrat, noting which of Plekhanov’s basic 
formulations remained unchanged and which underwent radical change.
  

    Lenin’s remarks and notations in Plekhanov’s book are inseparably 
linked with his numerous statements on Chernyshevsky—in the writings 
published before he became acquainted with Plekhanov’s book (What the “Friends of the People” 
Are and How They Fight the Social-Democrats, The Heritage We Renounce, On “Vekhi”;, and Materialism and 
Empirio-Criticism) as well as in those written afterwards (Peasant Reform 
and Proletarian Peasant Revolution, In Memory 
of Herzen, From the Past of the 
Workers’ Press in Russia, etc.).
  

 




INTRODUCTION

    [51]...The unfortunate outcome [52] of the
Crimean War compelled the Government to make
a few concessions to educated society and effect
at least the more pressing reforms that had long
since become indispensable. Soon the problem
of freeing the peasants was placed on the order
  










of the day, a problem plainly affecting the inter-
ests of all social-estates. Needless to say, Niko-
lai Gavrilovich[2] eagerly set about elaborating
the problem. His excellent articles on the peasants’
  





cause were written in 1857 and 1858. The mutual
    relations of our social forces in the epoch of the
abolition of serfdom are now fairly well known.
We shall, therefore, mention them only in passing,
  







    only insofar as it may be necessary to elucidate the
role adopted in this matter by our advanced publi-
cists, chief of whom then was N. G. Chernyshevsky.
It is well known that these writers zealously
defended the interests of the peasants. Our author
    wrote one article after another, advocating the
emancipation of the peasants and giving them
land, and maintaining that the Government would
find no difficulty whatever in redeeming the lands
allotted to the peasants. He supported his thesis
both with general theoretical considerations and
with the most detailed estimates. “Indeed, in
    what way can the redemption of land prove dif
ficult? How can it be too much for the people to
hear? That is improbable,” he wrote in the article
“Is Land Redemption Difficult?” “It runs counter
to the fundamental concepts of economics. Political
    economy teaches clearly that all the material
capital which a certain generation takes over from
previous generations is not too considerable in
value compared with the mass of values produced
by the labour of that generation. For example,
all of the land belonging to the French people,
together with all the buildings and their contents,
together with all the ships and cargoes, all the
    livestock and money and other riches belonging
to that country, is hardly worth a hundred thou-
sand million francs, while the labour of the French
people produces fifteen or more thousand million
francs’ worth of values annually, i.e., in no more
than seven years the French people produce a mass
of values equal to that of the whole of France from
the Channel to the Pyrenees. Consequently, if the
French had to redeem all France, they could do
so in the lifetime of one [53] generation, using
only one-fifth of their revenue for the purpose.
And what is the point at issue in our country?
Is it the whole of Russia that we must redeem
with all her riches? No, only the land. And is it
to be all the Russian land? No, the redemption
    would affect only those gubernias of European
Russia alone where serfdom is deep-rooted,” etc.[3]
After showing that the lands to be redeemed would
constitute no more than one-sixth of the area of
European Russia, he puts forward as many as eight
plans for carrying out redemption. According to
him, if the Government were to accept any one
of these plans, it could redeem the allotted lands
not only without burdening the peasants, but
also to the great advantage of the state treasury.
Chernyshevsky’s plans were all based on the con-
cept that it is “necessary to fix the
most moderate prices possible
in determining the amount of
redemption payments.” We know now
how much consideration the Government gave to the
interests of the peasantry in the abolition of
serfdom and how much it heeded Chernyshevsky’s
    advice regarding moderation in fixing redemption
payments. Whereas our government, in freeing
the peasants, never for a moment forgot the bene-
fits to the state treasury, it thought very little
about the interests of the peasants. In the re-
demption operations fiscal and landlord interests
were exclusively borne in mind.




 




    ...[57] It was not on economic problems alone
that Chernyshevsky had to wage a fierce polemic.
Neither were his opponents only liberal econo-
  





Sotsial-Dem-
  okrat No. 1,
  p. 152
  




mists. As the influence of the Sovremennik circle[4]
in Russian literature grew, the greater were the
    number of attacks launched from the most varied
  





[58] quarters both on that circle in general and
on our author in particular. The contributors to
Sovremennik were regarded as dangerous people
who were prepared to destroy all the notorious
    “foundations.” Some of “Belinsky’s friends,” who at
first considered it possible to go along with Cherny-
  











shevsky and those holding his views, repudiated
the Sovremennik as an organ of the “Nihilists,”
and began to exclaim that Belinsky would never
  





  Up to here So-
  tsial-Demokrat
  No. 1, p. 152
  




have approved of its trend. Such was I. S. Turge-
nev’s attitude.[5] Even Herzen grumbled at the
    “clowns,” in his Kolokol.[6] He warned them that:
  







    “while exhausting all their ridicule over the litera-
ture of exposures, our dear clowns forget that
on this slippery path they may not merely ‘whistle’
themselves into becoming like Bulgarin and Grech,
but even into being decorated with the Stanislav
    Order.” Herzen affirmed that there were excellent
things in the “literature of exposures” that the
    “clowns” were ridiculing. “Do you imagine that
all the tales of Shchedrin and others can just be
hurled into the water together with Oblomov[7] on
their necks? You indulge yourselves too much,
gentlemen!”[8].... The reference to
    Shchedrin was
extremely unfortunate since Chernyshevsky him-
  





self was well able to appreciate his works. In gen-
eral, everything shows that Herzen was misled
    by his liberal  friends,  such  as Kavelin. The
  





  NB
  




    “clowns”—or “whistlers,” as they were called in
Russia—were not ridiculing the exposures, but
the naive people who could not or would not go
beyond innocent exposures, forgetting the moral
of Krylov’s fable The Cat and the Cook[9]....
  

    Herzen himself was to see very soon how bad
in a political sense were those liberal friends who
  





kept questioning his relations with Chernyshevsky.
When he had to break with K. D. Kavelin, he
perhaps told himself that the “jaundiced ones”
    were not entirely wrong.[10] [59]
  

    Incidentally, the majority of the articles in
  











Svistok which evoked the especial dissatisfaction
    of the well-bred liberals did not belong to the
  





  NB
  




    pen of N. G. Chernyshevsky. Only rarely did
he contribute to it, as he was overwhelmed with
other work. In the closing years of his literary
activity he contributed regularly to every issue
of Sovremennik; what is more, every issue usually
contained several articles by him. As a general
rule, his articles were distributed among the
various sections of the journal as follows: first
of all, be contributed an article on some general
theoretical problem, then he wrote a political
survey, reviewed several new books, and, lastly,
by way of relaxation and diversion, as it were,
    he made polemical sorties against his opponents.
The Sovremennik of 1861 was particularly rich in
polemical articles written by him. It was at that
time that he wrote his well-known “Polemical
Gems,” “National Tactlessness” (attacking Slovo
of Lvov), “Popular Muddleheadedness” (attacking
Aksakov’s Den; we shall speak of this article
later), and numerous other polemical notes in the
section of Russian and foreign literature.
  

    What is now especially interesting in “Polemi-
cal Gems” is our author’s views on his own literary
activity. We shall cite them here. Chernyshevsky
was very well aware that he held a prominent
place in Russian literature, His opponents dreaded
him, and occasionally even paid him compliments.
But his growing renown did not make him happy
    in the least. He had too low an opinion of Russian
literature to consider the prominent place he
occupied in it to be honourable. He was “com-
pletely cold to his literary reputation.” The only
thing he was interested in was whether he would
be able to preserve the freshness of his thought
and feeling till those better days when our litera-
ture would become really useful to society. “I know
that better times will come for literary activity,
when it will be of real benefit to society, and
when he who possesses talent will really earn a good
name. And so I am wondering whether when the
time comes I shall still be able to serve society
properly. Fresh strength and fresh convictions
are needed for this. But I see that I am beginning
to join the company of ‘respected’ writers, that is
to say, of those writers who have been wrung dry,
who lag behind the movement of social require-
ments. This rouses a feeling of bitterness.
But what is there to be done? Age takes its toll.
Youth does not come twice, [60] I can’t help
    envying those who are younger and fresher
than I....”[11]


    [61] Meanwhile, feelings were rising, at least
in a section of Russian “society.” The student
youth were filled with unrest and secret revolu-
tionary organisations were springing up which
    printed their own manifestoes and programmes
and awaited an imminent peasant uprising. We
already know that Chernyshevsky fully recognised
the possibility of impending “troubled times”[12]






in Russia and we shall yet see how strongly the
rise of the social mood was reflected in his activity
as a publicist. But was he in any way connected
  





  NB
  




with the secret societies? It is not yet possible
to reply with certainty to this question, and who
knows whether we shall ever have the facts to
answer it. In the opinion of M. Lemke, who made
an excellent study of the N. G. Chernyshevsky
case, “it can be presumed (his italics) that he
was the author of the proclamation ‘To the Manorial
Peasants,’ which the court found him guilty of
having written.” Mr. Lemke supports his conjecture
by pointing to the style and content of the procla-
mation. We find these arguments not without
foundation. But we hasten to repeat with Mr. Lem-
    ke that “all these are more or less probable consider-
ations, and no more.”[13] We also consider fairly
well founded Mr. Lemke’s opinion that the famous
paper Velikoruss was, in part, the work of Cherny-
shevsky. Mr. Lemke supports his hypothesis by
quoting Mr. Stakhevich, who for several years
lived with Chernyshevsky in Siberia: “I noticed
that Chernyshevsky was obviously sympathetically
inclined towards the paper which appeared at
irregular intervals under the title of Velikoruss;
I recall three issues coming out. As I listened to 
    Nikolai Gavrilovich’s conversation, I sometimes
noticed that both his thoughts and the way he
expressed them [62] strongly reminded me of the
paper Velikoruss, and I decided in my own mind
that he was either the author or, at least, co-
author of the paper which advocated the need for
constitutional reforms.”[14] We are in full agreement






with Mr. Stakhevich: the style and content of
Velikoruss are indeed very reminiscent of Cherny-
    shevsky’s journalistic articles. And if Cherny-
  





  NB
  




shevsky was in fact the author, then that, of course,
explains the circumstance that Velikoruss was
far wiser and more tactful than other such papers
of the time.
  

    Simultaneously with the rise of the extreme
party in Russia, there was a growth of the rev-
olutionary movement in Poland. Had Cherny-
    shevsky any formal relations with the Polish
revolutionaries of whom there were not a few
in St. Petersburg at that time? Again, there are
no data on this point. Not wishing to indulge in
conjectures, we shall limit ourselves, in clarifying
Chernyshevsky’s general sympathies towards the
Polish cause, to data obtainable from his writings;
however, even such data are not numerous.
  



 




    We know that the Slavophils[15] very much
approved of the struggle of the Galician Ruthen-
ians against the Poles. Chernyshevsky was always
sympathetically inclined towards the Little Rus-
  





Sotsial-Demo
  krat No 1,
  p. 157
  




sians. He regarded Belinsky’s negative attitude
to the emerging Little Russian literature to be
a great mistake. In the January issue of Sovremen-
nik for 1864 he published a very sympathetic article
    on the occasion of the appearance of Osnova, the
organ of the Little Russians. But his attitude
towards the struggle of the Galician Ruthenians
against the Poles could not be one of unconditional
approval. First of all, he did not like the fact
that the Ruthenians sought the support of the
Viennese Government. Neither did he like the
influential role of the clergy in the movement of
the Galician Ruthenians. “Lay affairs,” he wrote,
“should be the concern of laymen.” Finally, Cherny-
shevsky did not like the exiusively national
formulation of this question, which he regarded as
    primarily an economic one. In an article
entitled “National Tactlessness” (Sovremennik,
July 1861) attacking the Lvov Slovo, Cherny-
shevsky [63] sharply criticised the excessive nation-
alism of that organ. “It is very possible that a
careful examination of existing relations,” he
wrote, “would show the Lvov Slovo that at the
basis of the matter there is a question that is far
removed from the racial question—the question
of social-estates. It is very possible that it would
see Ruthenians and Poles on each of the two sides—
people differing in race, but of the same social
position. We do not believe that the Polish peasant
should be hostile to the alleviation of the obliga-
tions and, in general, of the living conditions of
the Ruthenian settlers. We do not believe that the
sentiments of the Ruthenian landowners should
differ very much in this matter from the sentiments
of the Polish landowners. If we are not mistaken,
the root of the Galician question lies not in rela-
tions of race, but of social-estate.”
  

    The mutual hostility of the peoples composing
Austria ought to have appeared even more tactless
to Chernyshevsky, in that the Viennese Govern-
ment then, as previously, derived great advantages
from it. “When one reflects carefully, one is not
surprised at the many years of existence of the
Austrian Empire,” he wrote in a political review
in the same issue of Sovremennik that published
the article “National Tactlessness”; “and why
should it not maintain itself when there is such
    ‘excellent’ political tact on the part of the nationa-
lities embraced within its borders.” To Cherny-
shevsky the Austrian Germans, Czechs, Croats
and, as we have seen, Ruthenians seemed equally
“slow-witted”. He was afraid that the Slav “slow-
wittedness” which was particularly evident in
1848-49 would again go very far. At the beginning
of the sixties Hungary was waging a stubborn
    struggle against the Viennese reactionary central-
ists. The discontent of the Hungarians was running
so high that at one time it could have been expected
that there would be a revolutionary outburst in
their country. In his political reviews, our author
    repeatedly expressed the fear that, in the event
of a revolutionary movement in Hungary, the
Austrian Slavs would again become obedient
    tools of reaction. The tactics of many Slav races
in Austria at that time could only strengthen such
fears, since the Austrian Slavs even ventured
to boast of the disgraceful role they had played
in the 1848-49 events. Chernysheysky strongly
condemned these tactics and showed that it would
have been more to their advantage if, on the
    contrary, they had supported the enemies of the
Viennese Government, enemies from whom they
could have obtained substantial concessions. He
said this concerning the attitude of the Croats
to the Hungarians [64], and repeated this to the
Ruthenians. “The social-estate party, hostile to
the Ruthenians,” we read in his article “National
Tactlessness,” “is now ready for concessions....
It would do no harm for the Lvov Slovo to give
this some thought; perhaps the concessions which
people who seem to it to be enemies are sincerely
prepared to make, perhaps these concessions are
    so great that they would thoroughly satisfy the
  





Ruthenian settlers; in any event these concessions
are without doubt far greater and far more impor-
tant than the concessions the Ruthenian settlers
can get from the Austrians....”






  Up to here Sot-
  sial-Demokrat
  No. 1. p. 158
  


 




    [65]...Finally, the first part of the novel Prologue[16]
depicts the friendly attitude of Volgin to Sokolovsky
(Sierakowski). Volgin likes Sokolovsky’s utter
devotion to his [66] convictions, the absence of
conceited pettiness, his self-control, combined
with the passionate zeal of the true agitator.
  











Volgin calls him a  real man  and thinks that
    our liberals could learn a great deal from him.
All this is very interesting,[17] but it too in no way
  





  NB
  




explains Chernyshevsky’s practical relations with
the Polish affair.[18]




 




    At that time Chernyshevsky was about 34 years
of age. He was in the prime of his mental powers,
and who knows to what heights he might not have
risen in his development! But he had not long to
live in freedom. He was the recognised leader of
the extreme party, a highly influential exponent
of materialism and socialism. He was considered
    the “ringleader” of the revolutionary youth, and
was blamed for all their outbursts and agitation.
As always happens in such cases, rumour exagger-
ated the affair and ascribed to Chernyshevsky
intentions and actions which were foreign to him.
In “Prologue to a Prologue,”[19] Chernyshevsky
  





  idem
Sotsial-
  Demokrat
  No. 1,
  pp. 165-166
  




    himself describes the liberal sympathetic gossip
spread in St. Petersburg concerning Volgin’s
(i.e., his own) alleged relations with the London
circle of Russian exiles.[20] The gossip was occa-
sioned by the most insignificant incidents that
had absolutely nothing to do with politics. And,
as usual, things did not stop at mere gossip. The
police-inspired press had long been engaged in
literary denunciations of Chernyshevsky. In 1862,
Sovremennik was suspended for some time. Then
came non-literary denunciations as well. “The
Director of the Third Department of His Imperial
Majesty’s Own Chancellery,” said the indictment
of Chernyshevsky, “has received an anonymous
letter warning the Government against Cherny-
shevsky, ‘that youth ringleader and wily socialist’;
‘he himself has said that he will never be convict-
ed’; he is said to be a pernicious agitator, and
people ask to be spared from such a man; ‘all
of Chernyshevsky’s former friends, seeing that his
tendencies were finding expression in deeds and
not merely in words, liberal-minded people...
have dissociated themselves from him. Unless you
remove Chernyshevsky, writes the author of the
    letter [67], there will be trouble and bloodshed;
they are a band of rabid demagogues, of reckless
people.... Perhaps they will eventually be eliminat-
ed, but just think how much innocent blood will
be shed because of them.... There are committees
of such socialists in Voronezh, Saratov, Tambov
and elsewhere, and everywhere they inflame the
youth.... Send Chernyshevsky away wherever you
like, but be quick to deprive him of the opportunity
to act.... Deliver us from Chernyshevsky for the
sake of public peace”.... 
  

    [71]... What is the secret of the extraordinary
success of What Is To Be Done?[21] It is the same as
    is generally responsible for the success of literary
works, the fact that this novel gave a living and
universally understood answer to questions in
which a considerable section of the reading public
was keenly interested. In themselves, the thoughts
expressed in it were not new; Chernyshevsky had
taken them wholly from West-European literature.
In France,[22] George Sand had much earlier advocat-
ed free and, most important, sincere and honest
relations in the love of a man for a woman. As re-
gards the moral demands she puts on love, Lucrezia
Floriani differs in no way from Vera Pavlovna
    Lopukhova-Kirsanova. And as for the novel
Jacques [72], it would be simple to copy out a fairly
large number of passages from it to show that
in the novel What Is To Be Done? the thoughts
and reasonings of George Sand’s[23] freedom-loving,
selfless hero are at times reproduced almost in their
entirety. And George Sand was not the only one
to advocate freedom in relations of this kind.
It is well known that they were also advocated by
Robert Owen and Fourier, who had a decisive
    influence on Chernyshevsky’s outlook.[25] And
as early as the forties all these ideas met with
warm sympathy in our country. In his articles
Belinsky often called passionately for freedom
and sincerity in relations of love. The reader will
recall, of course, how bitterly the “impetuous
Vissarion” reproached Pushkin’s Tatyana because,
while loving Onegin, she did not follow the dictates
of her heart; she belonged to “another,” her aged
husband, whom she did not love but continued to
live with. In their attitude to women, the best
people of the “forties” adhered to the same principles
as those of Lopukhov and Kirsanov. However,
prior to the appearance of the novel What Is To
Be Done?, these principles were shared only by
a “select” handful; the mass of the reading public
  





did not understand them at all. Even Herzen
hesitated to expound them fully and clearly in
    his [73] novel Who Is To Blame? A. Druzhinin
handles the question more resolutely in his story
Polenka Saks.[26] But this story is too colourless,
and its characters, belonging to so-called high
  











society—officials and titled personages—did not
  





at all appeal to the non-gentry, who, after the








fall of Nicholas’ regime, formed the left wing
of the reading public. With the appearance of
  





  NB
  




What Is To Be Done? everything changed, every-
thing became clear, precise and definite. There was
no more room left for doubt. Thinking people
    were faced with the alternative of being guided
in love by the principles of Lopukhov and Kirsa-
nov, or of bowing to the sanctity of marriage and
resorting, should a new sentiment arise, to the
old, tested method of secret amorous adventures,
or else completely subduing all affection in their
hearts in view of the fact that they belonged to
a marriage partner, whom they no longer loved.
And the choice had to be made quite consciously.
Chernyshevsky dealt with the issue in such a way
that what had been natural instinctiveness and
sincerity in love relations became utterly impos-
sible. Mind control extended to love, and the gener-
al public adopted a conscious view of the relations
    between man and woman. And this was particu-
larly important in our country in the sixties. The
reforms which Russia had undergone turned
upside down both our social and family relations.
A ray of light reached into recesses that had been
in complete darkness. Russian people were com-
pelled to examine themselves, to take a sober
view of their relation to their kin, to society and
    family. A new element came to play a big role in
family relations, in love and friendship: viz.,
convictions, which formerly only the very smallest
handful of “idealists” had possessed. Differences
of conviction led to unexpected ruptures. A woman
“given in marriage” to a certain man often discov-
    ered with honor that her lawful “lord” was an
    obscurantist,, a bribe-taker, a flatterer grovelling
before his superiors. A man who had enjoyed the
“possession” of his beautiful wife, and unexpectedly
was affected by the current of new ideas, often
realised in dismay that what his charming play-
thing was interested in was not at all “new people”
or “new views,” but new dresses and dances, and
also [74] the title and salary of her husband....
  

    [75]...In Vera Pavlovna’s dreams we see that
side of Chernyshevsky’s socialist views to which,
unfortunately, Russian socialists up to now have
not paid sufficient attention. That which attracts
us in these dreams is the fact that Chernyshevsky
fully realised that the socialist system can only
  





be based on the broad application to production of
the technical forces developed by the bourgeois
period. In Vera Pavlovna’s dreams huge armies
of labour are jointly engaged in production, pass-
ing from Central Asia to Russia, from hot climate 
  







countries to the cold countries. All this, of course,
could have been conceived with the aid of Fourier
as well, but it is evident even from the subsequent
history of so-called Russian socialism that the
Russian reading public was not aware of this.
In their ideas of socialist society our revolution-
aries frequently went so far as to conceive it in
  





the form of a federation of peasant communities,
cultivating their fields with the same antiquated
plough as that used to scrape the soil in the time
  







of Basil the Blind. But obviously such “socialism”
cannot be recognised as socialism. The emancipa-
tion of the proletariat can come about only through
  





  NB
  cf. Sotsial-





    the emancipation of man from the “power of
the land” and nature in general. And this
  





Demokrat
  No. 1.
  




    emancipation has made absolutely indispensable
those [76] armies of labour and that extensive
application of modern productive forces to produc-
tion which Chernyshevsky spoke of in Vera Pav-
lovna’s dreams and which we have completely
forgotten in our desire to be “practical.”
  

    Chernyshevsky was present at the birth of the
  





                        
                  1
    new type of “new people” in our country. He has
drawn this type in the shape of Rakhmetov. Our
author joyfully welcomed the emergence of this
new type and could not deny himself the satisfac-
tion of depicting at least a vague profile of him.
  





1—“the revo-
  lutionary” in
Sotsial-
  Demokrat
  (No. 1.
  p. 173)[27]





At the same time he foresaw with sorrow how many
trials and sufferings there were in store for the
Russian revolutionary whose life must be one of
severe struggle and great self-sacrifice. And so,
in Rakhmetov, Chernyshevsky presents us with
the true ascetic. Rakhmetov positively tortures
himself. He is completely “merciless towards him-
self,” as his landlady says. He even decides to
test whether he can bear torture by spending
a whole night lying on a length of felt with nails
sticking through it. Many people, including Pisa-
rev, regarded this as mere eccentricity. We agree
that some aspects of Rakhmetov’s character could
have been drawn differently. But the character as
a whole nevertheless remains completely true
to life. Almost every one of our prominent






                        
                  2
[socialists of the sixties and seventies] possessed
                        
                  3
[no small] share of the Rakhmetov spirit.
  

    We should like to say in closing our introduc-
tion that Chernyshevsky’s significance in Russian
  





2—“Russian
  revolution-
  aries”
3—“enor-
  mous” (Sot-
  sial-Demokrat
  No. 1, p. 174)
  




    literature has yet to be appraised properly. How
much he is misunderstood in our country even
by many of those who think very well of him
can be seen from V. G. Korolenko’s reminiscences
of him. This gifted and intelligent author portrays
him as a sort of “rationalistic economist” who,
moreover, believes “in the power of Comte’s orga-
nising reason.”[28] If the words about “organising
    reason” mean anything at all, then they mean
that Chernyshevsky regarded social phenomena
from an idealistic standpoint, from which they
were considered by Comte himself. But he who
looks on social phenomena from an ideal-
    stic standpoint cannot be called an econo-
mist for the simple reason that this name is ap-
plied, even if not very properly, to those who,
while not believing [77] in the power of organising
    reason, do believe in the organising power of eco-
nomics. An “economist” who believed in the power
of organising reason would be like a Darwinist who
accepted the cosmogony of Moses. But this is
not the most important thing here. What is most
    important is the fact that Mr. Korolenko counter-
poses the sociological views of our “subjectivists”[29]






to the “economism” of Chernyshevsky. “We, too,
did not stand still when we ceased to be ‘rationalis-
tic economists.’ Instead of purely economic patterns,
the literary trend, represented chiefly by N. K. Mi-
khailovsky, has opened to us a veritable vista of
laws and parallels of a biological character, while
  











the play of economic interests was assigned a sub-
ordinate role.”[30]


    “Did not stand still,” indeed! The
“vista of laws and parallels of a biological char-
acter,” revealed by Mikhailovsky, was an
enormous step backwards in com-
parison with Chernyshevsky’s social views.[31]
N. K. Mikhailovsky was a disciple of P. L. Lavrov,
whose views on the course of social development
corresponded to those of Bruno Bauer, as we have
shown in the book The Development of the Monist
View of History. Hence whoever would like to
understand the relation between N. G. Cherny-
shevsky’s world outlook and that of our “subjectiv-
ists” should first of all try to understand the rela-
tion between Feuerbach’s philosophy, to which
    Chernyshevsky adhered, and Bruno Bauer’s views.
And this is clear and simple: Feuerbach is far
ahead of Bruno Bauer.
  



 




    As an epigraph to our first article on Cherny-
shevsky, written while the news of his death
was still fresh in mind, and completely revised in the
present edition, we have taken the following
  





  NB
  




    words from Chernyshevsky’s letter to his wife:
    “My life and yours belong to history; hundreds of
years will pass and our names will still be dear
to people who will recall them with gratitude
when those who lived with us are no more.” This
    letter was written on October 5, 1862, i.e., when
the author was already incarcerated.
  
 

 
PART ONE
N. G. CHERNYSHEVSKY’S
    PHILOSOPHICAL, HISTORICAL
AND LITERARY VIEWS
SECTION ONE
    N. G. CHERNYSHEVSKY’S PHILOSOPHICAL
VIEWS
     
Chapter One
    CHERNYSHEVSKY AND FEUERBACH

    [81]... In the first edition of this work, the first
article of which, dealing, inter aim, with Cherny-
sky’s philosophical views, was written in late
  





    18|9|9, we expressed the conviction that in his
  





|8|





philosophical views our author was a follower
of Feuerbach. Naturally, this conviction of ours
was based above all on a comparison of those ideas
of Chernyshevsky which had a more or less direct
bearing on philosophy, with Feuerbach’s views....
  
Chapter Three
    POLEMIC WITH YURKEVICH AND OTHERS

    ... [101] Yurkevich ascribes to Chernyshevsky
the idea that there is no difference at
all between material and psychical phenomena,
and inquires triumphantly how it is that sensa-
tions arise from the movement of a nerve. This is the
old nonsense that has long been flung at material-
ists and from which it merely follows that the
people who want to “criticise” materialism do not
even know the ABC of materialism. Nowhere in his
article does Chernyshevsky say that there is no
difference at all between so-called [102] physical
phenomena, on the one hand, and psychical pheno-
mena, on the other. On the contrary, he categori-
cally admits the existence of this difference; but
he believes that it in no way justifies attributing
psychical phenomena to a particular non-material
factor. We are already acquainted with his re-
mark to the effect that there are very many differ-
ent qualities in every object. Now we shall discuss
    it in more detail. “For example,” Chernyshevsky
says, “a tree grows and burns; we say it has two
qualities: the power of growth and combustibility.
What similarity is there between these two quali-
ties? They are totally different; there is no concept
under which one could put both these qualities,
except the general conception—quality; there
is no concept under which we could put both series
of phenomena corresponding to these qualities,
except the concept—phenomenon. Or, for example,
ice is hard and sparkles; what is there common to
hardness and sparkle? The logical distance from
one of these qualities to the other is immeasurably
great or, it would be better to say, there is no
    logical distance between them, whether near or
far, because there is no logical relation between
them. From this we see that the combination of
quite heterogeneous qualities in one object is the
  





    general law of things.” The same also with the
quality we call the capacity for sensation and
thought. Its distance from the so-called physical
qualities of the living organism is immeasurably
great. But this does not prevent it being a quality
  





  not immeasur-
  ably (al-
  though we still
  do not know
  this “mea-
  




of the same organism which, at the same time,
possesses extension and capacity for movement....
  





  sure”)
  


 




    [103]... Even J. Priestley remarked in his
Disquisitions that the idea that brain vibrations
are identical with perception would be a very
great abuse of materialist doctrine. “It is easy
to form an idea of there being vibrations without
any perceptions accompanying them. But it is
  











supposed that the brain, besides its vibrating
power, has superadded to it a percipient
    or sentient power, likewise; there being
no reason that we know why this power may not
be imparted to it.”[32] This is precisely the point
    of view held by all the prominent materialists of
modern times, including, of course, Feuerbach
and Chernyshevsky. The opponents of material-
ism—the consistent or inconsistent, conscious or
    unconscious idealists—ought, in their criticism
of this doctrine, to convince us above all that
they know more about it than Priestley does, and
show us what grounds specifically prevent them
    from recognising, together with Priestley, that
the brain, besides having the ability to vibrate,
may also be capable of perceiving. They undoubt-
edly have such grounds. But these amount to the
spiritualistic prejudice that by itself, i.e., unless
animated by spirit, matter is dead and incapable
not only of perception, but even of motion. To re-
fer, in arguing with the materialists, to such
grounds means to commit an obvious petitio
principii, i.e., to argue from the very same proposi-
tion which has to be proved. The opponents of
materialism themselves more or less vaguely sense
this. Therefore, they are usually very careful not to
show the grounds which hinder them from recognis-
ing the capacity for perceiving one of the prop-
erties of matter, and prefer to refute what no
single prominent materialist has ever stated, at
least in modern times, i.e., that perception is the
same as motion.[33] We leave it to the reader to judge
of this sort of criticism, a criticism which is more
widespread in our country than anywhere else,
and is more so now than ever before....
  

    [105]... “It stands to reason,” Chernyshevsky
admits, “that when we speak of the difference in
the state of the body during a chemical process
and at a time when it is not in that process, we
mean only the quantitative distinction between
a vigorous, rapid course of that process and a very
feeble slow course of it. Properly speaking, every
body is constantly going through a chemical pro-
cess. For example, a log, even if it is not set on
fire or burnt in a stove but lies quietly, seemingly
undergoing no changes, in the wall of a house,
will nevertheless come in time to the same end
to which burning brings it: it will gradually decay,
    and nothing will be left of it, too, but ashes (the
dust of decayed wood, of which in the end nothing
remains but the mineral particles of ash). But if
this process—e.g., in the case of the ordinary decay
of a log in a house wall—takes place very slowly
and feebly, then qualities which are proper to
a body going through the process manifest them-
selves with a microscopic feebleness that is com-
pletely imperceptible under ordinary conditions.
    For example, the slow decay of a piece of wood
in a house wall also generates heat; but that quan-
tity of it which in burning would have been con-
centrated into a few hours, in this case becomes
diluted, so to speak, into several decades, so that
it does not achieve any result that is easily per-
ceptible in practice; the existence of this heat is
negligible for practical purposes. It is the same as
    the taste of wine in a whole pond of water into
which one has let fall a drop of wine: from the
scientific point of view, the pond contains a mixture
of water and wine, but to all practical purposes
    it can be assumed that there is no wine at all
in it.”
  

    [106] This brilliant passage allows one to sur-
mise that for Chernyshevsky in this respect too
there was no cleavage between organised matter
on the one hand and unorganised matter, on the
    other. To be sure, the organism of the animal (and
even more so of the animal at the top of the zoologi-
cal tree, that is, man) displays in the respect that
is of interest to us such properties as are altogether
alien to unorganised matter. But, after all, the
    burning of a piece of wood, too, is accompanied
by a number of phenomena that are not to be
observed during the process of its slow decay.
However, there is no essential difference between
these two processes. On the contrary, this is one
and the same process, with this difference only
that in the one case it is very rapid and in the
other, extremely slow. Therefore, in the one case
the properties which belong to a body undergoing
this process manifest themselves with great force,
while in the other case they do so “with microscopic
feebleness that is completely imperceptible under
    ordinary conditions.” In regard to the question of
  





psychical phenomena this means that in an unor-
ganised form also, matter is not devoid of the
basic capacity for “sensation,” which provides
such rich “spiritual” fruits among the higher
    animals. But in unorganised matter this capacity
  





  NB
  




exists to an extremely small extent. Therefore
    it is totally imperceptible to the investigator and,
without risk of committing any appreciable error,
we can equate it to nil. Nevertheless, it must not
be forgotten that this capacity in general is inher-
ent in matter and that in consequence there are no
    grounds for regarding it as something miraculous
where it manifests itself particularly strongly, as
    can be seen, for example, among the higher animals
in general, and pre-eminently in man. In express-
ing this idea—with the caution necessary under the
conditions of our press at that time—Chernyshevsky
came close to such materialists as Lamettrie and
Diderot, who, in turn, adopted the view of Spinoz-
ism, freed of the unnecessary theological append-
ages....
  

    [107]... Yurkevich also asserted that quantita-
tive differences are transformed into qualitative
differences not in the object itself but in its re-
lation to the sentient subject. But this is a very
  





    gross logical mistake. In order to become changed
in its relation to the sentient subject, the object
    must undergo a preliminary change ||in itself.||






  not logical,
  but episte-
  mological
  




    If for us ice does not have the same properties as
steam, it is because the mutual relations of the
water particles in the former case are entirely
different from those in the latter. But enough
of this....
  

    We know how contemptuous Chernyshevsky
was of Yurkevich’s arguments. He did not analyse
these arguments—and had no possibility of doing
so under the conditions of the censorship—but sim-
ply declared them to be obsolete and not in the
least convincing.
  

    “I am a seminarian myself,” he wrote in his
Polemical Gems. “I know from my own experience
the position of people who get their education as
Yurkevich did. I have seen people in the same
position as he is. I therefore find it hard to laugh
at him; it would mean laughing at the impossibility
of having decent books available, laughing at the
complete helplessness in the matter of developing
oneself, at a situation that is unimaginably re-
    stricted in all possible respects.
  

    “I don’t know Mr. Yurkevich’s age; if he is no
    longer a young man, it is too late to worry about
him. But if he is still young, I gladly offer him
the small collection of books in my possession.”
  

    Mr. Volynsky still finds this reply highly [108]
unsatisfactory. He thinks that Chernyshevsky
replied in this way solely because of his inability
to decisively refute Yurkevich. Evidently some
journalists at the beginning of the sixties also
reasoned in this manner. For example, Dudyshkin,
enumerating Yurkevich’s allegedly irrefutable
arguments point by point, wrote the following in
Otechestvenniye Zapiski, addressing himself to
    Chernyshevsky:
  

    “The matter would appear to be clear; it now
concerns not someone else, but you; not philosophy
or physiology in general, but your ignorance of
these sciences. Why drag in the red herring of
    seminary philosophy? Why confuse totally differ-
ent things and say that you knew all that when you
were in the seminary and even now remember it
all by heart?”
  

    To this Chernyshevsky replied that Dudyshkin’s
lack of acquaintance with seminary notebooks
prevented him from understanding what was at
issue. “If you took the trouble to look through
these notebooks,” he continues, “you would see
that all the shortcomings which Mr. Yurkevich
discovers in me, these notebooks discover in
Aristotle, Bacon, Gassendi, Locke, etc., etc.,






in all the philosophers who were not idealists.
    Consequently, these reproaches by no means apply
to me as an individual writer; they apply properly
  





  NB
  




    to the theory which I consider it useful to popular-
ise. If you are incredulous, take a look at the
Philosophical Dictionary, published by Mr. S.G.,
which takes the same line as Mr. Yurkevich, and
you will see that the same thing is said there of
every non-idealist: he does not know psychology,
he is not acquainted with the natural sciences, he
rejects inner experience, he is overwhelmed by
facts, he confuses metaphysics with the natural
    sciences, he degrades man, etc., etc....”
  
Chapter Four
    THE DOCTRINE OF MORALITY

    [111]... In general, very noticeable in Cherny-
shevsky’s view of rational egoism is the endeavour,
characteristic of all “periods of enlightenment”
(Aufklärungsperioden), to seek support for morality
in reason, and in the more or less well-founded
calculations of the individual an explanation of
his character and behaviour. Sometimes Cherny-
shevsky’s arguments in this connection are as
similar as two peas in a pod to the arguments of
Helvétius and those who shared his ideas. They
recall almost as strongly the arguments of Socrates,
the typical representative of the epoch of enlight-
enment in ancient Greece, who, in coming forward
as a champion of friendship, showed that it is
advantageous to have friends because
  





they may [112] be of some use in times of mis-
fortune. The explanation for such |extremes of
rationality| is that the enlighteners were usually
incapable of adopting the viewpoint of
development.[34]










 




    We know that, according to Chernyshevsky’s
theory, man is by nature neither good nor evil
but becomes good or evil depending on circum-
stances.[35] Were we to recognise that man is always
prompted by calculation in his behaviour, then
we should have to formulate Chernyshevsky’s
view on human nature differently; we should have
to say that man is by nature neither good nor
evil but only calculating, this property of his
becoming more or less marked depending on cir-
cumstances. But such a formulation would hardly
be to our author’s liking.
  

    What is good, and what is evil, according to
his theory? This question is answered by the same
article, “The Anthropological Principle in Philos-
ophy”—a very informative one, as the reader can
see. “Individuals,” says Chernyshevsky in it,
    “regard as good the actions of other people that
are beneficial to them; society holds as good, what
is good for the whole of society, or for the majority
of its members. Lastly people in general, irrespec-
tive of a nation or a class, describe as good that
which is beneficial for mankind in general.” It often
    happens that the interests of different nations or
estates run counter to one another or to human
interests generally; it is also a frequent occurrence
that the interests of one estate are opposed to those
of the whole nation. How is one to decide in this
case what is good and what is bad?
  
 
SECTION TWO
    N. G. CHERNYSHEVSKY’S VIEWS
    ON HISTORY
     
Chapter Two
MATERIALISM IN CHERNYSHEVSKY’S VIEWS
ON HISTORY

    [159]... Chernyshevsky applied Feuerbach’s views
to aesthetics and in this, as we shall see below,
he achieved results that in a certain sense are
most remarkable. But here, too, his conclusions
    were not quite satisfactory because tbe perfectly
correct idea of the aesthetic development of man-
kind implies the preliminary elaboration of a general
conception of history. As regards this general con-
  





ception of history, Chernyshevsky succeeded in
making only a few, if very correct, steps towards
its elaboration. One may cite as examples of such
steps the large quotations from his writings that
we have just made [160]....
  




 



Chapter Three
  IDEALISM IN CHERNYSHEYSKY’S VIEWS
ON HISTORY

    Here is what we read in his article dealing with
    V. P. Botkin’s well-known-book Letters of Spain
    (Sovremennik, 1857, Book 2):
  

    “The division of a people into hostile castes is
one of the greatest obstacles to the improvement
of its future; in Spain, there is no such disastrous
division, no irreconcilable enmity between social-
estates every one of which would be prepared to
sacrifice the most precious historical achievements
  





if only it could do harm to another estate; in Spain
the entire nation feels itself a single whole. This
peculiarity is so extraordinary among the peoples
of Western Europe that it deserves the greatest
  







attention and may in itself be considered an
  






earnest of the country’s happy future.”[36]




 




    This is not a slip of the pen, because, several
pages further below in the same article, Cherny-
shevsky says: “The Spanish people have an indis-
putable advantage over most civilised nations in
  






one, exceedingly important respect: the Spanish
[161] estates are not divided either by deep-rooted
hatred or by substantial conflicting interests; they
do not constitute castes inimical to one another,
as is the case in many other West-European coun-
tries; on the contrary, in Spain, all the estates may
strive jointly for a common goal....”[37]


    [163]... Utopian socialists took an idealist view
of the entire future of contemporary society. They
were convinced that the fate of that society would
be decided by the “views” held by its members,
i.e., the standpoint which they took, with
regard to social reorganisation plan put forward
by a particular reformer. They did not ask
themselves why it was that the dominant
views in that particular society were such
and not others. That is why they were not
eager for a further elaboration of those elements
of a materialist interpretation of history which
their doctrines undoubtedly were replete with.
In fact, they were prone to look on mankind’s past
history as well from an idealist standpoint. For
this reason, in their statements about that history
    we very often encounter the most undoubted and,
it would seem, most obvious contradictions: facts
which have apparently been interpreted in an
  





entirely materialist sense are suddenly given an
entirely idealist explanation; and, on the other
hand, idealist interpretations are every now and
again upset by perfectly materialist eruptions.
This lack of stability, this recurrent shift from
materialism to idealism and from idealism to
materialism, a shift perceptible to the modern
reader but imperceptible to the author, makes
itself felt also in the historical statements of
    Chernyshevsky, who in this respect is very reminis-
cent of the great utopians of the West. In the
final analysis he inclines like them, we repeat,
to idealism.
  



 




    This can be clearly seen from his interesting
article “On the Causes of the Fall of Rome (an
Imitation of Montesquieu),” published in Sovre-
mennik for 1861 (Book 5). In it he vigorously
  






opposes the very widespread opinion that the
Roman Empire in the West [164] fell because of
its inherent inability to develop further, whereas
the barbarians who put an end to its existence
    brought new seeds of progress with them....
  

    No mention is made here either of the internal
social relations in Rome, which accounted for its
weakness and which were pointed out even by
    Guizot in his first article “Essais sur l’histoire de
    France”, or of the forms of communal life to which
the German barbarians owed their strength at the
time of the fall of the Roman Empire in the West.
Chernyshevsky forgot even the famous words of
    Pliny, which he himself quotes elsewhere: lati-
fundia perdidere Italiam (“latifundia were the
undoing of Italy”). In his “formula of progress”,
as the phrase went in our country afterwards,
  





[165] there is no room for the internal relations in
    the country concerned. Everything is reduced to
    intellectual development. Chernyshevsky states
  





  —
  




    emphatically that progress is based on intellectual
development and that “its fundamental aspect
consists precisely in the successes and develop-
ment of knowledge.” It does not occur to him that
“the successes and development of knowledge”
    may depend on social relations, which in some
cases are conducive to those successes and that
development and in others hinder them. He de-
picts social relations as a mere corollary of the
spread of certain views. We have just read this:
    “historical knowledge is broadened; this reduces
the number of false notions that prevent people
from organising their social life, which is, there-
fore, organised more successfully than before.”
This is very unlike what our author said in his
    article on Roscher’s book. From what he said
there it followed, moreover, that it is impossible,
  





and indeed ridiculous, to judge scholars as if
they were schoolboys, saying that a particular
    scholar was unfamiliar with a particular science
and therefore came to hold erroneous views. It also
  






followed from what he said there that what matters
is not the amount of knowledge acquired by a partic-
ular scholar, but the interests of the group which
he represents. In short, it followed from what he
said there that social views are determined by
social interests; and social thought, by social life.
Now, it is the other way round. Now, it appears
that social life is determined by social thought and
that if a social system has certain shortcomings, 
  





it is because society, like a schoolboy, has studied
poorly or little and therefore has conceived er-
roneous notions. It would be hard to think of a more
striking contradiction....
  




 




    [170]... Herzen formed his view of Russia’s
attitude to the “old world” under the strong in-
  





fluence of Slavophils and this view was wrong.
But one can arrive at an erroneuos view even
when one employs a more or less correct method,
    just as a correct view may result from the employ-
ment of a more or less erroneous method. It is
    therefore fair to ask oneself how the method by
  






    which Herzen formed his erroneous view was related
to the method which led Chernyshevsky to a com-
pletely justified repudiation and ridicule of that
view....
  
 

    Chapter Five
    CHERNYSHEVSKY AND 

    [188]...We may be reminded that, as we have
remarked, the reviews by Chernyshevsky which
we have examined appeared after the historical
  





    views of Marx and Engels shaped themselves into
a harmonious whole. We are not forgetful of this.
But we believe that this matter cannot be settled
by mere reference to chronology. The main writings
    of Lassalle, too, did not appear until after the
historical views of Marx and Engels assumed
a harmonious form, and yet, in ideological content,
  






those writings, too, belong to the period of transi-
  





tion from historical idealism to historical material-
ism. The point is not when a particular work ap-
peared but rather what was its content.
  




 




    If in previous historical periods the advance of
knowledge depended on the character of economic
relations, in passing to our own period Cherny-
shevsky should have asked himself: what are the
economic peculiarities of it that led to the discovery
of social truth and ensured the future realisation
of the latter. But in order to ask himself that
question, he should have broken resolutely with
    idealism and firmly adopted a materialist interpre-
  





tation of history. We shall not reiterate that
Chernyshevsky was still far from a break with
idealism and that his conception of the further
    trend of social development was completely ideal-
ist. We merely ask the reader to note that Cherny-
  






shevsky’s historical idealism compelled him in his
considerations of the future to give first place to
“advanced” people—to the intellectuals,
as we [189] now call them—who should disseminate
  





the ultimately discovered social truth among the
masses. The masses are allotted the role of back-
ward soldiers in the advancing army. Of course,
no sensible materialist will assert that the average
    “man in the street”, just because he is an ordinary
    person, i.e., “one of the masses”, knows no less
  










  
    than tho average “intellectual”. Of course he
knows less. But it is not a matter of the knowledge
of the “man in the street,” but of his actions.
  





The actions of people are not always determined
by their knowledge and are never determined only
by their knowledge, but also—and chiefly—by
their position, which is merely made clear and
    comprehensible by the knowledge they possess.
  





  NB
  




Here again one has to remember the fundamental
proposition of materialism in general, and of the
materialist explanation of history in particular:
    it is not being that is determined by consciousness,
but consciousness by being. The “consciousness”
of a man from the “intelligentsia” is more highly
developed than the consciousness of a man from the
  




  
“masses.” But the “being” of a man from the masses
prescribes to him a far more definite method of
action than that which the social position of the
intellectual prescribes to the latter. That is why
  





  NB
  




the materialist view of history allows one only
in a certain and, moreover, very limited sense to
speak of the backwardness of the man from the
“masses,” compared with the man from the intel-
    ligentsia; in a certain sense, the “man in the street”
    undoubtedly lags behind the “intellectual”, but
in another sense he undoubtedly is in advance of
him. And precisely because this is so, an adherent
of the materialist interpretation of history, while
by no means repeating the absurd attacks on the
intelligentsia that are coming from the Black-
    Hundred and syndicalist camp, would never agree
to assign the intelligentsia the role of a demiurge
of history which is generally assigned to it by
idealists. There are various kinds of aristocratical-
ness. Historical idealism is guilty of an “aristocrat-
icalness of knowledge.”
  



 




    What in Chernyshevsky’s historical views was
a shortcoming resulting from the insufficient
elaboration of Feuerbach’s materialism, later
became the basis of our subjectivism, which had
  






nothing in common with materialism and vigor-
ously opposed it not only in the field of history
but also in the field of philosophy. The subjectivists
boastfully called themselves continuers of the
best traditions of the sixties. In reality, they
continued only the weak aspects [190] of the
world outlook peculiar to that period....
  
 
Chapter Six
    LAST HISTORICAL WORKS OF CHERNYSHEVSKY

[199]...Had Chernyshevsky consistently elabo-
rated the idea expressed here, he would have had
to renounce completely the idealist views expressed
by him in the article—now familiar to us—con-
cerning the causes for the fall of Rome. But the
point is that he expresses such ideas only in pass-
ing, he does not enlarge on them. In expressing
them, he does not at all find it necessary to repu-
diate historical idealism, and this is not due to
  





a predilection for idealism as a philosophical
theory. Chernyshevsky’s attitude to this theory
was in general extremely negative. While expound-
ing the idealist view of the trend of historical
development, he continues to regard himself as
a consistent materialist. He is wrong. But the
root of his error lies in one of the chief shortcom-
ings of Feuerbach’s materialist system. Marx
expressed it rather aptly: “Feuerbach wants sen-
suous objects, really differentiated from the thought
  











objects, but he does not conceive of human activity
itself as being objective activity. Hence, in
the Essence of Christianity, he regards the theoreti-
cal attitude as the only genuinely human atti-
tude....“[38] ...Like his teacher, Chernyshevsky directs
his attention almost exclusively to the “theoretical”






  This is also the
  shortcoming of
  Plekhanov’s
  book on
  Chernyshevsky
  




activity of mankind, and, as a result, mental
development becomes for him the most basic
cause of historical movement....
  









 




[205]... It follows from Chernyshevsky that in
history vice is always punished as it deserves.
In reality, however, the historical facts known
to us do not at all warrant this view, which may
  






be comforting but is certainly naÏve. The only
  





question of interest to us is how it came to be
held by our author. This question can be answered
  






by reference to the period when Chernyshevsky
lived. It was a period of social upsurge, a period
having a moral need, so to speak, for such views
as would bolster faith in the inevitable defeat of
evil....
  




 
 

 

On to Part Two >>



Notes
[1] Here and elsewhere, an NB underscored with two slanting 
  lines implies that Lenin’s NB is in the corner of the page and apparently 
  refers to all of it. The full text of the page in question is therefore given 
  in such cases.—Ed.
[2] Chernyshevsky—Ed.
[3] Collected Works, Vol. IV, pp. 335-336. (Here 
  and elsewhere Plekhanov refers to the first Russian edition of N. G. 
  Chernysheveky’s works published in St. Petersburg in 1905-06.—Ed.
[4] The Sovremennik circle included, among others, 
  the revolutionary democrats N. G. Chernyshevsky, N. 
  A. Dobrolyubov, N. A. Nekrasov, M. I. Mikhailov.

Sovremennik (Contemporary)—a monthly scientific-political and 
  literary journal, founded by A. S. Pushkin in 1836. In 1847 the journal was 
  taken over by N. A. Nekrasov. From the mid-fifties on the journal became a 
  militant organ of the revolutionary democrats, who advocated a peasant revolution 
  and the overthrow of tsarism. Chernyshevsky was a most prominent contributor 
  until his arrest in 1862. In 1866 Sovremennik was closed down by the 
  tsarist government.

  In 1859-62 the satirical magazine Svistok (Whistle) appeared as a 
  supplement to Sovremennik. It wittily ridiculed the vain hopes
  of the liberals for bringing about a change in the political system of Russia 
  through literary denunciations of government officials, and without resorting 
  to revolutionary struggle.



[5]
    Chernysheviky relates that Turgenex could still
tolerate him to some extent but had no patience at all
with Dobrolyubov. “You’re just a snake, but Dobrolyubov
is a cobra,” he said to Chernysbeveky (see the letter
diready quoted: “By Way of an Expression of Gratitude,”
Collected Works, Vol. IX, p. 103).—Plekhanov.
  





[6] Kolokol (The Bell)—journal founded 
  by A. I. Herzen in London and illegally circulated in Russia. It appeared 
  from 1857 to 1868. The journal attacked the autocratic regime and serfdom. 
  It played an important role in the development of the revolutionary movement 
  in Russia. “Clowns” and “whistlers” were nicknames 
  given by liberals to the revolutionary democrats of Sovremennik and 
  Svistok.
[7] Oblomov—the title of a well-known 
  novel by the Russian author A. I. Goncharov which depicts the corruption 
  of the serf-owning system in 19th-century Russia.
[8] The article “Very Dangerous!” in
  Kolokol, No. 44.—Plekhanov.
[9] Regarding the article “Very Dangerous” 
  and its more or less conjectural consequences, see, among others Vetrinaky’s
      book Herzen, St. Petersburg, 1908, p. 354.—Plekhanov.
[10] The history of this break may be followed in the
  letters of K. D. Kavelin and I. S. Turgenev to A. I. Herzen, published by
      M. Dragomanov in Geneva in 1892.—Plekhanov.
[11] Collected Works, Vol. VIII, p. 
  231.—Plekhanov.
[12] i. e., the possibility of a revolution.—Ed.
[13] M. K. Lemke, “The Case of N. G. Chernyshevsky,”
      Byloye, 1906, No. 4, p. 179.—Plekhanov.
[14] K. K. Lemke, “The 
  Trial of the Velikoruss Publishers,” Byloye, 1906, No. 7,
      p. 92. Mr. Stakhevich’s article was published in Zakaspiiskoye Obozrenie,
  1905, No. 143.—Plekhanov.
[15] Slavophils represented a trend of social 
  thought arising in mid-19th-century Russia, which held that Russia’s 
  development would take place along a distinct path of its own. This, according 
  to them, stemmed from the communal system in Russia and its orthodoxy. The 
  Slavophils were confirmed opponents of the revolutionary movement in Russia 
  and the West.
[16] Chernyshevsky wrote the novel Prologue 
  while serving at hard labour in 1865-70. With great difficulty, his friends 
  smuggled the manuscript to St. Petersburg and then to London where it was 
  published in 1877.
 
  The novel describes Russia in the late fifties. A revolutionary 
  situation was maturing in the country and the tsarist government, preferring 
  to free the peasants “from above” rather than wait till they took 
  action “from below,” was preparing for the abolition of serfdom 
  (the so-called Peasant Reform). The book describes the sharp struggle between 
  various classes and groups over the reform and portrays real people of the day 
  under fictitious names. Thus, Chernyshevsky himself, who headed the revolutionary 
  party, appears under the name of Volgin; Kavelin, the liberal, appears under 
  the name of Ryazantsev; Sierakowski, a prominent figure in the Polish liberation 
  movement—under the name of Sokolovsky, etc.
[17] Volgin particularly prized in Sokolovsky his 
  “balanced judgment” which he displayed 
  in 1848 when of all his companions-in-arms in Volhynia Region he was the only 
  one not to lose his head and to weigh coolly the chances of the armed insurrection. 
  These proved to be all but nil.—Plekhanov.
[18] The reference here is to the uprising in Poland 
  in 1863-64, one of the organisers of which was Zygmunt Sierakowski. The uprising 
  against tsarist autocracy aimed at Polish national liberation. Broad support 
  for the uprising came from the szlachta intelligentsia, students, clergy, artisans, 
  workers and some sections of the peasantry. The Russian revolutionary democrats 
  also sympathised with the uprising. Members of the secret organisation 
  Zemlya i Volya, which had connections with Chernyshevsky, sought to render 
  help to the insurrection. A. I. Herzen published a number of articles in Kolokol
  supporting the struggle of the Polish people.

  However, the insurrection was ruthlessly suppressed by the tsarist government, 
  and its leaders, including Sierakowski, were executed.
[19] Prologue to a Prologue—the title 
  of the first part of the novel Prologue.
[20] The circle of Russian revolutionary emigrants in 
  London who were grouped around A. I. Herzen and N. A. Ogaryov.
[21] The reference is to Chernyshevsky’s novel 
  which exerted great influence on several generations of Russian revolutionary 
  youth. Chernyshevsky wrote the novel in 1862-63 in the Peter and Paul Fortress, 
  where he was imprisoned in the summer of 1862. The novel was published in Sovremennik
  in 1863.

  Vera Pavlovna, Lopukhov, Kirsanov and Rakhmetov mentioned by Plekhanov are 
  the chief characters in the novel.
[22] Let us note in passing that Goethe’s Wahlverwandschaften
  also represents a word in defence of such relations. This is well understood 
  by some German historians of German literature who, while not daring to decry 
  such an authoritative writer, and at the same time not daring to agree with 
  him hecause of their own philistine virtuousness, usually mutter something 
  totally unintelligihie ahout the apparently strange paradoxes of the great 
  German.—Plekhanov.



[23]
  On March 26, 1853, Chernyshevsky recorded in his
  diary the following conversation with his fiancée: “‘Can



21[24]




  you possibly think that I will deceive you?‘ ’I don’t think
  that, I don’t expect it, but I have considered such an event



22




  too.’ ‘What, then, would you do?’ I told her of George
  Sand’s Jacques. ‘Then you, too, would shoot yourself?’



23




  ‘I don't think so’; and I told her I would try to obtain
  George Sand for her (she had not read it, or at any rate does



25




  not remember the ideas in it)” (Collected Works, Vol. X,
  Part 2, Section 3, p. 78). We consider that It is not su-
  perfluous to note another passage from Chernyshevsky’s
  conversations with his fiancée: “But what these relations




  would be like—the day before yesterday she said: ‘We
  would have separate halves of the house and you ought



30




  not to come to me without permission’; I would have
  liked to arrange things that way myself, perhaps I think




  more seriously about it than she does;—she probably only
  means that she doesn’t want me to bore her, while I un-



35




  derstand it to mean that in general every husband should
  be extremely considerate to his wife in his matrimonial
  relations” (ibid., p. 82). Almost literally the same con-
  versation takes place between Vera Pavlovna and Lo-
  pukhov in the novel What Is To Be Done?—Plekhanov.



[24] These numbers, inserted by Lenin, correspond to 
  the lines on p. 72 of Plekhanov’s book.—Ed.



[25]
  It seems hardly necessary to recall what an ener-
  getic advocate Robert Owen was in this respect. As for



40




  Fourier, we quote here his very profound words: “les



41




coutumes en amour ... ne sont que tormes temporaires et
variables, et non pas fond immuabie” (Oeuvres complètes



42




de Ch. Fourier, tome IV, p. 84).—Plekhanov.



[26] Sovremennik, No. 12, 1847.—Plekhanov.
[27] Lenin is referring to the following passage in 
  Sotsial-Demokrat(Book 1, London, 1890, pp. 173-174):

  “Chernyshevsky was present at the birth of the new type of ‘new people’
  in our country—the revolutionary. He joyfully welcomed the emergence 
  of this new type and could not deny himself the satisfaction of depicting at 
  least a vague profile of him. At the same time, he foresaw with sorrow how 
  many trials and sufferings there were in store for the Russian revolutionary, 
  whose life must be one of severe struggle and great self-sacrifice. And so, 
  in Rakhmetov, Chernyshevsky presents us with the true ascetic. Rakhmetov 
  positively tortures himself. He is completely ‘merciless towards himself’,
  as his landlady says. He even decides to test whether he can bear torture by 
  spending a whole night lying on a length of felt with nails sticking through 
  it. Many people, including Pisarev, regarded this as mere eccentricity. We 
  agree that some aspects of Rakhmetov’s character could have been drawn 
  differently. But the character as a whole nevertheless remains completely true 
  to life. Every prominent Russian revolutionary possessed much of the 
  Rakhmetov spirit.”
[28] Korolenko, Those Who Are Gone, p. 
  78.—Plekhanov.
[29] 0ur “Subjectivists”—supporters 
  of the Narodnik doctrine which denied the existence of objective laws of 
  social development and held that individual outstanding personalities, not 
  the masses, make history. The chief exponents of this trend were P. L. Lavrov 
  and N. K. Mikhailovsky.
[30] Korolenko, op. cit., pp. 79-80.—Plekhanov.
[31] No wonder Chernyshevsky’s attitude to those 
  “laws and parallels” was entirely negative, according to the selfsame 
  Mr. Korolenko.—Plekhanov.
[32] Disquisitions Relating to Matter and Spirit.
  By Joseph Priestley, Vol. I. The second edition, Birmingham, MDCCLXXX, II, 
  p. 121.—Plekhanov.



[33]
We allow that among the ancient materialists—
  Democritus and Epidurus, for example—there could have
  been a certain lack of clarity on this account, although
  this is far from having been proved; it has to be remem-
  bered that the views of these thinkers have only reached
  us in an incomplete form.—Plekhanov.





NB



[34] See for particulars in our book Beitrage zur
  Geschichte der Materialismus—Holbach, Helvetius und Karl Marx,
  Stuttgart, 1896.—Plekhanov.
[35] It is worth noting, however, that in the past 
  our author expressed a different view of human nature. According to that
  view, man is “a being which by nature is inclined to respect and love 
  truth and good, and to abhor all that is bad, a being capable of violating 
  the laws of good and truth only through ignorance, error or under the influence 
  of circumstances stronger than his character and reason, but a being never 
  capable of preferring evil to good of his own free will.” (See the article 
  on Shchedrin’s Provincial Sketches in Sovremennik, No. 
  6, 1857, reprinted in The Complete Works, Vol. III. The lines quoted 
  are on pp. 221-222 of the volume.) This is closer to Socrates than to the present-day 
  doctrine of development.—Plekhanov.
[36] Collected Works, Vol. III, p. 
  38.—Plekhanov.
[37] Ibid., p. 44.—Plekhanov.
[38] See his Theses on Feuerbach, written 
  as early as the spring of 1845.—Plekhanov.
 



On to Part Two >>
<< Back to the Table of Contents


 





Works Index
    |   
  Volume 38

 | 

Collected Works
    |   L.I.A. Index




  < backward




  forward >





 



==========

## Part Two (pp. 529-557)











G. V. Plekhanov. N. G. Chernyshevsky. Shipovnik Publishing House. St. Petersburg, 1910. (Part Two)



Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Remarks on Books:
G. V. Plekhanov.
N. G. Chernyshevsky.
Shipovnik Publishing House.
St. Petersburg, 1910
(Part Two)


<< Back to Part One


 



SECTION THREE
        N. G. CHERNYSHEVSKY’S VIEWS
    ON LITERATURE
Chapter One
THE SIGNIFICANCE OF LITERATURE AND ART

[221]... The view of art as play, supplemented
by the view of play as a “child of labour,” sheds
a very bright light on the essence and history of
art. It makes it possible for the first time to view
them from a materialist standpoint. We know
that, at the very beginning of his literary activity,
Chernyshevsky made an attempt, which was most
successful in its own way, at applying Feuerbach’s
materialist philosophy to aesthetics. We have
devoted a special work to describing that attempt.[1]
So we shall merely say here that although it was
  





most successful in its own way, that attempt
is affected, in the same way as Chernyshevsky’s
views on history, by the main shortcoming of
Feuerbach’s philosophy: insufficient elaboration
of its historical, or to be more exact, dialectical
aspect. And it is just because this aspect was not
elaborated in the philosophy assimilated by him
that Chernyshevsky could overlook the great
importance of the concept of play for a materialist
  






interpretation of art....
  
Chapter Two
    BELINSKY, CHERNYSHEVSKY AND PISAREV

    [236]... “Lasting enjoyment is afforded to man
  





by reality alone; only those desires are of serious
importance which are based on reality; success
[237] may be expected only from hopes evoked
by reality, and only from those deeds which are
accomplished with the help of forces and circum-
stances offered by reality.”[3]









 




    Such was the new notion of “reality.” Cherny-
shevsky had Feuerbach in mind when he said that
it had been formed by modern thinkers from the
  




 
obscure allusions of transcendental philosophy.
And he expounded Feuerbach’s concept of reality
  






quite correctly. Feuerbach said that sensuousness
    or actuality is identical with truth, i.e., that the
object in its true sense is given only by sensation.








Speculative philosophy supposed that ideas of
objects based only on sense experience do not
correspond to the real nature of the objects and
    must be verified with the aid of pure thought,
  






i.e., thought not based on sense experience. Feuer-
bach decisively rejected this idealistic view.
He asserted that conceptions of objects based on
    our sense experience fully correspond to the nature
of these objects. The only trouble is that our
imagination frequently distorts these conceptions,
  





which, therefore, come into contradiction with
our sense experience. Philosophy should drive out
  











from our conceptions the fantastic element that
distorts them; it should bring them into accord
with sense experience. It must return mankind
to a contemplation of real objects undistorted by
fancy, such as prevailed in ancient Greece. And
insofar as mankind passes to such contemplation,
it returns to itself, because people who submit to
figments of the imagination can themselves be
    only imaginary and not real beings. In the words
of Feuerbach, the essence of man is sensuousness,
i.e., actuality, and not imagination and not ab-
straction. The task of philosophy and science in
general is to restore reality to its rightful place.
But if that is so, it follows of itself that the tasks
of aesthetics as a branch of science are also to
restore reality to its rightful place and combat the
imaginary element in man’s notions. It was on
this conclusion from Feuerbach’s philosophy that
    Chernyshevsky’s aesthetic views were based; it
constituted the main idea of his dissertation. And
there is no doubt that Belinsky had the same
conclusion in mind when, in his [238] second but
last annual review of literature, he described the
concept of “reality” as a new one....
  

    [242]... Everyone knows that the criticism of
the sixties, the criticism of Dobrolyubov for
example, often crossed over into journalism.
Hence, in speaking of Chernyshevsky, we shall
not so much present proofs of this thought as
illustrations of it. In 1858 Chernyshevsky’s article
“The Russian at a Rendezvous. Reflections on
Turgenev’s story Asya” appeared in the review
section of Atheneum, No. 3. This article is one
of the most brilliant examples of journalistic
criticism. Very little, almost nothing, is said in
    the article about Turgenev ’s actual story, which
Chernyshevsky calls “practically the only good
new story.” The author merely draws attention
to the scene in which the hero of the story makes
his declaration of love to Asya, and in connection
with this scene, he indulges in “reflections” The
reader will recall, of course, that at the critical
moment Turgenev’s hero turned coward and
withdrew. It Is this circumstance that caused
Chernyshevsky to “reflect.” He notes that indeci-
sion and cowardice are the distinctive features not
only of this hero, but of most of the heroes of
our best literary works. He recalls Rudin, Beltov,
and the tutor of Nekrasov’s Sasha, and sees the
same features in all of them. He does not blame
the authors of the novels on this account since
they were only recording what is met with at
every step in real life. There is no manliness in
Russian people, therefore the characters in the
novels have none either. And Russian people
have no manliness because they are not in the
  





habit of taking part in public affairs. “When
we go into society, we see around us people in
uniforms and civilian morning or evening dress;
  





Sotsial-
  Demokrat
  No. 1, p. 143
  




these people are five and a half or six feet tall,
and sometimes even more; they grow or shave
the hair on their cheeks, above their upper lip and
[243] on their chin; and we imagine we are looking
at men. This is a total error, an optical illusion,
a hallucination, nothing more. Without acquiring
the habit of elementary participation in civil
affairs, without acquiring the feelings of a citizen,
the male child grows up and becomes middle-aged,
and then an elderly being of the masculine gender,
but he does not become a man or, at any rate,
not a man of a noble character.”[4] Among humane,
educated people, the absence of noble manliness
strikes one still more than among ignorant people,
because the humane, educated man likes to talk
about important matters. He talks with enthusiasm
and eloquence, but only until it becomes a matter
of passing from words to deeds. “So long as there
is no question of action, but merely the need to
fill up empty hours, an empty mind, or an empty
heart, with talk and dreams, the hero is very glib;
but once it is a matter of expressing his feelings
    plainly and exactly, the majority of the heroes
    immediately begin to waver and feel tongue-tied.
A few, the most courageous, somehow contrive
to muster their forces and stammer something
that provides a vague idea of their thoughts.
But just attempt to take their wishes at face
value and say to them: ‘you want so-and-so;
we’re very glad; begin to do something about it
and you’ll have our support‘—if such a remark
is made one half of the very brave heroes faint,
        the other begin to gruffly reproach you for putting
        them in an awkward position; they begin to say
        that they did not expect such proposals from you,
        they are quite at a loss and cannot think properly
        because it is not possible to do so at a moment’s
        notice and, moreover, they are honest people,
        and not only honest but very mild, and they do
        not want to cause you any unpleasantness, and
        that, in general, it is not possible, really, to trouble
oneself about all that is said merely from having
  





    nothing to do, and that it is best not to undertake
    anything at all, because everything involves
trouble and inconvenience, and at present nothing
  





Sotsial-
  Demokrat
  No. 1, p.144—
  




good can come of it, because, as already said,
    they never for a moment expected, or anticipated,
and so on and so forth.”[5]
 
  





  “malicious
  and apt char-
  acterisation
  




    One can say that the portrait is painted with
    a master’s hand. However, the master was not
    a literary critic, but a journalist.
  





  of Russian
  liberalism”[6]



 




    [245]... As for the requirements of the period,
they consisted, to his mind, [246] in concessions
to the peasantry. Chernyshevsky exhorted the
“estimable” gentlemen with this quotation from
the Gospel: “Agree with thine adversary quickly,
whiles thou art in the way with him; lest at any
  











time the adversary deliver thee to the judge, and
the judge deliver thee to the officer, and thou be
cast into prison. Verily I say unto thee, thou
shalt by no means come out thence, till thou
hast paid the uttermost farthing.” (Mat., Oh. V,
verses 25 and 26).[7]




 




It is self-evident that every theoretical conclu-
sion concerning the capacity of a given social class
or stratum for definite practical action always
    requires a certain degree of verification by expe-
rience, and that, consequently, it can be considered
    trustworthy a priori only within certain, more or
less broad limits. Thus, for example, it was possible
  





  x NB





with complete assurance to foretell that even
the most educated section of the nobility would
refuse to sacrifice their interests for the sake of
the peasants. Such a prediction in no way required
practical verification. But when it was necessary to
etermine to what extent the educated nobility
were capable of making concessions to the peas-
antry in their own interests, then no one could
say in advance with absolute certainty: they will
not go in that direction beyond such-and-such
a limit. Here it was always possible to assume that
under certain circumstances the educated nobility
would go a little further, after arriving at a some-
what more correct understanding of its own inter-
ests. Being practical, as Chernyshevsky was in this
case, he not only could but had to endeavour to
persuade the nobility that certain concessions to
the freed peasants were required in its own in-
terests. Thus, what might have seemed to consti-
tute a contradiction in his article—the demand for
a judicious and resolute step on the part of people
whose incapacity for decision and wisdom is here
admitted and explained as a necessary product of
circumstances—was actually no contradiction at
  





all. Such imaginary contradictions can also be
found in the political practice of people who take
their stand on the firm ground of the materialist
explanation of history. However, here it is neces-
  





  NB
  




sary to make a very essential reservation. When
  





a materialist applies his theoretical [247] con-
clusions in practice with a certain amount of cau-
tion, he can nevertheless guarantee that his con-
clusions contain a certain element of the most
indisputable certainty. And this is because, when
he says: “everything depends on circumstances,”
  











he knows from what side one must expect the
appearance of the new circumstances that will
change the will of people in the direction he desires;
he knows quite well that, in the final analysis,
they are to be expected from the side of “econom-
ics,” and that the truer his analysis of the socio-
economic life of society, the more trustworthy
his prediction concerning the future development
of society. Not so with the idealist, who is con-
vinced that “opinions rule the world.” If “opin-
ions” are the basic cause of social movement,
then the circumstances on which the further devel-
    opment of society depends are linked chiefly to
the conscious activity of people, while the possi-
bility of any practical influence on this activity
is dependent on the greater or lesser ability of
people to think logically and master the new
truths discovered by philosophy or science. But this
ability depends itself on circumstances. Thus, the
idealist who recognises the materialist truth that
the character and also, of course, the views of man,
depend on circumstances, finds himself in a vicious
circle: views depend on circumstances, circum-
stances on views. The thought of the “enlightener”
in theory has never broken out of this vicious circle.
In practice the contradiction was usually solved
by a strong appeal to all thinking people, indepen-
dently of the circumstances under which such
people were living and acting. What we are now
saying may appear unnecessary and for that reason
a boring digression. But in point of fact this digres-
sion was essential for us. It will help us to under-






stand the nature of the journalistic criticism of
the sixties.






  NB
  


 




    Since the hopes of the “enlightener” are pinned
on the intellect and good will of thinking people,
i.e., in effect of the “enlighteners” themselves,
it is obvious that critics desiring to support these
people will demand from fiction above all an
exact depiction of social life with all its pros
and cons, with its “positive” and “negative” phenom-
    ena. Only an exact portrayal of all aspects of life
can furnish an “enlightener” with the factual data
needed by him for passing judgment on that
life....
  

    [253]... However, N. Uspensky used to express
himself even more emphatically. For example,
he wrote: “Nothing is to be expected from the
present-day peasants who not so long ago were the
victims of serfdom:—they will not be resurrect-
ed!... It is unlikely that medicine will ever cure
atrophy, because the disease is based on organic
damage....”[8] It was quite difficult for the
“people of the seventies” to agree with this. It was
chiefly this that gave rise to the unfavourable
attitude of the critics of that epoch towards
N. V. Uspensky.
  

    The reader will perhaps ask: but was it easy for
    Chernyshevsky himself to agree with N. V. Uspen-
    sky’s completely hopeless view of “the present-day
    peasants,” since Chernyshevsky evidently considered






possible at that time a broad movement of the
people who were dissatisfied with the conditions
of the abolition of serfdom. To this we reply that,
  





  NB
  




obviously, this would not have been easy for him
    if he considered himself bound to agree uncondi-
tionally with N. V. Uspensky. But that is precisely
the point—he did not agree unconditionally with
him. He considered N. V. Uspensky’s essays quite
truthful; but he did not draw a hopeless conclu-
sion from them. He said: “Routine dominates the
ordinary course of life of common people; and
among the plain folk, like in all other social-
estates, the routine is just as dull and banal as in
all other social-estates. Mr. Uspensky’s merit is to
have had the courage to depict for us, without con-
cealment or adornment, the routine thoughts
and actions, feelings and customs of plain
people. The picture is not at all attractive: at
every step nonsense and dirt, pettiness and
dullness.
  

    “But do not be in a hurry to draw conclusions
from this regarding the validity or non-validity
of your hopes, if you wish to alleviate the lot of
the people; or of your misgivings, if you were so
far concerned about the dullness and inertia of
the people. Take the commonest, most colourless,
weak-willed, shallow person; no matter how drab
and petty the life he leads, it has in it moments
  





of a totally different [254] shade, moments of
energetic efforts, courageous decisions. The same
is also encountered in the history of every na-
tion.“[9]










 




    The circumstances, on which everything depends
in the last resort, may take such a turn that even
    an apathetic mass will become capable of vigorous
effort and courageous decision. While waiting
for the moment when the circumstances take
a favourable turn, one must attentively study the
backward mass. The initiative in taking courageous
decisions will never come from the mass of the
populace; hut one has to know the character of the
people making up this mass “in order to know
in what way initiative may stimulate them.”[10]
    And the more accurately fiction represents the
character of the mass of the people, the more it
will facilitate the task of those who, under favour-
able circumstances, will have to take the initiative
in making great decisions.
  

    Now we shall ask the reader to recall that in
one of the theses of his dissertation Chernyshevsky,
emphasising the portrayal of life as the chief
characteristic of art, adds: “works of art often have
another significance—they explain life; often they
also provide a verdict on the phenomena of life.”
What we have quoted, if only from one article
“Is This Not the Beginning of a Change?”, clearly
shows to what extent literary criticism in the
person of Chernyshevsky was inclined to value
the portrayal of life chiefly as material for inter-
preting it and judging it (for passing a verdict on
the phenomena of life). The same tendency of
Chernyshevsky manifests itself definitely in all
his other literary articles. Here is what he says,
for example, in a review of a collection of poetry
by A. N. Pleshcheyev (Sovremennik, 1861,
No. 3).
  

    He recalls with displeasure the time when our
critics treated Pleshcheyev with scorn and even
ill-will. “It seems monstrous now,” he says. “Surely
the noble sentiments and noble ideas which breath-
ed from every page of Mr. Pleshcheyev’s booklet
    were not so commonplace in the Russian poetry of
the time as to be dismissed with scorn. When,
indeed, is such a thing possible and permissible?”
Pleshcheyev, according to him, had no great poetic
talent and his aspirations [255] and hopes were
quite vague. But he did possess great sincerity and
as for expressing his hopes with greater preci-
sion, he could not do so for reasons beyond his
control.
  

    [262]... Pisarev possessed tremendous literary
  





talent. But for all the enjoyment that the unpre-
judiced reader derived from the literary brilliancy
of Pisarev’s articles, it must be admitted that
“Pisarevism” was a sort of reductio ad absurdum
of the idealism of our “enlighteners...”
  






    [266]... Some of Mikhailovsky’s sociological
articles have now been translated into French and,
if we are not mistaken, also into German. Pre-
sumably, however, they will not make his name
very well known in Furope. But it is very possible
that they will earn praise from one or two of those
European thinkers who are going “back to Kant!”
    out of hatred of Marxism. In spite of the opinion
of our latest historian of literature, there can be
  





nothing flattering in these praises. But extremely
worth noting is the irony of history which makes
a theoretical weapon of reaction out of what was
an innocent theoretical mistake in a more or less
progressive utopism.
  





  NB
  



 
PART TWO
    N. G. CHERNYSHEVSKY’S VIEWS ON
POLITICS AND POLITICAL ECONOMY
 
SECTION ONE
    N. G. CHERNYSHEYSKY’S POLITICAL VIEWS
Chapter One
    UTOPIAN SOCIALISM

    [280]... His article goes on to tell of the strange
and often ridiculous acts to which the Saint-
Simonists were driven in their extreme exaltation.
He calls them drawing-room heroes overcome by
a fit of philanthropy. But he qualifies this severe
judgment of them. The Saint-Simonist movement
was the first expression of the concept of trans-
forming society, and that first expression is of great
  





[281] historic significance. It indicates that it is
    high time society concerned itself with the ideas
of reform that first appeared in the unsatisfactory
form of Saint-Simonism.
  

    In conclusion, Chernyshevsky says of reformist
  











ideas: “We shall soon see that they have begun
to appear in more reasonable forms and to reach
  





people for whom they are no longer a delightful
amusement but a matter of necessity, and when
that class which the Saint-Simonists wished to
    humbug begins reasonably to concern itself about
  







its own well-being, then, probably, life on earth
    will be better for it than it is at present.“[11] This
  








is a highly important remark. It shows that in his
views on the future of West-European socialism
Chernyshevsky came very close to the theory of the
class struggle. But we know already of the role
which this theory has played in his views on history.
Sometimes it helped him to explain very successful-
    ly certain isolated historical
phenomena; but he looked on it as a rather
serious obstacle to progress instead of a necessary
    condition for it in a society divided into classes.
The reader will recall that Cbernyshevsky saw
the weak development of the class struggle in
Spain as an earnest of that country’s progressive
    development in the future. In his comments on
events in France in 1848, as well as in the passage
we have just quoted, he seems to incline to the
idea that the emancipation movement of the
proletariat is now becoming the motive force of
social progress in Western Europe. But with him
this idea remains one of the germs of a materialist
interpretation of history to which we have repeated-
ly called the reader’s attention in dealing with our
    author’s views on history....
  

    [282]... He explains the backwardness of the
“ordinary people” of Europe as being due to the
fact that well-known scientific conceptions have
not yet reached the people. When they do, when
“ordinary people” become acquainted with philo-
sophical views “corresponding to their needs,” then
the triumph of the new principles in the social
life of Western Europe will not be far off.[12] Cherny-
shevsky does not ask himself the question whether
  





any phenomena exist in this life that could provide
an objective guarantee that the new philosophical
    ideas will, in fact, ultimately reach the “ordinary
    people.” He has no need for such a guarantee
  





  NB
  




because, as he sees it, the very nature of these
principles, and also the nature of man, quite
sufficiently guarantee the triumph of the new
    principles....
  
Chapter Two
  UTOPIAN SOCIALISM
  (Continuation)

    [289]... Chernyshevsky regards the question of
socialism, as he does all the other general questions
of historical development, from the point of view
of idealism. And this idealist attitude to the
    most important historical phenomena was typical
of the socialism of all countries in the utopian
period of its development. This feature of utopian
    socialism is of such tremendous importance that
  





it is necessary to dwell on it—without fear of
    a certain amount of repetition, which may very
well occur in the process.
  





  excessive!
  


 



Chapter Three
  CHERNYSHEVSKY’S “OWN” PLAN
  AND THE QUESTION OF THE LAND COMMUNE

    [313]. ..“Let us suppose,” he says, turning to his
    favourite method of explanation by means of a
    “parable”—“let us suppose that I was interested
in taking steps to preserve the provisions from the
store of which your dinner is prepared. Obviously,
if I did so out of affection for you, then my zeal
would he based on the assumption that the provi-
sions belong to you and that the dinner being pre-
pared from them is nourishing and good for you.
Just imagine my feelings when I learn that the
provisions do not really belong to you and that
for every dinner prepared from them you pay
money which is not only more than the dinner
itself is worth but which, in general, you cannot
pay without extremely embarrassing yourself.
What ideas will enter my head in the face of such
strange discoveries?... How stupid I was to hother
about a matter when the conditions for its use-
fulness were not guaranteed! Who but a dolt can
  





bother about the preservation of property in
certain hands, without first being assured that
the property will remain in those hands and on
advantageous terms?... Rather let all these provi-
sions, which only cause harm to the person I love,
he lost! Rather let the whole matter, which only
    causes your ruin, vanish! Sorrow for you, shame
on account of my own stupidity—that is what
  






I feel.”[13]


    [315]... Credit is due to Chernyshevsky for the
fact that, at the very beginning of his literary
activity, he displayed, in his comments on the
land commune, far more consideration than many
a “Russian socialist” even in the mid-nineties,
when to all appearances, only the blind could fail
    to see that our vaunted “age-long foundations”
  




  
were crumbling. As far back as April 1857 he
wrote: but “there is no concealing the fact that
Russia, which until now has had a small share in
    economic progress, is being rapidly swept along
with it, and our way of life, until now scarcely
affected by the economic laws which reveal their
power only in times of increased economic and
commercial activity, is beginning rapidly to be
subjected to them. Perhaps it will not be long
before we, too, are drawn into the sphere of full
operation of the law of competition.”[14]







    This is precisely what the theoreticians of our
Narodism ever since sought to conceal from them-
selves and their readers for so long and with so
much care. What the Scriptures say is true: star
differs from star in glory.... Being convinced that
our country lacks the conditions for making com-
munal land tenure a source of well-being for the
people, Chernyshevsky was to see that his sym-
pathetic attitude to the commune bore in fact very
little similarity to the Slavophils’ sympathetic
view of it. In his article “On the Causes of the Fall
of Rome,” he says that although the commune
could contribute to the further development of
Russia, it was nonetheless ridiculous to take
pride in it, because [316] it was after all a sign
of our economic backwardness. He offers an exam-
    ple: European engineers, he says, now use applied
mechanics to construct suspension bridges. But it
appears that in a backward Asiatic country—he
does not quite remember which one—local engineers
have long since been building suspension bridges
on suitable sites. Does that mean that applied
mechanics in Asia may be placed on a footing
with that in Europe? There are bridges and bridges,
and the Asian engineers’ suspension bridge is
    infinitely inferior to its European counterpart.
To be sure, when European engineers arrive in the
Asiatic country which has long been familiar with
suspension bridges, they will find it all the easier
  





    to convince a mandarin that the suspension bridge
of today is not a godless invention. But nothing
more than that. Despite its suspension bridges,
the Asiatic country will remain a backward country
all the same while Europe will still be its preceptor.
The same holds true for the Russian commune.
Perhaps the latter will promote the development
  






of our country; but the chief stimulus will come
nonetheless from the West, and it does not really
befit us to renovate the world, even by means of
the commune....
  
Chapter Four
  SOCIALISM AND POLITICS

    [317]... He who tries to obtain an idea of Cherny-
shevsky’s political views on the basis of his writ-
ings, at first feels a little embarrassed, that is,
if he himself is not indifferent [318] to politics.
Indeed, the man who next to Beliusky was the
most colourful exponent of progressive tendencies
in our literature, at first glance appears to be
politically indifferent. And it is not because he has
employed a few unfortunate expressions, nor be-
cause of a slip of the pen, but on account of the
        general principles by which he is sometimes guided
in judging the more important phenomena of
West-European life. For evidence of this we refer
to the article “Party Struggles in France Under
Louis XVIII and Charles X” (Sovremennik, 1858,
Nos. .8 and 9). There we read:
  

    “The fundamental desires, the basic urges, of
liberals and democrats are essentially different.
Democrats intend to abolish as far as possible
the predominance of the upper classes over the
lower in the state structure; on the one hand to
reduce the power and wealth of the upper social-
estates, on the other to give more weight and
well-being to the lower social-estates. How to change
the laws in this sense and to support the new
structure of society is almost a matter of indiffer-
ence to them. On the other hand, the liberals can-
not at all agree to give the predominance in society
  





to the lower social-estates because owing to their
lack of education and material poverty, these
social-estates are indifferent to the interests that
are of the utmost importance to the liberal party,
namely, the right of free speech and a constitu-
tional system. For the democrat, our Siberia, where
the ordinary people are well off, stands far higher
than England, where the majority of the people
    suffer great privations. Out of all political institu-
tions, the democrat is irreconcilably hostile to
only one—aristocracy; the liberal almost always
finds that only with a certain degree of aristocracy
can society attain the liberal system. Therefore
the liberals are usually the mortal enemies of the
democrats, and say that democracy leads to despo-
tism and is fatal to freedom.”[15]






  —
   
   
   
   
   
   
  Cf. Sotsial-
  Demokrat
  No. 1, p. 124
   
   
   
   
   
  —
  


 




    [319]... Chernyshevsky then explains his ideas
by arguments which bear out even more forcefully
our supposition that by democrats he means
socialists. He says: “From the theoretical aspect,
    liberalism may seem attractive to one whom good
fortune has delivered from want: freedom is a very
good thing. But liberalism takes a very narrow,
  





purely formal view of freedom. To it freedom con-
sists of abstract right, of formal permission of the
absence of legal restraint. It refuses to see that
legal right is of value to a person only when he has
the material means of exercising that right.[16]







The people have no material opportunity for avail-
ing themselves of political freedom. The majority
of them are illiterate almost in all countries. So why
should they treasure their right to free speech?
Want and lack of education doom them to com-
plete ignorance [320] of affairs of state. So why
should they take any interest in parliamentary
debates?” Chernyshevsky states emphatically that
“there is no European country where the vast
majority of the people is not completely indif-
ferent to the decrees which are the object of the
aspirations and concern of liberalism”[17]....
  

    [329]... In the political survey published in
No. 6 of Sovremennik for 1859, Chernyshevsky
remarks, after stating that the movement which
  





insists on intervention by the German [330] Union
in Austria’s favour is growing stronger in Germany:
    “we have not been speaking of ordinary people, but
actually of classes in which public opinion is
concentrated, classes which engage in political
affairs, read the newspapers and influence the
  











    course of affairs—that crowd which everywhere is
a plaything of self-interest and intrigue.”[18]


    The “ordinary people” do not read newspapers,
do not occupy themselves with political affairs
and have no influence on their course. That is the
situation now, while their consciousness is still
fast asleep. But when it awakens under the in-
fluence of the vanguard of the active historical
army, consisting of the “best people,” who have
learned the lessons of modern science, then the
  





“ordinary people” will understand that their task
consists in the radical reconstruction of society,
and then they will undertake the work of this re-






  NB
  




construction, which has no direct relation to
questions of the forms of political structure. Such
were Chernysheysky’s predominant views, which
  







are to be found in the majority of his
    numerous political reviews.[19] If at times
this essentially idealist view of politics
makes way for a different view, the germ,
as it were, of a materialist understanding
this is only an exception, quite like that
which we encountered in studying Cher-
nyshevsky’s historical views: the reader
will remember that in these views which
    are also essentially idealist, there are
  







    Because of the theo-
retical difference
between the ideal-
ist and materialist
views of history,
Plekhanov over-
looked the prac-
tical-political and
class difference be-
tween the liberal
and the democrat
  






    also germs of the materialist view of history.
Let us now elucidate with the help of two exam-
ples the character that Chernyshevsky’s political
reviews had taken under the influence of his
aforementioned predominant views regarding the
    relation of politics to the chief tasks of the
  





|  working class.  |







|  ?  |



 




    First example. In January 1862, in his political
review, he enters into a controversy with the
Prussian liberal National Zeitung regarding
Austria’s internal policy. The National Zeitung
wrote: “Let the fate of Austria be a lesson to other
states not to undertake expenditures that exceed
their financial strength. The cause of Austria’s
ruin is her excessive army expenditures.” Cherny-
shevsky does not like these reflections of the
National Zeitung.




 




    [331]... Such arguments, which led to the con-
clusion that the despotic Austrian Government is
acting perfectly correctly, should have astonished
and in fact did astonish a large number of the
  












    readers of Sovremennik. They produced [332]
an impression not so much of indifference to ques-
tions of political freedom as of direct sympathy
with the obscurantists. Chernyshevsky’s opponents
frequently accused him of such sympathies. It was
just because of accusations of this kind that at
the end of his political review in March 1862
  






  —
   
  Cf. Sotsial-
  Demokrat
  No. 1,
  p. 144[20]





he made the ironical confession: “for us there is
no better amusement than liberalism—and we
    have an irresistible desire to look about for liberals
I in order to poke fun at them.” But as a matter of
    fact, of course, he did not write his paradoxical
  






  changed!!
  




reviews in order to “poke fun” at the liberals, nor
to defend despotic governments. Basically the
  






  —
  




thought was that, while the given social relations
existed, things could not proceed otherwise than
they were doing and that anyone who wanted
  





them to proceed differently should devote his
efforts to a radical change in social relations. To act
  







differently would be a waste of time. The liberals
evoked Chernyshevsky’s ridicule precisely because
they proposed palliatives where a radical cure
was necessary.[21]





 




    Second example. In April of the same year,
Chernyshevsky again appeared to take the side of
absolutism in its struggle with liberalism in the
Prussian Government’s conflict with the Prussian
Diet. According to him, the liberals should not
have been surprised that the Prussian Government
did not make voluntary concessions to them but
preferred to agitate the country by dissolving the
Diet. “We find,” he says, “that the Prussian Govern-
ment acted as it should have.”[22] This again was
    bound to astonish the naïve reader and seem to
him a betrayal of the cause of freedom. It is clearly
  






  —
   
  Cf. Sotsial-
  Demokrat
  No. 1, p. 144
  tone!
   
   
   
   
   
  —
  




understandable, however, that here, too, our author
  





was not at all taking up the cudgels in defence of
    despotism, but only wanted [333] to utilise the
Prussian events in order to communicate to the
more astute of his readers the correct view of the
chief condition on which, in the final analysis, the
outcome of all broad social conflicts depends.
  












Here is what he says on this point:
  

    “Just as quarrels between different states are
    at first carried on by diplomatic means, so the
struggle for principles inside the state itself is at
first carried on by means of civilian influence or
so-called legal means. But just as a quarrel be-
tween different states, if it is sufficiently important,
  





    always loads to military threats, so too with the
    internal affairs of states, if the affair is not of minor
    importance. If the quarrelling states are very
unequal in power, then the affair is usually solved
  






  NB
  




    by military threats alone: the weaker state suc-
cumbs to the will of the stronger, and this prevents
open warfare. In just the same way, in important
internal affairs, war is only prevented if one of
the conflicting sides feels too weak compared with
the other: then it submits as soon as it sees that
the opposing party has really decided to resort to
military measures. But if two quarrelling states
are not so unequal in power that the weaker of
them cannot hope to repulse an attack, then the
affair may pass from threats to war. The defending
side has a very big advantage on its side and,
therefore, if it is not too weak, it does not lose
heart at the decision of the stronger opponent to
attack it.”[23]


    It was from this point of view that he examined
what was then taking place in Prussia. He defended
and praised the Prussian Government—this must
be noted—solely because “it was acting in the
best possible way in favour of national progress”
by destroying the political illusions of those naïve
    Prussians who, for no obvious reason, imagined






that a system of genuinely constitutional rule
    would be instituted in their country of itself,
without a struggle against the old order. And
  






  NB
  




    if he revealed not the slightest sympathy for the
Prussian liberals and even poked fun at them, the
explanation is that, in his just opinion, they too
wanted to achieve their aims [341] without a deter-






mined struggle against their political enemies.
In speaking of the possible outcome of the conflict
between the Diet and the Government he remarks,
with great perspicacity, that “judging by the
present mood of public opinion in Prussia, it is
to be presumed that the opponents of the present
  












    system find themselves too weak for military
struggle and are ready to yield at the first deter-
mined threat from the government that it will
resort to military measures.”[24] And so it turned
    out. Chernyshevsky was right in his contempt for
the Prussian liberals. They indeed wanted constitu-
tional order to be instituted in Prussia of itself. 
  





Not only did they not take determined action—for
that they could not be blamed since, with the
prevailing relation of social forces, this was not
possible—but they condemned in principle every













idea of such action, i.e., they hampered, insofar
as it depended on them, a change in social forces
that would have made it possible to resort to such
action in the future. Chernyshevsky could not
forgive them that, just as Lassalle could not. It is
noteworthy that just when Chernyshevsky was
ridiculing the Prussian liberals in his political
articles, Lassalle was tearing them to pieces in his
    speeches. And it is even more noteworthy that in
those speeches the German agitator sometimes
used the same words as Chernyshevsky to describe
the relation of social forces as the foundation of the
    political system in a particular country. Lassalle
had in many respects the same mentors as Cherny-
shevsky. It is natural, therefore, that the political
thinking of both tended in the same direction, and
achieved results that coincided in part. We say
    “in part” because, in noting the great sim-
ilarity of Lassalle’s views to Cherny-
shevsky’s, one must not close one’s eyes to the
differences between them. Lassalle does
not confine himself to concluding that the constitu-
tion of any country is the juridical expression of the
    prevailing correlation of social forces. He seeks
the causes which determine this correlation, and
finds them in the social economy. Those of Las-
salle’s speeches which bear on this question are
permeated with a materialist spirit, which is
more than can be said, for instance, of his speech
  





[335] on the philosophy of Fichte, or his “System
of Acquired Rights.” Neither does
Chernyshevsky ignore the question of the causes
determining the relation of social forces, but in his
analysis he stops at social self-consciousness, i.e.,
not crossing the boundary separating historical
  












    idealism from historical materialism. In contrast
to Lassalle, he is a far more consistent idealist in
his comments on Prussian affairs than in many
of his other articles dealing with politics or history.
This difference, too, should be attributed com-
pletely to the “relation of social forces.” In Prussia,
  





    no matter how weak Prussian capitalism was com-
pared with what it is at present, a working-
class movement in the modern sense of the
word had nevertheless already begun; but in
Russia the movement of the “non-
gentry,” which is usually called the movement
  






  i.e., the dem-
  ocratic move-
  ment
  




of the intelligentsia, had only just
begun to flourish. Influenced by the requirements
of the working-class movement, even idealists
are often compelled to reason materialis-
tically. One can find many examples in
present-day France of how the requirements of
the working-class movement exert their influence.
The movement of the intelligentsia, on the con-
    trary, sometimes drives even materialists
    to purely idealist reasoning. This is particu-
larly marked in Russia today.
  

    Chernyshevsky’s political reviews were intended
for the “best people,” who had to know what they
should teach the backward masses. The work of the
“best people” amounted, in the main, to
propaganda. But not exclusively. The
“ordinary people,” generally speaking, do not
figure on the political stage. And what takes place
on that stage—again speaking generally—little
  





affects their interests. But there are exceptional
epochs during which the masses of the people
awaken from their customary hibernation and make
energetic, although often hardly conscious, efforts
    to improve their destiny. In such exceptional epochs
  






  NB
  




the activity of the “best people” more or less loses
its predominantly propagandist charac-
  





ter and becomes agitational. This is what
  






  NB
  




    Chernyshevsky says of such epochs:
  

    “Historical progress takes place slowly and
arduously... [336], so slowly that, if we limit
ourselves to very short periods, the fluctuations
produced in the advancing course of history by
accidental circumstances may blind us to the
action of the general law. In order to convince
oneself of its immutability, it is necessary to con-
    sider the course of events over a fairly long time....
Compare the state of the social institutions and
laws of France in 1700 and today—the difference
is extremely great, and it is all to the advantage
of the present day; and yet almost all this century
and a half was very arduous and gloomy. The same
also in England. Whence comes the difference?
It was being constantly prepared for by the fact
that the best people of each generation found life
in their time extremely difficult; little by little at
least a few of their desires became comprehensible
to society, and then, at some time many years
later, on propitious occasions, society for six
months, a year, or hardly more than three or four
years, worked for the fulfilment of at least a few
of this small number of desires which had penetrat-
ed to it from the best people. The work was never
    successful: when half the work was done society’s
zeal would be exhausted, its strength would give
out, and once again the practical life of society
would fall into a long period of stagnation; and, as
before, the best people, if they survived the work
inspired by them, saw that their desires were far
from having been carried out and as before had
to bemoan life’s burdens. But in the brief period
of noble enthusiasm much was reconstructed. Of
    course, the reconstruction took place hurriedly,
there was no time to think about the elegance of the
new structures, which remained unfinished, there
was no time to bother about the subtle require-
ments of architectural harmony between the new
  





parts and the surviving remains, and the period
of stagnation inherited the reconstructed edifice
with a multitude of petty incongruities and hideosi-
ties. But that period of indolence afforded leisure
  






to examine carefully every detail and since the
improvement of the details that it disliked did
not require any particular effort, it was done
little by little; and while an exhausted society
busied itself with trivia, the best people were
saying that the reconstruction was incomplete,
and argued that the old parts of the building were
becoming more and more dilapidated, and that it
was necessary to resume work on a big scale.
At first a tired society refused to heed them, re-
garding their jarring cry as interference with its
rest; then, having recovered its energy, society
began to defer more and more to an opinion which
had previously aroused its indignation. [337] So-
    ciety gradually became convinced that there was
some truth in it, came to recognise that truth more
and more from year to year, and finally was pre-
pared to go along with those progressive people
who argued that reconstruction was necessary;
and, then, at the earliest opportunity it set to
work with renewed fervour, again left it unfinished,
and once more fell into a slumber, only to resume
the effort later on.”[25]


    Chernyshevsky’s political articles were aimed
at showing the “best people” that the old structure
of the contemporary social system was crumbling
more and more and that there was a need to “re-
sume work on a big scale.” And everything points
    to the fact that towards the end of the first, i.e.,
    pre—Siberian period of his literary activity, it
began to appear to him that society was more and
more heeding his opinion, and falling in with him.
  





In other words, he began to think that in Russian
history too there was approaching one of those
    beneficial leaps which rarely occur in history, but
which push far ahead the process of social develop-
ment. The spirits of the advanced sections of
  






  NB
  




Russian society were indeed rapidly rising, and
    with them Chernyshevsky’s spirits also rose.
At one time he had found it possible and useful
to make clear to the government its own interests
in the matter of freeing the peasants; now he does
not even think of addressing himself to the govern-
ment. To count on it at all seems to him harmful
self-delusion. In the article “The Russian Reformer”
(Sovremennik, October 1861), which he wrote in
connection with the publication of M. Korf’s book
  





The Life of Count Speransky, Chernyshevsky
    argues at length that no reformer should delude
himself with such calculations in our country.
Speransky’s enemies called him a revolutionary.
This opinion amused Chernyshevsky. Speransky
indeed had very broad plans for changes, but it is
ludicrous to call him a revolutionary, judging by







  —
   
  Cf. Sotsial-
  Demokrat
  No. 1, p. 161[26]
   
  —
  




the extent of the means he intended using to carry
out his intentions. He could maintain his position
only because ho had managed to earn the trust of
the tsar Alexander I. With this trust to support
him, he intended to carry out his plans. That is
why Chernyshevsky called him a dreamer....
  



 




    [338]... Only he who constantly remembers that
the course of social life is determined by the re-
lationship of social forces does not succumb to
harmful delusions in politics. He who wishes to act
    in accordance with this basic principle has some-
    times to go through a difficult moral struggle.
  






Sotsial-
  Demokrat,
  p. 161 changed
  




Chernyshevsky tries to warn the “best people” of
his time on this score, in view of what he thought
was the imminent leap. Thus, as far back as
January 1861, in analysing a book by the well-
known American economist, Carey, whose insig-
nificance, incidentally, he brilliantly exposes, he
unexpectedly passes to the well-known Jewish
heroine, Judith, and strongly justifies her action.
He says: “The path of history is not paved like
Nevsky Prospekt; it runs across fields, either dusty
or muddy, and cuts across swamps or forest thick-
ets. He who fears being covered with dust or mud-
dying his boots, should better not engage in social
activity, for this is a noble occupation when one
is really concerned with the good of the people,
but it is not exactly a tidy one. It is true, however,
that moral purity may be understood differently;
others, for example, may feel that Judith did not
tarnish herself.... Broaden your considerations and
on many individual questions you will have
obligations that are different from those resulting
from an isolated examination of the same ques-
tions.”[27]




 




    At the beginning of the sixties the government
conceived the idea of lifting censorship restrictions
to some extent. It was decided that new censorship
rules should be drawn up, and the press was allowed
    to express itself on the question of its own repres-
    sion. Chernyshevsky lost no time in stating his
personal views, which as usual strongly differed
  






  Cf. omission
Sotsial-
  Demokrat
  No. 1,
  p. 162[28]





from the usual liberal views. [339] True, Cherny-
shevsky himself maliciously ridicules the people
who suppose that the printing press has some
specific power like belladonna, sulphuric acid,
fulminate of silver, etc. “Our personal opinion is
not inclined towards expecting unnaturally harm-
ful results from objects and actions which do not
possess the power to produce such calamities.
We think the printing press is too weak to produce
social misfortune. After all, it does not contain
so much ink that the latter could come pouring out
somehow and flood our country; nor has it springs
    that, after jumping out somehow and thumping
the type, could fire it as case shot.” However,
Chernyshevsky admits that there are epochs when
the press can he no less dangerous than case shot to
the government of a country. These are the epochs
when a government’s interests differ from
the interests of society and a rev-
olutionary upheaval is imminent. A government
in such a position has every ground for restricting
the press, because the press, together with other
social forces, is preparing its downfall. Almost
all the successive French governments of this
century have been continuously in this situation.
All this is very painstakingly and calmly expounded
by Chernyshevsky. Nothing is said in the article,
until the very end, about the Russian Government.
But in conclusion Chernyshevsky suddenly asks
his reader—suppose it should turn out that the
press laws are really necessary in our country?
“Then we should again deserve to be called obscu-
rantists, enemies of progress, haters of freedom,
    panegyrists of despotism, etc., just as we have
already many times laid ourselves open to such
censure.” He therefore does not want to investigate
the question of whether there is a need for special
press laws in our country. “We fear,” he says,
    “that a conscientious investigation would lead
us to reply: yes, they are necessary.”[29] The






conclusion is clear: they are necessary because







  NB
  




the time for a “leap” is also approaching in
    Russia.
  

    In the same March issue of Sovremennik that
printed the article we have just quoted, there
appeared a polemical article entitled “Have We
Learned the Lesson?”, concerning the well-known
student demonstrations of 1861. In it Chernyshev-
sky defends the students, who were reproached by
our “guardians” for allegedly not wanting to study
[340]; and, incidentally, he also tells the govern-
ment many home truths. The immediate cause
for this polemic was an anonymous article in the
St. Petersburg Academic Bulletin entitled “To
Study or Not To Study?” Chernyshevsky replies
that in regard to students this question has no
sense, since they have always wanted to study,
but the restricting university regulations hindered
them. The university regulations would have
  





    dealt with students—people of an age when by our
laws a man may marry, be taken into the civil ser-
vice, or “command an army unit”—as children.
It is not surprising that they protested. They
were even barred from having such completely
  






  idem
Sotsial-
  Demokrat
  No. 1, p. 163
  



  
    harmless organisations as mutual aid societies,
which were undoubtedly essential in view of the
material insecurity of the majority of the students.
Students could not but revolt against such regula-
tions, because it was a question of “a crust of bread
    and the possibility of attending lectures. This
bread, this opportunity was being withdrawn.”
Chernyshevsky declared outright that the people
who made the university regulations actually
wanted to deprive the majority of those who entered
the university of any possibility of studying.
“If the author of the article and those who agree
with him consider it necessary to prove that this
was not the aim in view when the regulations
were drawn up, let them publish the documents
relating to the meetings at which the regulations
were decided on.” The anonymous writer of the
article “To Study or Not To Study?” directed
his charge of unwillingness to study not only
against the students but against the whole of
Russian society. Chernyshevsky took advantage
of this to carry the controversy about the unrest
at the university on to a more general field. His
opponent allowed that there were certain signs of
the desire of Russian society to study. Proof of
    this, in his opinion, was the “hundreds” of new
    periodicals, the “dozens” of Sunday schools for
adults that were appearing in our country. “Hun-
dreds of new periodicals, but where did he count the
hundreds?” exclaims Chernyshevsky. “And hundreds
would really be necessary, but does the author want
to know why hundreds of new periodicals are not
being founded, as they should? It is because under
the conditions of our censorship it is impossible
for any lively periodical to exist anywhere, except
in a few large towns. Every rich commercial town
should [341] have several, even if only small, news-
papers; several local news-sheets should be publi-
shed in every province. They do not exist, because
they are not allowed to.... Dozens of Sunday schools
for adults.... Now that is no exaggeration, it is not
the same as with the hundreds of new periodicals:
    in an empire with a population of over 60 million,
the Sunday schools for adults are indeed to be
counted only in dozens. Yet there should have
been tens of thousands of them, and it would have
    been possible to establish quickly tens of thousands
of them, and for at least many thousands to be now
in existence. How is it that there are only dozens?
Because they are so suspect, so hampered, so cir-
cumscribed, that the people who are most loyal
to the work of teaching in them have all desire to
teach driven out of them.”
  



 




    After referring to the existence of “hundreds”
of new periodicals and “dozens” of Sunday schools
for adults as apparent signs of the desire of society
to study, the author of the article which Cherny-
shevsky was analysing hastened to add that these
signs were deceptive. “You hear shouting in the
streets,” he proclaims mournfully, “something or
other is said to have happened somewhere, and
you involuntarily hang your head and are disillu-
sioned....” “Excuse me, Mr. Author of the article,”
objects Chernyshevsky, “what is the shouting you
hear in the streets? The shouting of constables and
police officers—we hear their shouting too. Are you
speaking of that shouting? You are told something
or other has happened somewhere... —what sort
of thing, for example? There a theft has occurred,
  






  idem
Sotsial-
  Demokrat
  No. 1, p. 164
  




here authority has been exceeded, there the rights
of the weak have been violated, here there has
been connivance with the strong—we are inces-
santly being told this sort of thing. Because of
this shouting which everyone hears, and this con-
stant talk, one does indeed involuntarily hang one’s
head and become disillusioned.”
  

    The accuser of the students attacked them for
their apparent intolerance of the opinions of
others, for having recourse in their protests to
whistling, pickled apples and similar “street weap-
    ons.” Chernyshevsky replies that “whistling and
pickled apples are not used as street weapons:
    street weapons take the form of bayonets, rifle-
butts and sabres.” He asks his opponent to recall
“whether it was the students who used these street
weapons against anyone, or whether they were
used against the students ... and whether there was
any need to use them against the students.”
  



 




    It is easy to understand the impression such
articles of Chernyshevsky’s were bound to make
on the Russian students. When [342], subsequently,
student demonstrations occurred again at the end
of the sixties, the article “Have We Learned the
Lesson?” was read at student gatherings as being
  












the best defence of their demands. It is also easy
to understand what the attitude of the “guardians”
must have been to such defiant articles. The great
    writer’s “dangerous” influence on the student youth
became more and more obvious to them.
  






  Up to here
Sotsial-
  Demokrat
  No. 1, p. 164
  —
  




    We know already how that influence was removed.
  
 
Holding a utopian socialist point of view,
    Chernyshevsky believed that the plans which those
of like mind in the West sought to realise could
be carried out under the most varied political
forms. That’s how it was according to theory. And
as long as he did not step out of this sphere, he
expressed this view without mincing words. When
he started on his literary career, our social life
seemed to furnish some confirmation, if only
indirect, of the correctness of this view; hope
arose among the advanced men of the day that the
government would take the initiative in reaching
a just solution of the peasant question. It was a
vain hope, which Chernyshevsky abandoned almost
before anyone else. And while in theory he did
not, even afterwards, clearly see the connection
between economics and politics, in his practical
activity—and by this we mean his journal-
istic efforts—he was an uncompromising enemy
of our old order, although his peculiar irony con-
tinued to mislead many liberal-minded readers
  





on that score. In deeds, if not in theory, he became
a man of irreconcilable political struggle and
    the thirst for struggle is felt in almost every line
of each of his articles relating to the year 1861
and, in particular, to the year 1862, a fateful one
for him.
  






  NB
  


 
 

 

<< Back to Part One



Notes
[1]  See the article “Chernyshevsky’s Aesthetic 
  Theory” in the collection In Twenty Years.—Plekhanov.
[2] Here and elsewhere, an NB underscored with two slanting 
  lines implies that Lenin’s NB is in the corner of the page and apparently 
  refers to all of it. The full text of the page in question is therefore given 
  in such cases.—Ed.
[3] N. G. Chernyshevksy, Collected Works, Vol. 
  II, p. 206.—Plekhanov.
[4] Collected Works, Vol. I, pp. 
  97-98.—Plekhanov.
[5] Collected Works, Vol. I, pp. 
  90-91.—Plekhanov.
[6] Lenin is referring to the following passage in 
  Plekhanov’s article in Sotsial-Demokrat:
“We have never 
  had occasion to read such malicious and at the same time such a highly accurate 
  characterisation of Russian liberalism.” (Sotsial-Demokrat, 
  Book 1, London, 1890, p. 144.)
[7] Ibid., p. 102.—Plekhanov.
[8] N. V. Uspensky, Collected Works, Vol. II,
  1883, p. 202.—Plekhanov.
[9] N. G. Chernyshevsky, Collected Works, Vol.
  VIII, p. 357.—Plekhanov.
[10] Collected Works, Vol. VIII. p. 
  346.—Plekhanov.
[11] N. G. Chernyshevsky, Collected Works, 
  Vol. VI, p. 150.—Plekhanov.
[12] Ibid., pp. 205-206.—Plekhanov.
[13] Collected Works, Vol. IV, p. 307.—Plekhanov.
[14] Collected Works, III, p. 185.—Plekhanov.
[15] Collected Works, Vol. IV, pp. 156-57.—Plekhanov.
[16] Collected Works, Vol. IV, p. 157.—Plekhanov.
[17] Ibid., p. 158.—Plekhanov.
[18] Collected Works, Vol. V, p. 248.—Plekhanov.
[19] These reviews take up at least two volumes of 
  his Collected Works.—Plekhanov.
[20] Lenin is referring to the following passage, 
  subsequently radically changed by Plekhanov; in an article in Sotsial-Demokrat
  (Book 1, London, 1890, p. 144):
  “For the sake of impartiality, however, it must be added 
  that our author was not only contemptuous of Russian liberals. In excellent 
  political reviews that he wrote in Sovremennik until the very end 
  of his free life, our author constantly displayed the most merciless contempt 
  for all European liberals in general—particularly, the liberals of Austria
  (i.e., the Liberal Party of Austrian Germans), Prussia and Italy. As is well 
  known, in articles on the history of France, he also did not manifest much 
  respect for the liberal party. All this, naturally, could not be pleasing 
  to the spokesmen of Russian liberalism and, in their fight with him, they 
  resorted to the method so often used by liberals of all countries in their 
  clashes with people further advanced than themselves politically; they accused 
  him of disliking freedom and even of sympathies for despotism; Of course, 
  such accusations from liberals could only amuse Chernyshevsky. He had so little 
  fear of them that at times he aroused his opponents to new accusations by 
  making believe that he recognised their complete fairness. ‘For us there
  is no better amusement than liberalism,’ he says in one of his last 
  political reviews, ‘and we have an irresistible desire to look about 
  for liberals in order to poke fun at them.’ He then begins to poke fun 
  at the Prussian liberals who, as he aptly puts it, were angered by the fact
  that political freedom in Prussia ‘does not become established by itself.’

  “This mockery did not prevent the attentive reader from understanding 
  that it was not a lack of love for freedom that made Chernyshevsky contemptuous 
  of liberalism. It was sufficient to read only a few of his political reviews 
  to see how passionately he sympathised with every liberation movement, no 
  matter where it began: in France or in Italy, in America or in Hungary. 
  He simply believed that the role of the liberals in such movements is usually
  very ugly. They themselves do very little and often even impede the efforts 
  of others by attacking people who are more daring and resolute than they.”
[21] In his Essays on Political Economy 
  Chernyshevsky, pointing to the lack of agreement between the existing economic 
  system and “the demands of a sound theory”, sometimes 
  interrupts his exposition with the question: “Should a system continue 
  which allows such disagreement?” (See, for instance, Collected Works, 
  Vol. VII, p. 513.) The reader of Chernyshevsky must have asked himself the 
  same question on reading his political surveys, especially those leading to 
  the “incongruous” conclusion that the apologists of despotism, 
  and not its opponents, were in the right. In Chernyshevsky such a conclusion 
  was just another argument against the contemporary life. 
  But the liberals often failed to under stand this.—Plekhanov.
[22] Collected Works, Vol. IX, p. 236.—Plekhanov.
[23] Collected Works, Vol. IX, p. 241.—Plekhanov.
[24] Collected Works, Vol. IX, p. 241.—Plekhanov.
[25] Collected Works, Vol. V, pp. 400-491.—Plekhanov.
[26] Lenin is referring to the following passage in 
  Plekhanov’s article in Sotsial-Demokrat (Book 1, London, 1890, p. 161):
 “In the article ‘The Russian Reformer’, 
  written on the occasion of the appearance of Baron M. Korf’s book The 
  Life of Count Speransky, Chernyshevsky demonstrates conclusively that 
  no reformer in our country could depend on the government as regards important 
  social reforms. Revolutionaries can depend on it even less. Enemies called 
  Speransky a revolutionary, but such an evaluation appears laughable to Chernyshevsky. 
  Speransky indeed had very extensive reform plans, but ‘it is ludicrous 
  to call him a revolutionary judging by the extent of the means he intended 
  using to carry out his intentions.’ He could maintain his post only 
  because he had managed to earn the trust of the tsar Alexander I. With this 
  trust to support him, he intended to carry out his plans. Precisely for this 
  reason, Chernyshevsky considered him to be a dangerous dreamer. Dreamers are 
  often simply ridiculous and their delusions trivial, hut they ‘can be 
  dangerous to society when their delusions concern important matters. In their 
  rapturous bustle off the track, they appear to achieve a measure of success, 
  thus confusing many who, as a result of this illusory success, get it into 
  their heads to follow them. From this standpoint, Speransky’s activity 
  may be called dangerous.’”
[27] Collected Works, Vol. VIII, pp. 37-38.—Plekhanov.
[28] The statement in Plekhanov’s article on 
  Chernyshevsky appearing in Sotsial-Demokrat (Book 1, London, 1890, 
  p. 162), but omitted by Plekhanov in the 1910 edition of his hook on Chernyshevsky, 
  is the following:
“With respect to the Russian Government, Chernyshevsky’s 
  tone becomes more and more defiant.”
[29] Collected Works, Vol. IX, pp. 130. 155.—Plekhanov.
 



<< Back to Part One
<< Back to the Table of Contents


 





Works Index
    |   
  Volume 38

 | 

Collected Works
    |   L.I.A. Index




  < backward




  forward >





 

