# Volume 19

==========

## Table of contents







Lenin Collected Works: Volume 19







Lenin
      Collected Works: Volume 19



 
Lenin Collected Works: Volume 19
March-December 1913



Preface




1913


 SPECIAL TRANSLATION: the follwing two titles were not in the English verison of the this or any volume of the LWC. This translation was done specially for the Lenin Internet Archive from the Russian edition.
Comments of V I Lenin concerning  Rosa Luxemburg’s book Accumulation of Capital (special translation) 96k 

Rosa Luxemburg’s Unsuccessful Addition to Marx’s Theory (special translation) 3k



The Three Sources and Three Component Parts of Marxism

   

  ¶ I
   

  ¶ II
   

  ¶ III

13k

Big Achievement of the Chinese Republic

6k

Old Problems and the Senile Decay of Liberalism

11k


The “Oil Hunger”

16k


The Cadet Assembly Bill

7k


The Balkan War and Bourgeois Chauvinism

7k


Conversation

19k


Contemporary Russia and the Working-Class Movement
A Newspaper Report

22k


Educated Deputies

6k


“Who Stands to Gain?”

7k


In Britain

  (The Sad Results of Opportunism)

7k


Civilised Europeans and Savage Asians

4k


Merchant Accountancy

11k


A Great Technical Achievement

5k


A Few Words on Results and Facts

17k


Significance of the Resettlement Scheme

5k


Vekhi Contributors and Nationalism

  (Bibliographical Note)

10k


The Liberals and Freedom for the Unions

10k


For the Attention of Luch and Pravda Readers

13k


Twenty-Fifth Anniversary of the Death of Joseph Dietzgen

13k


The Bourgeoisie and Peace

7k


The Awakening of Asia

8k


Separatists in Russia and Separatists in Austria

10k


The Resettlement Scheme Again

7k


The Working Class and the National Question

8k


British Socialist Party Conference

9k


Is the Condition of the Peasants Improving or Worsening?

12k


Backward Europe and Advanced Asia

9k


A Discreditable Role!

(Once More for the Attention of
  Luch and Pravda Readers)

10k


The Land Question Settled—Landowner Fashion

10k


Armaments and Capitalism

8k


Helplessness and Confusion

(Note)

14k


Draft Platform for the Fourth Congress of Social-Democrats of the Latvian Area

Appraisal of the Political Situation and the General
      Tactical Tasks of the Social-Democrats.
    

      The Question of the Unity of the R.S.D.L.P.
    

      Attitude to the Liquidators
    

      The Question of Support for the Liquidators' Conference
      and Organising Committee by the Central Com mittee of the
      Social -Democratic Party of the Latvian Area
    

      The National Question


33k


Liberal and Marxist Conceptions of the Class Struggle
Note

22k


Factory Owners on Workers' Strikes
     I II III

25k


An Incorrect Appraisal (Luch on Maklakov)

11k


Frank Speeches by a Liberal

9k


The Question of Ministry of Education Policy

  (Supplement to the Discussion on Public Education)

34k


Controversial Issues
An Open Party and the Marxists

I. The Decision of 1908

II. The Decision of 1910

III. The Attitude of the
      Liquidators to the Decisions of 1908 and 1910
  
IV. The Class Significance of
      Liquidationism

V. The Slogan of
    “Struggle for an Open Party”
  
VI. [notitle]
  


102k


Letter to M. S. Olminsky (Vitimsky)

11k


The Question of Mr. Bogdanov and the Vperyod Group

(For the Editors of Pravda)

14k


Has Pravda Given Proof of Bundist Separatism?

10k


Liberals as Defenders of the Fourth Duma

11k


The Question of the (General) Agrarian Policy of the Present Government

55k


Capitalism and Taxation

13k


Economic Strikes in 1912 and in 1905

9k


The Growth of Capitalist Wealth

9k


The Peasantry and the Working Class

10k


Child Labour in Peasant Farming

10k


The Results of Strikes in 1912 as Compared with Those of the Past

9k


In Australia

9k


May Day Action by the Revolutionary Proletariat

25k


Notes of a Publicist (June 15, 1913)

21k


Apropos of One Untruth

(Letter to the Editors)

7k


The Working Class and NeoMalthusianism


7k


Liberal Appeals to Support the Fourth Duma

13k


Bourgeois Financial Magnates and Politicians

8k


Theses on the National Question

31k


Instructive Speeches

14k


Pictures From Life

7k


The Adjourned Duma and the Embarrassed Liberals

10k


Fifth International Congress Against Prostitution


4k



Word and Deed

10k


Cadets on the Question of the Ukraine

9k


Fresh Data on German Political Parties

16k


Exposure of the British Opportunists

10k


The Ideas of an Advanced Capitalist

9k


What Can be Done for Public Education

7k



Petty Production in Agriculture

13k


A “Fashionable” Branch of Industry

6k


Dead Liquidationism and the Living Rech

11k


Mobilisation of Allotment Lands

15k


How Can per Capita Consumption in Russia be Increased?

9k


August Bebel

21k


The Separation of Liberalism from Democracy

14k


A Fine Business!

9k


The Nationalisation of Jewish Schools

5k



Iron on Peasant Farms

9k


Metalworkers' Strikes in 1912
    
  I
  II
  III
  IV
  V
  VI
  VII
  VIII
  IX
  X

46k


The Russian Bourgeoisie and Russian Reformism
11k


The Role of Social Estates and Classes in the Liberation Movement
13k


Class War in Dublin
16k


New Land “Reform” Measures
10k


The Merchant Salazkin and the Writer F. D.
11k


The Struggle for Marxism
17k


A Week After the Dublin Massacre
8k


Questions of Principle in Politics
The Liberal Bourgeoisie and Reformism

15k


Liberals and Democrats on the Language Question
13k


The Language of Figures
    
I
II
III
IV

23k


Bourgeois Gentlemen on “Family” Farming
17k


Harry Quelch
11k


Marxism and Reformism
13k


The Land Question and the Rural Poor
12k


How Does Bishop Nikon Defend the Ukrainians?
10k


Notes of a Publicist (September 13, 1913)


    I. Non-Party Intellectuals Against Marxism
  

    II. Liberal Blindness
  

    III. A Necessary Explanation
  


20k


Civilised Barbarism
8k


The Black Hundreds
9k


Russian Government and Russian Reforms
9k


How Vera Zasulich Demolishes Liquidationism
    
I
  II
  III
  IV
  V
  VI


73k


Resolutions of the Summer, 1913, Joint Conference of the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P. and Party Officials


      The Tasks of Agitation in the Present Situation
    

      Resolution on the Organisational Question and On the Party
      Congress
    

      The Strike Movement
    

      The Party Press
    

      Social-Democratic Activities In the Duma
    

      The Social-Democratic Group In the Duma
    

      Work In Legal Associations
    

      Resolution on the National Question
    

      The Narodniks
    


51k


There's a Trudovik For You!
17k


Bewildered Non-Party People
12k


The Liberals and the Land Problem in Britain
13k


A Weak Defence of a Weak Case
10k


Declaration
11k


The Duma “Seven”
9k


The Liberal Bourgeoisie and the Liquidators
12k


Capitalism and Workers' Immigration
8k


Material on the Conflict Within the Social-Democratic Duma Group


    Whose Will?
  

      What Is the Will of the Majority of the Class-Conscious
      Workers of Russia?
    

      What Did the Elections to the Second, Third and Fourth
      Dumas Reveal Concerning
      the Will of the Proletariat?
    

      Who Are the Deputies?
    

      What Is the Will of the Workers as Shown by Workers'
      Newspapers in Russia?
    

      What Is the Will of the Workers as Shown by Collections
      for Workers' Newspapers?
    

      What Is the Will of the Workers as Shown by the
      St. Petersburg Trade Unions?
    

      Ideological Unity
    

      The Liquidators and the Bourgeoisie
    

      Decision of the United Marxists
    

      Our Work Within the Duma Group
    

      What Do the Six Demand?
    

      Unity Inside and Outside the Duma
    


61k


A Cadet Property-Owner Argues “According to Marx”
9k


The Working-Class Masses and the Working-Class Intelligentsia
11k


The Split in the Russian Social-Democratic Duma Group
18k


The Left Narodniks on the Controversies Among the Marxists
9k


The Agrarian Question and the Present Situation in Russia

  (Notes of a Publicist)

17k


Two Methods of Controversy and Struggle
11k


Would-Be “Uniters”
15k


A Letter to S. G. Shahumyan
15k


“Cultural-National” Autonomy
11k



Coteries Abroad and Russian Liquidators
13k


The Cadet Maklakov and the Social-Democrat Petrovsky
9k


Zabern
12k


The Question of Bureau Decisions
11k


Working-Class Unity
11k


A Stubborn Defence of a Bad Case
12k


The Cadets and “The Right of Nations to Self-Determination”
11k


A Good Resolution and a Bad Speech
13k


The Nationality of Pupils in Russian Schools
7k



Strikes in Russia
21k


The National Programme of the R.S.D.L.P.

21k



Kautsky's Unpardonable Error
9k


Once More on the Segregation of the Schools According to Nationality
12k


Mr. Gorsky and a Certain Latin Proverb
5k


The Marx-Engels Correspondence

General Reiew


19k

 


Volume 19
      Transcription/Mark-up:

      •  
    UNKNOWN, 19??

    




      •  

    Sally Ryan, 19??

    





      •  

    Richard Bos, 1996

    

      •  

    Lee Joon Koo and Marc Luzietti, 1996

    

      •  

    R. Cymbala, 1996

    

      •  

    Zodiac, 1996

    

      •  

    Charles Farrell, 2000

    

      •  

    Brian Baggins, David
    Walters, and Zodiac,  2000

      •  

    Louis Proyect, 2003

    

      •  

    R. Cymbala,

    Aug. 22-Sep. 06, 2004

    










 
Previous

 | 
 Next 

 
Lenin
Collected Works 
 | 
 Lenin
Internet Archive 

 




 


 
 
 







==========

## Comments of V I Lenin concerning  Rosa Luxemburg’s book Accumulation of Capital








V I Lenin - Notes on Rosa Luxemburg's Accumulation of Capital




V I Lenin
Comments of V I Lenin concerning
Rosa Luxemburg's book Accumulation
of Capital


Written: March-April 1913
First Published:1933 
Source:«Замечания
В.И.
Ленина
по
поводу
книги Р.
Люксембург
«Накопление
Капитала»», Lенинский
Сборник
XXII,
(Партийное
Издательство,
Mосква, 1933),
c349-390. (from the Leninskii
Sbornik, [Lenin Miscellany], Party Publishing House,
Moscow, 1933, pp 349-390)
Translated: Steve
Palmer *
Transcription/Markup:
Steve Palmer **
Proofread: Steve Palmer
Public Domain:  Marxists Internet Archive
2010. This work is published under the Attribution-ShareAlike
Creative Commons license. 
Fair Use:  Marxists Internet Archive
(marxists.org) 2010. A portion of this document has been reproduced in
accordance with
§
107 of Title 17 in US Copyright Law. Exercise of
fair use detailed below. ***
Version: RC2 - Release
Candidate 2. Warning: Prints incorrectly from
Firefox. IE8 and Google Chrome print correctly.


‘I want to find
the cause of
imperialism. I am following up the economic aspects of this concept
… it will be a strictly scientific explanation of
imperialism and
its contradictions.’

Rosa Luxemburg to Konstantin Zetkin, November 1911

'I have read Rosa’s
new
book Die
Akkumulation des Kapitals. She has got into a shocking
muddle. She has
distorted Marx.'
Lenin to Kamenev, March 1913




“Herein lies the
peculiar character of reproduction
in a
capitalist society, which differs from all other known forms of
production. In the first place, every branch of production develops
independently within certain limits, in a way that leads to periodical
interruptions of production of shorter or longer duration. Secondly,
the
individual branches of reproduction show deviations from social
requirements amounting
35: «all-round disparity»
NB
(crisis) to all-round disparity and thus resulting in a
general interruption of reproduction.” (p35)

“It is very important, however, to establish quite
firmly
and from the very outset that this cyclical movement of boom, slump,
and
crisis, does not represent the whole problem of capitalist
reproduction,
although it is an essential element of it. Periodical cycles and crises
are specific phases of reproduction in a capitalist system of economy,
but not the whole of this process. In order to demonstrate the pure
implications of capitalist reproduction we must rather consider it
quite 35: «apart
from
crises» must
NBapart
from the
periodical cycles
and crises. Strange as this may appear,
the method is quite rational; it is indeed the only method of inquiry
that is scientifically tenable.” (p35)


“However, if we consider a 36:
«longer
period»; crisis and boom balanced
longer period, a whole cycle
with its alternating phases of prosperity and depression, of boom and
slump, that is if we consider reproduction at its highest and lowest
volume, including the stage of suspension, we can set off boom against
slump and work out an average, a mean volume of reproduction for the
whole cycle. This average is not only a theoretical figment of thought,
it is also a real objective fact. (p36)


When we speak of capitalist reproduction in the following
exposition, we shall always understand by this term a36-7: «we bear in mind
exactly the mean»
always
mean volume of
productivity which is an average taken over the various phases of a
cycle.” (36-7)


“Expanding reproduction is not a new discovery of
capital.
On the contrary, it had been the rule since time immemorial in every
form of society that displayed economic and cultural progress. It is
true, of course, that simple reproduction as a mere continuous
repetition of the process of production on the same scale as before can
be observed over long periods of social history. In the ancient
agrarian
and communist village communities, for instance, increase in population
did not lead to a gradual expansion of production, but rather to the
new
generation being expelled and the subsequent founding of equally small
and self-sufficient colonies. 41:
Simple
reproduction in China and primitive communism
The old small handicraft units of
India
and China provide similar instances of a traditional repetition of
production in the same forms and on the same scale, handed down from
generation to generation. But simple reproduction is in all these cases
the source and unmistakable sign of a general economic and cultural
stagnation. No important forward step in production, no memorial of
civilisation, such as the great waterworks of the East, the pyramids of
Egypt, the military roads of Rome, the Arts and Sciences of Greece, or
the development of craftsmanship and towns in the Middle Ages would
have
been possible without expanding reproduction; for the basis and also
the
social incentive for a decisive advancement of civilisation lies solely
in the gradual expansion of production beyond immediate requirements,
and in a continual growth of the population itself as well as of its
demands.
41. Under capitalism
expanded
reproduction takes
on a new character.
Exchange in particular, which brought about a class society,
and
its historical development into the capitalist form of economy, would
have been unthinkable without expanding reproduction. In a
capitalist
society, moreover, expanding reproduction acquires certain
characteristics.” (p41)


“This question may be answered by saying that the
capitalist’s greed for surplus value, enhanced by
competition, and
the automatic effects of capitalist exploitation, lead to the
production
of every kind of commodity, including means of production, and also
that
a growing class of proletarianised workers becomes generally available
for the purposes of capital. On the other hand, the 46. «Planlessness»
- Criseslack
of a plan
in
this respect shows itself in the fact that the balance between demand
and supply in all spheres can be achieved only by continuous
deviations,
by hourly fluctuations of prices, and by periodical crises and changes
of the market situation.
From the point of view of reproduction the question is a
different one. How is it possible that the unplanned supply in the
market for labour and means of production, and the unplanned and
incalculable changes in demand nevertheless provide adequate quantities
and qualities of means of production, labour and opportunities for
selling which the 46 Incorrect
formulation: individual.
This is not the
object of analysis individual capitalist needs in order to
make
a
sale? How can it be assured that every one of these factors increases
in
the right proportion? Let us put the problem more precisely. According
to our well-known formula, let the composition of the individual
capitalist’s production be expressed by the proportion
40c+10v+10s. His constant capital is consequently four times as much as
his variable capital, and the rate of exploitation is 100 per cent. The
aggregate of commodities is thus represented by a value of 60. Let us
now assume that the capitalist is in a position to capitalise and to
add
to the old capital of this given composition half of his surplus value.
In this case, the formula 44c+11v+11s=66 would apply to the next period
of production.
Let us assume now that the capitalist can continue the annual
capitalisation of half his surplus value for a number of years. For
this
purpose it is not sufficient that means of production, labour and
markets in general should be forthcoming, but he must find these
factors
in a proportion that is strictly in keeping with his progress in
accumulation.” (p46-47)


“As this obviously must also apply to the aggregate
of commodities, the national product, we are faced with the startling
discovery that, although the value of the aggregate of commodities
manufactured by capitalist methods represents all paid wages together
with the profits of capital and the rents, that is the aggregate
surplus value, and consequently can replace these, there is no
component of value which corresponds to the constant capital used in
production. According to Smith, v + s is the formula expressing the
value of the capitalist product as a whole. Demonstrating his view with
the example of corn, Smith says as follows:
51. Quote from Adam
Smith cribbed from Development
of
Capitalism


NB p48.
‘These three parts (wages, profit, and rent) seem either
immediately or ultimately to make up the whole price of corn. A fourth
part, it may perhaps be thought, is necessary for replacing the stock
of the farmer, or for compensating the wear and tear of his labouring
cattle, and other instruments of husbandry. But it must be considered
that the price of any instrument of husbandry, such as a labouring
horse, is itself made up of the same three parts: the rent of the land
upon which he is reared, the labour of tending and rearing him, and the
profits of the farmer who advances both the rent of this land and the
wages of this labour. Though the price of the corn, therefore, may pay
the price as well as the maintenance of the horse, the whole price
still resolves itself either immediately or ultimately into the same
three parts of rent, of labour and profit.’“
(p51)


54. Capital for one, income for
another(compare word for word p64 of Development of Capitalism)“These
examples make it seem plausible that an object which
is
capital for one person may be income for another and vice versa. How
can
it be possible under these circumstances to construct anything in the
nature of a total capital of society? Indeed almost every scientific
economist up to the time of Marx concluded that there is no social
capital.(5) Smith was still doubtful, undecided, vacillating about this
question; so was Ricardo.” (p54)


“The following exposition represents the highest
level of
clarity which he [Adam Smith] achieved in this respect:

58: Quote from Adam Smith = p49
of Development of
Capitalism 52
and 58-9 the same quotation‘Though
the whole annual produce of the land and
labour
of every country is, no doubt, ultimately destined for supplying the
consumption of its inhabitants and for procuring a revenue to them, yet
when it first comes either from the ground or from the hands of the
productive labourer, it naturally divides itself into two parts.
One of them, and frequently the largest, is, in the first
place,
destined for replacing a capital, or for renewing the provisions,
materials, and finished work, which had been withdrawn from a capital;
the other for constituting a revenue either to the owner of this
capital, as the profit of his stock, or to some other person; as the
rent of his land.’(10)
‘The gross revenue of all the inhabitants of a great
country comprehends the whole annual produce of their land and labour;
the neat revenue, what remains free to them after deducting the expense
of maintaining, first, their fixed, and secondly, their circulating
capital; or what, without encroaching upon their capital, they can
place
in their stock reserved for immediate consumption, or spend upon their
subsistence, conveniences, and amusements. Their real wealth too is in
proportion, not to their gross, but to their neat revenue.’
“ (p58-9)


“He emphasises here a radical distinction between
fixed and
circulating capital from the point of view of the society:

59: Quote from Adam Smith = p50
Development of
Capitalism (!!)‘The whole expense of
maintaining the fixed capital
must
evidently be excluded from the neat revenue of the society. Neither the
materials necessary for supporting their useful machines and
instruments
of trade, their profitable buildings, etc., nor the produce of the
labour necessary for fashioning those materials into the proper form,
can ever make any part of it. The price of that labour may indeed make
a
part of it, as the workmen so employed may place the whole value of
their wages in their stock reserved for immediate consumption. But in
other sorts of labour, both the price and the produce go to this stock,
the price to that of the workmen, the produce to that of other people
whose subsistence, convenience and amusements are augmented by the
labour of those workmen.’ “ (p 59-60)





“Sismondi’s exposition proves that he was unable to
grasp
the reproductive process as a whole. Quite apart from his unsuccessful
attempt to distinguish between the categories of capital and income
from
the point of view of society his theory of reproduction suffers from
the
fundamental error he took over from Adam Smith: the idea that personal
consumption absorbs the entire annual products without leaving any part
of the value for the renewal of society constant capitals and also,
that
accumulation consists merely of the transformation of capitalised
surplus value into variable capital. Yet, if later critics of Sismondi
e.g., the Russian Marxist
189: V Ilyin
«failed to notice» the real problems with Sismondi
Ilyin,(4) think that pointing out this
fundamental error in the analysis of the aggregate product can justify
a
cavalier dismissal of Sismondi’s entire theory of
accumulation as
inadequate, as ‘nonsense’, they merely demonstrate
their own
obtuseness in respect of Sismondi’s real concern, his
ultimate
problem. The analysis of Marx at a later date, showing up the crude
mistakes of Adam Smith for the first time, is the best proof that the
problem of accumulation is far from solved just by attending to the
equivalent of the constant capital in the aggregate product. This is
proved even more strikingly in the actual development of
Sismondi’s theory: his views involved him in bitter
controversy
with the exponents and popularisers of the classical school, with
Ricardo, Say and MacCulloch. The two parties to the conflict represent
diametrically opposed points of view: Sismondi stands for the sheer
impossibility, the others for the unrestricted possibility, of
accumulation. Sismondi and his opponents alike disregard constant
capital in their exposition of reproduction, and it was Say in
particular who presumed to perpetuate Adam Smith’s confused
concept of the aggregate product as v+s as an unassailable
dogma.”
(pp188-89)
"MacCulloch's whole position in truth stands or falls with the
statement that exchange is actually an interchange of commodities;
every
commodity accordingly represents not only supply but demand. The
dialogue then continues as follows:
"Demand and supply are truly correlative
and
convertible terms. The supply of one set of commodities constitutes the
demand for another. Thus, there is a demand for a given quantity of
agricultural produce, when a quantity of wrought goods equal thereto in
productive cost is offered in exchange for it; and conversely, there is
an effectual demand for this quantity of wrought goods, when the supply
of agricultural produce which it required the same expense to raise, is
presented as its equivalent."
The Ricardian's
193. «dodge»
of the Ricardian


(forgot m: C-M-C)
not the main point
dodge is obvious: he has
chosen to ignore the
circulation of money and to pretend that commodities are immediately
bought and paid for by commodities.
From the conditions of highly developed capitalist production,
we
are thus suddenly taken to a stage of primitive barter such as we might
find still flourishing at present in Central Africa. There is a distant
element of truth in this trick since money, in a simple circulation of
commodities, plays merely the part of an agent. But of course, it is
just the intervention of an agent which separates the two transactions
of circulation, sale and purchase, and makes them independent of one
another in respect of both time and place. That is why a further
purchase need not follow hard upon a sale for one thing; and secondly,
sale and purchase are by no means bound up with the same people: in
fact, they will involve the same performers only in rare and
exceptional
cases. MacCulloch, however, makes just this baseless assumption by
confronting, as buyer and seller, industry on the one hand and
agriculture on the other. The universality of these categories, qua
total categories of exchange, obscures the actual splitting up of this
social division of labour which results in innumerable private exchange
transactions where the sale and purchase of two commodities rarely come
to the same thing. MacCulloch's simplified conception of commodity
exchange in general which immediately turns the commodity, into money
and pretends that, it can be directly exchanged, makes it impossible to
understand the economic significance of money, its historical
appearance." (pp193-4)
"The question had been what happens to the capitalist surplus,
that surplus which is used not for the capitalist's own consumption but
for the expansion of production. MacCulloch solves it on the one hand
by
ignoring the production of surplus value altogether, and on the other,
by using all surplus value in the production of luxury goods. What
buyers, then, does he advance for this new luxury production? The
capitalists, evidently; the farmers and manufacturers, since, apart
from
these, there are only workers in MacCulloch's model. Thus the entire
surplus value is consumed for the personal satisfaction of the
capitalists, that is to say, simple reproduction takes place. The
answer
to the problem of the capitalisation of surplus value is, according to
MacCulloch, either to ignore surplus value altogether, or to assume
simple reproduction instead of accumulation as soon as surplus value
comes into being. He still pretends to speak of expanding reproduction,
but again, as before when he pretended to deal with the surplus', he
uses a trick, viz first setting out an impossible species of capitalist
production without any surplus value, and then persuading the reader
that the subsequent debut of the surplus value constitutes an expansion
of production.
Sismondi is not quite up to these Scottish acrobatics. He had
up
to now succeeded in pinning his Mac down, proving him to be obviously
absurd'. But now he himself becomes confused with regard to the crucial
point at issue. On the above rantings of his opponent, he should have
declared coldly: 197. Sismondi should
have responded to
MacCulloch


Ha!  respected
- rogue...Sir, with all respect for the flexibility of
your
mind,
you are dodging the issue. I keep on asking, who will buy the surplus
product, if the capitalists use it-for the purpose of accumulation;
i.e.
to expand production, instead of squandering it altogether? And you
reply: Oh well, they will expand their production of luxury goods,
which
they will, of course, eat up themselves.' But this is a conjuring
trick,
seeing that the capitalists consume the surplus value in so far as they
spend it on their luxuries-they do not accumulate at, all.. My question
is about the possibility of accumulation, not whether the personal
luxuries of the capitalists are possible. Answer this clearly, if you
can, or else go play with your wine and tobacco, or go to blazes for
all
I care." (pp197-8)
"One of the two champions of the "populist" movement.
Vorontsov,
known in Russia mainly under the nom de plume V. V, (his initials), was
an odd customer. His economics were completely muddled, and as an
expert
on theory he cannot be taken seriously at all. The other, Nikolayon
(Danielson), however, was a man of wide education, and thoroughly
conversant with Marxism. He had edited the Russian translation of the
first volume of Capital and was a personal friend of Marx and Engels,
with both of whom he kept up a lively correspondence (published in the
Russian language in 5908). Nevertheless it was Vorontsov who influenced
public opinion among the Russian intelligentsia in the eighties, and
Marxists in Russia had to fight him above all. As for our problem: the
general prospects of capitalist development, a new generation of
Russian
Marxists, who had learned from the historical experience and knowledge
of Western Europe, joined forces with George Plekhanov in opposition to
the above-mentioned two representatives of scepticism in the nineties.
They were amongst others
275: russian marxists:
Issayev!! Kablukov, Manuilov!!!
ha-ha!
Professor
Kablukov, Professor Manuilov,
Professor Issayev, Professor Skvortsov, Vladimir Ilyin [Lenin], Peter
v.
Struve; Bulgakov, and Professor Tugan Baranovski. In the further course
of our investigation we shall, however, confine ourselves to the last
three of these, since every one of them furnished a more or less
finished critique of this theory on the point with which we are here
concerned. This battle of wits, brilliant in parts, which kept the
socialist intelligentsia spellbound in the nineties and was only
brought
to an end by the walkover of the Marxist school, officially inaugurated
the infiltration into Russian thought of Marxism as an
economic-historical theory. 275:
From
the legal marxists not a single socialist (with
one exception) found themselves in the revolution on the
side of the proletariat'Legalist' Marxism at that time
publicly
took possession of the Universities, the Reviews and the economic book
market in Russia-with all the disadvantages of such a position. Ten
years later, when the revolutionary risings of the proletariat
demonstrated in the streets the darker side of this optimism about
capitalist development, none of this Pleiad of Marxist optimists, with
but a single exception [Lenin], was to be found in the camp of the
proletariat." (p275)
 

287fn2, Fn: V Ilyin shows the
kinship between Nikolayon and Sismondi"Vladimir
Ilyich [Lenin] has given detailed proof of the
striking
similarity between the position of the Russian "populists" and the
views
of Sismondi in his essay On the Characteristics of Economic Romanticism
(1897)." (p287, fn2)
"Bulgakov faithfully reproduces Marx's well-known diagram of
simple reproduction, adding comments which do credit to his insight. He
further cites Marx's equally familiar diagram of enlarged
reproduction-and this indeed is the proof we have been so anxious to
find.
"Consequent upon what we have said, it
will not be
difficult now to determine the very essence of accumulation. The means
of-production department I must produce additional means of production
necessary for enlarging both its own production and that of Department
II. II, in its turn, will have to supply additional consumption goods
to
enlarge the variable capital in both departments. Disregarding the
circulation of money, the expansion of production is reduced to an
exchange of additional products of I needed by II against additional
products of II needed by I.'
Loyally following Marx's deductions, Bulgakov does not notice
that so far his entire thesis is nothing but words. He believes that
these mathematical formulae solve, the problem of accumulation. No
doubt
we can easily imagine proportions such as those he has copied from
Marx,
and f there is expanding production, these formulae will apply. Yet
'Bulgakov overlooks the principal problem: who exactly is to profit by
an expansion such as that whose mechanism ,he examines? Is it explained
just because we can put the mathematical proportions of accumulation on
paper? Hardly, because just as soon as Bulgakov has declared the matter
settled and goes on to introduce: the circulation of money into the
analysis, he right away comes up against the question: where are I and
II to get the money for the purchase of additional products? When we
dealt with Marx,, time and again the weak point in his analysis, the
question really of consumers in enlarged reproduction, cropped up in a
perverted form as the question of additional money sources. Here
Bulgakov quite 299 i.f. Bulgakov slavishly! follows
Marx's schemaslavishly follows Marx's approach,
accepting his
misleading formulation of the problem without noticing that it is not
straightforward, although he knows perfectly well that Marx
himself
did
not answer this question in the drafts which were used to compile the
second volume of Capital." (p299)

"Bulgakov’s arguments about foreign commerce again
imply a
fundamental misconception. Against the sceptics, from Sismondi to
Nikolayon, who believed that they had to take recourse to outside
markets for the realisation of capitalist surplus value, he chiefly
argues as follows:



‘These experts obviously consider external commerce as a
“bottomless pit” to swallow up in all eternity the
surplus
value which cannot be got rid of inside the country.’



Bulgakov for his part triumphantly points out that foreign commerce is
indeed not a pit and certainly not a bottomless one, but rather appears
as a double-edged sword, that exports always belong with imports, and
that the two usually counterbalance one another. Thus, whatever is
pushed out over one border, will be brought back, in a changed
use-form,
over another. ‘We must find room for the commodities that
have
been imported as an equivalent of those exported, within the bounds of
the given market, and as this is impossible, ex hypothesi, it would
only
generate new difficulties to have recourse to an external
demand.’



On another occasion he says that the way to realise the surplus value
found by the Russian ‘populists’, viz. external
markets, is
much less favourable than that discovered by Malthus, v. Kirchmann and
Vorontsov himself when he wrote the essay On Militarism and
Capitalism’." (p309)




"A quite uncompromising version of the same view is given by 309. Fn  «In other
respects» V Ilyin gives a «more correct»
explanation of the foreign market than Struve or Bulgakov
(vague) the
Oracle has spoken!V.
Ilyin
[Lenin]; ‘The romanticists (as he calls the sceptics) argue
as
follows; the capitalists cannot consume the surplus value; therefore
they must dispose of it abroad. I ask; Do the capitalists perhaps give
away their products to foreigners for nothing, throw it into the sea,
maybe? If they sell it, it means that they obtain an equivalent. If
they
export certain goods, it means that they import others’
(Economic
Studies and Essays, p. 2). As a matter of fact, his explanation of the
part played by external commerce in capitalist production is far more
correct than that of Struve and Bulgakov." (p309, n2)




" We have seen above the decisive part played by the fundamental law of
capital in the controversy between the Russian Marxists and the
sceptics. Bulgakov’s remarks we already know; another Marxist
already referred to, Vladimir
Ilyin, expresses himself in similar terms
in his polemics against the populists:

317. Quote from Ilyin


about c/v NB
‘It is well known that the law of capitalist production
consists
in the fact that the constant capital grows more rapidly than the
variable capital, that is to say an ever increasing part of the newly
formed capital falls to the department of social production which
creates producer goods. In consequence, this department is absolutely
bound to grow more rapidly than the department creating consumer goods,
that is to say, the very thing happens which Sismondi declared to be
“impossible”, “dangerous”, etc.
In consequence,
consumer goods make up a smaller and smaller share of the total bulk of
capitalist production, and this is entirely in accordance with the
historical “mission” of capitalism and its specific
social
structure: the former in fact consists in the development of the
productive forces of society (production as an end in itself), and the
latter prevents that the mass of the population should turn them to
use.’" (p317)




" The opinion, that producer goods can be produced independent of
consumption, is of course a mirage of Tugan-Baranovski’s,
typical
of vulgar economics. Not so the fact cited in support of this fallacy:
the quicker growth of Department I as compared with Department II is
beyond dispute, not only in old industrial countries but wherever
technical progress plays a decisive part in production. It is the
foundation also of Marx’s fundamental law that the rate of
profit
tends to fall. Yet in spite of it all, or rather precisely for this
reason, it is a 320. Huge error of Bulgakov, Tugan-Baranovsky


and Ilyin
(NB)howler if Bulgakov, Ilyin and Tugan-Baranovski imagine
to have discovered in this law the essential nature of capitalist
economy as an economic system in which production is an end in itself
and human consumption merely incidental.


321 i.f. «only the
capitalist
expression»


The growth of the constant at the expense of the variable capital is
only the capitalist expression of the
general effects of increasing
labour productivity. The formula c greater than v (c > v),
translated
from the language
of capitalism into that of the social labour process,321. What nonsense!!
means only that the higher the productivity of human labour, the
shorter
the time needed to change a given quantity of means of production into
finished products.(4)



This is a 322: universal law for all social formationsuniversal
law of human labour. It has been valid in all
pre-capitalist forms of production and will also be valid in the future
in a socialist order of society. In terms of the material use-form of
society’s aggregate product, this law must manifest itself by
more
and more social labour time being employed in the manufacture of 322  greater application of
labour time to means of
production than means of consumption (a mess)producer
than of consumer goods. In a planned and controlled social
economy, organised on socialist lines, this transformation would in
fact
be more rapid even than it is in contemporary capitalist economy. In
the
first place, rational scientific techniques can only be applied on the
largest scale when the barriers of private ownership in land are
abolished. This will result in an immense revolution in vast provinces
of production which will ultimately amount to a replacement of living
labour by machine labour, and which will enable us to tackle technical
jobs on a scale quite impossible under present day conditions.
Secondly,
the general use of machinery in the productive process will be put on a
new economic basis. At present the machine does not compete with living
labour but only with that part of it that is paid. The cost of the
labour power which is replaced by the machine represents the lowest
limit of the applicability of the machine. Which means that the
capitalist becomes interested in a machine only when the costs of its
production—assuming the same level of
performance—amount to
less than the wages of the workers it replaces. From the point of view
of the social labour process which is the only one to matter in a
socialist society, the machine competes not with the labour that is
necessary to maintain the worker but with the labour he actually
performs. In other words, in a society that is not governed by the
profit motive but aims at saving human labour, the use of machinery is
economic-aims indicated just as soon as it can save more human labour
than is necessary for making it, not to mention the many cases where
the
use of machinery is desirable even if it does not answer this economic
minimum—for reasons of health and similar considerations, in
the
interest of the workers themselves. However that may be, the tension
between the respective economic usefulness of the machine in (a) a
capitalist, and (b) a socialist society is at least equal to the
difference between labour and that part of it that is paid; it is, in
other words, the precise equivalent of the whole capitalist surplus
value. Consequently, if the capitalist profit motive is abolished and a
social organisation of labour introduced, the marginal use of the
machine will suddenly be increased by the whole extent of the
capitalist
surplus value, so that an enormous field, not to be gauged as yet, will
be open to the triumphal march of the machine. This would be tangible
proof that the capitalist mode of production, alleged to spur on to the
optimum technical development, in fact sets large social limits to
technical progress, in form of the profit motive on which it is based.
It would show that as soon as these limits are abolished, technical
progress will develop such a powerful drive that the technical marvels
of capitalist production will be child’s play in comparison.



In terms of the composition of the social product, this technical
transformation can only mean that, compared to the production of
consumer goods, the323. Under
socialism means of production
:
means of
consumption grows even more rapidly (must)
production of
producer goods measured in units of
labour time - must increase more rapidly in a socialist society
than
it does even to-day. Thus the relation between the two departments of
social production which the Russian Marxists took to reveal typical
capitalist baseness, the neglect of man’s need to consume,
rather
proves to be the precise manifestation of the progressive subjection of
nature to social labour, which will become even more striking when
production is organised solely with a view to human needs. The only
objective proof for Tugan-Baranovski’s ‘fundamental
law’ thus collapses as a ‘fundamental’
confusion. His
whole construction, including his ‘new theory of
crises’,
together with the ‘lack of proportion’, is reduced
to its
foundations on paper: a slavish copy of Marx’s diagram of
enlarged
reproduction. " (p320-323)


III Section


329. At the root of
mistakes!
In the first section, we ascertained that Marx's diagram of
accumulation
does not solve the question of who is to benefit in the end by enlarged
reproduction. If we take the diagram literally as it is set out at the
end of volume 2, it appears that capitalist production would itself
realise its entire surplus value, and that it would use the capitalised
surplus value exclusively for its own needs. This impression is
confirmed by Marx's analysis of the diagram where he attempts to reduce
the circulation within the diagram altogether to terms of money, that
is
to say to the effective demand of capitalists and workers-an attempt
which in the end leads him to introduce the producer of money' as a
deus
ex machina.” (p329)




“The following conditions of accumulation are here laid down:
(1)
The surplus value to be capitalised first comes into being in the
natural form of capital (as additional means of production and
additional means of subsistence for the workers). (2) The expansion of
capitalist production is achieved exclusively by means of capitalist
products, i.e. its own means of production and subsistence. (3) The
limits of this expansion are each- time determined in advance by the
amount of surplus value which is to be capitalised in any given case;
they cannot be extended, since they depend on the amount of the means
of
production and subsistence which make up the surplus product; neither
can they be reduced, since a part of the surplus value could not then
be
employed in its natural form. Deviations in either direction (above and
below) may give rise to periodical fluctuations and crises-in this
context, however, these may be ignored, because in general the surplus
product to be capitalised must be equal to actual accumulation; 330. §4 NB against
R.Luxemburg(4)
Since capitalist production buys up its entire surplus product, there
is
no limit to the accumulation of capital.” (p330)


330-1. An assortment of quotes from
Marx against R.Luxemburg
“Considered in isolation, Marx's diagram does indeed permit
of
such
an interpretation since he himself explicitly states time and again
that
he aims at presenting the process of accumulation of the aggregate
capital in a society consisting solely of capitalists and workers.
Passages to this effect can be found in every volume of Capital. 


In volume 1, in the very chapter on 'The Conversion of Surplus-Value
into Capital', he says: 


"In order to examine the object of our investigation in its integrity,
free from all disturbing subsidiary circumstances, we must treat the
whole world as one nation, and assume that capitalist production is
everywhere established and has possessed itself of every branch of
industry." 


In volume 2, the assumption repeatedly returns; thus in chapter 17 on
'The Circulation of Surplus-Value': 'Now, there are only two points of
departure: The capitalist and the labourer. All third classes of
persons
must either receive money for their services from these two classes,
or,
to the extent that they receive it without any equivalent services,
they
are joint owners of the surplus-value in the form of rent, interest,
etc.... The capitalist class, then, remains the sole point of departure
of the circulation of money.'? 


Further, in the same chapter 'On the Circulation of Money in Particular
under Assumption of Accumulation': 'But the difficulty arises when we
assume, not a partial, but a general accumulation of money-capital on
the part of the capitalist class. Apart from this class, there is,
according to our assumption the general and exclusive domination of
capitalist production -no other class but the working class.'3 


And again in chapter 20: ". . . there are only two classes in this
case,
the working class disposing of their labour-power, and the capitalist
class owning the social means of production and the money." 


In volume 3, Marx says quite explicitly, when demonstrating the process
of capitalist production as a whole: 'Let us suppose that the whole
society is composed only of industrial capitalists and wage workers.
Let
us furthermore make exceptions of fluctuations of prices which prevent
large portions of the total capital from reproducing themselves under
average conditions and which, owing to the general interrelations of
the
entire process of reproduction, such as are developed particularly by
credit, must always call forth general stoppages of a transient nature.
Let us also make abstraction of the bogus transactions and
speculations,
which the credit system favours. In that case, a crisis could be
explained only by a disproportion of production in various branches,
and
by a disproportion of the consumption of the capitalists and the
accumulation of their capitals. But as matters stand, the reproduction
of the capitals invested in production depends largely upon the
consuming power of the non producing classes; while the consuming power
of the labourers is handicapped partly by the laws of wages, partly by
the fact that it can be exerted only so long as the labourers can be
employed at a profit for the capitalist class.'(2) 


This last quotation refers to the question of crises with which we are
not here concerned. It can leave no doubt, however, that the movement
of
the total capital, as matters stand'; depends in Marx's view on three
categories of consumers only the capitalists, the workers and the
non-productive classes', i.e. the hangers-on of the capitalist class
(king, parson, professor,. prostitute, mercenary), of whom he quite
rightly disposes in volume 2 as the mere representatives of a
derivative
purchasing power, and thus the parasitic joint consumers of the surplus
value or of the wage of labour. 


Finally, in: Theories of Surplus Value,(3) Marx formulates his general
presuppositions with regard to accumulation as follows: 'Here we have
only to consider the forms through which capital passes during the
various stages of its development. Thus we do not set out the actual
conditions of the real process of production, but always assume that
the
commodity is sold for what it is worth. We ignore the competition of
capitalists and the credit system; we also leave out of account the
actual constitution of society which never consists exclusively of the
classes of workers and industrial capitalists, and where there is
accordingly no strict division between producers and consumers. The
first category (of consumers, whose revenues are partly of a secondary,
not a primitive nature, derived from profits and the wage of labour) is
much wider than the second category (of producers). Therefore the
manner
in which it spends its income, and the extent of such income, effects
very large modifications in the economic household, and especially so
in
the process of circulation and reproduction of capital.' 


Speaking of the 'actual constitution of society', Marx here also
considers merely the parasitic joint consumers of surplus value and of
the wage of labour, i.e. only the hangers-on of the principal
categories
of capitalist production. 


There can be no doubt, therefore, that Marx wanted to demonstrate the
process of accumulation in a society consisting exclusively of workers
and capitalists, under the universal and exclusive domination of the
capitalist mode of production. On this assumption, however, his diagram
does not permit of any other interpretation than that of production for
production's sake.”  (pp330-333)




“In accordance with Marx's assumption in volume I of Capital,
the
capitalised part of the surplus value first comes into being as
additional means of production and as means of subsistence for the
workers, both serving the purpose of an ever expanding production in
the
two departments. 334.
«cannot
be discovered»
in Marx «for whom»It
cannot be discovered from the assumptions of Marx's
diagram for whose sake production is progressively expanded.”
(p334)




“Who, then, realises the permanently increasing surplus
value? The
diagram answers: the capitalists themselves and they alone. And what do
they do with this increasing surplus value? -The diagram replies: They
use it for an ever greater expansion of their production. These
capitalists are thus fanatical supporters of an expansion of production
for production's sake. They see to it that ever more machines are built
for the sake of building-with their help-ever more new machines. Yet
the
upshot of all this is not accumulation of capital but an increasing
production of producer goods to no purpose whatever. Indeed, one must
be
as reckless as Tugan-Baranovski, and rejoice as much in paradoxical
statements, to assume that this untiring merry-go-round in thin air
could be a faithful reflection in theory of capitalist reality, a true
deduction from Marx's doctrine.'(4) 


Besides the analysis of enlarged reproduction roughed out in Capital,
volume 2, the whole of Marx's work, volume 2 in particular, contains a
most elaborate and lucid exposition of his general views regarding the
typical course of capitalist accumulation. If we once fully understand
this interpretation, the deficiencies of the diagram at the end of
volume 2 are immediately evident. 
335: «schema contradict
Marx's
theory» fanatic etc. (source) mere verbiageIf we
examine critically the diagram of enlarged reproduction in the
light of Marx's theory, we find various contradictions between the
two.” (pp334-335) 




“On the basis of what is actually happening, namely a greater
yearly increase of constant capital as against that of variable
capital,, as well as a growing rate of surplus value, discrepancies
must
arise between the material' composition of the social product and the
composition of capital in terms of value. If, instead of the unchanging
proportion of 5 to 1 between constant and variable capital, proposed by
Marx's diagram, we assume for instance that this increase of capital is
accompanied by a progressive readjustment of its coin- position, the
proportion between constant and variable in the second year being 6 to
1, in the third year 7 to 1, and in the fourth year 8 to 1 - if we
further assume that the rate of surplus value also increases
progressively in accordance with the higher productivity of labour so
that, in each case, we have the same amounts as those of the diagram,
although, because of the relatively decreasing variable capital, the
rate of surplus value does not remain constant at the original 100 per
cent-and if finally we assume that one-half of the appropriated surplus
value is capitalised in each case (excepting Department II where
capitalisation exceeds 50 per cent, 184 out of 285 being capitalised
during the first year), the result will be as follows: 



1st year:


I.    5,000c + 1,000v + 1,000s = 7,000 means
of
production


II.    1,430c + 285v + 285s = 2,000 means of
subsistence



2nd year:


I.    5,428 4/7c + 1,071 3/7v + 1,083s =
7,583 means of
production


II.    1,587 5/4c + 311 2/7v + 316s = 2,215
means of
subsistence



3rd year:


I.    5,903c + 1,139v + 1,173s = 8,215 means
of
production


II.    1,726c + 331v + 342s = 2,399 means of
subsistence



4th year:


I.    6,424c + 1,295v + 1,271s = 8,900
means of
production


II.   1,879c + 350v + 371s = 2,600 means
of
subsistence





If this were a true picture of the accumulative process, the means of
production (constant capital) would show 337
i.f.
example «does not tally»a deficit of
16 in the second
year, of 45 in the third year and of 88 in the fourth year; similarly,
the means of subsistence would show a surplus of 16 in the second year,
of 45 in the third year and of 88 in the fourth year. ”
(pp336-337) 




“We may put our point in yet another way: it is clear that a
quicker growth of constant as compared with variable capital, i.e. the
progressive metamorphosis of the organic composition of capital, must
take the material form of faster expansion of production in Department
I
as against production in Department II. 340.
in
f. in Marx «directly excludes»  > increase  of
I over IIYet Marx's diagram, where strict
conformity of the two departments is axiomatic, precludes any such
fluctuations in the rate of accumulation in either department. It is
quite -legitimate to- -suppose -that — under- -the- technical
conditions' of progressive accumulation, society would invest ever
increasing portions of the surplus value earmarked for accumulation in
Department I rather than in Department II. Both departments being only
branches of the same social production-supplementary enterprises, if
you
like, of the aggregate capitalist', such a progressive transfer, for
technical reasons, from one department to the other of a part of the
accumulated surplus value would be wholly feasible, especially as it
corresponds to the actual practice of capital. Yet this assumption is
possible only so long as we envisage the surplus value earmarked for
capitalisation purely in terms of value. The diagram, however, implies
that this part of the surplus value appears in a definite material form
which prescribes its capitalisation. Thus the surplus value of
Department II exists as means of subsistence, and since it is as such
to
be only realised by Department I, this intended, transfer of part of
the
capitalised surplus value from Department II to Department I is ruled
out, first because the material form of this surplus value is obviously
useless to Department I, and secondly because of the relations of
exchange between the two departments which would in turn necessitate an
equivalent transfer of the products of Department I into Department II.
341. [> growth I over II.]
«downright impossible» ???It is
therefore downright impossible to achieve a faster expansion of
Department I as against Department II within the limits of Marx's
diagram. 


However we may regard the technological alterations of the mode of
production in the course of accumulation, they cannot be accomplished
without upsetting the fundamental relations of Marx's diagram.
”
(pp340-341)





“In one passage of his Theories,(6) Marx explains in so many
words
that he is not at all concerned in this connection with an accumulation
of capital greater than can be used in the productive process and might
lie idle in the banks in monetary form, with the consequence of lending
abroad'. Marx refers these phenomena to the section on competition. Yet
it is important to establish that his diagram veritably precludes the
formation of such additional capital. Competition, however wide we may
make the concept, obviously cannot create values, nor can it create
capitals which are not themselves the result of the reproductive
process. 
342. Schema excludes expansion by
leaps
and bounds !??The diagram thus precludes the expansion of
production by leaps and
bounds. It only allows of a gradual expansion which keeps strictly in
step with the formation of the surplus value and is based upon the
identity between realisation and capitalisation of the surplus value.
” (p342) 

[343]. contradicts book
III!!!Finally,
the diagram contradicts the conception of the
capitalist total process and its course as laid down by Marx in
Capital, volume iii. This conception is based on
the inherent
contradiction between the unlimited expansive capacity of the
productive forces and the limited expansive capacity of social
consumption under conditions of capitalist distribution. Let us see how
Marx describes this contradiction in detail in chapter 15 on
‘Unravelling the Internal Contradictions of the
Law’ (of the declining
profit rate):

343-5. Quote from III,1,p224 = Development of Capitalism
p57.
 ‘The creation of
surplus-value, assuming
the necessary means of production, or sufficient accumulation of
capital, to be existing, finds no other limit but the labouring
population, when the rate of surplus-value, that is, the intensity of
exploitation, is given; and no other limit but the intensity of
exploitation, when the labouring population is given. And the
capitalist process of production consists essentially of the production
of surplus-value, materialised in the surplus-product, which is that
aliquot portion of the produced commodities, in which unpaid labour is
materialised. It must never be forgotten, that the production of this
surplus-value—and the re-conversion of a portion of it into
capital, or
accumulation, forms an indispensable part of this production of
surplus-value—is the immediate purpose and the compelling
motive of
capitalist production. It will not do to represent capitalist
production as something which it is not, that is to say, as a
production having for its immediate purpose the consumption of goods,
or the production of means of enjoyment for the capitalists. (And, of
course, even less for the worker. R. L.) This would be overlooking the
specific character of capitalist production, which reveals itself in
its innermost essence. The creation of this surplus-value is the object
of the direct process of production, and this process has no other
limits than those mentioned above. As soon as the available quantity of
surplus-value has been materialised in commodities, surplus value has
been produced. But this production of surplus-value is but the first
act of the capitalist process of production, it merely terminates the
act of direct production. Capital has absorbed so much unpaid labour.
With the development of the process, which expresses itself through a
falling tendency of the rate of profit, the mass of surplus-value thus
produced is swelled to immense dimensions. Now comes the second act of
the process. The entire mass of commodities, the total product, which
contains a portion which is to reproduce the constant and variable
capital as well as a portion representing surplus-value, must be sold.
If this is not done, or only partly accomplished, or only at prices
which are below the prices of production, the labourer has been none
the less exploited, but his exploitation does not realise as much for
the capitalist. It may yield no surplus-value at all for him, or only
realise a portion of the
produced surplus-value, or it may even mean a partial or complete loss
of his capital. The conditions of direct exploitation and those of the
realisation of surplus-value are not identical. They are separated
logically as well as by time and space. The first are only limited by
the productive power of society, the last by the proportional relations
of the various lines of production and by the consuming power of
society. This last-named power is not determined either by the
absolute productive power or by the absolute consuming power, but by
the consuming power based on antagonistic conditions of distribution,
which reduces the consumption of the great mass of the population to a
variable minimum within more or less narrow limits. The consuming power
is furthermore restricted by the tendency to accumulate, the greed for
an expansion of capital and a production of surplus value on an
enlarged scale. This is a law of capitalist production imposed by
incessant revolutions in the methods of production themselves, the
resulting depreciation of existing capital, the general competitive
struggle and the necessity of improving the product and expanding the
scale of production, for the sake of self-preservation and on penalty
of failure. The market must, therefore, be continually extended, so
that its interrelations and the conditions regulating them assume more
and more the form of a natural law independent of the producers and
become ever more uncontrollable. This eternal contradiction seeks to
balance itself by an expansion of the outlying fields of production.
But to the extent that the productive power develops, it finds itself
at variance with the narrow basis on which the conditions of
consumption rest. On this self-contradictory basis it is no
contradiction at all that there should be an excess of capital
simultaneously with an excess of population. For while a combination of
these two would indeed increase the mass of the produced surplus-value,
it would at the same time intensify the contradiction between the
conditions under which this surplus-value is produced and those under
which it is realised.’

(pp343-5)



“In
yet another passage, Marx clearly shows that
Tugan-Baranovski's notion of production for production's sake is wholly
alien to him: 346. Quote from
III,1,p289
= Development of
Capitalism, top
p55.
'Besides, we have seen in volume 2 part iii that a
continuous circulation takes place between constant capital and
constant
capital (even without considering any accelerated accumulation), which
is in so far independent of individual consumption, as it never enters
into such consumption, but which is nevertheless definitely limited by
it because the production of constant capital never takes place for its
own sake, but solely because more of this capital is needed in those
spheres of production whose products pass into individual consumption.
'” (p346) 




“Now, however, the question arises whether the assumptions
which
were decisive in the case of individual capital, are also legitimate
for
the consideration of aggregate capital. 


'We must now put the problem in this form: given universal
accumulation,
that is to say provided that in all branches of production there is
greater or less accumulation of capital-which in fact is a condition of
capitalist production, and which is just as natural to the capitalist
qua capitalist as it is natural to the miser to amass money (but which
is also necessary for the perpetuation of capitalist production)-what
are the conditions of this universal accumulation, to what elements can
it be reduced?' 


And the answer: 'The conditions for the accumulation of capital are
precisely those which rule its original production and reproduction in
general: these conditions being that one part of the money buys labour
and the other commodities (raw materials, machinery, etc.) ...
Accumulation of new capital can only proceed therefore under the same
conditions under which already existing capital is reproduced."(2) 


In real life the actual conditions for the accumulation of the
aggregate
capital are quite different from those prevailing for individual
capitals and for simple reproduction. The problem amounts to this: If
an
increasing part of the surplus value is not consumed by the capitalists
but employed in the expansion of production, what, then, are the forms
of social reproduction? What is left of the social-product after
deductions for the replacement of the constant capital cannot, ex
hypothesis, be absorbed by the consumption of the workers and
capitalists-this being the main aspect of the problem-nor can the
workers and capitalists themselves realise the aggregate product. They
can always only realise the variable capital, that part of the constant
capital which will be used up, and the part of the surplus value which
will be consumed, but in this way they merely ensure that production
can
be renewed on its previous scale.350:
against Marx
N.B. particularly i.f.
The workers and capitalists
themselves
cannot possibly realise that part of the -surplus value-which is to be
capitalised. Therefore, the realisation of the surplus value for the
purposes of accumulation is an 350
NB
«impossible task»impossible task for a
society which
consists solely of workers and capitalists.” (pp349-50) 




“The salient feature of the problem of accumulation, and the
vulnerable point of earlier attempts to solve it, has only been shown
up
by Marx's more profound analysis, his precise diagrammatic
demonstration
of the total reproductive process, and especially his inspired
exposition of the problem of simple reproduction. Yet he could not
supply immediately a finished solution either, partly because he broke
off his analysis almost as soon as he had begun it, and partly because
he was then preoccupied, as we have shown, with denouncing the analysis
of Adam Smith and thus rather lost sight of the main problem. In fact,
he made the solution even more difficult by assuming the capitalist
mode
of production to prevail universally. Nevertheless, a solution of the
problem of accumulation, in harmony both with other parts of Marx's
doctrine and with the historical experience and daily practice of
capitalism, is implied in Marx's complete analysis of simple
reproduction and his characterisation of the capitalist process as a
whole which shows up its immanent contradictions and their development
(in Capital, Vol. 3). In the light of this, the deficiencies of the
diagram can be 351:
«corrected»!!corrected.
All the relations being, as it were,
incomplete, a closer study of the diagram of enlarged reproduction will
reveal that it points to some sort of organisation more advanced than
purely capitalist production and accumulation.” (pp351) 




“Realisation of the surplus value is doubtless a vital
question of
capitalist accumulation. It requires as its prime condition ignoring,
for simplicity's sake, the capitalists' fund of consumption
altogether-that there should be strata of buyers outside capitalist
society. Buyers, it should be noted, not consumers, since the material
form of the surplus value is quite irrelevant to its realisation. The
decisive fact is that the surplus value cannot be [351-2] consumed by neither
capitalists nor
workers, non-capitalist producersrealised by sale
either to workers or to capitalists, but only if it is sold to such
social organisations or strata whose own mode of production is not
capitalistic. Here we can conceive of two different cases: 


(1) Capitalist production supplies consumer goods over and above its
own
requirements, the demand of its workers and capitalists, which are
bought by non-capitalist strata and countries. The English cotton
industry, for instance, during the first two-thirds of the nineteenth
century, and to some extent even now, has been supplying cotton
textiles
to the peasants and petty-bourgeois townspeople of the European
continent, and to the peasants of India, America, Africa and so on. The
enormous expansion of the English cotton industry was thus founded on
consumption by non-capitalist strata and countries.(3) ”
(pp351-2)





“As we have seen, this conception, which is based upon the
self-sufficiency and isolation of capitalist production, falls down as
soon as we consider the realisation of the 354
Surplus
value to non-capitalist producers 


=  V. 
V.!  ..surplus
value. If we assume,
however, that the surplus value is realised outside the sphere, of
capitalist production, then its material form is independent of the
requirements of capitalist production itself. Its material form
conforms
to the requirements of those non-capitalist circles who help to realise
it, that is to say, capitalist surplus value can take the form of
consumer goods, e.g. cotton fabrics, or of means of production, e.g.
materials for railway construction,, as the case may be.”
(pp354)





“In addition, there is no obvious reason why means of
production
and consumer goods should be produced by 357:
not
only capitalist!!!capitalist methods alone. This
assumption, for all Marx used it as the corner-stone of his thesis, is
in conformity neither with the daily practice, and the history, of
capital, nor with the specific character of this mode of
production.” (pp357) 


358. «Capitalist mode of
production» limited mainly to «industrial activity»


Ha-ha!!
“In general, capitalist production has hitherto been confined
mainly to the countries in the temperate zone, whilst it made
comparatively little progress in the East, for instance, and the
South.” (pp358) 



“It must be noted that, when we assumed above that only the
surplus product of the first or the second department is realized in a
non-capitalist milieu, we were taking the most favourable case for
examining Marx’s schemes, a case which shows the conditions
of
reproduction in its purity. In reality, nothing forces us to assume
that
there is not a fraction of the constant and variable capital which is
also realized out of the capitalist realm. Accordingly, the expansion
of
production as well as the replacement in kind of the materials consumed
in production may be undertaken by means of products from the
non-capitalist sphere. What should be clear from the above-mentioned
examples is the [359***].
Impossibility
of capitalist realisation of surplus-value!!fact
that, at least, it is impossible that the
capitalized surplus value and the corresponding part of the capitalist
output can be realized within the capitalist realm; this part must be
sold out of the capitalist sphere, in social strata and forms which do
not produce in capitalist way.” [translated by Alejandro
Ramos-Martinez]




“In his analysis of the accumulation of individual capital,
Marx
gives the following answer: 'Now in order to allow of these elements
actually functioning as capital, the capitalist class requires
additional labour. If the exploitation of the labourers already
employed
does not increase, either extensively or intensively, then additional
labour-power must be found. For this the mechanism of capitalist
production provides beforehand, by converting the working class into a
class dependent on wages, a class whose ordinary wages suffice, not
only
for its maintenance, but for its increase. It is only necessary for
capital to incorporate this additional labour-power, annually supplied
by the working class in the shape of labourers of all ages, with the
surplus means of production comprised in the annual produce, and the
conversion of surplus-value into capital is complete."(7)



Thus the increase in the variable capital is directly and exclusively
attributed to the natural physical increase of a working class already
dominated by capital. This is in strict conformity with the diagram of
enlarged reproduction which recognises only the social classes of
capitalists and workers, and regards the capitalist mode of production
as exclusive and absolute. On these assumptions, the natural increase
of
the working class is the only source of extending the labour supply
commanded by capital. 361.
Growth through increase in population «contradicts the law of
accumulation»
This
view, however, is contrary to the laws
governing the process of accumulation. The natural propagation of the
workers and the requirements of accumulating capital are not
correlative
in respect of time or quantity. Marx himself has most brilliantly shown
that natural propagation cannot keep up with the sudden expansive needs
of capital. If natural propagation were the only foundation for the
development of capital, accumulation, in its periodical swings from
overstrain to exhaustion, could not continue, nor could the productive
sphere expand by leaps and bounds, and accumulation itself would become
impossible. The latter requires an unlimited freedom of movement in
respect of the growth of variable capital equal to that which it enjoys
with regard to the elements of constant capital-that is to say it must
needs dispose over the supply of labour power without restriction. Marx
considers that this can be achieved by an industrial reserve army of
workers'. His diagram of simple reproduction admittedly does not
recognise such an army, nor could it have room for it, since the
natural
propagation of the capitalist wage proletariat cannot provide an
industrial reserve army. Labour for this army is recruited from social
reservoirs outside the dominion of capital -it is drawn into the wage
proletariat only if need arises. Only the existence of non-capitalist
groups and countries can guarantee such a supply of additional labour
power for capitalist production. Yet in his analysis of the industrial
reserve Marx only allows for (a) the displacement of older workers by
machinery, (b) an influx of rural workers into the towns in consequence
of the ascendancy of capitalist production in agriculture, (c)
occasional labour that has dropped out of industry, and (d) finally the
lowest residue of relative over-population, the paupers. All these
categories are cast off by the capitalist system of production in some
form or other, they constitute a wage proletariat that is worn out and
made redundant one way or another. Marx, obviously influenced by
English
conditions involving a high level of capitalist development, held that
the rural workers who continually migrate to the towns belong to the
wage proletariat, since they were formerly dominated by agricultural
capital and now become subject to industrial capital. He ignores,
however, the problem which is of paramount importance for conditions on
the continent of Europe, -namely the sources from which this urban and
rural proletariat is recruited: the continual process by which the
rural
and urban middle strata become proletarian with the decay of peasant
economy and of small artisan enterprises, the very process, that is to
say, 362: What
a mess!!!of
incessant transition from non-capitalist to capitalist
conditions of a labour power that is cast off by pre-capitalist, not
capitalist, modes of production in their progressive breakdown and
disintegration. Besides the decay of European peasants and artisans we
must here also mention the disintegration of the most varied primitive
forms of production and of social organisation in non-European
countries.” (pp360-362) 




“The interrelations of accumulating capital and
non-capitalist
forms of production extend over values as well as over material
conditions, for constant capital, variable capital and surplus value
alike. The non-capitalist mode of production is the given historical
setting for this process. Since
the accumulation of capital becomes
365:
Root of errors ... «inconceivable» NB
impossible in all points without non-capitalist
surroundings, we cannot
gain a true picture of it by assuming the exclusive and absolute
domination of the capitalist mode of production. Sismondi
and his
school, [365] Sismondi's correct
instinct
when they attributed their difficulties entirely to the problem
of realising the surplus value, indeed revealed a proper sense for the
conditions vital to accumulation. Yet the conditions for augmenting the
material elements of constant and variable capital are quite a
different
matter from those which govern the realisation of surplus value.
Capital
needs the means of production and the labour power of the whole globe
for untrammelled accumulation; it cannot manage without the natural
resources and the labour power of all territories. Seeing that the
overwhelming majority of resources and labour power is in fact still in
the orbit of precapitalist production-this being the historical milieu
of accumulation-capital must go all out to obtain ascendancy over these
territories and social organizations. There is no a priori reason why
rubber plantations, say, run on capitalist lines, such as have been
laid
out in India, might not serve the ends of capitalist production just as
well. Yet if the countries of those branches of production are
predominantly non-capitalist, capital will endeavour to establish
domination over these countries and societies. And in fact, primitive
conditions allow of a greater drive and of far more ruthless measures
than could be tolerated under purely capitalist social conditions.



It is quite different with the realisation of the surplus value. Here
outside consumers qua other-than-capitalist are really essential. Thus
the immediate and vital conditions for capital and its accumulation is
the existence of non-capitalist buyers of the surplus value, which is
decisive to this extent for the problem of capitalist accumulation.



Whatever the theoretical aspects, the accumulation of capital as an
historical process, depends in every respect upon non-capitalist social
strata and forms of social organisation.

366: solution to the problem between
both extremes
The solution to this problem which for almost a century has been the
bone of contention in economic theory thus lies between the two
extremes
of the petty-bourgeois scepticism preached by Sismondi, v.. Kirchmann,
Vorontsov and Nikolayon, who flatly denied accumulation, and the crude
optimism advocated by Ricardo, Say and Tugan-Baranovski who believed in
capital's unlimited capacity . for parthenogenesis, with the logical
corollary of capitalism-in-perpetuity. The solution envisaged by Marx
lies in the dialectical conflict that capitalism needs non-capitalist
social organisations as the setting for its development, that it
proceeds by assimilating the very conditions which alone can ensure its
own existence.



At this point we should revise the conceptions of internal and external
markets which were so important in the controversy about accumulation.
They are both vital to capitalist development and yet fundamentally
different, though they must, be conceived in terms of social economy
rather than of political geography. In this light, the internal market
is the capitalist market, production itself buying its own products and
supplying its own elements of production. 366
external market = non-capitalist social environment!!!The
external market is the
non-capitalist social environment which absorbs the products of
capitalism and supplies producer goods and labour power for capitalist
production. Thus, from the point of view of economics, Germany and
England traffic in commodities chiefly on' an internal, capitalist
market, whilst the give and take between German industry and German
peasants is transacted on an external market as far as German capital
is
concerned.” (pp365-366) 




“The existence and development of capitalism requires an
environment of non-capitalist forms of production, but not every one of
these forms will serve its ends. 368:
Market for surplus-value in non-capitalist environment
 rubbish 
 Capitalism needs non-capitalist social strata as a market
for its surplus value, as a source of supply for its means of
production and as a reservoir of labour power for its wage
system.” (pp368) 




“The method of violence,
then, is the immediate consequence of the clash between capitalism and
the organisations of a natural economy which would restrict
accumulation. Their means of production and their labour power no less
than their demand for idem
371 («surplus product»)surplus
products is
necessary
to capitalism.” (pp371) 





Amusing! «Chapter 28 Introduction of Commodity
Economy»


In the
beginning: «realizing» surplus-value (s.359, 2nd
paragraph of chapter), -
and account of forced introduction of opium to
China!!! Account very
very interesting, detailed. How many junks sunk 7.IX.1839 etc.!! What
erudition!
Chapter 29 Opium in China  Quotes from Nikolayon -
concerns «bonanza farms» etc - boers, torturers
of negroes in South
Africa and so on. Sensational, flashy, empty.




“The general result of the struggle between
capitalism and
simple
commodity production is this after, substituting commodity economy for
natural economy, capital takes the place of simple commodity economy.
Non-capitalist organisations provide a fertile soil for capitalism;
more
strictly: capital feeds on the ruins of such organisations, and,
although this non-capitalist milieu is indispensable for accumulation,
the latter proceeds, at the cost of this medium nevertheless, by eating
it up. Historically, the accumulation of capital is a kind of
metabolism
between capitalist economy and those pre-capitalist methods of
production without which it cannot go on and which, in this light, it
corrodes and assimilates. Thus capital cannot accumulate without the
aid
of non-capitalist organisations, nor, on the other hand, can it
tolerate
their continued existence side by side with itself. Only the continuous
and progressive disintegration of non-capitalist organisations makes
accumulation of capital possible.



The premises which are postulated in Marx's diagram of accumulation
accordingly represent no more than the historical tendency of the
movement of accumulation and its logical conclusion. The accumulative
process endeavours everywhere to substitute simple commodity economy
for
natural economy. Its ultimate aim, that is to say, is to establish the
exclusive and universal domination of capitalist production in all
countries and for all branches of industry.



Yet this argument does not lead anywhere. As soon as this final result
is achieved-in theory, of course, because it can never actually
happen-accumulation must come to a stop. The realisation and
capitalisation of surplus value become impossible to accomplish. Just
as
soon as reality begins to correspond to Marx's diagram of enlarged
reproduction, the end of accumulation is in sight, it has reached its
limits, and capitalist production is in extremis. For capital, the
standstill of accumulation means that the development of the productive
forces is arrested, and the collapse of capitalism follows inevitably,
as an objective historical necessity. This is the reason for the
contradictory behaviour of capitalism in the final stage of its
historical career: imperialism.



Marx's diagram
of enlarged reproduction thus does not conform to the
conditions of an accumulation in actual progress. Progressive
accumulation cannot be reduced to static interrelations and
interdependence between the two great departments of social production
(the departments of producer and consumer goods), as the diagram would
have it. Accumulation is more than an internal relationship between the
branches of capitalist economy; it is primarily a relationship between
capital and a non-capitalist environment, where the two great
departments of production sometimes perform the accumulative process on
their own, independently of each other, but even then at every step the
movements overlap and intersect. 417
NB
Ignorance of Marx and Engels False 


-418 (essence)

Rubbish
From
this we get most complicated
relations, divergences in the speed and direction of accumulation for
the two departments, different relations with non-capitalist
modes of
production as regards both material elements and elements of value,
which we cannot possibly lay down in rigid formula. Marx's diagram of
accumulation is only the theoretical reflection of the precise moment
when the domination of capital has reached its limits, and thus it is
no
less a fiction than his diagram of simple reproduction, which gives the
theoretical formulation for the point of departure of capitalist
accumulation. The precise definition of capitalist accumulation and its
laws lies somewhere in between these two fictions.”
(pp416-418) 




“These inherent conflicts of the international loan system
are a
classic example of spatio-temporal divergencies between the conditions
for the realisation of surplus value and 421: «conditions
of
capitalisation and realisation of surplus-value
(?). Not only surplus-value but also c+v!! the
capitalisation thereof.
While realisation of the surplus value requires only the general
spreading of commodity production, its capitalisation demands the
progressive supercession of simple commodity production by capitalist
economy, with the corollary that the limits to both the realisation and
the capitalisation of surplus value keep contracting ever
more.”
(pp421) 




“Realised surplus value, which cannot be capitalised and lies
idle
in England or Germany, is invested in railway construction, water
works,
etc in the Argentine, Australia, the Cape Colony or Mesopotamia.
Machinery, materials and the like are supplied by the country where the
capital has originated, and the same capital pays for them. Actually,
this process characterises capitalist conditions everywhere, even at
home. Capital must purchase the elements of production and thus become
productive capital before it can operate. Admittedly, the products are
then used within the country, while in the former case they are used by
foreigners. But then capitalist production does not aim at its products
being enjoyed, but at the accumulation of surplus value. There had been
no demand for the surplus product within the country, so capital had
lain idle without the possibility of accumulating. But abroad, where
capitalist production has not yet developed, there has come about,
voluntarily or by force, a new demand of the non-capitalist strata. The
consumption of the capitalist and working classes at home is irrelevant
for the purposes of accumulation, and what matters to capital is the
very fact that its products are 427:
«consumption» by non-capitalist strata (railways in
Asia etc)."used"
by others. The new consumers
must
indeed realise the products, pay for their use, and for this they need
money. They can obtain some of it by the exchange of commodities which
begins at this point, a brisk traffic in goods following hard on the
heels of railway construction and mining (gold mines, etc.). Thus the
capital advanced for railroad building and mining, together with an
additional surplus value, is gradually realised. It is immaterial to
the
situation as a whole whether this exported capital becomes share
capital
in new independent enterprises, or whether, as a government loan, it
uses the mediation of a foreign state to find new scope for operation
in
industry and traffic, nor does it matter if in the first case some of
the companies are fraudulent and fail in due course, or if in the
second
case the borrowing state finally goes bankrupt, i.e. if the owners
sometimes lose part of their capital in one way or another. Even the
country of origin is not immune, and individual capitals frequently get
lost in crises. The important point is that capital accumulated in the
old country should find elsewhere new opportunities to beget and
realise
surplus value, so that accumulation can proceed. In the new countries,
large regions of natural economy are open to conversion into commodity
economy, or existing commodity economy can be ousted by capital.
Railroad construction and mining, gold mining in particular, are
typical
for the investment of capitals from old capitalist countries in new
ones. They are pre-eminently qualified to stimulate a brisk traffic in
goods under conditions hitherto determined by natural economy and both
are significant in economic history as mile-stones along the route of
rapid dissolution of old economic organisations, of social crises and
of
the development of modern conditions, that is to say of the development
of commodity economy to begin with, and further of the production of
capital.



For this reason, the part played by lending abroad as well as by
capital
investments in foreign railway and mining shares is a 428: «critical illustration in
Marx's schema»... nonsense:
in other countries capital and  workers consume
c
and v and m are not
exchanged for this. The development of capitalism goes sometimes in
breadth(foreign countries) sometimes in depthfine
sample of
the
deficiencies in Marx's diagram of accumulation. In these instances,
enlarged reproduction of capital capitalises a surplus value That has
already been realised (in so far as the loans or foreign investments
are
not financed by the savings of the petty bourgeoisie or the
semi-proletariat). It is quite irrelevant to the present field of
accumulation, when, where and how the capital of the old countries has
been realised so that it may flow into the new country. British capital
which finds an outlet in Argentine railway construction might well in
the past have been realised in China in the form of Indian opium.
Further, the British capital which builds railways in the Argentine, is
of English origin not only in its pure value-form, as money capital,
but
also in its material form, as iron, coal and machinery; the use-form of
the surplus value, that is to say, has also come into being from the
very beginning in the use-form suitable for the purposes of
accumulation. The actual use-form of the variable capital, however,
labour power, . is mainly foreign: it is the native labour of the new
countries which is made a new object of exploitation by the capital of
the old countries. If we want to keep our investigation all on one
plane, we may even assume that the labour power, too, has the same
country of origin as the capital. In point of fact new discoveries, of
gold mines for instance, tend to call forth mass emigration from the
old
countries, especially in the first stages, and are largely worked by
labour from those countries. It might well be, then, that in a new,
country capital, labour power and means of production all come from the
same capitalist country, say England. So it is really in England that
all the material 428. conditions for accumulation exist-a realised
surplus value as money capital, a surplus product in productive form,
and lastly labour reserves. Yet accumulation cannot proceed here:
England and her old buyers require neither railways nor an expanded
industry. Enlarged reproduction, i.e. accumulation, is possible only if
new districts with a non-capitalist civilisation, extending over large
areas, appear on the scene and augment the number of
consumers.”
(pp426-429) 




“It should now be clear that the transactions between
European
loan capital and European industrial, 438
-Egypt's Ruin very good by Rothstein
etc. conclusion: «kourbash» [whip made from
hippopotamus hide - tr] 
capital are based upon relations
which are extremely rational and "sound" for the accumulation of
capital, although they appear absurd to the casual observer because
this
loan capital pays for the orders from Egypt and the interest on one
loan
is paid out of a new loan. Stripped of all obscuring connecting links,
(438). Precisely! Rosa
Luxemburg whips herself. Not for the sake of «realisation of
surplus-value» but for the sake of
convenience of exploitation («whips», unpaid labour
etc.) Migration of
capital to backward countries. High returns! And that's all. Theft of
land (without payment). Loans at 12-13% (433-4) etc. That's at the
root.
(State guarantees: 440) etc. etc.
these relations consist in the simple fact that European capital has
largely swallowed up the Egyptian peasant economy. Enormous tracts of
land, labour, and labour products without number, accruing
to the state
as taxes, have ultimately been converted into European capital and have
been accumulated. Evidently, only by use of the kourbash could the
historical development which would normally take centuries be
compressed
into two
or three decades, and it was just the primitive nature of
Egyptian conditions which proved such fertile soil for the accumulation
of capital.” (pp438) 












“The more ruthlessly capital sets about the destruction of
non-capitalist strata, at home and in the outside world, the more it
lowers the standard of living for the workers as a whole, the greater
also is the change in the day-to-day history of capital. It becomes a
string of political and social disasters and convulsions, and under
these conditions, punctuated by periodical economic catastrophes or
crises, accumulation can go on no longer.

467. i.f. conclusion natural
economic impasse «still markets»
But even before this natural economic impasse of capital's own creating
is properly reached it becomes a necessity for the international
working
class to revolt against the rule of capital.

467. i.f. «first mode of
economy with the weapon of propaganda»!!
Capitalism is the first mode of economy with the weapon of propaganda,
a
mode which tends to engulf the entire globe and to stamp out all other
economies, tolerating no rival at its side. Yet
at the same time it is
also the first mode of economy which is unable to exist by itself,
which
needs other economic systems as a medium and soil.???- and «first, which cannot exist
by itself without other economic systems»
Although it strives
to become universal, and, indeed, on account of this its tendency, it
must break down -because it is immanently incapable of becoming a
universal form of production.” (pp466-467)

 
 
 


Notes
*
Lenin's original notes are a mixture of Germand and Russian: we have
rendered both into English. There
are a number of differences between this translation and "Marginal
Notes on Luxemburg's Accumulation
of Capital", translated
by James Lawler and annotated to the English edition of Luxemburg by
Paul Zarembka, in Research
in Political Economy,
Volume 18, (Elsevier
Science, New York, 2000), pp 225-235. The textual differences will be
evident on inspection.
'i.f.' is the
abbreviation of the latin expresson
‘in
fine’, following the usage indicated by the Soviet editors
(p344n) as “signifies at the end of the page”.

**
The markup follows, as
faithfully as possible, the layout in the source text, where the
comments are correlated with the corresponding passages from Accumulation of Capital.
Additional textual markings indicating Lenin's emphasis are included
within the limits of web technology.
The Soviet editors indicated where they have expanded
abbreviations, thus 'Ad Sm' (Adam Smith) appears in the sbornik as
Ad[am] Sm[ith]. We ignore these indications, for example, 'Ad[am]
Sm[ith]' in the sbornik text appears simply as 'Adam Smith' in the
English translation. We have correlated page numbers to both
Accumulation of Capital and Lenin's Development of Capitalism in Russia
to the respective English editions.
***
Fair use claim refers to
the incorporation of a paragraph missing from p359 of the original
English translation of Accumulation of Capital. This passage,
translated by Alejandro Ramos-Martinez, appears on p232
of "Marginal Notes ...", loc. cit.








==========

## Rosa Luxemburg’s Unsuccessful Addition to Marx’s Theory






V I LENIN - Rosa Luxemburg's Unsuccessful Addition to
Marx's Theory



 V I Lenin
 Rosa Luxemburg's Unsuccessful Addition to Marx's Theory

 Written:
 March-April 1913
First Published:
 1933
Source: Lенинский
Сборник
XXII,
Партийное
Издательство,
Mосква,
1933, c347-8. (from the Leninskii Sbornik, [Lenin Miscellany], Party Publishing House, Moscow, 1933, pp347-8)
Translated:
 Steve Palmer
Transcription/Markup:
Steve Palmer
Proofread: Steve Palmer
Public Domain: Marxist
Internet Archive
2010. This work is completely
free. 
Copyleft:
Creative
Commons
(Attribute & Share-alike) Marxist Internet Archive 2010. 


Lenin read Rosa Luxemburg's Accumulation of Capital
in 1913, critically annotating it ('Marginal Notes on Rosa Luxemburg's book Accumulation of Capital'). In March
1913 he wrote to the publishers of the Russian Journal Sotsialdemokrat
in Paris: 'I have just read Rosa's new book ... She has got into a
shocking muddle. She has distorted Marx. I'm very glad that Pannekoek,
Eckstein and Otto Bauer have all condemned her book with one accord and
used the same arguments which I already used in Number 4 of
Prosveshchenie.' (Lenin, Works, Volume 35, pp 93-4. According to a footnote, Lenin
drew up a plan of the article and this document is apparently the
outline of that article.

(S.322)*
Roughly:
I. 14 years ago. Narodniks versus marxists.

        Legal
marxists and social-democrats
II. Distortion by R. Luxemburg.
III. State of theoretical problems.
IV. Rosa Luxemburg's ["additions"] Criticism. Anti-Criticism.
 
V.  Rosa Luxemburg's "addition". Failure
V. bis. German Social-Democrat Press and
the "Trouble-maker".
VI. Dialectics and Eclectics
VII.Imperialism and realization  Surplus-value
(Rothstein etc.)
 

* On p.322 [p.351 Eng. ed.] R Luxemburg writes of the
necessity to supplement ['correct' Eng. Ed.] (zu ergänzen)
Marx. (Soviet editor.)






Works
  Index   |  

     | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index









==========

## The Three Sources and Three Component Parts of Marxism




Lenin: The Three Sources and Three Component Parts of Marxism








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The Three Sources and Three Component Parts of Marxism


 Published: Prosveshcheniye 
  No 3., March 1913.  Signed: V. I..  Published according 
  to the Prosveshcheniye text.
      Source: Lenin’s Collected 
  Works, Progress Publishers, 1977, Moscow, Volume 19,
      pages 21-28.
      Translated: The Late George Hanna
      Original Transcription:
Lee 
  Joon Koo and Marc 
  Luzietti
Re-Marked up by: K. Goins (2008)
  Public Domain: Lenin Internet Archive (1996).
      You may freely copy, distribute,
  display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
  commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
  Archive” as your source.





  This article was published in 1913 in Prosveshcheniye No. 3,
  dedicated to the Thirtieth Anniversary of Marx’s death.

Prosveshcheniye (Enlightenment) was a Bolshevik
  social, political and literary monthly published legally in St. Petersburg
  from December 1911 onwards. Its inauguration was proposed by Lenin to
  replace the Bolshevik journal Mysl (Thought), a Moscow
  publication banned by the tsarist government. Lenin directed the work of
  the journal from abroad and wrote the following articles for it:
  “Fundamental Problems of the Election Campaign”, 
  “Results of the Election”, “Critical Remarks on the 
  National Question”, “The Right of
  Nations to Self-Determination”, and others.

  The journal was suppressed by the tsarist government in June
  1914, on the eve of the First World War. Publication was resumed in the
  autumn of 1917 but only one double number appeared; this number contained
  two articles by Lenin: “Can the Bolsheviks Retain State Power?” and “A
  Review of the Party Programme”.


Throughout the civilised world the teachings of Marx evoke
the utmost hostility and hatred of all bourgeois science (both official and
liberal), which regards Marxism as a kind of “pernicious sect”. And no
other attitude is to be expected, for there can be no “impartial” social
science in a society based on class struggle. In one way or another,
all official and liberal science defends wage-slavery,
whereas Marxism has declared relentless war on that slavery. To expect
science to be impartial in a wage-slave society is as foolishly naïve as
to expect impartiality from manufacturers on the question of whether
workers’ wages ought not to be increased by decreasing the profits of
capital.

But this is not all. The history of philosophy and the history of
social science show with perfect clarity that there is nothing resembling
“sectarianism” in Marxism, in the sense of its being a hidebound,
petrified doctrine, a doctrine which arose away from the high road
of the development of world civilisation. On the contrary, the genius of
Marx consists precisely in his having furnished answers to questions
already raised by the foremost minds of mankind. His doctrine emerged as
the direct and immediate continuation of the teachings of the
greatest representatives of philosophy, political economy and socialism.

The Marxist doctrine is omnipotent because it is true. It is
comprehensive and harmonious, and provides men with an integral world
outlook irreconcilable with any form of superstition, reaction, or defence
of bourgeois oppression. It is the legitimate successor to the best that
man produced in the nineteenth century, as represented by German

 

philosophy, English political economy and French socialism.

It is these three sources of Marxism, which are also its component
parts that we shall outline in brief.
I

The philosophy of Marxism is materialism. Throughout the
modern history of Europe, and especially at the end of the eighteenth
century in France, where a resolute struggle was conducted against every
kind of medieval rubbish, against serfdom in institutions and ideas,
materialism has proved to be the only philosophy that is consistent, true
to all the teachings of natural science and hostile to superstition, cant
and so forth. The enemies of democracy have, therefore, always exerted all
their efforts to “refute”, under mine and defame materialism, and have
advocated various forms of philosophical idealism, which always, in one way
or another, amounts to the defence or support of religion.

Marx and Engels defended philosophical materialism in the most
determined manner and repeatedly explained how profoundly erroneous is
every deviation from this basis. Their views are most clearly and fully
expounded in the works of Engels, Ludwig Feuerbach and
Anti-Dühring, which, like the Communist Manifesto, are
handbooks for every class-conscious worker.

But Marx did not stop at eighteenth-century materialism:
he developed philosophy to a higher level, he enriched it with the
achievements of German classical philosophy, especially of Hegel’s system,
which in its turn had led to the materialism of Feuerbach. The main
achievement was dialectics, i.e., the doctrine of development in
its fullest, deepest and most comprehensive form, the doctrine of the
relativity of the human knowledge that provides us with a reflection of
eternally developing matter. The latest discoveries of natural
science—radium, electrons, the transmutation of elements—have been a
remarkable confirmation of Marx’s dialectical materialism despite the
teachings of the bourgeois philosophers with their “new” reversions to
old and decadent idealism.


Marx deepened and developed philosophical materialism to the full, and
extended the cognition of nature to include the cognition of human
society. His historical materialism was a great achievement
in scientific thinking. The chaos and arbitrariness that had previously
reigned in views on history and politics were replaced by a strikingly
integral and harmonious scientific theory, which shows how, in consequence
of the growth of productive forces, out of one system of social life
another and higher system develops—how capitalism, for instance, grows
out of feudalism.  

Just as man’s knowledge reflects nature (i.e., developing matter),
which exists independently of him, so man’s social knowledge
(i.e., his various views and doctrines—philosophical, religious,
political and so forth) reflects the economic system of
society. Political institutions are a superstructure on the economic
foundation. We see, for example, that the various political forms of the
modern European states serve to strengthen the domination of the
bourgeoisie over the proletariat.  

Marx’s philosophy is a consummate philosophical materialism which has
provided mankind, and especially the working class, with powerful
instruments of knowledge.  
II

Having recognised that the economic system is the foundation on which
the political superstructure is erected, Marx devoted his greatest
attention to the study of this economic system. Marx’s principal work,
Capital, is devoted to a study of the economic system of modern,
i.e., capitalist, society.  

Classical political economy, before Marx, evolved in England, the most
developed of the capitalist countries. Adam Smith and David Ricardo, by
their investigations of the economic system, laid the foundations of the
labour theory of value. Marx continued their work; he provided a
proof of the theory and developed it consistently. He showed that the value
of every commodity is determined by the quantity of socially necessary
labour time spent on its production.  


Where the bourgeois economists saw a relation between things (the
exchange of one commodity for another) Marx revealed a relation between
people. The exchange of commodities expresses the connection between
individual producers through the market. Money signifies that the
connection is becoming closer and closer, inseparably uniting the entire
economic life of the individual producers into one whole. Capital
signifies a further development of this connection: man’s labour-power
becomes a commodity. The wage-worker sells his labour-power to the owner of
land, factories and instruments of labour. The worker spends one part of
the day covering the cost of maintaining himself and his family (wages),
while the other part of the day he works without remuneration, creating for
the capitalist surplus-value, the source of profit, the source of
the wealth of the capitalist class.  

The doctrine of surplus-value is the corner-stone of Marx’s economic
theory.  

Capital, created by the labour of the worker, crushes the worker,
ruining small proprietors and creating an army of unemployed. In industry,
the victory of large-scale production is immediately apparent, but the same
phenomenon is also to be observed in agriculture, where the superiority of
large-scale capitalist agriculture is enhanced, the use of machinery
increases and the peasant economy, trapped by money-capital, declines and
falls into ruin under the burden of its backward technique. The decline of
small-scale production assumes different forms in agriculture, but the
decline itself is an indisputable fact.  

By destroying small-scale production, capital leads to an increase in
productivity of labour and to the creation of a monopoly position for the
associations of big capitalists. Production itself becomes more and more
social—hundreds of thousands and millions of workers become bound
together in a regular economic organism—but the product of this
collective labour is appropriated by a handful of capitalists. Anarchy of
production, crises, the furious chase after markets and the insecurity of
existence of the mass of the population are intensified.  

By increasing the dependence of the workers on capital, the capitalist
system creates the great power of united labour.  


Marx traced the development of capitalism from embryonic commodity
economy, from simple exchange, to its highest forms, to large-scale
production.  

And the experience of all capitalist countries, old and new, year by
year demonstrates clearly the truth of this Marxian doctrine to increasing
numbers of workers.  

Capitalism has triumphed all over the world, but this triumph is only
the prelude to the triumph of labour over capital.  
III

When feudalism was overthrown and “free” capitalist society
appeared in the world, it at once became apparent that this freedom meant a
new system of oppression and exploitation of the working people. Various
socialist doctrines immediately emerged as a reflection of and protest
against this oppression. Early socialism, however, was utopian
socialism. It criticised capitalist society, it condemned and damned it, it
dreamed of its destruction, it had visions of a better order and
endeavoured to convince the rich of the immorality of exploitation.  

But utopian socialism could not indicate the real solution. It could
not explain the real nature of wage-slavery under capitalism, it could not
reveal the laws of capitalist development, or show what social
force is capable of becoming the creator of a new society.  

Meanwhile, the stormy revolutions which everywhere in Europe, and
especially in France, accompanied the fall of feudalism, of serfdom, more
and more clearly revealed the struggle of classes as the basis and
the driving force of all development.  

Not a single victory of political freedom over the feudal class was won
except against desperate resistance. Not a single capitalist country
evolved on a more or less free and democratic basis except by a
life-and-death struggle between the various classes of capitalist society.

The genius of Marx lies in his having been the first to deduce from
this the lesson world history teaches and to apply that lesson
consistently. The deduction he made is the doctrine of the class
struggle.  


People always have been the foolish victims of deception and
self-deception in politics, and they always will be until they have learnt
to seek out the interests of some class or other behind all moral,
religious, political and social phrases, declarations and
promises. Champions of reforms and improvements will always be fooled by
the defenders of the old order until they realise that every old
institution, how ever barbarous and rotten it may appear to be, is kept
going by the forces of certain ruling classes. And there is only
one way of smashing the resistance of those classes, and that is to
find, in the very society which surrounds us, the forces which can—and,
owing to their social position, must—constitute the power capable of
sweeping away the old and creating the new, and to enlighten and organise
those forces for the struggle.  

Marx’s philosophical materialism alone has shown the proletariat the
way out of the spiritual slavery in which all oppressed classes have
hitherto languished. Marx’s economic theory alone has explained the true
position of the proletariat in the general system of capitalism.  

Independent organisations of the proletariat are multi plying all over
the world, from America to Japan and from Sweden to South Africa. The
proletariat is becoming enlightened and educated by waging its class
struggle; it is ridding itself of the prejudices of bourgeois society; it
is rallying its ranks ever more closely and is learning to gauge the
measure of its successes; it is steeling its forces and is growing
irresistibly.  
 
 






Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 



==========

## Big Achievement of the Chinese Republic









Lenin: Big Achievement of the Chinese Republic







V. I.  

      Lenin
Big Achievement of the Chinese Republic




Published:
Pravda No. 68, March 22, 1913.

      Signed: W..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 29-30.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

We know that the great Chinese Republic, established at the cost of
such sacrifice by progressive democrats among the Asian masses, recently
encountered very grave financial difficulties. The six “Great” Powers,
which are considered civilised nations, but which in reality follow the
most reactionary policies, formed a financial consortium which suspended
the granting of a loan to China.  

The point is that the Chinese revolution did not evoke among the
European bourgeoisie any enthusiasm for freedom and democracy—only the
proletariat can entertain that feeling, which is alien to the knights of
profit; it gave rise to the urge to plunder China, partition her
and take away some of her territories. This “consortium” of the six
Powers (Britain, France, Russia, Germany, Japan and the United States) was
trying to make China bankrupt in order to weaken and undermine the
republic.  

The collapse of this reactionary consortium is a big success
for the young republic, which enjoys the sympathy of the working masses the
world over. The President of the United States has announced that his
government will no longer support the consortium and will officially
recognise the Republic of China in the near future. The American
banks have now left the consortium, and America will give China
much-needed financial support, opening the Chinese market to American
capital and thereby facilitating the introduction, of reforms in China.


Influenced by America, Japan has also changed her policy towards
China. At first, Japan would not even allow Sun Yat-sen to enter the
country. Now the visit has taken place, and all Japanese democrats
enthusiastically welcome an

    

alliance with republican China; the conclusion of that alliance is
now on the order of the day. The Japanese bourgeoisie, like the American,
has come to realise that it stands to profit more from a policy of peace
with China than from a policy of plundering and partitioning the Chinese
Republic.  

The collapse of the robber consortium is, of course, a defeat of no
mean importance for Russia’s reactionary foreign policy.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Old Problems and the Senile Decay of Liberalism









Lenin: Old Problems and the Senile Decay of Liberalism







V. I.  

      Lenin
Old Problems and the Senile Decay of Liberalism




Published:
Pravda No. 71, March 26, 1913.

      Signed: M..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 31-32.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 
Deputy Shingaryov, one of the most prominent
Cadets,[1] recently delivered a lecture in St. Petersburg on “The New
Duma and Old Problems”, a lively, interesting and topical subject.  

As is the custom, our Cadet trounced the
Octobrists.[2] “The Octobrists”, he exclaimed, “hesitate to associate
themselves with the Right wing and dare not associate with the Left”
(Rech[3] No. 70). Our bold (bold, that is, before a democratic
audience) Cadet apparently regards the Progressists as belonging to the
“Left”. But Mr. Shingaryov remained silent on the fact that three
quarters of these closest friends and political comrades-in-arms of the
Cadets are themselves Octobrists.  

He wants democrats to regard the Cadets as “Lefts” not
withstanding the permanent and very close bloc that actually
exists between the Cadets and the Progressists, who stand half way
between the Cadets and the Octobrists! In other words—the Cadets are
angling for the democrats although they are themselves actually held in
captivity by the Progressists, who are notoriously anti-democratic.  


   “The torpor reminds one of the stale of passengers in
   a train that has been held up at a wayside station,” said
   Mr. Shingaryov, speaking of the Fourth Duma. “To shake off their torpor
   and get the train going the passengers would have to clear the way
   themselves. But to get the heavy Legislative machine going, the strength
   of the passengers alone is not enough. There are three padlocks on our
   re forms—the law of June 3, the upper chamber and the fact that the
   executive authorities are not responsible. How these three padlocks will
   be opened, whether in peace and quietness or in some other way, history
   will show. Our contemporaries cannot remain absolute non-participants;
   they must all pull together” (Rech No. 70).  

 

References to history are convenient! Mr. Shingaryov and the Cadets
refer to history in the same way as those people about whom Marx
said that they defend the whip because it is a historical
whip.[4] 

“History will,” of course, “show how the padlocks will be
opened”; that is an incontestable and fruitless truism. It is an excuse
deriving from senile decay. A politician must be able to say which
class owns the padlocks and which classes must open them and
by what means.  

“History will show” exactly what it showed seven and a half years
ago—the fruitlessness of liberal reformism and liberal dreams of living
in peace with the class that owns the “padlocks”.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Cadets—members of the Constitutional-Democratic
Party—the chief party of the liberal-monarchist bourgeoisie in
Russia, founded in October 1905. The Cadets called themselves the “party
of people’s freedom”, but in reality strove to come to terms with the
autocracy in order to retain tsarism in the form of a constitutional
monarchy. At the time of the First World War (1914–18) they demanded “war
till victory is won”. After the victory of the February Revolution they
came to terms with the S.R. and Menshevik leaders of the Petrograd Soviet
and as a result acquired a leading position in the bourgeois Provisional
Government where they pursued an anti-popular, counter-revolutionary
policy. Following the October Socialist Revolution they acted as the
agents-of foreign imperialism and were the organisers of the internal
counter-revolutionary forces. Lenin called the Cadet Party the all-Russian
headquarters of the counter-revolution.





[2]
Octobrists—members of the Union of October
Seventeenth—a party that took shape after the publication of the
tsar’s Manifesto of October 17, 1905. It was a counter-revolutionary party
that represented the big bourgeoisie and big capitalist farmers. Its
leaders were the well-known industrialist and Moscow house-owner,
A. Guchkov, and the big landed proprietor M. Rodzyanko. The Octobrists gave
full support to the domestic and foreign policy of the tsarist government.





[3]
Rech (Speech)—the central daily newspaper of the
Cadet Party that was published in St. Petersburg from February 1906
onwards. It was suppressed by the Military-Revolutionary Committee of the
Petrograd Soviet on October 26 (November 8), 1917, but continued to appear
under other names until August 1918.





[4]
Lenin here refers to a statement by Marx in his Introduction to A
Critique of the Hegelian Philosophy of Right: “A school that
legitimises the vileness of today by the vileness of yesterday, a school
that declares every cry of the serf against the whip to be rebellious since
the whip is an ancient, hereditary, historical whip ... that historical
school of law would have invented German history if it had not itself
been invented by German history.” (See Karl Marx, Friedrich Engels,
Werke, Bd. 1, S. 380, Dietz Verlag, Berlin, 1956.)










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The “Oil Hunger”









Lenin: The 'Oil Hunger'







V. I.  

      Lenin
The “Oil Hunger”[2]




Written: Written not earlier than March 26 (April 8), 1913 

Published:

      First published in Pravda No. 21, January 21, 1940.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 33-36.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The question of the “oil hunger”, the inordinate increase in the
price of oil and the criminal conspiracy of the oil magnates for the
purpose of fleecing the consumer, has aroused quite legitimate interest and
quite understandable indignation in the Duma, and to a still greater degree
out side the Duma.  

The duel between the Minister of Commerce and Industry, who in a
faintly disguised form defended the oil kings of the syndicate,
and Mr. Markov the Second, who furiously and ardently expressed the hurt
feelings of the noble feudal landowners—this duel (at the State Duma
sitting on March 22) deserves the particular attention of the working class
and all democrats. The duel throws a bright light on the relations as a
whole that exist between the two “ruling” classes of Russia, the two
so-called “higher” (but actually very low, despicable, plundering)
classes, the class of feudal landowners and the class of financial tycoons.


It would seem at first glance that the question of the oil syndicate is
an isolated one. But that is not so. Actually it is only a manifestation of
the general and fundamental question of the government of Russia (or rather
the plunder of Russia) by the two commanding classes. The speech by Markov
the Second was a magnificent reply to the defender of the oil “kings”
given from the standpoint of a
diehard[3] who was cheated when the prey was divided. No wonder
Mr. Markov the Second could not “behold himself”, could not look at
himself (and his landowning friends) in the mirror at the time of his
speech. I shall try to do Mr. Markov the Second a service—I will place a
mirror in front of him. I will draw him a portrait of himself. I will show
that the

    

“quarrel” between Markov the Second and Khvostov, on the one hand and the
oil kings, the tycoons of the kerosene syndicate, the millionaires of Baku, on
the other, is a domestic quarrel, a quarrel between two
plunderers of the people’s property. “The falling-out of lovers is
the renewing of love.” The Minister and Messrs. Nobel & Co., on the
one hand, and Messrs. Khvostov, Markov and their friends in the
Senate,[4] the Council of State, etc., on the other, are
“lovers”. But the tens of millions of workers and ruined
peasants of Russia get a rough deal from this sweet and loving lot!


What lies at the bottom of the oil question?


First of all it is the shameless inflation of oil prices by the oil kings
accompanied by the artificial curtailment of oil-well and refinery
productivity by these “knights” of capitalist profit.


The chief figures illustrating these points have been quoted in the Duma, but I
must repeat them in brief to make my further exposition quite clear. The price
of oil was six kopeks a

 pood[1]

in 1902. By 1904 it had risen to fourteen
kopeks. Then the price “race” became all the merrier and, after the
Revolution of 1905, the price of a pood of oil rose to twenty-one kopeks in
1908-09 and to thirty-eight kopeks in 1912.


Thus the price has increased more than sixfold in ten years! In the
same period the extraction of oil has decreased from 600-700 million
poods in 1900-02 to 500-585 million poods in 1908-12.


These figures are worth remembering. They deserve some thought. A reduction of
output in a decade of tremendous upward leaps in world production, accompanied
by a more than sixfold price increase.


The Minister of Commerce and Industry put forward unbelievably weak arguments
in defence of these merchants and industrialists who are acting in collusion.


“There is an increased demand for fuel,” he said. “There is an
increased demand for oil from the automobile and air craft industry.” And
he comforted us and the Russian people by saying that it is a
“world-wide” phenomenon.

 

“What about America?” we ask. This is a question that arises
naturally because everybody knows that America is Russia’s only serious
competitor in oil production. In 1900 Russia and America together produced over
nine-tenths of the world’s oil and in 1910 they produced over
eight-tenths.


If it is a matter of a “world-wide” phenomenon, Mr. Minister,
the same must also be true of America? In order to create an
impression on inattentive listeners, the Minister, when defending the
conspiring oil plunderers, quoted figures for America ... but only for two
years! During the two past years the price of oil in America, and in
Rumania, too, has doubled.


Very good, Mr. Minister! Why not make your comparison complete? If you want to
draw comparisons do so properly. Don’t play with figures. You must take
the figures for America for the same period as that for which the
figures for Russia have been given. Surely it must be obvious that this is the
most fundamental, the most elementary condition, the very ABC of every
conscientious application of statistics!


In Russia in ten years prices have increased more than sixfold as
compared with the lowest price, that of 1902, quoted by the Minister
himself. And in America? Nothing like such a rise in prices has
occurred. Between 1900 and 1910 the price in America was
reduced. During recent years it has remained firm.


What, then, is the result? The price has been doubled in America and
increased sixfold in Russia. In 1900 the output of oil in America was
less than in Russia and in 1910 it was three times greater
than in Russia!


This is something the Minister, in his clumsy defence of the oil millionaires’
conspiracy, did not want to say. The fact is there, however. Whatever figures
you take, there can be no doubt that the rise in prices in America for the past
ten years has been incomparably smaller than in Russia, while the
output has increased tremendously at a time of disgraceful stagnation
or even a step backward in Russia.


We see immediately how little truth and how much untruth there is in our
Minister’s reference to the “world-wide” phenomenon of price
increase. Yes, there are higher prices everywhere. Yes, there are the causes,
common to all capitalism, that give rise to it.

 

The situation is intolerable in Russia, however, because in
our country it is on oil that the price increase is immeasurably greater,
and because in the oil industry we have stagnation instead of increased
output. The situation is absolutely intolerable in Russia because
we see, instead of a broad, free and rapid development of capitalism,
stagnation and decay. High prices are therefore a hundred times more
malignant in Russia.  

Russia has a population of 170,000,000 and America 90,000,000, i.e., a
little more than half. America now extracts three times more oil
than we do and eighteen times more coal. Judging by the wages of
the workers, living standards in America are four times higher
than in Russia.  

Is it not clear that the Minister’s statement to the effect that the
evil is a world-wide phenomenon contains a glaring untruth? The evil hears
four times, if not ten times, more heavily on Russia.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
Pood=36.11 lbs.—Ed.  
 



[2]
The MS. has no heading. This title was provided by the Institute of
Marxism-Leninism of the Central Committee of the C.P.S.U.





[3]
Diehard was the name given to the extreme Right wing of the
reactionary landed proprietors.





[4]
Senate—one of the highest government bodies in tsarist
Russia. It was founded by Peter I in 1711 to replace the Boyars’ Council as
the supreme administrative and executive body dealing with current
governmental questions. The members of the Senate were appointed by the
tsar from among the higher civil servants.  

Council of State—one of the highest government bodies of
tsarist Russia. It was founded in 1810 as a legislative advisory body whose
members were appointed or approved by the tsar. The Council of State was a
reactionary body that rejected even moderate bills passed by the State
Duma.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Cadet Assembly Bill









Lenin: The Cadet Assembly Bill







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Cadet Assembly Bill




Published:
Pravda No. 72, March 27, 1913.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 37-38.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Among the bills on civil liberties submitted to the Duma by
the Cadets there is one on assembly.  

The Cadets consider themselves a democratic party. They must realise
that an assembly bill submitted to the Fourth Duma has a purely propaganda
value, i.e., that the purpose of its submission to the house is the
propaganda, dissemination and explanation of the principles of freedom of
assembly.  

It is from this point of view that the Cadet bill must be
appraised—will it help explain to the population of Russia the
significance of freedom of assembly, the importance of that freedom and the
conditions under which it can be achieved?  

It will not. The bill has been drawn up by liberal civil servants,
not by democrats. It contains a mass of absurd, bureaucratic
rules, but not what is needed from the stand point of democracy.  

Meetings are forbidden on railway lines (§ 3) or within a distance
of one

verst[1]

of the building where the State Duma is in session, etc. (§ 4); a
preliminary announcement is required in towns but not in villages
(§§ 6 and 7), and so on—what is all this? What is the need for
all this miserable, ridiculous, pitiful bureaucratic nonsense?  

It has all been copied from European counter-revolutionary
laws, every bit of it reeks of periods when democracy was under suspicion
or suppressed, and it is all hopelessly out of date. It is in the towns,
for example, that public meetings are announced in the newspapers—so why
this idiotic fuss

    

about “announcements”? For the sole reason that the Cadets want to show
the powers that be that they, the Cadets, have a “statesmanly” point of
view, that they are “people of law and order” (i.e., enemies of
democracy), and that they are “also able to appreciate” civil service
pettifoggery.  

There is nothing important or serious in the bill as far as present-day
democracy is concerned. What the masses need are premises in which to hold
meetings. We need a law to the effect that, on the demand of, say,
a definite small number of citizens, all public buildings,
schools, etc., must be made available to the people for meetings,
free and unhindered, in the evenings and, in general, in non-working
hours. This is done in France, and there can be no other obstacles to this
democratic custom than the barbarity of the Purishkeviches.  

The fact of the matter is that the whole spirit of the Cadet bill on
civil liberties, its whole content, is not democratic but liberal
bureaucratic.  

 
Notes
 

[1]

* Verst=0.66 miles.—Ed.  
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Balkan War and Bourgeois Chauvinism









Lenin: The Balkan War and Bourgeois Chauvinism







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Balkan War and Bourgeois Chauvinism




Published:
Pravda No. 74, March 29, 1913.

      Signed: V. I..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 39-40.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The Balkan War is coming to an end. The capture of
Adrianople is a conclusive victory for the Bulgarians, and the problem’s
centre of gravity has shifted from the theatre of operations to that of the
squabbles and intrigues of the so-called Great Powers.  

The Balkan War is one link in the chain of world events marking the
collapse of the medieval state of affairs in Asia and East Europe. To form
united national states in the Balkans, shake off the oppression of the
local feudal rules and completely liberate the Balkan peasants of all
nationalities from the yoke of the landowners—such was the historic task
confronting the Balkan peoples.  

The Balkan peoples could have carried out this task ten times more
easily than they are doing now and with a hundred times fewer sacrifices by
forming a Federative Balkan Republic. National oppression, national
bickering and incitement on the ground of religious differences would have
been impossible under complete and consistent democracy. The Balkan peoples
would have been assured of truly rapid, extensive and free development.


What was the real historical reason for settling urgent Balkan problems
by means of a war, a war guided by bourgeois and dynastic interests? The
chief cause was the weakness of the proletariat in the Balkans, and also
the reactionary influence and pressure of the powerful European
bourgeoisie. They are afraid of real freedom both in their own countries
and in the Balkans; their only aim is profit at other people’s expense;
they stir up chauvinism and national enmity to facilitate their policy of
plunder and to impede the free development of the oppressed classes of the
Balkans.  
 

Russian chauvinism over the Balkan events is no less disgusting than
that of Europe. And the concealed, prettified chauvinism of the Cadets,
coloured with liberal phrases, is more disgusting and more harmful than the
crude chauvinism of the Black-Hundred newspapers. Those newspapers openly
attack Austria—in that most backward of European countries the peoples
(say we in parenthesis) are ensured far greater liberty than in Russia. The
Cadet Rech, however, said on the occasion of the capture of
Adrianople: “The new circumstances give Russian diplomacy every
opportunity of showing greater firmness....”  

Fine “democrats”, who pretend not to understand that the only
firmness that can be spoken of here is firmness in the pursuit of
chauvinist aims! No wonder Milyukov and Yefremov, Guchkov, Bennigsen,
Krupensky and Balashov got on well together at a dinner given by Rodzyanko
on March 14. Nationalists, Octobrists, Cadets—these are but different
shades of the disgusting bourgeois nationalism and chauvinism that are
irrevocably hostile to liberty.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Conversation









Lenin: Conversation







V. I.  

      Lenin
Conversation




Written: Written in March-April 1913 

Published:

      First published May 5, 1932 in Pravda No. 123.

      Signed: K—v.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 41-46.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    


 

First Bystander. I am following, as closely as I can, the
struggle among the workers over “the six and the
seven”.[1] I try to follow both newspapers. I compare, as far as
possible, the repercussions in the bourgeois and Black-Hundred
newspapers.... And d’you know what I think? It seems to me that the
struggle is taking grave forms, that it is degenerating into squabbles and
bickerings, and that the result will, in any case, be tremendous
demoralisation.  

Second Bystander. I don’t understand you. Whoever heard of a
struggle anywhere that did not become grave if it was over
something really serious? It is because the struggle is over a serious
problem that it cannot stop at “a slight quarrel”. Those who are used to
denying, and who continue to deny, the principles of party organisation
will not surrender without the most desperate resistance. Desperate
resistance always and everywhere engenders “grave forms of struggle”,
engenders attempts to shift the dispute from the sphere of
principles to that of squabbles. What if it does? Because of that do you
want us to reject the struggle for the fundamental principles of party
organisation?  

First Bystander. You are wandering away a bit from the
question I raised and are in too much of a hurry to “go over to the
offensive”. Every workers’ group on both sides is in a hurry to “dash
off” a resolution, and there is something almost like competition
developing between them to see who can outdo the other in the use of strong
language. So much vituperation makes the working-class press repulsive to
large numbers of working people who are seeking the light of socialism and
who, perhaps, throw down the newspaper with a feeling of confusion, or even
a feeling of shame for

    

socialism.... They may even be disappointed in socialism for a long time. A
slanging match creates a sort of “un-natural selection” that
brings the “list-fight specialists” to the fore.... Prowess in abusing
one’s opponent is encouraged on both sides. Is this the sort of
education the socialist party should give the proletariat? Does this not
turn out to be approval of, or at least connivance at, opportunism, since
opportunism is the sacrifice of the basic interests of the
working-class movement to momentary success. The basic interests of the
working-class movement are being sacrificed to momentary success by both
sides.... Instead of experiencing the joy of socialist work, of being
inspired by it and showing a serious attitude towards it, the socialists
themselves are driving the masses away from socialism. Willy-nilly, those
bitter words come to mind—the proletariat will achieve socialism
despite the socialists.  

Second Bystander. We are both outsiders, that is, neither of
us is a direct participant in the struggle. But bystanders who are trying
to understand what is happening before their eyes may react to the struggle
in two ways. Looking on from the outside, one may see only what one might
call the outward aspect of the struggle; speaking figuratively, one may see
only clenched fists, distorted faces and ugly scenes; one may condemn it
all, one may weep and wail on account of it. But one can also, looking on
from the outside, understand the meaning of the struggle that is
going on, which is slightly, if you will excuse my saying so, more
interesting and historically more significant than the scenes and pictures
of the so-called excesses or extremes of the struggle. There can be no
struggle without enthusiasm and no enthusiasm without extremes; and as far
as I’m concerned I hate most of all people who focus their attention on
“extremes” in the struggle of classes, parties and factions. I always get
the impulse—pardon me again—to shout at those people: “I don’t care if
you drink, as long as you understand what you are
doing.”[2] 

And this is about something big, historically big. A working-class
party is being built up. Workers’ independence, the influence of the
workers on their own parliamentary group, decisions by the workers
themselves on questions of their own party—such is the great historical
significance of what

    

is going on; the mere wish is becoming fact before our very
eyes. You are afraid of “extremes” and you regret them, but I watch in
admiration a struggle that is actually making the working class of Russia
more mature and adult, and I am mad about one thing only—that I am a
bystander, that I cannot plunge into the midst of that struggle....  

First Bystander. And into the midst of the “extremes”, eh?
And if the “extremes” lead to the fabrication of resolutions will you
also proclaim “hatred” for the people who draw attention to it, who are
indignant about it and who demand that such things should be stopped at all
costs?  

Second Bystander. Don’t try to frighten me, please! You won’t
frighten me, anyway! You really are getting like those people who are ready
to condemn publicity because of some false information that has been
published. I remember once in
Pravda[3] a report of the political dishonesty of a certain
Social-Democrat was published; some time afterwards the report was
refuted. I can well imagine what that Social-Democrat’s feelings must have
been in the period between publication and refutal! But publicity is a
sword that itself heals the wounds it makes. There will be fabrication of
resolutions, you say? The falsifiers will be exposed and thrown out, that’s
all. Serious battles are not staged without a field hospital somewhere
nearby. But to allow yourself to be scared, or your nerves shattered by
“field hospital” scenes is something unpardonable. If you’re scared of
wolves, keep out of the forest.  

As to opportunism, that is, ignoring the basic aims of socialism,
you’re putting the blame on the wrong side. According to you, those basic
aims are some “angelic ideal” that has nothing to do with the “sinful”
struggle for the cause of the day, for the urgent matters of the moment. To
look on matters that way is simply to turn socialism into a sweet phrase,
into saccharine sentimentalising. Every struggle for every matter of the
moment must be intimately connected with basic aims. It is only
this understanding of the historical meaning of the struggle that makes it
possible, by deepening and sharpening it, to get rid of that negative side,
that “prowess”, that “fist-fighting” which is inevitable wherever there
is a crowd making a noise, shouting and shoving, but which disappears of
itself.  
 

You speak of a socialist party educating the proletariat. In the
present struggle the very question at issue is that of defending
the basic principles of party life. The question of what
policy it wants conducted in the Duma, what attitude it
has to an open party or an underground one, and whether it considers the
Duma group to be above the party or vice versa, is confronting
every workers’ study circle starkly, in a form that demands an immediate
and direct answer. This, indeed, is the ABC of party existence, it is a
question of whether the party is to be or not to be.  

Socialism is not a ready-made system that will be mankind’s
benefactor. Socialism is the class struggle of the present-day proletariat
as it advances from one objective today to another objective tomorrow
for the sake of its basic objective, to which it is coming
nearer every day. In this country called Russia, socialism is today
passing through the stage in which the politically conscious workers are
themselves completing the organisation of a working-class party despite the
attempts of the liberal intelligentsia and the “Duma Social-Democratic
intelligentsia” to prevent that work of organisation.  

The liquidators are out to prevent the workers from building
up their own working-class party—that is the meaning and significance of
the struggle between “the six and the seven”. They cannot, however,
prevent it. The struggle is a hard one, but the workers’ success is
assured. Let the weak and the frightened waver on account of the
“extremes” of the struggle—tomorrow they will see for themselves that
not a step further could have been taken without going through this
struggle.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
See “Material on the Conflict Within the Social-Democratic Duma
Group”, p. 458 of this volume.





[2]
This is the concluding line of Ivan Krylov’s fable “Musicians”; it
has become proverbial in Russian. The fable is about a landowner who
boasted to his neighbour of the choir that he had formed from his
serfs. The singers had no ear for music and no voices, but this did not
bother the serf-owner, who valued them mainly for their soberness and
exemplary behaviour.





[3]
Pravda (Truth)—Bolshevik legal daily published in
St. Petersburg. It was founded in April 1912 on the initiative of
St. Petersburg workers.  

Pravda was a mass working-class newspaper maintained by funds
collected by the workers themselves. Articles were contributed by a large
group of worker-correspondents and worker-writers—in one year alone the
paper published 11,000 items from its worker-correspondents. The average
circulation was 40,000, and occasionally it reached 60,000 copies.  

Lenin directed the work of the paper from abroad, writing an article
almost daily; he gave his advice to the editors and mustered the Party’s
best literary forces for the paper.  

The police persecuted Pravda systematically; in the first year
of publication 41 issues were confiscated and 36 summonses were made
against the editors.  

In the course of two years and three months Pravda was sup
pressed eight times but each time it again appeared under a new
name—Rabochaya Pravda (Workers’ Truth), =

Severnaya Pravda (Northern Truth), =

Pravda Truda (Labour’s Truth), =

Za Pravdu (For Truth), =

Proletarskaya Pravda (Proletarian Truth), =

Put Pravdy (The Way of Truth), =

Rabochy (The Worker), =

Trudovaya Pravda (Labour Truth). =

The newspaper was finally suppressed on July 8 (21), 1914, on the eve of
the First World War, and publication did not begin again until after the
February Revolution. From March 5 (18), 1917, Pravda was published
as the Central Organ of the R.S.D.L.P. Lenin joined the editorial hoard on
April 5 (18), 1917, on his return from abroad and guided the work of the
editors. On July 5 (18), 1917, the Pravda offices were wrecked by
military cadets and Cossacks. From July to October 1917, Pravda,
persecuted by the Provisional Government, frequently changed its

   

name and appeared as: Listok Pravdy (Pravda’s Sheet),
Proletary (The Proletarian), Rabochy (The
Worker), and Rabochy Put (Workers’ Path). Since
October 27 (November 9), 1917, the newspaper has appeared regularly under
its original name of Pravda.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Contemporary Russia and the Working-Class Movement









Lenin: Contemporary Russia and the Working-Class Movement







V. I.  

      Lenin
Contemporary Russia and the Working-Class Movement[1]
A NEWSPAPER REPORT




Published:

      First published in Russian in the fourth Russian edition of V. I. Lenin’s Collected Works.

      Published April 22, 1913 in the newspaper Naprz&owhatthed No. 92.

      Published according the Naprz&owhatthed text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 47-51.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



 

A few days ago in Cracow a report was delivered by Comrade Lenin, one
of the most outstanding leaders of the Russian Social-Democrats. Here
follows a brief outline of the report; for the information of our Galician
readers we must add that Lenin is the leader of the so-called “Bolshevik”
trend, that is, the more radical, implacable trend in the Russian
Social-Democratic Party.  

While describing the working-class movement in Russia, the speaker
noted its great importance to the Western countries as well, since there
was no doubt that in the period of socialist revolutions events there would
resemble those that had taken place in Russia. As an example, the speaker
mentioned the sudden transition from relative calm to the emergence of mass
movements. In 1895 the number of strikers in Russia had been only 40,000
whereas in 1905 there had been 400,000 striking workers in January alone;
in the course of the whole year the figure had increased to three million.


The present political situation in Russia had come about as a result of
revolutionary experience, as a result of the class battles that had taken
place at that time. A certain Japanese had called the Russian revolution
“an impotent revolution under an incompetent government”. The government,
however, had made full use of the experience of the revolution. It would
suffice to mention the attitude of the government to the peasantry. At
first, when the law governing the elections to the First Duma had been
drawn up, the government had placed great hopes in the peasantry as a
quiet, patriarchal element. But when it turned out that the

    

Russian peasant, fighting for land, is by nature, not a socialist indeed,
as some Narodnik utopians had thought, but, at any rate, a democrat, the
government made a volte-face and changed the election
law.[2] 

The present Duma, he said, was no plaything, but an actual organ of
power of the reactionary strata, the tsarist bureaucracy allied to the
feudal landowners and the top bourgeoisie.  

What had been the role of the Russian liberals? In the First and Second
Dumas the liberals had tried to pacify the peasants, to divert them from
the revolutionary to the so-called constitutional path. It was obvious,
however, that the purchase of part of the landed estates, proposed by the
Cadets, was only a fresh attempt to plunder and deceive the Russian
peasant. This attempt had failed mainly owing to the tactics of the
Social-Democrats in the Duma, who had been persistently urging the peasants
leftward.  

The October strike had been a turning-point in Russian
liberalism. Before the revolution the liberals had said that “the
revolution must become the ruling power” (Struve), but they later changed
their tone, allegedly in fear of the excesses of the revolution although
they knew perfectly well that the only “excesses” were those of the
government. The Octobrists departed from liberalism and went over directly
to the side of the government, serving the government as its lackeys. It
was at that time that Guchkov, leader of the Octobrists, had written to
Prince Trubetskoi that further revolutionary explosions menaced the very
well-being of the bourgeoisie.  

Such was the class basis of contemporary counter-revolution. Acts of
lawlessness were committed quite openly and the class character of the
government had been exposed. The government handed out praise and medals
for lawless acts against revolutionary elements. The speaker gave an
example: during the recent search of Deputy Petrovsky’s apartment the
police, in violation of the law, had locked him in a room, and when a
question was asked about it in the Duma, the Minister said that they should
be grateful to the police for such zeal.  

Stolypin had learned from the experience of Class battles during the
revolution and had launched his notorious agrarian

    

policy of stratifying the peasants into affluent petty bourgeois and
semi-proletarian elements. This new policy was a mockery of the old
“patriarchal slogans” of Katkov and
Pobedonostsev.[3] The government, however, could not have acted
otherwise.  

The government, therefore, relied on the landowners and the terrified
bourgeoisie in introducing the present counter revolutionary system. It was
true that the “united
nobility”[4] had tried to get the Duma disbanded as far back as 1906,
but the government had then waited before making the coup, expecting
results from its agrarian policy in respect of the peasants and changes in
the psychology of a bourgeoisie terrified by the revolution.  

This counter-revolutionary system had now played itself out,
had exhausted its social forces. Circumstances had arisen that made any
social reforms in contemporary Russia impossible. The Duma was concerned
with trivialities; if it did adopt any decision, the Council of State and
the Court annulled it or changed it beyond all recognition. There were
no possibilities of effecting reforms in contemporary Russia. This
made clear the demagogy of Cadet tactics in submitting to the Duma various
“bills of principle” for all kinds of liberties; they introduced them
because they knew that the Duma could under no circumstances adopt
them. “We have a constitution, thank God!” Milyukov had exclaimed. There
could not be any reforms under the existing social system although Russia’s
internal situation was pitiful and her backwardness, even as compared with
Asia, was obvious. Even the Octobrist press had said “it is impossible to
go on living like this any longer”.  

All this made clear the tasks of a proletariat faced with another
revolution. The mood was rising. In 1910 the number of strikers,
according to official statistics, had been only 40,000, but in 1912 it had
been 680,000, of which 500,000 had taken part in political strikes.  

This made clear the tactics of the Russian Social-Democrats. They would
have to strengthen their organisation, their press, etc.; that was the ABC
of socialist tactics long since elaborated in the West, especially by the
German Social-Democrats. The primary task of the R.S.D.L.P., however, was
to train the masses for democratic revolution.

    

This task was no longer on the order of the day in the West; theirs was an
altogether different task, that of mobilisation, of mustering the masses
and training and organising them for the abolition of the capitalist
system.  

If attention were concentrated on the question of the approaching
revolution in Russia and on the tasks of the Social Democrats in that
revolution, the essence of the dispute with those known as “liquidators”
among the Russian Social-Democrats would be understood. Liquidationism was
not the invention of a section of the Russian Social-Democrats; the first
liquidators were the “Narodniks”, who in 1906 published their slogans in
the magazine Russkoye
Bogatstvo[5]—down with the underground movement, down with the
republic! The liquidators wanted to abolish the illegal party and organise
an open party. That was ridiculous, especially if we bear in mind that even
the Progressists (a mixture of Octobrists and Cadets) dared not ask to be
legalised. Under such circumstances the liquidators’ slogans were downright
treachery. It stood to reason that an illegal party should take advantage
of all legal opportunities—the press, the Duma, even the insurance
law[6]—but only for the purpose of extending agitation and
organisation; the substance of the agitation must remain
revolutionary. There must be a struggle against the illusion that there
was a constitution in Russia, and reformist slogans should be counter-posed
by the slogan of revolution, of a republic!  

Such was the content of Comrade Lenin’s report. One of those present
asked him about his attitude to the national question; the speaker said
that the Russian Social-Democratic Party recognised in full the right of
every nation to “self-determination”, to decide its own fate, even to
secede from Russia. The Russian revolution and the cause of democracy were
not in any way connected (as was the case in Germany) with the cause of
unification, centralisation. The democratisation of Russia depended not on
the national but on the agrarian question.  

At the same time Comrade Lenin stressed the necessity for full unity
throughout the revolutionary army of the proletariat of different
nationalities in the struggle for the full democratisation of the
country. Only on that basis could the national question be solved, as in
America, Belgium

    

and Switzerland. The speaker dealt polemically with Renner’s theses on the
national question and came out sharply against the slogan of
cultural-national autonomy. There were people in Russia who maintained that
Russia’s further development would follow the Austrian path, a path that
was slow and rotten. But, said the speaker, we must beware of any national
struggle within Social-Democracy because it would militate against the
great task of revolutionary struggle; in that respect the national struggle
in Austria should be a warning to
us.[7] The Caucasian Social-Democrats should be a model for Russia; they
conducted propaganda simultaneously in the Georgian, Armenian Tatar and
Russian
languages.[8] 

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
This newspaper report of a lecture delivered by Lenin in Cracow on
April 18, 1913 (N.S.) was published in Naprz&owhatthed
(Forward), the Central Organ of the Polish Social-Democratic Party
of Galicia and Silesia, issued in Cracow from 1892 onwards.





[2]
Lenin is here referring to the reactionary coup d’état of June 3
(16), 1907 when the government dissolved the Second Duma and changed the
law regulating elections to the Duma.  

The new election law greatly increased the Duma representation of the
landed proprietors and the commercial and industrial bourgeoisie and
greatly reduced the already tiny number of peasant, worker and non-Russian
deputies. The new law allotted one elector to 230 voters in the Landowner
curia, 1,000 voters in the first urban curia (big bourgeoisie), 15,000
voters in the second urban curia (other urban voters), 60,000 voters in the
peasant curia, and 125 000 in the worker curia. As a result of the June
Third Election Law, the Third and Fourth Dumas were mainly Black-Hundred
and Cadet in composition.





[3]
The “patriarchal slogans” of Katkov and Pobedonostsev was
the name Lenin gave to their demand for the “inalienability” of peasant
allotments, the preservation of the village commune and other survivals of
serfdom. Katkov was the editor of the reactionary Moskovskiye
Vedomosti (Moscow Recorder) and Pobedonostsev was the
Procurator General of the Synod; both were ardent advocates of the policy
of privileges for the landed nobility, pursued by Alexander III.





[4]
This refers to a reactionary organisation, the Council of the
United Nobility, founded in May 1906. The Council exercised
considerable influence over the policy of the tsarist government. Lenin
called it the “Council of the United Feudalists”.





[5]
Russkoye Bogatstvo (Russian Wealth)—a monthly
magazine published in St. Petersburg from 1876 to the middle of 1918. In
the early 1890s it became an organ of the liberal Narodniks. From 1906
onwards the magazine was actually the organ of the Popular Socialist Party,
a semi-Cadet organisation. In this period Lenin defined the policy of
Russkoye Bogatstvo as “Narodnik, Narodnik Cadet”.





[6]
The law referred to was promulgated on June 23 (July 6), 1912; it
provided for insurance against illness and accidents and was adopted by the
Third Duma under pressure from the working-class movement. The law covered
only 20 per cent of all industrial workers and did not provide benefits in
cases of disablement, old age and unemployment.  


The Bolshevik Party organised a mass campaign for the expansion of
workers’ insurance, thereby strengthening its influence among the
working-class masses.





[7]
The struggle within the Austrian Social-Democratic Party resulted in
the fragmentation of the united party into six national Social-Democratic
parties—German, Czech, Polish, Ruthenian, Italian and South-Slav. There
was constant friction between these parties.





[8]
The Social-Democrat Bolshevik organisations in the Caucasus united the
advanced proletarians of many nationalities.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Educated Deputies









Lenin: Educated Deputies







V. I.  

      Lenin
Educated Deputies




Published:
Pravda No. 83, April 10, 1913.

      Signed: B..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      page 52.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



 

At the evening sitting on April 2, the Octobrist
L. G. Lyuts said, when objecting to the working-class deputies’ demand for
a discussion of the question asked about the Lena
events[1]: 


   “Two days from now will be the anniversary of the events
   on the Lena. Apparently the Social-Democrats are trying to
   budirovat the feelings of the workers in order to encourage
   excesses....”  


The French word bouder, rendered in Russian by
budirovat means to sulk, to pout. Mr. Lyuts,
apparently, derives budirovat from budorazhit (excite)
or, perhaps, vozbudit (in cite). How the bourgeois deputies and
the bourgeois press laughed when a peasant in the First Duma used the
foreign word “prerogatives” in the sense of barriers
(“rogatki” in Russ.—Ed.)! The mistake was all the more
pardonable since various prerogatives enjoyed by the ruling classes are
actually barriers in Russian life. Mr. Lyuts’ educational attainments,
however, did not “vozbudirovat” the laughter of his educated
friends or their press.  
 

Notes
 
 



[1]
The reference is to the shooting of unarmed workers in the Lena
Goldfields (Siberia) on April 4 (17), 1912.  

News of the bloody drama in the Lena Goldfields aroused the wrath of
the working class throughout Russia; there were street demonstrations,
meetings and protest strikes all over the country. The Social-Democratic
Duma group submitted a question to the tsarist government on the Lena
shootings. The insolent answer given by the Tsar’s Minister Makarov: “So
it has been, and so it will be in the future” served to increase the
indignation of the workers. Up to 300,000 workers took part in strikes of
protest against the Lena shootings. The strikes merged with the May Day
strikes in which 400,000 workers took part.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## “Who Stands to Gain?”









Lenin: 'Who Stands to Gain?'







V. I.  

      Lenin
“Who Stands to Gain?”




Published:
Pravda No. 84, April 11, 1913.

      Signed: V..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 53-54.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



 

There is a Latin tag cui prodest? meaning “who
stands to gain?” When it is not immediately apparent which political or
social groups, forces or alignments advocate certain proposals, measures,
etc., one should always ask: “Who stands to gain?”  

It is not important who directly advocates a particular
policy, since under the present noble system of capitalism any money-bag
can always “hire”, buy or enlist any number of lawyers, writers and even
parliamentary deputies, professors, parsons and the like to defend any
views. We live in an age of commerce, when the bourgeoisie have no scruples
about trading in honour or conscience. There are also simpletons who out of
stupidity or by force of habit defend views prevalent in certain bourgeois
circles.  

Yes, indeed! In politics it is not so important who directly
advocates particular views. What is important is who stands to
gain from these views, proposals, measures.  

For instance, “Europe”, the states that call themselves
“civilised”, are now engaged in a mad armaments hurdle-race. In thousands
of ways, in thousands of newspapers, from thousands of pulpits, they shout
and clamour about patriotism, culture, native land, peace, and
progress—and all in order to justify new expenditures of tens and
hundreds of millions of rubles for all manner of weapons of
destruction—for guns, dreadnoughts, etc.  

“Ladies and gentlemen,” one feels like saying about all these phrases
mouthed by patriots, so-called. “Put no faith in phrase-mongering, it is
better to see who stands to gain!”  

A short while ago the renowned British firm Armstrong, Whitworth &
Co. published its annual balance-sheet. The

    

firm is engaged mainly in the manufacture of armaments of various kinds. A
profit was shown of £ 877,000, about 8 million rubles, and a
dividend of 12.5 per cent was declared! About 900,000 rubles were set
aside as reserve capital, and so on and so forth.


That’s where the millions and milliards squeezed out of the workers and
peasants for armaments go. Dividends of 12.5 per cent mean that capital is
doubled in 8 years. And this is in addition to all kinds of fees to
directors, etc. Arm strong in Britain, Krupp in Germany, Creusot in France,
Cockerill in Belgium—how many of them are there in all the
“civilised” countries? And the countless host of contractors?


These are the ones who stand to gain from the whipping up of
chauvinism, from the chatter about “patriotism” (cannon patriotism),
about the defence of culture (with weapons destructive of culture) and so forth!


 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## In Britain









Lenin: In Britain







V. I.  

      Lenin
In Britain
(THE SAD RESULTS OF OPPORTUNISM)




Published:
Pravda No. 85, April 12, 1913.

      Signed: W..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 55-56.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



 

The British Labour Party, which must be distinguished from the two
socialist parties in Britain, the British Socialist Party and the Independent
Labour Party, is the workers’ organisation that is most opportunist and soaked
in the spirit of liberal-labour policy.


In Britain there is full political liberty and the socialist parties exist quite
openly. But the Labour Party is the parliamentary representative of workers’
organisations, of which some are non-political, and others liberal, a regular
mixture of the kind our liquidators want, those who hurl so much abuse at the
“underground”.


The opportunism of the British Labour Party is to be explained by the
specific historical conditions of the latter half of the nineteenth century in
Britain, when the “aristocracy of labour” shared to some extent in
the particularly high profits of British capital. Now these conditions are be
coming a thing of the past. Even the Independent Labour Party, i.e., the
socialist opportunists in Britain, realises that the Labour Party has
landed in a morass.


In the last issue of The Labour Leader, the organ of the Independent
Labour Party, we find the following edifying communication. Naval estimates are
being discussed in the British Parliament. The socialists introduce a motion to
reduce them. The bourgeoisie, of course, quash it by voting
for the government.


And the Labour M.P.s?


Fifteen vote for the reduction, i.e., against the government; 21 are
absent; 4 vote for the government, i.e., against the reduction!

 

Two of the four try to justify their action on the grounds that the
workers in their constituencies earn their living in the armament
industries.  

There you have a striking example of how opportunism leads to the
betrayal of socialism, the betrayalof the workers’
cause. As we have already indicated, condemnation of this treachery is
spreading ever wider among British socialists. From the example of other
people’s mistakes, the Russian workers, too, should learn to understand how
fatal are opportunism and liberal-labour policy.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Civilised Europeans and Savage Asians









Lenin: Civilised Europeans and Savage Asians







V. I.  

      Lenin
Civilised Europeans and Savage Asians




Published:
Pravda No. 87, April 14, 1913.

      Signed: W..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 57-58.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
S. Ryan
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (1901).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



 

The well-known English Social-Democrat, Rothstein, relates
in the German labour press an instructive and typical incident that
occurred in British India. This incident reveals better than all arguments
why the revolution is growing apace in that country with its more than 300
million inhabitants.  

Arnold, a British journalist, who brings out a newspaper in Rangoon, a
large town (with over 200,000 inhabitants) in one of the Indian provinces,
published an article en titled: “A Mockery of British Justice”. It
exposed a local British judge named Andrew. For publishing this article
Arnold was sentenced to twelve months’ imprisonment, but he appealed and,
having connections in London, was able to get the case before the highest
court in Britain. The Government of India hastily “reduced” the sentence
to four months and Arnold was released.  

What was all the fuss about?  

A British colonel named McCormick had a mistress whose servant was a
little eleven-year-old Indian girl, named Aina. This gallant representative
of a civilised nation had enticed Aina to his room, raped her and locked
her up in his house.  

It so happened that Aina’s father was dying and he sent for his
daughter. It was then that the village where he lived learned the whole
story. The population seethed with indignation. The police were compelled
to order McCormick’s arrest.  

But Judge Andrew released him on bail, and later acquitted him,
following a disgraceful travesty of justice. The gallant colonel declared,
as gentlemen of noble extraction

    

usually do under such circumstances, that Aina was a prostitute, in proof
of which he brought five witnesses. Eight witnesses, however, brought by
Aina’s mother were not even examined by Judge Andrew.  

When the journalist Arnold was tried for libel, the President of the
Court, Sir (“His Worship”) Charles Fox, refused to allow him to call
witnesses in his defence.  

It must be clear to everyone that thousands and millions of such cases
occur in India. Only absolutely exceptional circumstances enabled the
“libeller” Arnold (the son of an influential London journalist) to get
out of prison and secure publicity for the case.  

Do not forget that the British Liberals put their “best” people at
the head of the Indian administration. Not long ago the Viceroy of India,
the chief of the McCormicks, Andrews and Foxes, was John Morley, the
well-known radical author, a “luminary of European learning”, a “most
honourable man” in the eyes of all European and Russian liberals.  

The “European” spirit has already awakened in Asia, the
peoples of Asia have become democratic-minded.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Merchant Accountancy









Lenin: Merchant Accountancy







V. I.  

      Lenin
Merchant Accountancy




Published:
Pravda No. 90, April 20, 1913.

      Signed: V. F..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 59-60.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



 

The biggest millionaires, the tycoons of our big industry,
belong to a “council of congresses of industrial and commercial
representatives”. This council of congresses issues its own periodical,
Promyshlennost i
Torgovlya.[1] The interests of our Kit
Kityches[2] are defended by this journal in its ponderous, elaborate and
mostly semi-literate articles.  

They show particular discontent at the injustice of Zemstvo
representation and Zemstvo taxation. Believe it or not, the feudal
landowner is unfair to poor Kit Kitych! Here is an instructive table
showing the composition of the elected membership at uyezd Zemstvo
assemblies[3] (Promyshlennost i Torgovlya, 1913, No. 3): 





 
Number
    of
    members
Percentages




From the First Electoral Assembly (land- ed nobility)
5,508
53.4


From the Second Electoral Assembly
    (commercial and industrial enter-
    prises, etc.)
1,294
12.6


Jointly from the First and Second As-
    semblies
290
2.8


From village communes
3,216
31.2


[Total] In 34 gubernias with Zemstvos
10,308
100.0




There is indeed a crying injustice in the matter of representation in
the Zemstvos. The conclusion to be drawn is obvious and incontestable—the
Zemstvos in Russia have been put entirely into the hands of the feudal
landowners.  

These interesting figures must give any educated person cause to ponder
over the conditions that give rise to such unequal representation.  
 

It would, of course, be ridiculous to expect the Kit Kityches and their
hack writers to be capable of pondering over general political questions or
to be interested in political knowledge. The only thing that interests Kit
Kitych is that be pays “a lot” and a member of the nobility pays
“little”. The writer hired by Kit Kitych quotes the total amounts of
Zemstvo impositions (as fixed by the official scale)—First Electoral
Assembly (24.5 million rubles in 34 gubernias with Zemstvos), Second
Electoral Assembly (49 million rubles) and village communes (45.5 million
rubles). He divides these impositions by the number of members and in this
way determines “the cost of one seat”! Thus it turns out that a seat for
a nobleman “costs” 4,500 rubles, for a merchant 38,000 rubles and for a
peasant 14,000 rubles.  

That is how the hired advocates of the merchant class argue—election
rights are calmly examined as though they were an article of commerce. As
though those who pay the impositions fixed by the Zemstvo thereby
purchase the right to representation.  

Of course, there actually is glaring inequality in Zemstvo
impositions. The full burden of that inequality, however, is not borne by
the industrialists, but by the peasants and workers. If the
peasantry pay 45.5 million rubles that they squeeze out of their poor,
exhausted, over-cultivated land while the landowners pay 24.5 million
rubles, that can mean nothing but the extortion of millions of rubles
tribute from the “muzhiks” in the form of Zemstvo impositions in
addition to all their other burdens.  

This the Kit Kityches do not see. What they are after is that
privileges, instead of going to the nobility alone, should be shared “on
an equal footing” with the merchants.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Promyshlennost i Torgovlya (Industry and
Commerce)—the organ of the council of congresses of industrial and
commercial representatives; the journal was published in St. Petersburg
from January 1908 to December 1917. It expressed the views of the big
industrial and commercial bourgeoisie.





[2]
Kit Kitych—the nickname of Tit Titych (Kit in
Russian means “whale”), a rich merchant in A. N. Ostrovsky’s comedy
Shouldering Another’s Troubles. Lenin applies the epithet to
capitalist tycoons.





[3]
Zemstvos—the name by which local self-government bodies in
the rural districts were known; they were set up in the central gubernias
of tsarist Russia in 1864. The Zemstvos were dominated by the nobility and
their competence was limited to purely local economic and welfare matters
(hospital and road building, statistics, insurance, etc.). They functioned
under the control of the governors of the gubernias and the Ministry of the
Interior, which could block any decisions the government found undesirable.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## A Great Technical Achievement









Lenin: A Great Technical Achievement







V. I.  

      Lenin
A Great Technical Achievement




Published:
Pravda No. 91, April 21, 1913.

      Signed: I..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 61-62.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
S. Ryan
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (1901).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



 

The world-famous British chemist, William Ramsay, has
discovered a method of obtaining gas directly from a coal seam. Ramsay is
already negotiating with a colliery owner on the practical application of
this method.  

A great modern technical problem is thus approaching solution. The
revolution that will be effected by this solution will be a tremendous one.


At the present time, to utilise the energy contained in it, coal is
transported all over the country and burned in numerous factories and
homes.  

Ramsay’s discovery means a gigantic technical revolution in this,
perhaps the most important, branch of production in capitalist countries.


Ramsay has discovered a method of transforming coal into gas right
where the coal lies, without hauling it to the surface. A similar but much
simpler method is sometimes used in the mining of salt: it is not brought
to the surface directly, but is dissolved in water, the solution being
pumped to the top.  

Ramsay’s method is to transform, as it were, the coal mines into
enormous distilling apparatuses for the production of gas. Gas is used to
drive gas engines which can ex tract twice as much energy from
coal as steam-engines can. Gas engines, in their turn, transform the energy
into electricity, which modern technology can already transmit over
enormous distances.  

Such a technical revolution would reduce the cost of electricity to
one-fifth or even one-tenth of its present price. An
enormous amount of human labour now spent in extracting and distributing
coal would be saved. It would be

    

possible to use even the poorest seams, now not being worked. The cost of
lighting and heating houses would be greatly reduced.


This discovery will bring about an enormous revolution in industry.


But the consequences this revolution will have for social life as a whole under
the present capitalist system will be quite different from those the discovery
would yield under socialism.


Under capitalism the “release” of the labour of millions of miners
engaged in extracting coal will inevitably cause mass unemployment, an enormous
increase in poverty, and a worsening of the workers’ conditions. And the profits
of this great invention will be pocketed by the Morgans, Rockefellers,
Ryabushinskys, Morozovs, and their suites of lawyers, directors, professors, and
other flunkeys of capital.


Under socialism the application of Ramsay’s method, which will
“release” the labour of millions of miners, etc., will make it
possible immediately to shorten the working day for all from 8 hours
to, say, 7 hours and even less. The “electrification” of all
factories and railways will make working conditions more hygienic, will free
millions of workers from smoke, dust and dirt, and accelerate the transformation
of dirty, repulsive workshops into clean, bright laboratories worthy of human
beings. The electric lighting and heating of every home will relieve millions of
“domestic slaves” of the need to spend three-fourths of their lives
in smelly kitchens.


Capitalist technology is increasingly, day by day, out growing the
social conditions which condemn the working people to wage-slavery.


 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## A Few Words on Results and Facts









Lenin: A Few Words on Results and Facts







V. I.  

      Lenin
A Few Words on Results and Facts




Published:
Pravda No. 92, April 23, 1913.

      Signed: K. P..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 63-65.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The Pravda anniversary must turn the thoughts of every politically
conscious worker (and, we would add, every politically conscious democrat) to
the results achieved by the newspaper of consistent democrats and
Marxists.


The question of results, of course, is connected with the question of whether
the advanced workers of Russia are, in their mass, on the side of
Pravda. As far as bourgeois subscribers are concerned a newspaper is
important if it sells, it does not matter to them where it is sold or whether it
serves to rally a certain class and which class; a newspaper is important to the
Marxist and consistent democrat as an organ for the enlightenment and
consolidation of truly advanced classes.


We are not indifferent to the question of where and how our newspaper is
sold. It is most important for us to know whether it really does serve
to enlighten and consolidate the advanced class of Russia, i.e., the working
class.


To gain this knowledge one must look for facts that can
provide an answer to the question.


By facts, different people understand different things. Bourgeois journalists do
not hesitate to lie by omitting to cite a single precise and clear fact
that can be verified.


Liberal working-class politicians, the liquidators, imitate the bourgeois
journalists. One of them, and a leading one at that,
F. D.[2] himself, wrote in
Luch[3] No. 57 (143):



   “It is a fact that cannot be denied and one that we feel
   [what feeling people they are!] with pride in our day-to-day work, that our
   newspaper [Luch] is truly the organ of a good nine-tenths of the
   advanced, politically conscious workers of Russia.”  


It is worth while having a good laugh at this Khlestakov
or
Nozdryov,[4] and Pravda has already had its laugh. Mere

    

ridicule, however, is not enough. Workers must learn to grasp facts and verify
them for themselves so that the Nozdryovs will not be able to deceive
them or their less developed workmates.


How are facts to be sought and verified? Best of all by finding out how
Pravda and Luch circulate among workers (and not
among the liberal intelligentsia, who are liquidators almost to a man). But no
such facts are available.


Let us look for some others.


Let us take the figures for the workers’ groups that support
Pravda and Luch by voluntary contributions. These figures,
published in the two papers, are facts. Anybody can verify
them, anybody can, by studying them, expose the Nozdryovs, of whom there are
many in the world of journalism.


Pravda has once already published these facts for a half
year (see No. 80 for

 1912[1]

)—for

the first six months of 1912—and nobody can refute them. We now give them
for the
whole of 1912 and the beginning of 1913.






Year
Number of collections for
    newspapers by workers’
    groups


Pravda
Luch
Moscow
    workers

    newspaper[5]





1912 1st quarter . . . . .  
108
7
—


” 2nd ” . . . . .         
396
8
—


” 3rd ” . . . . .         
81
9
—


” 4th ” . . . . .         
35
65
5


1913 1st ” . . . . .       
309
139
129


” 10 days of April . . .   
93
28
43


Totals . . . . . . . . 
1,022
256
177




Any reader can check these figures by taking Pravda and
Luch and can correct the totals if he finds a mistake.


These are real facts that it is worth while distinguishing from
the boasting and untruths of Messrs. F. D. and other Luch
gentlemen.


Do not these facts constitute a splendid confirmation of Luch’s
reference to nine-tenths, made in the Nozdryov manner?

 

The “nine-tenths” Luch supporters, among whom there are,
notoriously, the Bund members and the “upper crust” of the Letts,
have not been able, in the more than six months of
Luch’s existence (fourth quarter of 1912 and first quarter of
1913, plus ten days of April), to mobilise even one half the number of
workers Pravda and the future Moscow news paper have been able to. Is
this not a true Nozdryov method, this conversion of an obvious minority
into “nine-tenths”?


The workers are surrounded on all sides by such a sea of lies in the bourgeois
newspapers that they must fight for the truth at all costs, they must learn to
recognise falsehoods and reject them. The erroneous views of the liquidators of
the workers’ party must be calmly refuted. But an impudent Nozdryov
lie, this shameless corruption of the workers, must be branded, and the liars
chased out of the workers’ midst.


The workers want unity in their actions. The workers are right. Without unity of
action there is no salvation for the workers.


When you think of it—how can there be unity without the submission of the
minority to the majority? Everyone realises that without it unity is impossible.


And so, even if the liquidators were not the liquidators of the Party, the
workers would have to know what views are held by the majority. If they
do not know this the workers cannot achieve unity of action (because
frequently Party and non-Party workers have to act jointly).


The workers cannot build up their own party unless they ruthlessly
fight every lie that is told about it. In order to expose lies it is necessary
to seek precise facts, verify them and think about the meaning of what
has been verified.


Class-conscious workers, those who oppose liquidationism, have undoubtedly taken
first place in creating a working-class press. They have won an incontestable,
overwhelming majority for themselves. They will treat every lie that is spread
about this serious and very important question with contempt and disdain.


 
Notes
 

[1]
See present edition, Vol. 18, pp. 196–200.—Ed.  
 



[2]
F. D.—F. Dan, one of the leading Menshevik liquidators.





[3]
Luch (The Ray)—legal daily newspaper published in
St. Petersburg from September 1912 to July 1913 by the Menshevik
liquidators.





[4]
Khlestakov—the hero of Gogol’s Inspector-General;
an inveterate braggart and liar.  

Nozdryov—a character from Gogol’s Dead Souls; a
brawling landowner and swindler.





[5]
As early as the summer of 1912, Lenin had spoken of the need to publish
a legal working-class newspaper in Moscow. “Every politically conscious
worker realises that St. Petersburg without Moscow is like one hand without
the other,” he wrote. “... Moscow will of course have to have a workers’
daily newspaper of its own.” Nevertheless Lenin considered it
necessary to consolidate Pravda and then start the newspaper in
Moscow—Moscow Pravda, he called it in a letter to Maxim
Gorky. The question of publishing a Party newspaper in Moscow was discussed
at the Conference of Central Committee members in Poronin on July 27
(August 9), 1913.  

A campaign to collect funds for a Moscow newspaper began in
December 1912 after a letter had appeared in Pravda (No. 176,
November 24, 1912) from a group of Moscow workers pointing-out the
importance and the feasibility of launching a working-class newspaper in
Moscow; the letter also appealed for collections to be made for a newspaper
fund. The appeal was taken up energetically by the workers, but the
appearance of the paper was delayed by the arrest of a group of Bolsheviks
making preparations for its issue. The first issue of the Moscow workers
newspaper appeared on August 25 (September 7), 1913 and was called Nash
Put (Our Path).










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Significance of the Resettlement Scheme









Lenin: Significance of the Resettlement Scheme







V. I.  

      Lenin
Significance of the Resettlement Scheme




Published:
Pravda Nos. 98 and 99, April 27 and May 1, 1913.

      Signed: V. I..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 66-71.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

We know that since 1905, the government, in connection with
its “new” agrarian policy in European Russia, has been making particular
efforts to promote peasant resettlement to Siberia. The landowners regarded
these resettlement schemes as a sort of opening of the safety valve, and as
a “blunting” of the agrarian contradictions in the centre of Russia.


What has happened as a result? Has there been a blunting or a
sharpening of contradictions following their transfer to a wider arena?


First of all let us cite some general figures on the resettlement of
peasants to Siberia.  

From 1861 to 1885 about 300,000 peasants migrated, that is, 12,000 a
year; from 1886 to 1905 the number was about 1,520,000, that is, about
76,000 a year; from 1906 to 1910 it was about 2,516,075 or about 500,000 a
year.  

The growth in the number of peasants resettled in the
counter-revolutionary period is enormous. Undoubtedly a temporary
“rarefaction” of the atmosphere in Central Russia was bound to take place
as a result.  

But for how long and at what cost?  

The answer to this is provided by the figures showing the drop
in the wave of settlers that began in 1909 and the amazing growth
in the number of those returning. Here are the figures: 





Year
Number of
    settlers
    (thousands)
Number
    returning
    (percentage)




1905  
39
10


1906  
141
4


1907  
427
6


1908  
665
6


1909  
619
13


1910  
316
36


1911[1]

183
60



 

Thus the official promoters of resettlement succeeded in rarefying the
atmosphere for something like four years (1906–09). Then a
new crisis began, because the huge drop in the number of settlers
and the incredible increase in the number of “returnees”—36 per cent
and 60 per cent—without any doubt mean a crisis, and an extremely serious
one at that, one that covers an immeasurably wider arena.  

Thirty-six and 60 per cent of settlers returning means a sharpening of
the crisis in Russia and in Siberia. It is the poorest who return to
Russia, the most unfortunate, who have lost everything and are bitterly
angry. The land question must have become very acute in Siberia for it to
have become impossible, despite the efforts of the government, to
accommodate hundreds of thousands of settlers.  

The figures quoted show without doubt, therefore, that the struggle
against the 1905 agrarian crisis in Russia by means of resettlement has
brought about a postponement of the crisis for only a very short
period and at the cost of an incomparably greater sharpening and extension
of the crisis, as at present.  

An interesting confirmation of this conclusion drawn from dry
government statistical data is a book by Mr. A. I. Komarov, a former
official of the Forestry Department who was twenty-seven years in the
service and took a special interest in the Siberian resettlement
scheme. His book is called The Truth About the Resettlement Scheme
(St. Petersburg, 1913. Price 60 kopeks).  

It consists mainly of newspaper articles written by the author under a
pseudonym for the newspaper Novaya
Rus[2] between 1908 and 1910 in which, in a “jovial” manner, he
tells a story “of state

spoliation

or, rather, devastation of Siberian lands and forests that makes the
plunder of the Bashkirian lands that once took place seem trivial indeed”.


The author’s position is that of the well-intentioned official reduced
to despair by the “resettlement muddle” (his newspaper articles bore that
title), the plunder, ruin and Impoverishment of the old inhabitants and the
settlers, “the complete disorganisation of all that is called rational
forestry”, the flight of the settlers back to Russia and the formation of
an army, “hundreds of thousands strong”, of

    

“vagrant Russia” and, finally, the impenetrable wall of stupidity and
officialdom, the system of secret informers, the embezzling and
incompetence in the organisation of the whole business.  

Despite the fact that the articles are written in a “jovial” manner,
or rather because they are, their cumulative effect is to produce
a very strong impression of the fumes, the fug, the suffocation that
surround the old feudal officialdom. Nothing but disaster can come of a new
bourgeois agrarian policy that is carried out by such means and methods and
under such circumstances and is guided by such social elements.  

Here is a picture of the journey to Siberia made in August 1910 by
Prime Minister Stolypin and Mr. Krivoshein, the Chief Administrator of
Agriculture and Land Settlement.  A speech was made from the platform of
the minister’s rail way coach at the Taiga station ... “everything is
magnificent and therefore satisfactory”.  


   “This clownish tour,” writes the old civil servant,
   “this journey so similar to that made by Catherine the Great to the south
   of Russia, with Mr. Schumann, the Resettlement and Land Administrator of
   Tomsk Gubernia, playing the role of Potyomkin on instructions from
   St. Petersburg ... was the last straw that made me abandon the service and
   publish this pamphlet.”  


Poor, well-intentioned official—it was too much for him!  

Here is a picture of the resettlement muddle at the time of the
greatest wave of settlers.  


   “The lands allotted were not ready, the roads to them
   had not been laid, the resettlement centres were only just being
   built.... Then people began settling of their own accord in surveyed forest
   areas that took their fancy, and seizing plots leased from the state,
   reserve plots that had at some earlier date been set aside for the Siberian
   estates of the nobility, etc.; and then, of course, began the expulsion of
   these illegal settlers, accompanied by a series of sad and often cruel
   scenes that it would be superfluous to describe.”  The resettlement
   officers were compelled to “tear to pieces areas of state forest that had
   been surveyed only the day before”. “They seized the land piecemeal, took
   whatever they first laid eyes on, anything so long as they could
   accommodate, get rid of, the scores of emaciated exhausted people hanging
   around the resettlement centre and standing for long hours outside the
   resettlement office, people who for some unknown reason invade the gubernia
   municipal offices in crowds and, in general, do not leave a single
   government office in peace.”  

 

“Many millions of rubles” are being embezzled and wasted. “One
conclusion that suggests itself”, writes the author, “is the need to
transfer the resettlement scheme to the future Siberian Zemstvo.” This
na\"ive, “honest-minded” Russian official believes that this threadbare
cloak can be patched up ... with a Zemstvo.  

Here is a picture of the way the forests are being looked
after. Settlers “upon whom fortune had smiled” were permitted to sell
timber; they sold 300 dessiatines of mature building timber at 17 rubles
per dessiatine. Even by Siberian standards a dessiatine of mature building
timber is worth, at the very least, about 200 rubles. Another picture:
settlers sold the contractor Zhogolyov 25,000 railway sleepers at four
kopeks each. He paid 5 kopeks for felling, 25 kopeks for removal from the
forest and 10 kopeks each for transport by steamer, and received
80 kopeks a sleeper from the treasury.... There you have Octobrist
capitalism in the epoch of primitive accumulation, and it lives comfortably
side by side with the Purishkeviches and the Purishkevichism of Russian
life!  

Here is a series of pictures of land settlement. Minusinsk Uyezd, the
“Siberian Italy”. The old inhabitants of Minusinsk received four
dessiatines each and “came to know the sacred rights of property”. At the
same time they were banned from using tens of thousands of dessiatines of
the best land.  


   “In recent times, this Italy, because of the general
   organisation of state economy, has been very regularly visited by, to use
   the official expression, ‘crop failures’ ....”  

   “... In Yeniseisk Uyezd there is the famous Ob-Yenisei
   Canal, that has for a number of years duly devoured a good many millions
   from the treasury, but has not thereby got itself into a decent condition
   fitting it for the transport of goods, since it was dug in a place where it
   should not have been dug 

   “Kurinsky resettlement area ... is made up of lands that
   belong ed to non-Russians around the Altai Salt Refinery. The non-Russians
   had a tough time of it after their land had been taken away from them, but
   the settlers had a worse time—the local water was quite unsuitable for
   drinking. Nor did well-digging produce any results. Then the resettlement
   administration started drilling and drilled down to water that was saltier
   still. The settlers now drive seven or eight versts to the Yenisei from the
   village for water, so everything is satisfactory’....”  

 

... A very valuable stand of pine had been completely eaten away by the
pine moth. When the trouble began the forest warden had to send a
written application asking for credit. While the correspondence and
negotiations with St. Petersburg proceeded, the timber was
ruined.... “Every thing that is usually called forestry,” writes the old
warden, “has been totally abandoned.”  

People of any integrity are squeezed out of the civil service world by
informers (p. 118) and the “higher authorities” cut short foresters who
have thirty-five years’ service behind them with roars of “Silence!” if
they dare to tell the truth (p. 121). “A base and sordid period,” says
the good Mr. Komarov, indignantly, who suggests this “period” began when
a “good” boss was changed for a bad one.  

The author summarises his illustrations as follows: 


   “If all I have said sounds like so many anecdotes, then
   they are anecdotes from a reality that Russian constitutional—save the
   mark!—life has accustomed us to; and is not the whole of our present-day
   Russian life one long and rather unpleasant anecdote?”  


With regard to the settlers that are returning, Mr. Komarov ridicules
the assertion of some “bold” medical man that they constitute no more
than 6 per cent. We have quoted exact figures on this question above.  


   “The Russian landowners, more than anybody, are very,
   very interested in this [in the number of settlers returning],” writes
   Mr. Komarov. “This is understandable: those returning are the sort that
   are destined to play a terrible role in the future. The man who is
   returning is not the one who all his life has been a farm labourer and is
   no longer accustomed to that which gave him, like Antaeus of old, gigantic,
   incredible strength. The man who is returning is the one who, until
   recently, was a property-owner, a man who never dreamed that he and the
   land could exist apart. This man is justifiably indignant, to him it is a
   mortal offence that he has not been provided for, but, on the contrary,
   that he and his family have been ruined and transformed from farmers and
   growers of corn into people of no consequence; this man is a menace to any
   political system, no matter what it be. And the best minds, those that have
   seen the light since 1905, are paying due consideration to this.”  


In the spring of 1910, the author visited a Marshal of the
Nobility[3] in European Russia; he was a man of conservative convictions
who enjoyed the author’s trust and esteem.  


   “‘We are considering it, indeed we are,’ he
   told me. ‘It is not for nothing that we have fled from the country into the
   town. The

    

   muzhik glowers at us like a wild beast. The young people are almost all
   hooligans, and now there are these people coming back from you in Siberia
   who have nothing to lose.’  

   “I understood dear Pyotr Fyodorovich best of all,”
   continues kindly Mr. Komarov, “when among others who came to me for
   information ‘about the lands in Siberia’ was one of the forgotten friends
   of my childhood, one with whom I had played tip-cat and other games and
   with whom I had later taken part in fist-fights. Alas, he was no longer my
   former companion in the village fist-fights but a respect able-looking
   muzhik with a big beard with silver threads in it and a bald patch exposing
   half his pate. We had a talk, recalled old times and I mentioned 1905. I
   must mention that our uyezd was one of those that had been particularly
   brightly illuminated by the ruddy glow of burning landowners’ mansions and
   ruined estates, and I for my part made a quite natural reproach to my
   friend, as far as I remember in the following terms: 

   “‘Thedevil alone knows what you people got up
   to in 1905! You could have got much better conditions....’  

   “When I said this, I did not have in mind the theory of
   the agrarian question as propounded by the Social-Democrats and
   Socialist-Revolutionaries which, to anybody in any degree acquainted with
   political economy, somehow sounds completely inacceptable; I was given this
   answer: 

   “‘Howtrue your words are.... You’re quite
   right.... That was not what we should have done....’  

   “‘There you are, I said soothingly, glad that
   we had understood each other.  

   “‘Yes, it’s true enough.... We made a fine
   blunder.... We shouldn’t have let anyone go....’  

   “‘What do you mean by that?’  

   “‘I mean we should have gone through with it,
   ... given all of them short shrift....’  

   “And as he spoke his face was smiling and kindly, there
   were attractive wrinkles around his bright, gentle, childishly naive and
   smiling eyes 

   “But I admit quite frankly that a cold shiver ran down
   my back and the hair on my head must have stood on end; if that was how the
   gentle ones felt about it, what could we expect from those who were coming
   back, those who had sold their land and were ruined for ever?  

   “Yes, indeed, the ‘banking on the strong’ that was
   presented to Russia by the late Prime Minister and the Octobrists, may, as
   time goes on and the full effect of the resettlement muddle is felt, bring
   many horrors into our lives” (p. 75).  


We will stop here, at this conversation between a kindly, peaceable
intellectual and a gentle, mild, na\"ive, respect able-looking, bald-headed
muzhik.  

 

Notes
 

[1]
Eleven months. —Lenin
 



[2]
Rus (Russia) (Molva [Tidings],
Novaya Rus [New Russia], Oko [The
Eye])—the various names under which a bourgeois-liberal newspaper
was published in St. Petersburg from 1903 to 1910.





[3]
Marshal of the Nobility—the elected representative of the
nobility of a gubernia or uyezd. He was in charge of all the affairs of the
nobility, occupied an influential position in the administration and took
the chair at meetings of the Zemstvo.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Vekhi Contributors and Nationalism









Lenin: Vekhi Contributors and Nationalism







V. I.  

      Lenin
Vekhi Contributors and Nationalism
(BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE)




Published:
Prosveshcheniye No. 4, April 1913.

      Signed: V..

      Published according to the Prosveshcheniye text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 72-73.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

A boring magazine, that Russkaya
Mysl[1] There is only one interesting thing about it. Among its
writers there are liberals who contribute to and support
Vekhi,[2] the notorious renegade book in which yesterday’s
champions of liberty poured mud and filth on the struggle of the masses
for liberty, a book in which, furthermore, the democratic masses of
workers and peasants were depicted as a herd led by “intellectuals”—an
old trick used by all Black-Hundred supporters.  

It was not mere chance that Russian liberal “educated society” turned
against the revolution and against democracy; this was inevitable after
1905. The bourgeoisie was frightened by the independent action of the
workers and the awakening of the peasants. The bourgeoisie, especially its
richer section, anxious to preserve its position as exploiter, decided that
reaction was better than revolution.  

It was these selfish class interests of the money-bags that gave rise
to the extensive and deep-going counter-revolutionary trend among
the liberals, a trend against democracy, in defence of any kind of
imperialism, nationalism and chauvinism, in defence of all obscurantism.


Class-conscious workers are not surprised at this apostasy, this
defection, because the workers never did have a very high opinion of the
liberals. It is, however, worth while examining what the liberal renegades
are preaching, with what ideas they hope to fight democracy in
general and Social-Democracy in particular.  


   “Russian intellectual society,” writes Mr. Izgoyev
   in Russkaya Mysl “was, and, in the mass, still is convinced
   that the fundamental

    

   question of European life is the proletariat’s struggle for socialism
   against the bourgeoisie....”  


Mr. Izgoyev says that this idea is “preconceived and erroneous”; he
points out that among the Poles in Germany struggling to maintain their
nationality, a new middle stratum has been created and is growing up—“a
democratic middle class”.  

When Izgoyev speaks of “intellectuals” he actually means socialists
and democrats. The liberal is not pleased that the struggle of the
proletariat against the bourgeoisie is regarded as the fundamental
question. The liberal strives to ignite and fan the flames of national
struggle in order to divert attention from the serious questions
of democracy and socialism.  

Socialism actually does take first place among the “questions of
European life” and the national struggle takes ninth place and becomes,
furthermore, the weaker and less harmful the more consistently democracy
functions. It is ridiculous even to compare the struggle of the proletariat
for socialism, a world phenomenon, with the struggle of one of the
oppressed nations of Eastern Europe against the reactionary bourgeoisie
that oppresses it (and the Polish bourgeoisie willingly joins
forces with the German bourgeoisie against the proletariat on
every convenient occasion).  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Russkaya Mysl (Russian Thought)—a monthly bourgeois
liberal magazine that began publication in Moscow in 1880. After the 1905
Revolution it became the organ of the Right wing of the Cadet Party. In
this period of its existence Lenin referred to it as “Black Hundred
Thought”. The magazine was suppressed in mid-1918.





[2]
Vekhi (Landmarks)—a symposium issued in Moscow in
the spring of 1909 by counter-revolutionary bourgeois liberal
journalists. In articles on the Russian intelligentsia, the Vekhi
writers at tempted to denigrate the revolutionary-democratic traditions of
the liberation movement in Russia and the views and activities of the
prominent revolutionary democrats of the nineteenth century—V. Belinsky,
N. Dobrolyubov, N. Chernyshevsky and D. Pisarev. They reviled the
revolutionary movement of 1905 and thanked

   

the tsarist government for having saved the bourgeoisie from “the fury of
the people with its bayonets and jails”.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Liberals and Freedom for the Unions









Lenin: The Liberals and Freedom for the Unions







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Liberals and Freedom for the Unions




Published:
Pravda No 101. May 4, 1913.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 74-75.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The Mining Congress has declared itself in favour of the
freedom for the unions. One of the biggest liberal bourgeois newspapers,
Kievskaya
Mysl[1] has this to say about it: 


   “One of the greatest services rendered by the Congress
   is this declaration of the right of workers to organise, this support for
   the demand for freedom of workers’ association.  

   “Since the working-class movement in Russia re-emerged
   after the interval of 1908–09 and greater and more frequent repressions
   have been showered upon it, the demand for freedom of association is
   increasingly becoming a demand put forward by the masses of the
   working-class. Until now, however, the demand for the right of association
   has been regarded as the slogan of the day only in working-class
   circles. Liberal society showed complete indifference towards it. The
   Congress, which included quite a number of industrialists, has now been
   compelled to afford moral support to the demand of the working class.”
   


Here we can clearly see how the liberals are employing their widely
circulated, profit-making press to curtail the demands and slogans
of the working class. The liberals know full well that the workers have
quite different “slogans of the day”, uncurtailed slogans. The
liberals are foisting on the workers their own liberal narrowness
which they claim to be the opinion of “masses” of workers; this is the
old, worn-out method of making the supposedly undeveloped masses
responsible for the unwillingness of the liberal bourgeoisie to face up to
the real source of political privileges and lack of political rights! This
was the method employed by the “liberal” serf-owners who, half a century
ago, said that the abolition of all landowner privileges was
not “a slogan of the day” for “the masses”.  

Characteristically, the liberals give themselves away. The Congress
demand is incomplete, they say. Why? Listen to this: 
 


   “The Congress favoured the right of association but
   could not hide from itself the fact that the realisation of this right
   inevitably presupposes a whole series of legal conditions. It is impossible
   to grant freedom to trade unions where general freedom for unions and
   societies does not exist. Freedom for the working-class press can only be
   established where there is freedom for the liberal and democratic
   press. Freedom of association cannot exist where administrative control is
   the rule and where the masses of the population are kept from participation
   in elections to legislative bodies. The Congress should have indicated the
   need to bring about these conditions if it wished to be consistent.”  


So the Congress was not consistent. In what way was it not consistent?
In its not having listed certain reforms, answers the liberal.


But did you list everything, gentlemen?  

Of course not! You got as far as the “conditions” that are
“presupposed” before certain liberties can be “brought about”,
but you did not say what these conditions were. You stopped there. You are
today afraid of the slogan of the “working-class masses”—not
reforms but “reform”. In substance you adopt the
viewpoint of Struve. Struve took up this slogan in the spring
preceding October 17, but he does not accept it today because the
entire bourgeoisie, even the most liberal, has turned to the right.  

There was a similar situation at the time of the abolition of
serfdom. The consistent democrats, Dobrolyubov and Chernyshevsky, justly
ridiculed the liberals for their reformism, underlying which there
was always a striving to curtail the activities of the masses and defend a
little bit of privilege for the landowners, such as redemption payments for
the land, etc.  

The liberals are wasting their time trying to blame the poverty of
their reformism on the “masses of the working class”! 

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Kievskaya Mysl (Kiev Thought)—a liberal-bourgeois
daily published from December 1906 to December 1918. The Menshevik
liquidators were closely connected with the paper.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## For the Attention of Luch and Pravda Readers









Lenin: For the Attention of Luch and Pravda Readers







V. I.  

      Lenin
For the Attention of Luch and Pravda Readers




Published:
Pravda No. 102, May 5, 1913.

      Signed: Reader of Pravda and Luch.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 76-78.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Both Luch and Pravda have on a number of
occasions published letters from workers demanding that the editors of
these newspapers give them a calm and clear exposition of the substance of
their differences. This is a legitimate and natural demand, and it is worth
while seeing how the two editorial boards have complied with it.  

Under the heading “Controversial

       Issues”[1]
Pravda published the explanatory articles that had been asked
for. What were they about? Those articles outlined and explained Party
decisions on disputed questions. Through the author of those articles
Pravda stated that to decide who is right in the dispute, where
the truth lies, one must examine the facts and documents of Party history,
try to put aside every thing personal, everything extraneous and understand
the social roots of the dispute. The dispute with the liquidators, said
Pravda, “is not a matter of the evil will of certain individuals,
but of the historical situation of the working-class
     movement”.[2]

Those who seriously want to get at the bottom of the dispute must take the
trouble to understand that historical situation.  

“It is necessary to understand,” says Pravda, “the
class origin of the discord and disintegration, to understand what
class interests emanating from a non-proletarian environment
foster confusion among the friends of the

   proletariat.”[3]


This is a serious presentation of the question. It is a direct response
to the workers’ demand that they be helped to

    

understand the serious dispute between Pravda and
Luch. In this way the workers will get to know the facts
of Party life and will learn to distinguish what in this dispute is true
and a matter of principle, and what is shallow and fortuitous they will
seek the class roots of the discord.  

It is possible that a worker, having learned the facts, having read
through the documents, etc., will in the end not agree with
Pravda—that is a matter of his own convictions and his
experience. But in any case, if he follows Pravda’s advice he will
learn a lot and will realise what the whole dispute is about.  

Such is Pravda’s reply to the workers’ demand to make them
familiar with the existing differences. How did Luch act?  

At the same time as Pravda published its articles on
“controversial issues”, Luch printed a lengthy article on the
same subject. Not a single fact is cited in the article, the
author does not attach any social significance at all to the dispute and
does not call the reader’s attention to a single document.  

This enormous article, spread over two issues of the paper, is packed
with gossip and allusions to personalities. The working-class reader is
informed of the “touchiness” and “charming witticisms” of one Marxist,
the “superman” pretensions of a second and the “cynicism” of a
third. All disputes are attributed to “the settling of personal
accounts”, to “discontent over matters of seniority” and to the
“struggle for power” in the Party. And an underhand rumour, worthy of the
official press, is slipped in to suggest that certain “master-hands at
revolution” are to blame for it all be cause they are afraid of losing
their influence if the broad masses of the workers enter into the dispute.


What the author and the newspaper that published his article are aiming
at is to pack people’s heads with gossip, squabbles and personalities, and
thus avoid the necessity of explaining their point of view. It would not be
half as bad if it were merely gossip. But this is the gossip of an
embittered renegade, that is the trouble. Read what he writes at the
beginning of the second part of his article about “provoked and provoking
acts”, about “the dictatorship in the Party of supermen with a cynical
attitude to the masses”; read how he abuses the devoted people of 1905 by

    

calling them “master-hands at revolution” who have behaved in a way that
would be quite “impermissible in an environment with any degree of
culture”. All that,, of course, is lifted straight from
Zemshchina,[4] or from Vekhi!  

This appeared not in Novoye
Vremya[5] but in a paper that calls itself a workers’ newspaper, it
is offered as a reply to working men’s demands for a serious explanation of
the paper’s point of view! And even after that Luch dares protest
against sharper forms of polemic and set itself up as a model of decorum
that wants to put Pravda to shame.  

We most insistently advise those workers who still believe that
Luch, unlike Pravda, is a newspaper that stands for
unification and the cessation of internal squabbles, to read the
above-mentioned article and compare it with the way Pravda
discusses the same questions.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
See pp. 147–56 of this volume.—Ed.  

[2]

** [sic.] See p. 154 of this volume.—Ed.  

[3]

** [sic.—shared footnote] See p. 154 of this volume.—Ed.

 



[4]
Zemshchina (Land Affairs)—a Black-Hundred daily
published in St. Petersburg from July 1909 to February 1917. It was
subsidised by the tsarist government and the Council of the United
Nobility.





[5]
Novoye Vremya (New Times)—a daily newspaper
published in St. Petersburg from 1868 to October 1917. It was at first a
moderately liberal paper but towards the end of the 1870s it became an
organ of reactionary nobility and bureaucratic circles. The paper conducted
a struggle not only against the revolutionary movement, but also against
the liberal-bourgeois movement; from 1905 onwards it was one of the organs
of the Black Hundreds. Lenin referred to Novoye Vremya as an
example of the venal press.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Twenty-Fifth Anniversary of the Death of Joseph Dietzgen









Lenin: Twenty-Fifth Anniversary of the Death of Joseph Dietzgen







V. I.  

      Lenin
Twenty-Fifth Anniversary of the Death of Joseph Dietzgen




Published:
Pravda No. 102, May 5, 1913.

      Signed: V. Ilyin.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 79-82.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Joseph Dietzgen, a tannery worker and one of the most
eminent German Social-Democratic philosophical writers, died twenty-five
years ago, in 1888.  

Joseph Dietzgen was the author of a number of works (most of them
translated into Russian) that include The Nature of the Workings of the
Human Mind (published in 1869), A Socialist’s Excursions into the
Theory of Knowledge, Acquisition of Philosophy, etc. It was Karl Marx,
in a letter to Kugelmann on December 5, 1868, who made the best appraisal
of Dietzgen and his place in the history of philosophy and of the
working-class movement: 

“A fairly long time ago he sent me a fragment of a manuscript on the
‘faculty of thought’ which, in spite of a certain confusion and of too
frequent repetition, contains much that is excellent and—as the
independent product of a working man—admirable.”  

Such is the importance of Dietzgen—a worker who arrived at
dialectical materialism, i.e., Marx’s philosophy, in dependently. In
forming an assessment of the worker Dietzgen it is of great value to
remember that he never considered himself the founder of a school.  

Dietzgen spoke of Marx as the leader of a trend as early as
1873, when few people understood Marx. Dietzgen emphasised that Marx and
Engels “possessed the necessary philosophical training”. And in 1886, a
long time after the publication of Engels’s Anti-D\"uhring, one of
the chief Marxist philosophical works, Dietzgen wrote of Marx and Engels as
the “recognised founders” of a trend.  
 

This must be borne in mind when judging the many sup porters of
bourgeois philosophy, i.e., idealism and agnosticism (including Machism),
who attempt to take advantage of “a certain confusion” in
Dietzgen’s writing. Dietzgen himself would have ridiculed such admirers and
would have repulsed them.  

To become politically conscious, workers should read Dietzgen but
should never for a moment forget that he does not
always give a true picture of the doctrine of Marx and Engels, who are
the only writers from whom philosophy can be learned.  

Dietzgen wrote at a time when simplified, vulgarised
materialism was most widespread. Dietzgen, therefore, laid his
greatest stress on the historical changes that had taken place in
materialism, on the dialectical character of materialism, that is,
on the need to support the point of view of development, to understand that
all human knowledge is relative, to understand the multilateral connections
between, and interdependence of, all phenomena in the universe, and to
develop the materialism of natural history to a materialist conception of
history.  

Because he lays so much stress on the relativity of human knowledge,
Dietzgen often becomes confused and makes incorrect concessions to idealism
and agnosticism. Idealism in philosophy is a defence, sometimes extremely
elaborate, sometimes less so, of clericalism, of a doctrine that places
faith above science, or side by side with science, or in some way or
another gives faith a place. Agnosticism (from the Greek words “a”
no and “gnosis” knowledge) is vacillation between
materialism and idealism, i.e., in practice it is vacillation between
materialist science and clericalism. Among the agnostics are the followers
of Kant (the Kantians), Hume (the positivists, realists and others) and the
present-day Machists. This is why some of the most reactionary bourgeois
philosophers, the most thorough-placed obscurantists and direct defenders
of clericalism, try to “use” Dietzgen’s mistakes.  

By and large, however, Dietzgen was a materialist. He was an enemy of
clericalism and agnosticism. “The only thing we have in common with
earlier materialists,” wrote Dietzgen, “is that we accept matter as the
prerequisite to,

    

or foundation of, the idea.” That “only thing” is precisely the
essence of philosophical materialism.  

“The materialist theory of knowledge,” wrote Dietzgen, “may be
reduced to a recognition of the fact that the human organ of knowledge does
not irradiate any metaphysical light but is a bit of nature that reflects
other bits of nature.” That is the materialist theory of the
reflection in human knowledge of eternally moving and changing
matter, a theory that evokes hatred and horror, calumny and distortion on
the part of all official, professorial philosophy. And how Dietzgen berated
and branded the “certificated lackeys of clericalism”, the idealist
professors, the realists and others—how he lambasted them with the deep
passion of a true revolutionary!  “Of all parties,” Dietzgen rightly
said, speaking of the philosophical “parties”, i.e., materialism and
idealism, “the vilest is the party of the centre”.  

To this “vile party” belong the Luch editorial board and
Mr. S. Semkovsky (Luch No. 92). The editors made a tiny
reservation. “We do not share the general philosophical point of view”,
they say, but the exposition of Dietzgen’s views is “correct and clear”.


That is an appalling untruth. Mr. Semkovsky unconscionably misquoted
and distorted Dietzgen, seizing upon the “confusion” and
ignoring Marx’s appraisal of Dietzgen. Incidentally, both
Plekhanov, a socialist who possesses the greatest knowledge of the
philosophy of Marxism, and the best Marxists of Europe have recognised
that appraisal in full.  

Mr. Semkovsky distorts both philosophical materialism and Dietzgen,
talking nonsense on the question of “one or two worlds” (this,
supposedly, is the “key question”! Learn a little, my friend, at least
read Engels’s Ludwig Feuerbach) and on the question of the
universe and phenomena (Dietzgen is supposed to have reduced the real world
to nothing but phenomena; this is clerical and professorial slander of
Dietzgen).  

It is impossible to list all Mr. Semkovsky’s distortions. Let workers
interested in Marxism know that the Luch editors are a union
of liquidators of Marxism. Some want to liquidate the underground,
i.e., the Party of the proletariat (Mayevsky, Sedov, F. D., etc.), others,
the idea of the

    

hegemony of the proletariat (Potresov, Koltsov, etc.), the third, the
philosophical materialism of Marx (Mr. Semkovsky & Co.), the fourth,
the internationalism of proletarian socialism (the Bund members Kosovsky,
Medem and other supporters of “cultural-national autonomy”), the fifth,
the economic theory of Marx (Mr. Maslov with his theory of rent and the
“new” sociology) and so on and so forth.  

This blatant distortion of Marxism by Mr. Semkovsky and the editors who
defend him is only one of the more obvious examples of the “activities”
of this literary “union of liquidators”.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Bourgeoisie and Peace









Lenin: The Bourgeoisie and Peace







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Bourgeoisie and Peace




Published:
Pravda No. 103, May 7, 1913.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 83-84.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The conference of French and German parliamentarians held
in Berne last Sunday, May 11 (April 28 O.S.), reminds us once more of the
attitude of the European bourgeoisie to war and peace.  

The initiative in calling the conference was taken by representatives
from Alsace-Lorraine and Switzerland. Socialist deputies from France and
Germany turned up in full force. Of the bourgeois deputies quite a number
of French Radicals and Radical-Socialists (petty-bourgeois democrats who
are, in fact, alien and, for the greater part, hostile to socialism). An
insignificant number of bourgeois deputies from Germany attended. The
National-Liberals (midway between the Cadets and the Octobrists, something
like our “Progressists”) confined themselves to sending greetings. From
the party of the “Centre” (the Catholic petty-bourgeois party in Germany
that loves playing at democracy) two promised to come
but—decided not to turn up!  

Among the, prominent socialists who spoke at the conference were
Greulich, a veteran Swiss Social-Democrat, and August Bebel.  

A resolution condemning chauvinism and declaring that the overwhelming
majority of the two nations, French and German, want peace and demand the
settlement of international conflicts by courts of arbitration, was adopted
unanimously.  

There is no doubt that the conference was an impressive demonstration
in favour of peace. But it would be a huge mistake to trust the
tender-hearted speeches of those few bourgeois deputies who attended the
conference and voted for the resolution. If they seriously wanted peace
those

    

bourgeois deputies should have condemned outright the in crease in
Germany’s armaments (the German army is to be increased by 140,000 officers
and men; this new government proposal will no doubt be adopted by the
bourgeois parties of Germany despite the vigorous protests of the
socialists); they should also have condemned in exactly the same way the
French government proposal to increase army service to three years.  

That was something the bourgeois deputies would not venture to
do. Still less were they capable of making a resolute demand for a militia,
that is, for the replacement of the standing army by arming the entire
people. This measure, which does not go beyond the bounds of bourgeois
society, is the only one that can democratise the army and advance the
question of peace even one step forward in a manner at all
serious.  

But no, the European bourgeoisie clings frantically to the militarists
and reactionaries out of fear of the working-class movement. The
insignificant number of petty-bourgeois democrats is not capable of a
strong desire for peace and still less capable of bringing it about. Power
is in the hands of the banks, the trusts and big capital in general. The
one guarantee of peace is the organised, conscious movement of the working
class.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Awakening of Asia









Lenin: The Awakening of Asia







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Awakening of Asia




Published:
Pravda No. 103, May 7, 1913.

      Signed: F..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 85-86.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Was it so long ago that China was considered typical of the
lands that had been standing still for centuries? Today China is a land of
seething political activity, the scene of a virile social movement and of a
democratic upsurge. Following the 1905 movement in Russia, the democratic
revolution spread to the whole of Asia—to Turkey, Persia, China. Ferment
is growing in British India.  

A significant development is the spread of the revolutionary democratic
movement to the Dutch East Indies, to Java and the other Dutch colonies,
with a population of some forty million.  

First, the democratic movement is developing among the masses of Java,
where a nationalist movement has arisen under the banner of
Islam. Secondly, capitalism has created a local intelligentsia consisting
of acclimatised Europeans who demand independence for the Dutch East
Indies. Thirdly, the fairy large Chinese population of Java and the other
islands have brought the revolutionary movement from their native land.


Describing this awakening of the Dutch East Indies, van Ravesteyn, a
Dutch Marxist, points out that the age-old despotism and tyranny of the
Dutch Government now meet with resolute resistance and protest from the
masses of the native population.  

The usual events of a pre-revolutionary period have begun. Parties and
unions are being founded at amazing speed. The government is banning them,
thereby only fanning the resentment and accelerating the growth of the
movement. Recently, for example, it dissolved the “Indian Party” because
its programme and rules spoke of the striving for

    

independence. The Dutch
Derzhimordas[1] (with the approval, incidentally, of the
clericals and liberals—European liberalism is rotten to the core!)
regarded this clause as a criminal attempt at separation from the
Netherlands! The dissolved party was, of course, revived under a different
name.  

A National Union of the native population has been formed in Java. It
already has a membership of 80,000 and is holding mass meetings. There is
no stopping the growth of the democratic movement.  

World capitalism and the 1905 movement in Russia have finally aroused
Asia. Hundreds of millions of the down trodden and benighted have awakened
from medieval stagnation to a view life and are rising to fight for
elementary human rights and democracy.  

The workers of the advanced countries follow with interest and
inspiration this powerful growth of the liberation movement, in all its
various forms, in every part of the world. The bourgeoisie of Europe,
scared by the might of the working-class movement, is embracing reaction,
militarism, clericalism and obscurantism. But the proletariat of the
European countries and the young democracy of Asia, fully confident of its
strength and with abiding faith in the masses, are advancing to take the
place of this decadent and moribund bourgeoisie.  

The awakening of Asia and the beginning of the struggle for power by
the advanced proletariat of Europe are a symbol of the new phase in world
history that began early this century.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Derzhimorda—the name of a policeman in Gogol’s
Inspector-General, a boorish, insolent oppressor, a man of
violence.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Separatists in Russia and Separatists in Austria









Lenin: Separatists in Russia and Separatists in Austria







V. I.  

      Lenin
Separatists in Russia and Separatists in Austria




Published:
Pravda No. 104, May 8, 1913.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 87-88.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Among the various representatives of Marxism in Russia the Jewish
Marxists, or, to be more exact, some of them—those known as the
Bundists—are carrying out a policy of separatism. From the
history of the working-class movement it is known that the Bundists
left the Party in 1903, when the majority of the party of the
working class refused to accept their demand to be recognised as the
“sole” representatives of the Jewish proletariat.  

This exit from the Party was a manifestation of separatism deeply
harmful to the working-class movement. But, in fact, the Jewish workers
have entered and continue to enter the Party everywhere in spite of the
Bund. Side by side with the separate (isolated) organisations of
the Bundists, there have always existed general
organisations of the workers—Jewish, Russian, Polish, Lithuanian,
Latvian, etc.  

From the history of Marxism in Russia we know, further more, that when
the Bund in 1906 again returned to the Party, the Party stipulated the
condition that separatism should cease, i.e., that there should be local
unity of all the Marxist workers of whatever
nationality. But this condition was not fulfilled by the Bundists,
despite its special confirmation by a special decision of the
Party in December
1908.[1] 

That, shortly, is the history of Bundist separatism in
Russia. Unfortunately, it is little known to the workers, and little
thought is given to it. Those having the closest practical acquaintance
with this history are the Polish, the Lithuanian (especially in Vilna in
1907) and the Latvian Marxists (at the same time, in Riga), and the
Marxists of South and Western Russia; It is well known, incidentally,

    

that the Caucasian Marxists, including all the Caucasian
Mensheviks, have until quite recently maintained local unity and
even fusion of the workers of all nationalities, and have condemned the
separatism of the Bundists.  

We should also note that the prominent Bundist, Medem, in the
well-known book, Forms of the National Movement (St. Petersburg,
1910), admits that the Bundists have never implemented unity in the
localities, i.e., they have always been separatists.  

In the international working-class movement, the question of separatism
came to the front most urgently in 1910, at the Copenhagen Congress. The
Czechs came forward as separatists in Austria, and destroyed the
unity that had existed previously between the Czech and German workers. The
International Congress at Copenhagen unanimously condemned
separatism, but the Czechs have unfortunately remained separatists right up
to the present.  

Feeling themselves isolated in the proletarian International, the Czech
separatists spent a long time searching unsuccessfully for supporters. Only
now have they found some—in the Bundists and liquidators. The
&chatechoslavische Sozialdemokrat, the bit of a journal published
by the separatists in German, printed an article in its issue No. 3
(Prague, April 15, 1913) under the title “A Turn for the Better”. This
“turn” that is supposed to be for the “better” (actually, towards
separatism) the Czech separatists saw—where do you think, reader? In
Nasha
Zarya,[2] the liquidators’ journal, in an article by the
Bundist V. Kosovsky!  

At last the Czech separatists are not alone in the proletarian
International!  Naturally they are glad to be able to rope in even
liquidators, even Bundists. But all class-conscious workers in Russia
should give this fact some thought:
the Czech separatists, unanimously condemned by the International, are
clinging to the coat-tails of liquidators and Bundists.  

Only that complete unity (in every locality, and from top to bottom) of
the workers of all nations, which has existed so long and so successfully
in the Caucasus, corresponds to the interests and tasks of the workers’
movement.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
The decisions here referred to were Draft Terms for the Union of the
Bund with the R.S.D.L.P. (adopted at the Fourth [Unity] Congress of the
R.S.D.L.P. in 1906) and the resolution on “The Unity of National
Organisations in the Localities” (adopted at the Fifth [All-Russian]
Conference of the R.S.D.L.P. in 1908).





[2]
Nasha Zarya (Our Dawn)—a Menshevik liquidator
monthly published legally in St. Petersburg from 1910 to 1914. It served as
a rallying centre for the liquidationist forces in Russia.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Resettlement Scheme Again









Lenin: The Resettlement Scheme Again







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Resettlement Scheme Again




Published:
Pravda No. 105, May 9, 1913.

      Signed: V. I..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 89-90.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

In Pravda No. 96

(300)[1]

I quoted the chief resettlement data for Russia. Those data were up to
1911, and that year was incomplete (11 months). In Rech,
Mr. Kaufmann has now quoted data from official, recently published records
for the whole of 1911 and 1912.  

It appears that the number of settlers has increased, albeit very
slightly—from 190,000 in 1911 to 196,500 in 1912. The number of returning
settlers, however, has greatly in creased—from 36,000 (1911) to 58,000
(1912).  

The explanation of this phenomenon discloses to us still more
profoundly the collapse of the new agrarian policy. Until now between three
quarters and four-fifths of all settlers have come from the Ukrainian and
Central Black-Earth gubernias. That is the centre of Russia where the
survivals of serfdom are strongest, where wages are lowest and where the
mass of the peasantry live under particularly difficult conditions.  

The ruined, impoverished, hungry masses of this centre—the “heart”
of Russia—rushed for resettlement (1907–09) and provided, in the end, 60
per cent of those returning, that is, of those who were ruined and still
more embittered.  

A wave of settlers has now come from another area, this time from the
Volgaside gubernias, which until recently produced very few settlers.  

What is the reason?  

The “harvest failure”, the famine of 1911!... The famine embraced a
new part of Russia. A new wave of fugitives has left for Siberia. We
already know that Siberia will

    

ruin and embitter the Volgaside peasants still further, as it did the
peasants of Central Russia.  

In other words, resettlement to Siberia has shown first the peasants of
Central Russia and now those of the Volga side that salvation cannot be
achieved in this way.  

The “new” agrarian policy, ruining one area of Russia after another,
the peasants of one district after another, is gradually making it clear to
all peasants that their real salvation is not to be found there.  
 

Notes
 

[1]
See p. 66 of this volume—Ed.  
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Working Class and the National Question









Lenin: The Working Class and the National Question







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Working Class and the National Question




Published:
Pravda No. 106, May 10, 1913.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 91-92.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Russia is a motley country as far as her nationalities are
concerned. Government policy, which is the policy of the landowners
supported by the bourgeoisie, is steeped in Black-Hundred nationalism.


This policy is spearheaded against the majority of the peoples
of Russia who constitute the majority of her population. And
alongside this we have the bourgeois nationalism of other nations (Polish,
Jewish, Ukrainian, Georgian, etc.), raising its head and trying to
divert the working class from its great world-wide tasks by a
national struggle or a struggle for national culture.  

The national question must be clearly considered and solved by all
class-conscious workers.  

When the bourgeoisie was fighting for freedom together with the people,
together with all those who labour, it stood for full freedom and equal
rights for the nations. Advanced countries, Switzerland, Belgium, Norway
and others, provide us with an example of how free nations under a really
democratic system live together in peace or separate peacefully from each
other.  

Today the bourgeoisie fears the workers and is seeking an alliance with
the Purishkeviches, with the reactionaries, and is betraying democracy,
advocating oppression or unequal rights among nations and corrupting the
workers with nationalist slogans.  

In our times the proletariat alone upholds the real freedom of nations
and the unity of workers of all nations.  

For different nations to live together in peace and freedom or to
separate and form different states (if that is more convenient

    

for them), a full democracy, upheld by the working class, is essential. No
privileges for any nation or any one language! Not even the slightest
degree of oppression or the slightest injustice in respect of a national
minority—such are the principles of working-class democracy.  

The capitalists and landowners want, at all costs, to keep the workers
of different nations apart while the powers that be live splendidly
together as shareholders in profitable concerns involving millions (such as
the Lena Gold fields); Orthodox Christians and Jews, Russians and Germans,
Poles and Ukrainians, everyone who possesses capital, exploit the
workers of all nations in company.  

Class-conscious workers stand for full unity among the workers
of all nations in every educational, trade union, political, etc., workers’
organisation. Let the Cadet gentle men disgrace themselves by denying or
belittling the importance of equal rights for Ukrainians. Let the
bourgeoisie of all nations find comfort in lying phrases about national
culture, national tasks, etc., etc.  

The workers will not allow themselves to be disunited by sugary
speeches about national culture, or “national cultural autonomy”. The
workers of all nations together, concertedly, uphold full freedom and
complete equality of rights in organisations common to all—and that is
the guarantee of genuine culture.  

The workers of the whole world are building up their own
internationalist culture, which the champions of freedom and the enemies of
oppression have for long been preparing. To the old world, the world of
national oppression, national bickering, and national isolation the workers
counterpose a new world, a world of the unity of the working people of all
nations, a world in which there is no place for any privileges or for the
slightest degree of oppression of man by man.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## British Socialist Party Conference









Lenin: British Socialist Party Conference







V. I.  

      Lenin
British Socialist Party Conference




Published:
Pravda No. 109, May 14, 1913.

      Signed: V..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 93-95.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The British Socialist Party was founded in Manchester in
1911. It included the former Socialist Party, which had earlier been known
as the Social Democratic Federation, and several isolated groups and
individuals, among them Victor Grayson, a very fiery socialist but one not
strong in principles and given to phrase-mongering.  

The Second Conference of the British Socialist Party was held in the
seaside town Blackpool from May 10 to May 12 (N S.). Only 100 delegates
were present, less than one-third of the full number, and this
circumstance, coupled with the bitter struggle of the majority of the
delegates against the old party executive, produced a very bad impression
on outside observers. The British bourgeois press (exactly like that of
Russia) does its best to pick out, colour up and make a splash of episodes
from any particularly acute struggle between the party and its executive.


The bourgeois press is not concerned with the ideological
content of the struggle inside the socialist movement. All it needs is
sensation, and a spicy bit of scandal....  

The ideological content of the struggle in the B.S.P., however, was
very serious. The old executive was headed by Hyndman, one of the founders
of the party. He has been acting for a number of years without any
attention to the party, and even against the party, on the important
question of armaments and war. Hyndman has got it into his head that
Germany is threatening to crush and enslave Britain and that socialists
should, therefore, support the demand

    

for a “proper” (i.e., strong) navy for the defence of Britain!  

Socialists in the role of supporters of a “strong” navy—and this in
a country whose navy helps enslave and plunder in the most shameless,
feudal manner the three hundred millions of India’s population,
tens of millions of people in Egypt and other colonies.  

Understandably, this fancy idea of Hyndman’s pleased the British
bourgeoisie (the Conservatives and Liberals). It can also be understood
that British Social-Democrats—be it said to their credit—would not
tolerate this disgrace and shame and heatedly opposed it.  

The struggle was a long and stubborn one; attempts at a compromise were
made, but Hyndman was incorrigible. It is greatly to the advantage of
British socialism that Hyndman was forced to leave the executive at this
Conference and the composition of the executive was, in general, changed by
75 per cent (of its eight members only two were re-elected—Quelch and
Irving).  

The Conference adopted a resolution against the old executive which
reads as follows: 


   “This Conference congratulates our French and German
   comrades on their vigorous opposition to the increase of armaments in their
   respective countries, and pledges the British Socialist Party, as an
   integral part of the International Socialist Party, bound by the
   resolutions on war passed at Stuttgart and Basle, 1912, to pursue the same
   policy in Great Britain, with the object of checking the growth of all
   forms of militarism and of reducing the existing abominably high
   expenditure on armaments.”  


The resolution is sharply worded. But the truth has to be told, even if
sharply. The British Social-Democrats would have forfeited their right to
struggle against the opportunists of the so-called Independent (independent
of socialism, but dependent on the Liberals) Labour Party if they had not
sharply opposed the nationalist sins of their executive.  

Let the bourgeois press display their wrath and their buffoonery over
the internal struggle among Social-Democrats. The Social-Democrats do not
regard themselves as saints; they know that now and again the proletariat
becomes

    

infected by some dirty disease from the bourgeoisie in its
environment—this is inevitable in filthy, disgusting capitalist society
But the Social-Democrats are able to heal their party with direct and
fearless criticism. In Britain, too, they will certainly cure the disease.


 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Is the Condition of the Peasants Improving or Worsening?









Lenin: Is the Condition of the Peasants Improving or Worsening?







V. I.  

      Lenin
Is the Condition of the Peasants Improving or Worsening?




Published:
Pravda No. 111, May 16, 1913.

      Signed: F..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 96-98.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Under this heading some official ink-slinger, a
Mr. Y. P—v, published an article in the official
Torgovo-Promyshlennaya
Gazeta[1] (No. 100), to prove, of course, that the peasants’
condition is improving and “undoubtedly ... is steadily progressing year
by year”.  

It is extraordinarily instructive to note that the figures quoted by
the author show the exact opposite! This is typical proof of the
shameless lying of official writers and official newspapers!  

What are the author’s figures? First, be it noted that he does not give
an exact source. We should not for a moment conclude, therefore, that the
official ink-slinger is quoting this unknown source at first hand, or that
he is quoting correctly.  

Let us, however, for a minute suppose that he is quoting correctly.



   “Some Zemstvos,” writes the author, “for instance, the
   Moscow Zemstvo, resort to questionnaires to determine whether the condition
   of the peasants is worsening or improving. The Zemstvo’s local
   correspondents provide general answers that are then summarised.  

   “The result of these lengthy investigations (taking six years),”
   writes Mr. Y. P—v, “was a rather interesting numerical summary for the
   central zone. To each hundred answers of all types we get” 





Answers indicating the economic condition of the
    peasants:


Year
Improved
Worsened
Unchanged
Total




1907 
15
44
41
100


1908 
8
53
39
100


1909 
8
64
28
100


1910 
21
34
45
100


1911 
32
16
52
100


1912 
38
15
47
100




 

And so the writer in an official newspaper draws the conclusion—“in
the last three years ... we have seen a continuous improvement in the
economic level of the peasantry, with a corresponding reduction in the
percentage under the headings ‘worsened’ and ‘unchanged’.”  

Examine the figures carefully. For the first three years there was an
obvious and considerable worsening. For the last three years there
was an improvement, but to a far lesser degree than the worsening
of the first three years!  

Mr. Y. P—v himself admits that these fluctuations “are coincident
with the fluctuations in harvests”.  

Why does he take the three years with good harvests for his
general conclusions and ignore the three years with bad
harvests? What would we think of a merchant who summed up the results of
his trading by showing his profit and concealing his losses? We
should call him a swindler, should we not, Mr. Official Writer in an
official newspaper?  

Now let us make the simple calculation of profit and loss that is
obligatory for everyone except swindlers, taking into consideration the
“minuses” as well as the “pluses”, the “bad” as well as the “good”
harvests. To do this we must add up the figures for the six years and
divide by six (amazingly clever, Mr. Official Journalist, isn’t it?). We
then get the average for all the six counter-revolutionary years.


The figures are these. From 100 answers: 

Favourable (“improved”)—20 

Unfavourable (“worsened”)—38 

Average (“unchanged”)—42.  

That is the result. What does it mean?  

It means that the peasants are growing poorer and being
ruined. For the six years of the counter-revolution the number of
unfavourable answers is, on the average, almost twice as great as
the number of favourable answers!  

This conclusion can be demonstrated clearly by applying the figures to
the whole of Russia, to 20,000,000 peasant families, as follows: 

In six years 4,000,000 peasant families have impoved their condition, 7,600,000 have grown poorer and
8,400,000

    

families have remained at the former (i.e., impoverished) level!  

And this is in a period of high prices when the landowners and
bourgeoisie are raking in gold by the shovelful.  

In all probability the peasants will thank and bless the landowners’
Duma and the government of the landowners.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Torgovo-Promyshlennaya Gazeta (Commercial and Industrial
Gazette)—government daily published in St. Petersburg from 1893 to
September 1918. The newspaper carried statistics and economic reviews of
industry, trade, agriculture and finance.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Backward Europe and Advanced Asia









Lenin: Backward Europe and Advanced Asia







V. I.  

      Lenin
Backward Europe and Advanced Asia




Published:
Pravda No. 113, May 18, 1913.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 99-100.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The comparison sounds like a paradox. Who does not know
that Europe is advanced and Asia backward? But the words taken for this
title contain a bitter truth.  

In civilised and advanced Europe, with its highly developed machine
industry, its rich, multiform culture and its constitutions, a point in
history has been reached when the commanding bourgeoisie, fearing the
growth and increasing strength of the proletariat, comes out in support of
every thing backward, moribund and medieval. The bourgeoisie is hying out
its last days, and is joining with all obsolete and obsolescent forces in
an attempt to preserve tottering wage-slavery.  

Advanced Europe is commanded by a bourgeoisie which supports everything
that is backward. The Europe of our day is advanced not thanks to,
but in spite of, the bourgeoisie, for it is only the proletariat
that is adding to the million-strong army of fighters for a better
future. It alone preserves and spreads implacable enmity towards
backwardness, savagery, privilege, slavery and the humiliation of man by
man.  

In “advanced” Europe, the sole advanced class is the
proletariat. As for the living bourgeoisie, it is prepared to go to any
length of savagery, brutality and crime in order to uphold dying capitalist
slavery.  

And a more striking example of this decay of the entire
European bourgeoisie can scarcely be cited than the support it is lending
to reaction in Asia in furtherance of the selfish aims of the
financial manipulators and capitalist swindlers.  

Everywhere in Asia a mighty democratic movement is growing, spreading
and gaining in strength. The bourgeoisie

    

there is as yet siding with the people against
reaction. Hundreds of millions of people are awakening to life,
light and freedom. What delight this world movement is arousing in the
hearts of all class-conscious workers, who know that the path to
collectivism lies through democracy! What sympathy for young Asia imbues
all honest democrats!  

And “advanced” Europe? It is plundering China and helping the foes of
democracy, the foes of freedom in China!  

Here is a simple but instructive little calculation. A new Chinese loan
has been concluded against Chinese democracy:
“Europe” is for Y\"uan Shih-kai, who is preparing a military
dictatorship. Why does it support him? Because it is good business. The
loan has been concluded for about 250,000,000 rubles, at the rate of 84 to
a 100. That means that the bourgeois of “Europe” will pay the
Chinese 210,000,000 rubles, but will take from the public 225,000,000
rubles. There you have at one stroke—a clear profit of fifteen
million rubles in a few weeks! It really is a “clear”
profit, isn’t it?  

What if the Chinese people do not recognise the loan? China, after all,
is a republic, and the majority in parliament are against the
loan.  

Oh, then “advanced” Europe will raise a cry about “civilisation”,
“order”, “culture” and “fatherland”! It will set the guns in
motion and, in alliance with Y\"uan Shih-kai, that adventurer, traitor and
friend of reaction, crush a republic in “backward” Asia.  

All the commanders of Europe, all the European bourgeoisie are in
alliance with all the forces of reaction and medievalism in China.


But all young Asia, that is, the hundreds of millions of Asian working
people, has a reliable ally in the proletariat of all civilised
countries. No force on earth can prevent its victory, which will liberate
both the peoples of Europe and the peoples of Asia.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## A Discreditable Role!









Lenin: A Discreditable Role!







V. I.  

      Lenin
A Discreditable Role!
(ONCE MORE FOR THE ATTENTION OF LUCH AND PRAVDA READERS)




Published:
Pravda No. 114, May 19, 1913.

      Signed: Reader.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 101-102.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

In Pravda
       No. 102[1]

I called the attention of reader comrades to an article in Luch
Nos. 93 and 94.  

I compared that article with those published simultaneously in
Pravda under the heading “Controversial
      Issues”.[2]

I said that Pravda in its articles gives the reader facts and
documents with which to decide disputed questions of organisation and
tactics while Luch in its article gives him gossip and personal
insults that do not help the workers to under stand the dispute and only
serve to clutter up their heads.  

I said that the Luch article speaks of the active people of
1905 in the same terms as the organs of terrified landowners and of
liberals embittered against the workers.  

Luck has sent the worker Herman against me. The worker Herman
is a man of determination and possesses a ready tongue. He has berated me
in no uncertain terms. I, he says, “want to mislead our reader comrades”
and am telling “obvious untruths” and nothing of what I said has ever
actually happened. Having thus accused me of a number of crimes, the worker
Herman then rounds off his article with a list of titles of articles
printed in Luch.  

Very good! But what about the article in Luch that I actually
spoke about, and which I quoted? The worker Herman does not say a
single word about that article, makes no attempt to dispute the
correctness of the words I quoted from it, and offers nothing to contest my
characterisation of the article as impermissible in the working-class
press. What reason is there for that? You cursed me uphill and down dale,
my dear man, but not only could you not dis

    

prove a single word of what I said about the Luch article, you did
not even try to.  

Did the article I wrote about appear in issues 93 and 94? It did. And
so what right have you to state that “nothing of the sort has actually
happened”?  

Is that article full of gossip and bickering instead of a calm analysis
of the disagreements? You did not dare say a word against that! What right
have you to suspect me of a desire to “mislead the comrades”?  

Did you understand what you were writing? Did you realise that you, in
accusing a contributor to a working-class newspaper of “obvious untruths”
and a desire to “mislead readers”, have to be ready to answer for it, not
to me, but to all those who stand behind Pravda, that is, to its
working-class readers?  

You undertook to defend Luch against my accusation that the
article in issues 93 and 94 does not explain disputed questions but
clutters up the heads of its readers with gossip and “personalities”. For
that purpose you published in the columns of the same Luch a
number of unfounded accusations and obvious libels (“Reader” [referring
to me] wants to mislead our reader comrades), i.e., you did exactly what I
accused Luch of doing in its article in issue 94. Your article
was a confirmation of my accusation against Luch and not a refutation
of it.  

Perhaps you will now say—it was all due to your inexperience. Very
good. But your article was read by the editors. Why did they not warn you?
Why did they not tell you that when accusing me you would first of all have
to refute what I had said about the facts I mentioned, and not evade them
by further silence? Why? Apparently because the editors knew that
everything I had said about the article in issues 93 and 94 was true, they
knew that what I said could not be refuted. That is why they allowed you to
indulge in plain vituperation, that is, they repeated the very method I had
accused them of in my first article.  

Was this a creditable role that you, who signed yourself “worker”,
played in the hands of the Luch editors?  

 

Notes
 

[1]
See pp. 76–78 of this volume.—Ed. 

[2]
See pp. 147–56 of this volume.—Ed.
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Land Question Settled—Landowner Fashion









Lenin: The Land Question Settled—Landowner Fashion







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Land Question Settled—Landowner Fashion




Published:
Pravda No. 115, May 21, 1913.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 103-105.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

As usual there was an immoderate amount of rubbish in the
budget debate in the Fourth State Duma. The vain efforts of Markov the
Second to trip up Kokovtsov, and the vain efforts of Kokovtsov “to charm
away” with words the feudal character of “our” policy and our budget,
and the vain efforts of the Cadets to assure a gullible public that
Kokovtsov “admitted it was the Cadets who had to be taken into
consideration” in the Fourth Duma—this was just a lot of tedious,
overworked and hypocritical rubbish.  

There are, however, a few grains of truth in this rubbish heap. The
Markovs, Kokovtsovs and Shingaryovs tried to hide them deeper in it. But it
is worth while pulling them out.  


   “I have dealt at such length with the settlement of the
   land question,” Kokovtsov exclaimed on May 13, “because in that question
   is contained the whole solution of Russia’s future....”  


It was not the “whole” solution and the “future” in general that
needed to be discussed, but the future of the June Third
system,[1] which gives all power to the “bureaucracy” and the feudal
landowners. Under the old rural organisation we cannot
retain power—that was what the landowners, taught by bitter experience,
had decided. In order to retain power they had to arrange in their own way
for the reorganisation of the old countryside on bourgeois lines. That is
the basis and the essence of “the land question”.  


   “... Whether the government will be able to do this,
   whether it [the settlement of the land question] will bring the benefit the
   government and the legislative institutions expect,” continued the
   Minister, “the future will show....”  

 

Of course, the future will reveal everything and show
everything. It will show the outcome of the efforts of
the feudals and the efforts of the proletariat that marches at the head of
the democrats. But the figures given by the “serious” (by Cadet
standards) Mr. Kokovtsov show absolutely nothing. The number of
applications for land is rapidly increasing—and Mr. Kokovtsov is
enraptured, the Rights in the Duma are enraptured. The number of
applications was: in 1907—221,000; in 1908—385,000; in 1909—711,000;
in 1910—651,000; in 1911—683,000; in 1912—1,183,000; total 3,834,000.


Arrangements have been made for only 1,592,000 peasant households.


Such are the Minister’s “proofs” and his material for judging the
future.  

On that very same May 13 the government newspaper
Novoye Vremya published data for the house-to-house Zemstvo census
taken in 1911 in Samara Uyezd. The number of households obtaining titles to
land amounted in that uyezd to forty per cent, that is, higher than the
average for Russia. This uyezd, therefore, is most “favourable” for the
government.  

And how did it turn out? Of the total number obtaining titles to land
less than three out of a hundred (2.9 per cent) own real, separate
farmsteads; only, one-sixteenth (6.5 per cent) own their land in one piece
and more than nine-tenths (90.6 per cent) have land in strips in
different places!  

Nine-tenths of the title-holding peasants farm strips that are isolated
from each other, just as they did before. Farming conditions are even
worse than before because formerly the commune could
“correct” the strip system to some extent by frequent redistributions.


In a mere four years a third of the land transferred to the
title-holders has already passed into other hands. Loss of land is
increasing, impoverishment is increasing still more rapidly and there is
growing confusion because of the strips of land. Unbelievable poverty is
increasing in the villages, as is the number of famines. The number of
landless peasants, pure proletarians, is increasing. The number of
impoverished “would-be proprietors” is increasing; they are
trapped both by the old bondage and by the system

    

of allotting scattered strips of land that has resulted from the notorious
landowners’ solution to the land problem.  

Apparently this bondage will not be abolished by the
landowners’ solution to the peasant land problem. It can
only be cured if the land question is settled on broad democratic lines.


 
Notes
 
 



[1]
The June Third Law

marked the beginning of the period known as the “Stolypin reaction” (also
the June Third system).










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Armaments and Capitalism









Lenin: Armaments and Capitalism







V. I.  

      Lenin
Armaments and Capitalism




Published:
Pravda No. 115, May 21, 1913.

      Signed: Fr..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 106-107.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Britain is one of the richest, freest and most advanced
countries in the world. The armaments fever has long afflicted
British “society” and the British Government, in exactly the same way as
it has the French, German and other governments.  

And now the British press, particularly the labour press, is publishing
very interesting data, which reveal the ingenious capitalist “mechanics”
of arms manufacture. Britain’s naval armaments are particularly
great. Britain’s ship yards (Vickers, Armstrong, Brown and others) are
world-famous. Hundreds and thousands of millions of rubles are being spent
by Britain and other countries on war preparations, and of course it is all
being done exclusively in the interests of peace, for the preservation of
culture, in the interests of the country, civilisation, etc.  

And we find that admirals and prominent statesmen of both parties,
Conservative and Liberal, are shareholders and directors of shipyards, and
of gunpowder, dynamite, ordnance and other factories. A shower of gold is
pouring straight into the pockets of bourgeois politicians, who have got
together in an exclusive international gang engaged in instigating an
armaments race among the peoples and fleecing these trustful,
stupid, dull and submissive peoples like sheep.  

Armaments are considered a national matter, a matter of patriotism; it
is presumed that everyone maintains strict secrecy. But the shipyards, the
ordnance, dynamite and small-arms factories are international
enterprises, in which the capitalists of the various countries work
together in duping and fleecing the public of the various countries, and

    

making ships and guns alike for Britain against Italy, and for Italy
against Britain.  

An ingenious capitalist set-up! Civilisation, law and order, culture,
peace—and hundreds of millions of rubles being plundered by capitalist
businessmen and swindlers in ship building, dynamite manufacture, etc.!


Britain is a member of the Triple Entente, which is hostile to the
Triple Alliance. Italy is a member of the Triple Alliance. The well-known
firm of Vickers (Britain) has branches in Italy. The shareholders
and directors of this firm (through the venal press and through venal
parliamentary “figures”, Conservative and Liberal alike) incite Britain
against Italy, and vice versa. And profit is taken both from the workers of
Britain and those of Italy; the people are fleeced in both countries.  

Conservative and Liberal Cabinet Ministers and Members of Parliament
are almost all shareholders in these firms. They work hand in glove. The
son of the “great” Liberal Minister, Gladstone, is a director of the
Armstrong concern. Rear-Admiral Bacon, the celebrated naval specialist and
a high official at the Admiralty, has been appointed to a post at an
ordnance works in Coventry at a salary of £7,000 (over 60,000
rubles). The salary of the British Prime Minister is £5,000 (about
45,000 rubles).  

The same thing, of course, takes place in all capitalist
countries. Governments manage the affairs of the capitalist class, and the
managers are well paid. The managers are shareholders themselves. And they
shear the sheep together, under cover of speeches about “patriotism....”


 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Helplessness and Confusion









Lenin: Helplessness and Confusion







V. I.  

      Lenin
Helplessness and Confusion
(NOTE)




Published:
Pravda No. 115, May 21, 1913.

      Signed: V. Ilyin.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 108-109.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The reasons for the chaos and confusion among modern Social-Democrats
and “near Social-Democrats” are not only external (persecutions, etc.),
but also internal. A huge number of old “prominent Party people”
are completely confused, they have understood absolutely nothing about the
new state of affairs (the counter-revolution of the June Third system), and
their helpless “dithering”—today to the left, tomorrow to the
right—has caused hopeless confusion in everything they undertake.  

A perfect example of this embarrassment, helplessness and confusion is
to be found in the article by A. Vlasov in Luch No. 109 (195).


There is not a single idea, a single sound word in the whole of
Vlasov’s article. It is all confusion and helpless limping after the
liquidators combined with futile efforts to disassociate himself from
them. It is not true that “formerly” our Party was sometimes built up
“without the workers themselves”, or that “the activities of the
underground amounted largely (!!?) to abstract (!?) propaganda of the ideas
of socialism”. The history of the old Iskra (1900-03), which
created the Party programme and the fundamentals of Party tactics, fully
refutes this. It is not true that the Party’s task today is “open
work (!!?), but the secret organisation of it”. A. Vlasov has
completely failed to understand the liquidationist content of the slogan
“struggle for an open party”, although it was explained in
Pravda No. 108 (312), popularly and not for the first time.  

It is not true that Pravda advises “adopting the work of the
old Party organisation as an example”. “It is essential

    

to outline, even if briefly, the nature of the activity of this (new)
underground, i.e., its tactics,” says A. Vlasov with amusing pomposity
(“we, the practical workers”). As far back as
December 1908[1] the Party “outlined” its tactics (and in
1912[2] and
1913[3] confirmed and explained them) and its organisation, giving a
clear “example” of old tasks and new forms of
preparation. If A. Vlasov has not yet understood this he has only himself
to blame: it is his fate to repeat fragments of liquidationism, the dispute
with which, incidentally, has nothing to do with the “organisation
question”.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Lenin here refers to the decisions passed by the Fifth (All-Russian)
Conference of the R.S.D.L.P. held in Paris between December 21 and December
27, 1908 (January 3–9, 1909). The Conference was attended by 16 delegates
with full powers: five Bolsheviks, three Mensheviks, five Polish
Social-Democrats and three Bundists. Lenin represented the Central
Committee of the R.S.D.L.P.; he delivered a report on “The Tasks of the
Party in the Present Situation”; he also spoke on the Social-Democratic
Duma group and on organisational and other questions. At the Conference the
Bolsheviks fought two opportunist trends in the Party—liquidationism

   

and otzovism. On Lenin’s proposal the Conference condemned liquidationism
and called upon all Party organisations to struggle resolutely against all
attempts to liquidate the Party. Bolshevik resolutions on all questions
were adopted.





[2]

“In 1912” refers to the decisions of the Sixth (Prague) All-Russian
Conference of the R.S.D.L.P. held from January 5 (18) to January 17(30),
1912, which actually fulfilled the functions of a Party congress. Lenin
guided the work of the Conference.  

The important business of the Conference was that of purging the Party
of opportunists. The resolutions adopted on “Liquidationism and the Group
of Liquidators” and on “The Party Organisation Abroad” were of great
importance both from the theoretical and from the practical points of
view. The liquidators grouped around two legal publications, Nasha
Zarya (Our Dawn) and Dyelo Zhizni (Life’s
Cause). The Conference put on record “that by its conduct the
Nasha Zarya and Dyelo Zhizni group had definitely placed
itself outside the Party”. The liquidators were expelled from the
R.S.D.L.P. The Conference condemned the activities of anti-Party groups
abroad—the Golos group of Mensheviks, the Vperyod group
and Trotsky’s group. It recognised the absolute necessity for a single
Party organisation abroad promoting Party interests under the guidance and
control of the Central Committee and resolved that groups abroad “which
refuse to submit to the Russian centre of Social-Democratic activity, i.e.,
to the Central Committee, and which cause disorganisation by communicating
with Russia independently and ignoring the Central Committee, have no right
to use the name of the R.S.D.L.P.” These resolutions played an important
part in strengthening the unity of the Marxist party in Russia.  

The Prague Conference played an outstanding part in the organisation of
the Bolshevik Party, a party of a new typo. It summed up a whole historical
epoch of the struggle of the Bolsheviks against the Mensheviks and
strengthened the victory of the Bolsheviks. Party organisations in all
localities were consolidated on the basis of the Conference decisions; the
Conference also strengthened the Party as an all-Russian organisation, and
outlined the political line and tactics of the Party under conditions of
the new revolutionary upsurge. The Bolshevik Party, purged of the
opportunists, headed a mighty new upsurgence of the revolutionary mass
struggle.  

The Prague Conference was of great international significance. It
offered revolutionary elements in the parties of the Second International a
model of determined struggle against opportunism, pursuing the struggle as
far as complete organisational rupture with the opportunists.





[3]

“In 1913” refers to the Joint Conference of the Central Committee of
the R.S.D.L.P. and Party officials held in Cracow from December 26, 1912 to
January 1, 1913 (January 8–14, 1913). Underground Party organisations in
St. Petersburg, Moscow Region, the South, the Urals and the Caucasus were
represented. Lenin presided over

   

the Conference and spoke on “The Revolutionary Upsurge, Strikes and the
Party’s Tasks” and on “The Attitude to Liquidationism, and Unity” (the
texts of these speeches have been lost); Lenin also compiled or edited all
the Conference resolutions and wrote the “Notification” of the Central
Committee of the R.S.D.L.P. on the Conference.  

The Conference took decisions on the most important questions of the
working-class movement—the tasks of the Party in connection with the new
revolutionary upsurge and the growth of the strike movement, the building
of the underground organisation, the work of the Social-Democratic Duma
group, the insurance campaign, the Party press, the national
Social-Democratic organisations, the struggle against liquidationism and
the unity of the party of the proletariat.  

The decisions of the Conference played an important part in
strengthening the Party and its unity, in extending and consolidating the
Party’s contacts with the masses, and in the elaboration of new forms of
Party work fitted to the mounting activity of the working-class
movement. The Resolutions of the Cracow Conference were confirmed by the
Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Draft Platform for the Fourth Congress of Social-Democrats of the Latvian Area









Lenin: Draft Platform for the Fourth Congress of Social-Democrats of the Latvian Area







V. I.  

      Lenin
Draft Platform for the Fourth Congress of Social-Democrats of the Latvian Area[2]




Written: Written in May, before June 25 (7), 1913 

Published:

      First published in Russian in 1929 in the second and third editions of V. I. Lenin’s Collected Works, Vol. XVII.

      First published in Lettish in the newspaper Cinas Biedrs No. 4 in August 1913.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 110-118.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The revolutionary upsurge of the working-class movement in Russia, the
sharpening of the political crisis in the country, the economic crisis that
will begin in the near or not far distant future, the wavering and
confusion among the many groups and circles of Social-Democrats—all this
compels class-conscious Latvian workers to appeal to their comrades to make
intensive preparations for the convocation of the Fourth Congress of
Social-Democrats of the Latvian Area and to engage in a thorough discussion
of the tasks now confronting revolutionary Social-Democracy.  

A group consisting of members of various Latvian Social-Democratic
organisations proposes to all Social-Democratic organisations, as material
for discussion, the following platform of views on the most
important questions of principle, questions that concern the very existence
of our Social-Democratic Labour Party, and the whole direction its
activities should take—in particular those questions which the present
Central Committee of the Latvian Social-Democratic Party stubbornly ignores
or, we are convinced, decides in correctly.  
APPRAISAL OF THE POLITICAL SITUATION AND THE GENERAL TACTICAL TASKS OF
THE SOCIAL-DEMOCRATS

It is an open secret that the prevalence of counter-revolution has
brought about a deep-going ideological disintegration and a confusion of
mind among Social-Democrats. Everywhere there are Social-Democrats who, as
Comrade
An[3] so aptly put it (Luch No. 95), are wandering about

    

like lost sheep. Views are expressed in the Social-Democratic press to the
effect that workers should not prepare for a revolution, that they should
not expect a revolution, that the democratic revolution is over, etc. The
so-called liquidators (Nasha Zarya and Luch), supported
by the present Central Committee of the Social-Democratic Party of the
Latvian Area, regularly base their tactical arguments on such views,
although no responsible group or organisation of the R.S.D.L.P. has
expounded them in a manner that is in any way definite, precise and formal.


In the press of this trend we meet at every turn with references to the
fundamental difference between Russia’s present state system and the
pre-October system (as though we no longer needed a revolution to win for
ourselves the elements of political liberty), or comparisons of the present
tactics of the Russian Social-Democrats with those of European
Social-Democrats living under a constitution, the tactics, for example, of
the Austrians and Germans in the seventies of the nineteenth century (as
though a constitution already existed in Russia, as Milyukov thinks it
does), or the promulgation of the slogan of an open workers’ party and
freedom to form associations (a slogan that could be understood only if
there existed the general foundation and the pillars of political liberty
and a bourgeois constitution in the country), and so on and so forth.  

Under such circumstances, to refuse to give a precise definition of the
tactical tasks of Social-Democrats or an appraisal of the political
situation, or to postpone this appraisal or definition, would mean not only
not fighting against ideological confusion, disintegration, despondency and
lack of faith, it would mean directly assisting that disintegration and
giving indirect support to views that nullify the old revolutionary Party
decisions adopted by the Social-Democrats.  

The R.S.D.L.P., however, has an accurate Party answer to these urgent
and fundamental questions. The answer was given in the resolution of
December 1908, which is a resolution binding on Party members and has not
been annulled by anyone.  

The years that have passed since the resolution was adopted have fully
confirmed its correctness—its statements on

    

the change in the nature of the autocracy, on the counter revolutionary
nature of liberalism, etc., and its conclusion that the autocracy continues
to exist, although in a partly renovated form, that the conditions that
gave rise to the 1905 Revolution are still there, that the
Social-Democratic Party is confronted with the old tasks that
demand a revolutionary solution and revolutionary tactics. The employment
of the Duma as a tribune, and of all legal opportunities, which is
Categorically demanded in the decisions of the same conference of the
R.S.D.L.P. (December 1908), must be effected entirely in the
spirit of these revolutionary tactics and in the name of the old
revolutionary tasks of the R.S.D.L.P. We therefore suggest that all
Social-Democratic organisations once more hold a thorough discussion of the
resolution, which was, incidentally, confirmed by the January 1912
Conference of the R.S.D.L.P., and propose to the Congress of
Social-Democrats of the Latvian Area that it definitely confirm this
resolution.  

We call the serious attention of all comrades to the anti-Party method
of the August 1912 (liquidators’) Conference of “Social-Democratic
organisations”, which removed from the agenda the appraisal of the current
situation and the definition of general tactical tasks, thus throwing open
the door to every possible renunciation of revolutionary tasks (on
the excuse that “the forecast” concerning the revolution had not been
proved, etc.).  

We protest in particular against the Bund, which played such an
important role at the August Conference, and which at its own Ninth
Conference went so far in renouncing revolutionary tasks as to withdraw the
slogan of a democratic republic and confiscation of landed estates!  
THE QUESTION OF THE UNITY OF THE R.S.D.L.P.

The more widespread the economic and political struggle of the workers,
the more urgently they feel the need for unity. Unless the working class is
united, its struggle cannot be successful.  

What is this unity? Obviously, the unity of the Social Democratic
Party. All Latvian Social-Democratic workers belong to the
Social-Democratic Party and know full well

    

that the Party is illegal, underground, and cannot be anything else.  

There cannot, therefore, be any other way in which unity
in deed (not merely in word) can be achieved except from below, by
the workers themselves, in their underground organisations.  

It is this demand for unity that the Congress of Social-Democrats
of the Latvian Area must definitely recognise. It was, incidentally,
put forward by the February 1913 meeting held at the Central Committee of
the R.S.D.L.P.  

If Luch answered such an appeal for unity by
ridiculing “Lenin’s party”, and if the Bund (in the shape of “active
Jewish members of the working-class movement”) rejected the appeal, both
of them, the “Luchists” and Bund members, thereby proved their
allegiance to the liquidators.  

Latvian social-Democratic workers, who recognise the illegal Party not
merely in word but in deed, will not allow themselves to be deceived by
legal orations in favour of unity. Let him who wants unity join the illegal
Party!  
ATTITUDE TO THE LIQUIDATORS

The question of liquidationism, which was first brought up by Party
decisions and by the press abroad, has now been offered for the judgement
of all class-conscious workers in Russia. Latvian Social-Democratic workers
must also endeavour to ensure that there are no evasions or reservations on
this question, that it is presented clearly, discussed from all angles and
given a definite solution.  

We have had enough fairy-tales about the liquidators being the
champions of an open movement. These tales have been refuted by
facts proving that Party members who are against the liquidators,
those who are unmistakably supporters of the underground movement, are
incomparably stronger than the liquidators in all spheres
of the open movement.  

Liquidationism is the rejection or the belittling of the underground,
that is, the illegal (and only existing) Party. It is only the underground
that works out revolutionary tactics and takes those tactics to
the masses through both the illegal and the legal press.  
 

The decisions adopted by the R.S.D.L.P. in December 1908 and
January 1910, which no one has annulled, and which are obligatory for all
Party members, clearly and precisely recognise the content of
liquidationism as described above, and roundly condemn it.  

Nevertheless, Nasha Zarya and Luch continue preaching
liquidationism. In Luch No. 15 (101) the growth of sympathy for
the underground on the part of the workers was declared
deplorable. In Nasha Zarya No. 3 (March 1913) the author
of that article (L. Sedov) emphasised his liquidationism more than
ever. This was admitted even by An in Luch (No. 95)!
And the Luch editors, replying to An, defend the liquidator
Sedov.  

Latvian Social-Democratic workers must at all costs ensure that the
Congress of Social-Democrats of the Latvian Area resolutely condemns
the liquidationism of “Nasha Zarya” and
“Luch”. The conduct of these periodicals has fully confirmed and
is daily continuing to confirm the correctness of the resolution on
liquidationism adopted at the meeting in February 1913 at the Central
Committee of the R.S.D.L.P.  
THE QUESTION OF SUPPORT FOR THE LIQUIDATORS’ CONFERENCE AND ORGANISING
COMMITTEE BY THE CENTRAL COMMITTEE OF THE SOCIAL-DEMOCRATIC PARTY OF THE
LATVIAN AREA

The present Central Committee of the Social-Democratic Party of the
Latvian Area maintains that it supports the August Conference and the
Organising Committee not be cause they are liquidator institutions
but for the sake of unity in the R.S.D.L.P.  

Such an answer could satisfy only children, and the Latvian
Social-Democratic workers are not children.  

Those who organised the August Conference themselves invited
Plekhanov and the
Vperyod[4] group to it. Neither of them had taken part in the
January Conference, that is, they showed not merely in word but in
deed that they are neutral in the struggle between the trends.


And what did these neutral Social-Democrats say? Plekhanov and
Alexinsky forthrightly recognised the August

    

Conference to be a liquidators’ conference. The resolutions of that
conference show its liquidationist character to the full. Luch, by
announcing that it supports the decisions of the August Conference, is
preaching liquidationism.  

Whom are the worker Social-Democrats of Russia following?  

This was demonstrated by the elections to the Duma in the worker curia
and by the data on the working-class press.  

In the Second Duma the Bolsheviks gained 47 per cent of the votes of
the workers’ curia (11 deputies out of 23); in the Third Duma they had 50
per cent (4 out of 8) and in the Fourth Duma they had 67 per cent (6 out of
9). The working-class press of the anti-liquidators (Pravda and
the Moscow newspaper) is supported by 1,199 groups of workers as compared
with 256 groups supporting Luch.  

And so, the present Central Committee of the Social-Democratic Party of
the Latvian Area, in the name of Latvian revolutionary worker
Social-Democrats, supports the liquidators against the obvious
majority of worker Social-Democrats in Russia!  

An end must be put to this. We all recognise the under ground and
revolutionary tactics. We must support the Central Committee of the
R.S.D.L.P., which implements these tactics and which has behind it the
overwhelming majority of worker Social-Democrats in Russia both in
the under ground and in the open movement.  
THE NATIONAL QUESTION

This question, both in its general theoretical, socialist presentation,
and from the practical, organisational point of view (the organisation of
our own Party) is in urgent need of discussion and solution by all
Social-Democratic organisations.  

The liquidators’ conference in August 1912—as was admitted even by
the neutral Menshevik Plekhanov—contravened the Programme of the
R.S.D.L.P. in the spirit of “adaptation of socialism to
nationalism”.  

In fact, this conference recognised, on the proposal of the Bund, the
permissibility of the slogan of “cultural-national

    

autonomy”, which was contrary to the decision taken by the Second Party
Congress.  

This slogan (defended in Russia by all the bourgeois Jewish
nationalist parties) contradicts the internationalism of
Social-Democracy. As democrats, we are irreconcilably hostile to any,
however slight, oppression of any nationality and to any privileges for any
nationality. As democrats, we demand the right of nations to
self-determination in the political sense of that term (see the
Programme of the R.S.D.L.P.), i.e., the right to secede. We demand
unconditional equality for all nations in the state and the
unconditional protection of the rights of every national minority. We
demand broad self-government and autonomy for regions, which must be
demarcated, among other terms of reference, in respect of nationality too.


All these demands are obligatory for every consistent democrat, to say
nothing of a socialist.  

Socialists, however, do not limit themselves to general-democratic
demands. They fight all possible manifestations of bourgeois
nationalism, crude or refined. “National-cultural autonomy” is a
manifestation precisely of this type—it joins the proletarians
and bourgeoisie of one nation and keeps the proletarians
of different nations apart.  

Social-Democrats have always stood and still stand for the
internationalist point of view. While protecting the equality of
all nationalities against the serf-owners and the police state we do not
support “national culture” but inter national culture,
which includes only part of each national culture—only the consistently
democratic and socialist content of each national culture.  

The slogan of “national-cultural autonomy” deceives the workers with
the phantom of a cultural unity of nations, whereas in every nation today a
landowners’, bourgeois or petty-bourgeois “culture” predominates.  

We are against national culture as one of the slogans of bourgeois
nationalism. We are in favour of the international culture of a fully
democratic and socialist proletariat.  

The unity of the workers of all nationalities coupled with the
fullest equality for the nationalities and the most consistently democratic
state system—that is our slogan, and it is the slogan of international
revolutionary Social-Democracy.

    

This truly proletarian slogan will not create the false phantom and
illusion of “national” unity of the proletariat and the bourgeoisie,
while the slogan of “national-cultural autonomy” undoubtedly does create
that phantom and does sow that illusion among the working people.  

We, Latvian Social-Democrats, living in an area with a population that
is very mixed nationally, we, who are in an environment consisting of
representatives of the bourgeois nationalism of the Letts, Russians,
Estonians, Germans, etc., see with particular clarity the bourgeois falsity
of the slogan of “cultural-national autonomy”. The slogan of the
unity of all and every organisation of workers of all
nationalities, tested in practice in our own Social-Democratic
organisation, is particularly dear to us.  

Reference is frequently made to Austria in justification of the slogan
of “national-cultural autonomy”. As far as this reference is concerned it
must be remembered that: first, the point of view of the chief Austrian
theoretician on the national question, Otto Bauer (in his book The
National Question and Social-Democracy) has been recognised as an
exaggeration of the national factor and a terrible
underestimation of the international factor even by such a cautious
writer as Karl Kautsky (see: K. Kautsky, Nationalit\"at und
Internationalit\"at; it has been translated into Russian); secondly,
in Russia only the Bund members, together with all Jewish
bourgeois parties, have so far defend ed “cultural-national autonomy”,
whereas neither Bauer nor Kautsky recognise
national autonomy for the Jews, and Kautsky (op. cit.) declares
outright that the Jews of Eastern Europe (Galicia and Russia) are a
caste and not a nation; thirdly, the
       Br\"unu[1]

national programme of the Austrian Social-Democratic Party
(1899)[5] does not fully recognise extra-territorial (personal)
national autonomy and goes only as far as to demand the union of all
national regions of one nationality throughout the state (Sec. 3 of the
Br\"unn Programme); fourthly, even this programme, obviously a compromise
(and unsatisfactory from the standpoint of internationalism), was a
complete fiasco in Austria itself, because the compromise did not
bring peace but led, instead,

    

to the secession of the Czech separatists; fifthly, these Czech
separatists, unanimously condemned at the Copenhagen Congress by the entire
International, declare the Bund type of separatism to be close to them
(see: Der &chatechoslavische Sozial-demokrat No. 3, organ of the
separatists, which may be obtained gratis from Prague: Praha,
Hybernska 7); sixthly, Bauer himself demands the unity of Social-Democratic
political organisations of various nationalities in each
locality. Bauer himself considers the “national system” of the
Austrian party, which has now led to a complete schism, to be
unstable and contradictory.  

In short, references to Austria speak against the Bund and not
in its favour.  

Unity from below, the complete unity and consolidation in each locality
of Social-Democratic workers of all nationalities in all working-class
organisations—that is our slogan. Down with the deceptive bourgeois,
compromise slogan of “cultural-national autonomy”!  

We are against federation in the structure of our Party, too;
we are for the unity of local (and not only central) organisations
of Social-Democrats of all nations.  

The Congress must reject both the slogan of cultural-national autonomy
and the principle of federation in the structure of the Party. The Latvian
Social-Democrats, like the Polish Social-Democrats, like the
Social-Democrats of the Caucasus throughout the period from 1898 to 1912
(for 14 whole years of Party history) must remain true to
Social-Democratic internationalism.  
 

Notes
 

[1]
Now Brno in Czechoslovakia.—Ed.  
 



[2]
Lenin wrote this Draft Platform for the Latvian Bolsheviks in May 1913,
when preparations were being made to convene the Fourth Congress of the
Social-Democrats of the Latvian Area. It was a time when the struggle
between the Bolsheviks and Mensheviks in the Latvian Social-Democratic
Party had become sharper; all the central positions in the Party had been
seized by Menshevik liquidators and conciliators. The Latvian Bolsheviks
formed their own group with the support of Bolshevik-minded workers. Lenin
helped them in their struggle against the liquidationist leadership.  

The Bolshevik leaders of the Latvian Social-Democrats set up their
centre abroad—the Bureau of Groups Abroad—and published Lenin’s
platform as a reprint from No. 8 of their Bilitens
(Bulletin) under the heading “Our Platform for the Fourth
Congress of Social-Democrats of the Latvian Area”. The Draft Platform was
republished in issue No. 9–10 of the Bilitens. The editors of the
Bilitens, influenced by the conciliatory elements among them,
omitted the section of the platform dealing with the national question, and
made some alterations and deletions in other sections.





[3]
An—pseudonym of N. N. Jordania, leader of the Caucasian
Mensheviks.





[4]
Vperyod group—an anti-Party group consisting of otzovists,
ultimatumists, god-builders, empirio-monists (supporters of the reactionary
idealist philosophy of Mach and Avenarius); it was organised abroad in
December 1909 and was headed by A. Bogdanov and G. Alexinsky; there were
several small circles, mainly of intellectuals, in Paris, Geneva and
Tiflis. The views of the Vperyod
   

group were, to use Lenin’s words, “a caricature of Bolshevism”. The group
found no support among the workers and disintegrated in 1913.





[5]
The programme referred to is the Austrian Social-Democratic Party’s
Programme on the National Question adopted at the Congress in Br\"unn
(Brno) in September 1899.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Liberal and Marxist Conceptions of the Class Struggle









Lenin: Liberal and Marxist Conceptions of the Class Struggle







V. I.  

      Lenin
Liberal and Marxist Conceptions of the Class Struggle
NOTE




Published:
Prosveshcheniye No. 5, May 1913.

      Signed: V. Ilyin.

      Published according to the Prosveshcheniye text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 119-124.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

A. Yermansky, a liquidator, poured down an amazing
abundance of angry words in Nasha Zarya on my criticism of his
(and Gushka’s) point of view on the question of the political role of the
big commercial and industrial bourgeoisie (Prosveshcheniye
     Nos. 5–7).[1]


Mr. Yermansky, with his vituperation and recollections of old
“insults” (including the “insult” to Mr. Dan & Co., who tried,
unsuccessfully, to split the St. Petersburg Social-Democratic organisation
in 1907), tries to conceal the real substance of the issue.  

We shall, however, not permit Mr. Yermansky to conceal the substance of
the present dispute by recalling undeserved insults to and defeats of the
liquidators. For the present dispute concerns a very important question of
principle that comes up again and again for a thousand different reasons.


To be precise, it is the question of the liberal falsification of
Marxism, the substitution of a Marxist, revolutionary conception of the
class struggle by a liberal conception. We shall never tire of explaining
this ideological basis of all the disputes between the Marxists and the
liquidators.  

Mr. A. Yermansky writes: 


   “The ‘Marxist’ Ilyin refuses to recognise, in the
   activities of industrial organisations, the class struggle ‘on a
   nation-wide (and partly even international) scale’ as I [Yermansky]
   described them in my article. Why?  Because of the ‘absence’ here ‘of the
   fundamental feature of the nation-wide or
   state-wide—the organisation of state
   power’”...(Nasha Zarya, p. 55).  

 

Here is an exposition of the substance of the question given
by Mr. Yermansky himself, who does everything possible and impossible to
evade that substance! No matter how he may accuse me of distorting his
views and of all the mortal sins, no matter how he twists and turns, even
seeking refuge in recollections of the 1907 split, the truth will out.


My thesis, therefore, is clear—the basic feature of the nation-wide
is the organisation of state power.  

You do not share that view, my angry opponent? You do not think this
the only Marxist view?  

Then why not say so straight out? Why not counterpose a correct view to
an incorrect one? If the view that the fundamental feature of the
nation-wide is the organisation of state power is, in your opinion, only
Marxism in inverted commas, why do you not refute my error and expound
your understanding of Marxism clearly, precisely and without
evasion?  

The answer to these questions will be clear to the reader if we quote
the passage from Mr. A. Yermansky which followed immediately after
the one quoted above: 


   “Ilyin wants the big Russian bourgeoisie to carry on
   their class struggle in a different way, he wants them to try to bring
   about a change in the entire state system. Ilyin wants, the bourgeoisie do
   not want—and the one at fault, of course, is Yermansky the ‘liquidator’,
   who ‘substitutes the liberal conception of the class struggle for
   the conception of the class struggle in the Marxist sense’.”  


Here you have Mr. Yermansky’s tirade in full and it will enable you to
get a picture of the evasive liquidator caught in the act.  

The evasion is obvious.  

Have I or have I not indicated correctly the “fundamental feature” of
the nation-wide?  

Mr. A. Yermansky himself was forced to admit that I indicated precisely
the substance of the matter.  

And Mr. Yermansky evades an answer, realising that he has been caught!


And having been caught in the act, Mr. Yermansky evades the question of
the correctness or incorrectness of the fundamental feature I indicated and
jumps over this question to the question of what Ilyin and the bourgeoisie
“want”.

    

But no matter how bold, how daring Mr. Yermansky’s leaps, they do not
disguise the fact that he has been caught.  

What have “wants” got to do with it, my dear opponent, when the
dispute concerns the concept of the class struggle?! You had to
admit that I accused you of substituting a liberal for a Marxist
conception, and that I indicated the “fundamental feature” of
the Marxist conception as including the organisation of state
power in the idea of a nation-wide class struggle.  

Mr. A. Yermansky is such a clumsy polemicist, even if an angry one,
that he gave a clear explanation, by his own example, of the
connection between liquidationism in general and his own, Yermansky’s,
mistakes in particular and the liberal conception of the class struggle!


The question of the class struggle is one of the fundamental questions
of Marxism. It is, therefore, worth while dealing with the concept
of class struggle in greater detail.  

Every class struggle is a political
struggle.[2] We know that the opportunists, slaves to the ideas of
liberalism, understood these profound words of Marx incorrectly and tried
to put a distorted interpretation on them. Among the opportunists there
were, for instance, the Economists, the elder brothers of the
liquidators. The Economists believed that any clash between classes was a
political struggle. The Economists therefore recognised as “class
struggle” the struggle for a wage increase of five kopeks on the ruble,
and refused to recognise a higher, more developed, nation-wide
class struggle, the struggle for political aims. The
Economists, therefore, recognised the embryonic class struggle but did not
recognise it in its developed form. The Economists recognised, in other
words, only that part of the class struggle that was more tolerable to the
liberal bourgeoisie, they refused to go farther than the liberals, they
refused to recognise the higher form of class struggle that is unacceptable
to the liberals. By so doing, the Economists became liberal workers’
politicians. By so doing, the Economists rejected the Marxist,
revolutionary conception of the class struggle.  

To continue. It is not enough that the class struggle be comes real,
consistent and developed only when it embraces the sphere of politics. In
politics, too, it is possible to restrict oneself to minor matters, and it
is possible to go

    

deeper, to the very foundations. Marxism recognises a class struggle as
fully developed, “nation-wide”, only if it does not merely
embrace politics but takes in the most significant thing in politics—the
organisation of state power.  

On the other hand, the liberals, when the working-class movement has
grown a little stronger, dare not deny the class struggle but attempt to
narrow down, to curtail and emasculate the concept of class
struggle. Liberals are prepared to recognise the class struggle in the
sphere of politics, too, but on one condition—that the organisation of
state power should not enter into that sphere. It is not hard to
under stand which of the bourgeoisie’s class interests give rise to the
liberal distortion of the concept of class struggle.  

Now, when Mr. Yermansky rehashed the work of the moderate and
punctilious civil servant Gushka, when he expressed solidarity with him,
not noticing (or not wishing to see?) the liberal emasculation of
the concept of class struggle, I pointed out to Mr. Yermansky his chief sin
against theory and general principles. Mr. Yermansky grew angry and began
to use bad language and to twist and turn, being unable to refute what I
had said.  

In doing so, Mr. A. Yermansky proved such a clumsy polemicist that he
exposed himself with particular clarity! “Ilyin wants, the bourgeoisie do
not want,” he writes. We now know what particular features of the point of
view of the proletariat (Marxism) and of the bourgeoisie (liberalism) give
rise to these different “wants”.  

The bourgeoisie “want” to curtail the class struggle, to distort and
narrow the conception and blunt its sharp edge. The proletariat
“wants” this deception exposed. The Marxist wants whoever undertakes to
speak of the class struggle of the bourgeoisie in the name of Marxism
to expose the narrowness, the selfish narrowness, indeed,
of the bourgeois conception of the class struggle, and not merely
to quote figures, not merely to go into ecstasies over “big” figures. The
liberal “wants” to appraise the bourgeoisie and its class struggle in
such a way as to conceal its narrowness, to conceal the
failure to include in the struggle that which is “basic” and most
important.  

Mr. A. Yermansky was caught out in discussing in liberal
fashion the interesting, but ideologically empty or slavishly

    

compiled figures of Mr. Gushka. Obviously, when this was revealed, there
was nothing left for Mr. A. Yermansky to do but curse and wriggle.  

Let us continue the passage from Mr. A. Yermansky’s article where we
left off: 


   “It is clear that, in fact, Ilyin is the only person who
   is replacing a study of the real state of affairs by his own
   qualifications, and also [!!] by a stereotyped pattern based on schoolboy
   models drawn from the history of the great French Revolution.”  


Mr. A. Yermansky has got into such a tangle that he be comes ever more
ruthless in “destroying” himself! He does not notice the extent to which
his liberalism is revealed by this angry sally against the “stereotypes”
of the great French Revolution!  

My dear Mr. Yermansky, you must understand (no matter how difficult it
may be for a liquidator to understand) that it is impossible “to study the
real state of affairs” without qualifying it, without appraising
it from the Marxist, or the liberal, or the reactionary, etc., point of
view!  

You, Mr. Yermansky, qualified and still qualify the “study” of the
good civil servant Gushka in liberal fashion and I qualify it in Marxist
fashion. That is what is at the bottom of it all. By leaving your critical
analysis on the threshold of the question of the
organisation of state power, you thereby proved the liberal
limitations of your conception of the class struggle.  

Which was to be shown!  

Your sally against the “stereotype” of the great French Revolution
gives you away completely. Anybody can understand that a stereotype or a
French model has nothing to do with the matter—for instance, there were
not and could not have been strikes, especially political strikes at
that time, under “stereotype and model” conditions.  

The fact of the matter is that when you became a liquidator you forgot
how to apply the revolutionary point of view to an appraisal of
social events. That is where the trouble lies. Marx certainly did not limit
his thinking to “stereotypes and models” taken from the end of the
eighteenth century, but the point of view he adopted was always
revolutionary, he always appraised (“qualified” if you prefer
that

    

“learned” word, my dear Mr. Yermansky!) the class struggle most
profoundly, always revealing whether it affected “fundamentals”,
always mercilessly berating any timidity of thought, any concealment of
underdeveloped, emasculated, selfishly distorted class struggle.  

The class struggle at the end of the eighteenth century showed us how
it can become political, how it can develop to really “nation-wide”
forms. Since then capitalism and the proletariat have developed to a
gigantic extent. The “models” of the old do not prevent, for instance,
the study of the new forms of struggle that I have, in part,
outlined above.  

The point of view of the Marxist, however, will always require
a profound and not a superficial “appraisal”, will always expose the
poverty of liberal distortions, understatements and cowardly
concealment.  

Let us congratulate Mr. Yermansky on his devoted and splendid
explanation of the way in which the liquidators substitute a liberal
conception of the class struggle for the Marxist conception, forgetting how
to examine social events from the revolutionary point of view.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
See present edition Vol. 18 pp. 56–72.—Ed.  
 



[2]
See K. Marx and F. Engels, “Manifesto of the Communist Party”,
Selected Works, Vol. I, Moscow, 1955, p. 42.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Factory Owners on Workers' Strikes









Lenin: Factory Owners on Workers' Strikes







V. I.  

      Lenin
Factory Owners on Workers’ Strikes




Published:
Pravda Nos. 123, 126, 127 and 131; May 30, June 2, 5 and 9, 1913.

      Signed: V. I..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 125-131.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

I

P. P. Ryabushinsky’s press in Moscow has published an interesting book
entitled The Association of Factory Owners in the Moscow Industrial
Area in 1912 (Moscow, 1913). The price is not given. The factory
owners do not wish their publications to be put on sale.  

Yuli Petrovich Guzhon, the president of the association, when opening
this year’s annual meeting on March 30, congratulated the industrialists
“on the beginning of the seventh operative year” of their organisation
and declared that the industrialists had “by their unity created for
themselves a conception of the might of the industrial corporation that
could not be ignored”. “The present main task of new members of the
association must be the strengthening of the prestige of that might,” said
Mr. Guzhon.  

As you see, the speech was not what one might call literate, it was
reminiscent of the speech of some army clerk; nevertheless it was full of
arrogance.  

Let us look at the sections of the book dealing with facts. More than
one-third of it (pp. 19–69) is taken up by the section devoted to
strikes. The industrialists give us the following picture of the
total number of workers taking part in strikes in 1912.  
    

    




Category of strike
Number of striking workers


1912
1911




Economic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
207,720 
96,730


  Metal goods industry . . . . . . . . . . .   
64,200           
17,920


  Textiles ” ” . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   
90,930           
51,670


   Other branches  . . . . . . . . . . . . .   
52,590           
27,140


Political  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   
855,000 
8,380


  Over Lena events . . . . . . . . . . . . .   
215,000          
 


  May Day celebrations . . . . . . . . . . .   
300,000          
 


  Autumn political strikes . . . . . . . . .   
340,000          
 


Totals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
1,062,720        
105,110




It is easy to see that the industrialists’ figures are an
understatement. But for the time being we shall not deal with that
(the Lena strike of 6,000 workers has been omitted because the Lena
Goldfields do not come under the Factory Inspectorate), but we shall
examine the factory owners’ statistics.  

The number of workers who took part in strikes in 1912 was more
than a half of the total number of industrial workers in Russia, to be
exact, 51.7 per cent. Economic strikes, furthermore, accounted for only
one-tenth of the workers (10.1 per cent) and political strikes for
more than four-tenths (41.6 per cent).  

“Typical of the past year,” write the factory owners, “was the
extraordinary growth in the number of political strikes that time and again
interrupted the normal course of work and kept the entire industry in a
state of tension.” This is followed by a list of the most important
strikes in the second half of the year—August, in Riga, against the
disenfranchisement of workers; September, in Warsaw, over the events at the
Kutomary Penal Colony; October, in St. Petersburg, over the annulment of
the elections of representatives, in Revel, in memory of the events of
1905, and in St. Petersburg, over the well-known verdict in the case of
naval ratings; November, in St. Petersburg, over the Sevastopol verdict and
on the day of the opening of the Duma, and then a strike On the occasion of
the second anniversary of Leo Tolstoy’s death; December, in St. Petersburg,
over the appointment of workers in insurance institutions. From this the
factory owners draw the conclusion: 
 


   ‘The frequency of the demonstration strikes, which occur
   one after another, and the unusual variety and difference in the importance
   of the motives for which the workers considered it necessary to interrupt
   work, are evidence, not only of a considerable thickening of the political
   atmosphere, but also of the decline of factory discipline.” Then follow
   the usual threats of “severe measures”—fines, stopping of bonuses,
   lock-outs. “The interests of the country’s production,” declare the
   factory owners, “urgently demand the raising of factory discipline to the
   high level at which it stands in the West-European countries.”  


The factory owners wish to raise “discipline” to the “Western”
level but do not think of raising the “political atmosphere” to the same
level....  

We shall leave for subsequent articles the data concerning strike
distribution over various areas, and in various branches of industry and
according to the degree of success achieved.  
II

The 1912 data of the Moscow Factory Owners Association on the incidence
of strikes in various areas and branches of industry are very badly
compiled. It would do no harm if our millionaires were to hire, say, some
high-school boy to help them compile their books and check the
tables. Mistakes and absurdities leap to the eye when we compare, for
example, the data given on pages 23, 26 and 48. Oh yes, we love talking
about culture and “the prestige of the might” of the merchants, but we
can’t do even the simplest job half-way decently.  

Below we give the factory owners’ strike statistics—for economic
strikes only—by areas for 1912 as a whole and for the last seven
months of that year: 





Areas
For all 1912
For the last 7 months of 1912


Number of strikers 
Number of days lost (000) 
Number of strikers 
Number of days  lost (000) 




Moscow . . . . . . . . .  
60,070
799.2
48,140
730.6


St. Petersburg . . . . .  
56,890
704.8
35,390
545.7


Baltic . . . . . . . . .  
18,950
193.5
13,210
153.6


South . . . . . . . . . . 
23,350
430.3
22,195
427.0


Kingdom of Poland . .     
21,120
295.7
12,690
249.9


Totals . . . .   
180,380
2,423.5
131,625
2,107.4



 

A glance at the figures for the South is enough to show how useless,
i.e., extremely incomplete, the factory owners’ statistics are. The figures
for the last seven months of 1912 seem to be more reliable, because here,
and only here, the distribution of strikers is given in detail according to
areas, major industries and the results achieved.  

The area data show us that the St. Petersburg workers are in advance of
all the workers of Russia in the economic struggle as well (to say nothing
of the political struggle). The number of strikers in the St. Petersburg
area (35,000 for the last seven months of 1912) is about three-quarters of
the number of strikers in the Moscow area (48,000) although the number of
factory workers there is about four times that of the number in
the St. Petersburg area. In the Kingdom of Poland there are slightly more
workers than in the St. Petersburg area but the number of strikers there
was little more than a third of the St. Petersburg figure.  

As far as Moscow is concerned, there is, of course, the need to
consider the worsening marketing conditions in the textile industry,
although in Poland two-thirds of those participating in economic strikes
were textile workers and we shall see later that these textile strikes in
Poland were particularly successful.  

In 1912, therefore, the St. Petersburg workers to a certain extent drew
the workers of other parts of Russia into the economic strike movement.


In respect of determination, on the other hand, the strikes in
the South and in Poland take first place; in these areas nineteen days per
striker were lost, whereas in St. Petersburg and Moscow the figure was
fifteen days (in the Baltic area 12 days per striker). The average for all
Russia was sixteen days on strike per striker. The gentlemen who compile
the factory owners’ statistics give the figure for the whole of 1912 as
13.4 days. It follows from this that the persistence of the workers and
their determination in struggle were greater in the second half of the
year.  

Statistics show, furthermore, the increased persistence of the
workers in the strike struggle. From 1895 to 1904 the average number of
days lost per striker was 4.8, in 1909 it was 6.5 days, in 1911 it was
7.5 days (8.2 days if political strikes are excluded) and in 1912,
13.4 days.  
 

The year 1912, therefore, showed that there is a growing
persistence among workers in the economic struggle and that the number
of strikers—compared with the number of workers—is greatest in
St. Petersburg.  

In our next article we shall examine data on the degree of success
achieved by strikes.  
III

The factory owners’ statistics give the following figures for strikers
(in economic strikes) for 1912 according to branches of industry: 





Branch of industry
For all 1912
For the last 7 months of 1912


Number of strikers
Number of days lost (000)
Number of strikers
Number of days lost (000)




Metalworkers . . . . .    
57,000
807.2
40,475
763.3


Textile workers . . . . . 
85,550
1,025.8
66,590
930.6


Others . . . . . . . . .  
37,830
590.5
24,560
413.5


Totals 
180,380
2,423.5
131,625
2,107.4




Here the extreme insufficiency of the factory owners’ statistics and
the extreme carelessness with which they have been compiled are still more
apparent—the number of strikers for the first five months (which was
79,970) added to that for the last seven months gives a total of 211,595,
and not 180,000, and not 207,000!  

The factory owners themselves prove that they underestimate
the number of strikers.  

The metalworkers are in the lead both in the ratio of number of
strikers to the total number of workers and in the duration of the strikes;
18 days were lost per metalworker on strike, 14 days per textile worker and
16 days per worker in other industries. The better marketing conditions in
the iron and steel industry do not, as we see, relieve the workers of the
necessity of striking for a tiny wage increase!  

As far as the results of the strikes are concerned, the factory owners’
statistics declare that 1912 was a less favourable
    

year for the workers than 1911 had been. In 1911, they say, 49 per cent of
the strikers suffered a defeat and in 1912, 52 per cent were
defeated. These data, however, are not convincing, because the figures
compared are for the whole of 1911 and for seven months
of 1912.  

The strikes of 1912 were offensive and not defensive in character. The
workers were fighting for improved working conditions and not
against worse conditions. This means that 52 per cent of the
workers did not gain any improvement, 36 per cent were fully or partially
successful and for 12 per cent the results are unclear. It is very
likely that the factory owners concealed their defeat in this 12 per cent
of all cases because every success of capital over labour arouses their
special attention and jubilation.  

If we compare the outcome of strikes for the last seven months of 1912
by areas and by branches of industry, we get the following picture.  

The least successful of all were the strikes in the Moscow area—75
per cent of the strikers failed (i.e., did not gain any improvement); then
follow the St. Petersburg area with 63 per cent, the South with 33
per cent, the Baltic area with 20 per cent and Poland with 11 per cent of
failures. In the last-named three areas, therefore, the workers
achieved tremendous victories. Out of the 48,000 strikers in these
three areas, 27,000 achieved improvements, they were
victorious; 11,000 suffered defeats; the results achieved by 10,000
are uncertain.  

In the first two areas (Moscow and St. Petersburg), on the contrary,
out of the 83,000 strikers only 20,000 were successful; 59,000
were defeated (i.e., did not achieve any improvement) and the results
achieved by 4,000 are uncertain.  

Taken by branches of industry, the number of strikers who were defeated
was: textile workers, 66 per cent, metal-workers, 47 per cent, and others,
30 per cent.  

Marketing conditions were worst of all for the textile workers. In the
Moscow area only 6,000 of the 38,000 strikers in the textile
industry were successful, 32,000 were defeated; in St. Petersburg there
were 4,000 successful and 9,000 defeated. Textile workers in Poland,
however, had 8,000 successful strikers and 400 defeated.  
 

The financial results of the strikes (economic strikes) for the last
two years are shown as follows by the factory owners statistics: 





 
Industrialists’ direct losses
Losses of wages
Losses in output for the country


(thousand rubles)




Iron and steel industry . . 
558
1,145
4,959


Textile industry . . . . .  
479
807
6,010


Other branches . . . . . .  
328
529
3,818


   Totals for 1912 
1,365
2,481
14,787


   Totals for 1911 
402
716
4,563




Thus the factory owners’ total losses for two years amount to
1,800,000, workers’ losses in wages to 3,000,000 rubles, and
losses in output to 19,000,000 rubles.  

Here the factory owners place a period. How wise they are! What did the
workers gain?  

In two years 125,000 workers gained a victory. Their wages for
the year amount to 30,000,000 rubles. They demanded pay increases of 10
per cent, 25 per cent and even 40 per cent, as the factory owners
themselves admit. Ten per cent of 30,000,000 rubles is 3,000,000
rubles. And the reduction in the working day?  

And what of the new (the factory owners expression) demands,
such as the demand “not to discharge workers without the consent
of their fellow-workers”?  

You are wrong, you gentlemen who own factories! Even in the economic
sense (to say nothing of political strikes) the workers’ gains are
terrifying. The bourgeoisie does not understand either workers’
solidarity or the conditions of proletarian struggle.  

About 300,000 workers have sacrificed 3,000,000 rubles to the economic
struggle in two years. A direct gain was immediately achieved by
125,000 workers. And the whole working class made a step forward.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## An Incorrect Appraisal (Luch on Maklakov)









Lenin: An Incorrect Appraisal (Luch on Maklakov)







V. I.  

      Lenin
An Incorrect Appraisal (Luch on Maklakov)[2]




Written: Written at the beginning of June 1913 

Published:

      First published in 1937 in Lenin Miscellany XXX.

      Signed: W..

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 132-134.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

...programmes and resolutions of the
      liberals.[1]


In the Luch (No.  122) editorial we come across a profoundly
incorrect appraisal of this important speech. “Cadet doctrinairism” is
what Luch saw in it. Deputy Maklakov is likened to an animal that
brushes out its tracks with its tail. “The numerous parentheses in his
speech completely destroyed its oppositional character”—and
Luch quotes the words of Mr. V. Maklakov to the effect that
“reaction is an historical law”, that one should (according to Bismarck’s
theory) be able to distinguish moments when it is necessary to rule in
liberal fashion and moments when despotic rule is essential.  

“Such speeches could be made by a professor,” concludes
Luch, “but not by a politician upholding the right of democracy
to self-determination” [?].  

No, Mr. V. Maklakov is by no means a doctrinaire and his speech is not
that of a professor. And it is nothing less than ridiculous to expect
V. Maklakov to uphold the rights of democracy. He is a liberal-bourgeois
businessman who has fearlessly exposed the very “guts” of the policy of
his class. Mr. V. Maklakov made the accusation that the government “could
have comprehended [when the revolution had died down I how to
stamp out the revolution entirely” but failed to comprehend.


“When a government fights against a revolution it is right, that is
its duty,” exclaimed Mr. V. Maklakov, and added, “the same will be true
of the revolutions when it is victorious, it will fight against
counter-revolution” (here this

    

“experienced” orator made an amusing slip, using, for some unknown
reason, only the future tense.) Mr. V. Maklakov repeated several times that
he blamed the government “not for fighting disorder and revolution, but
for fighting against law and order itself”.  

Mr. V. Maklakov compared Stolypin to a fireman who breaks the windows
of a burning house.  

From this it can be seen that the predominant tone and substance of
this noteworthy speech are not a professorial stunt or doctrinairism but
whole-hearted, persistent counter-revolution. It is all the more important
to deal at length with this since the newspaper hubbub over petty details
of the “conflict” so zealously hides the substance of it. The policy of
liberalism and its class roots cannot be understood unless this,
its typical and fundamental feature, is mastered.  

Luch displays an amazing and amusing lack of understanding of
this matter when it exclaims: “Is it not the worst form of doctrinairism
to worship the statesmanship of Bismarck who, whatever is said about him,
always remained a man of blood and iron?”  

What has this to do with doctrinairism, gentlemen? You are right off
the mark. V. Maklakov said as clearly as it could be said that he approves
“fighting disorder and revolution”, approves of “the fireman”, and, it
goes without saying, V. Maklakov knows very well what that means—blood
and iron. V. Maklakov said as clearly as it could be said that
this was the very policy he favoured—provided it succeeded! You
have to break windows, he preaches, don’t be afraid of breaking windows, we
are not sentimental people, we are not professors, not doctrinaires, but
when you break windows, do it as Bismarck did, i.e., successfully,
strengthening the alliance of the bourgeoisie and the landowners.


And you, says V. Maklakov to the government, you break Windows for
no reason, like a street lout, not like a fireman.  

Bismarck represented the counter-revolutionary landowners of
Germany. He realised he could save them (for a few decades) only
by a sound alliance with the counter-revolutionary liberal bourgeoisie. He
succeeded in forming this alliance because the resistance of the
proletariat was weak and lucky wars helped solve the current
problem—that of the national unification of Germany.  
 

We have our counter-revolutionary landowners. And we have our
counter-revolutionary liberal bourgeoisie. V. Maklakov is their foremost
representative. He showed by his speech that he is prepared to do any
amount of bowing and scraping before Purishkevich & Co. This, however,
is not enough for the “marriage” to be a success. The current historical
task must be fulfilled, and ours is not national unification (of which we
have more than enough...) but the agrarian problem ... at a time
when the resistance of the proletariat is stronger.  

About this, the pitiful liberal, V. Maklakov, who pines for a Russian
Bismarck, was unable to say a single articulate word.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
The first page of the manuscript has not been found.—Ed.

 



[2]
Until 1954 this article was known under the beading given by the
editors “Apropos of Cadet Maklakov’s Speech”. In 1954 the Institute of
Marxism-Leninism of the C.C., C.P.S.U. received a number of documents from
the Cracow-Poronin Lenin archive, among them Lenin’s list of articles
written for Pravda, from which it was established that Lenin had
entitled this article “An Incorrect Appraisal (Luch on
Maklakov)”.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Frank Speeches by a Liberal









Lenin: Frank Speeches by a Liberal







V. I.  

      Lenin
Frank Speeches by a Liberal




Published:
Pravda No. 125, June 1, 1913.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 135-136.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

V. M. Sobolevsky, editor of Russkiye
Vedomosti,[1] recently passed away. The liberals honoured him as a
“staunch progressive figure”. They spoke and wrote of his personal
qualities. They avoided the question of the political trend followed by
Russkiye Vedomosti.  

There is nothing more convenient for our liberals than that ancient,
colourless, general haziness—“oppositionism”, “progressism”. What is
hidden behind those words, what sort of oppositional activity was
displayed by an individual, which class he served, are things they
prefer not to discuss. These things are distasteful to liberals.  

Democracy, however, should try to establish the truth. Honour
V. M. Sobolevsky as a progressive, that is your right. But if you really
want to teach politics to the people do not forget the trend
followed by Russ/aye Vedomosti, that provides a unique combination
of Right Cadetism and Narodnik overtones.  

Mr. L. Panteleyev, who published in Rech an article to the
memory of V. M. Sobolevsky, wrote that he was a “great sceptic in respect
of the availability of the forces possessed by our progressive society”.


Nothing here is definite. What sort of scepticism was it? What society
is he talking about? The curtain is drawn back slightly by the words of
V. M. Sobolevsky that Mr. Panteleyev quotes: “What has a society to offer
that in the mass is saturated to the marrow of its bones with the
traditions and habits of serfdom? What support for a new system is to be
expected from millions of semi-slaves, beggars, starving people, drunkards
and ignoramuses?”  
 

Mr. Panteleyev, who deemed it proper to publish these frank statements,
did not notice the light they cast on the attitude of Russian liberals to
democracy.  

In the summer of 1905, Russkiye Vedomosti published an article
by Mr. Vinogradov, the star of liberal scholar ship, arguing that these
semi-slaves should not go too far, that they should be more modest and
calm. Russkiye Vedomosti was probably a little ahead of other
liberal news papers in declaring quite definitely its counter-revolutionary
attitude to events.  

There is scepticism and scepticism. As far as a public figure is
concerned, one should ask: in respect of which class is he a
sceptic? Sobolevsky (and his Russkiye Vedomosti) was a sceptic and
even a pessimist in respect of the peasantry. He was an optimist in respect
of the landowners; he pictured them as being capable of “reforms”, as
“sincerely sympathising with the new social system” as “cultured
people”, etc. The mixture of this landowner liberalism (not semi-slavish
but utterly slavish) and Narodism, was a sign of the rottenness of the
“enlightened”, well-to-do, satiated liberal society that taught
slave morality and slave politics to the “millions of semi-slaves” who
were awakening. This liberal society was, “to the marrow of its bones”,
slavish towards the landowners, and the Narodism of Russkiye
Vedomosti reflects more than anything else the patriarchal Russia of
the humble muzhik and the landowner flirting with liberalism.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Russkiye Vedomosti (Russian Recorder)—a daily
newspaper published in Moscow from 1863 onwards by liberal professors of
Moscow University and Zemstvo officials; it expressed the views of the
liberal landowners and bourgeoisie. From 1905 onwards it was an organ of
the Right Cadets; shortly after the October Revolution in 1917 it was
suppressed.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Question of Ministry of Education Policy









Lenin: The Question of Ministry of Education Policy







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Question of Ministry of Education Policy[2]
(SUPPLEMENT TO THE DISCUSSION ON PUBLIC EDUCATION)




Written: Written April 27 (May 10), 1913 

Published:

      First published in 1930 in the second and third editions of V. I. Lenin’s Collected Works, Vol. XVI.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 137-146.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Our Ministry of Public (forgive the expression)
“Education” boasts inordinately of the particularly rapid growth of its
expenditure. In the explanatory note to the 1913 budget by the Prime
Minister and the Minister of Finance we find a summary of the estimates of
the Ministry of Public (so-called) Education for the post-revolutionary
years. These estimates have increased from 46,000,000 rubles in 1907 to
137,000,000 in 1913. A tremendous growth—almost trebled in something like
six years!  

But our official praise-mongers who laud the police “law and order”
or disorder in Russia ought not to have forgotten that
ridiculously small figures always do grow with “tremendous”
rapidity when increases in them are given as percentages. If you give five
kopeks to a beggar who owns only three his “property” will immediately
show a “tremendous” growth—it will be 167 per cent greater!  

Would it not have been more fitting for the Ministry, if it did not aim
at befogging the minds of the people and concealing the
beggarly position of public education in Russia, to cite other
data? Would it not have been more fitting to cite figures that do not
compare today’s five kopeks with yesterday’s three, but compare what we
have with what is essential to a civilised state? He who does not
wish to deceive either himself or the people should admit that the Ministry
was in duty bound to produce these figures, and that by not
producing such figures the Ministry was not doing its
duty. Instead of making clear to the people, and the people’s
representatives, what the needs of the state are, the

    

Ministry conceals these needs and engages in a foolish
governmental game of figures, a governmental rehash of old figures that
explain nothing.  

I do not have at my disposal, of course, even a hundredth part of the
means and sources for studying public education that are available to the
Ministry. But I have made an attempt to obtain at least a little
source material. And I assert boldly that I can cite indisputable
official figures that really do make clear the situation in our
official public “miseducation”.  

I take the official government Russian Yearbook for 1910,
published by the Ministry of the Interior (St. Petersburg, 1911).  

On page 211, I read that the total number attending schools in
the Russian Empire, lumping together primary, secondary and higher schools
and educational establishments of all kinds, was 6,200,172 in 1904 and
7,095,351 in 1908. An obvious increase. The year 1905, the year of
the great awakening of the masses of the people in Russia, the year of the
great struggle of the people for freedom under the leadership of the
proletariat, was a year that forced even our hidebound Ministry to
make a move.  

But just look at the poverty we are doomed to, thanks to the
retention of officialdom, thanks to the almighty power of the feudal
landowners, even under conditions of the most rapid
“departmental” progress.  

The same Russian Yearbook relates in the same place that there
were 46.7 people attending school to every 1,000 in habitants in 1908 (in
1904 the figure was 44.3 to every 1,000 inhabitants).  

What do we learn from these figures from a Ministry of the Interior
publication that the Ministry of Public Education did not feel inclined to
report to the Duma? What does that proportion mean—less than 50
people out of a 1,000 attending school?  

It tells us, you gentlemen who uphold our hidebound public
miseducation, of the unbelievable backwardness and barbarity of
Russia thanks to the omnipotence of the feudal landowners in our state. The
number of children and adolescents of school age in Russia amounts to over
20 per cent of the population, that is, to more than
one-fifth. Even
    

Messrs. Kasso and Kokovtsov could without difficulty have learned these
figures from their departmental clerks.  

And so, we have 22 per cent of the population of school age
and 4.7 per cent attending school, which is only a little more than
one-fifth! This means that about four-fifths of the children
and adolescents of Russia are deprived of public education!  

There is no other country so barbarous and in which the masses of the
people are robbed to such an extent of education, light and
knowledge—no other such country has remained in Europe; Russia is the
exception. This reversion of the masses of the people, especially the
peasantry, to savagery, is not fortuitous, it is inevitable under
the yoke of the landowners, who have seized tens and more tens of millions
of dessiatines of land, who have, seized state power both in the Duma and
in the Council of State, and not only in these institutions, which are
relatively low-ranking institutions....  

Four-fifths of the rising generation are doomed to illiteracy by the
feudal state system of Russia. This stultifying of the people by the feudal
authorities has its correlative in the country’s illiteracy. The same
government Russian Year book estimates (on page 88) that only 21
per cent of the population of Russia are literate, and even if children of
pre-school age (i.e., children under nine) are deducted from the
total population, the number will still be only 27 per cent.  

In civilised countries there are no illiterates at all (as in Sweden or
Denmark), or a mere one or two per cent (as in Switzerland or
Germany). Even backward Austria-Hungary has provided her Slav population
with conditions incomparably more civilised than feudal Russia
has; in Austria there are 39 per cent of illiterates and in Hungary 50
per cent. It would be as well for our chauvinists, Rights, nationalists and
Octobrists to think about these figures, if they have not set
themselves the “statesmanlike” aim of forgetting how to think, and of
teaching the same to the people. But even if they have forgotten, the
people of Russia are learning more and more to think, and to
think, furthermore about which class it is that by its dominance in the
state condemns the Russian peasants to material and spiritual poverty.


America is not among the advanced countries as far as the
number of literates is concerned. There are about 11 per cent

    

illiterates and among the Negroes the figure is as high as 44 per cent. But
the American Negroes are more than twice as well off in respect of
public education as the Russian peasantry. The American Negroes, no matter
how much they may be, to the shame of the American Republic, oppressed, are
better off than the Russian peasants—and they are better off because
exactly half a century ago the people routed the American slave-owners,
crushed that serpent and completely swept away slavery and the slave-owning
state system, and the political privileges of the slave-owners in America.


The Kassos, Kokovtsovs and Maklakovs will teach the Russian people to
copy the American example.  

In 1908 there were 17,000,000 attending school in America,
that is, 192 per 1,000 inhabitants—more than four times
the number in Russia. Forty-three years ago, in 1870, when America had only
just begun to build her free way of life after purging
the country of the diehards of slavery—forty-three years ago there were
in America 6,871,522 people at tending school, i.e., more than in Russia in
1904 and almost as many as in 1908. But even as far back as 1870
there were 178 (one hundred and seventy-eight) people enrolled in
schools to every 1,000 inhabitants, little short of four times the number
enrolled in Russia today.  

And there, gentlemen, you have further proof that Russia still
has to win for herself in persistent revolutionary struggle by the people
that freedom the Americans won for them selves half a century ago.


The estimate for the Russian Ministry of Public Miseducation is fixed
at 136,700,000 rubles for 1913. This amounts to only 80 kopeks per head of
the population (170,000,000 in 1913). Even if we accept the “sum-total of
state expenditure on education” that the Minister of Finance gives us on
page 109 of his explanatory text to the budget, that is, 204,900,000
rubles, we still have only 1 ruble 20 kopeks per head. In Belgium, Britain
and Germany the amount expended on education is two to three rubles and
even three rubles fifty kopeks per head of the population. In 1910, America
expended 426,000,000 dollars, i.e., 852,000,000 rubles or 9 rubles
24 kopeks per head of the population, on public education. Forty-three
years ago,

    

in 1870, the American Republic was spending 126,000,000 rubles a year on
education, i.e., 3 rubles 30 kopeks per head.  

The official pens of government officials and the officials themselves
will object and tell us that Russia is poor, that she has no money. That is
true, Russia is not only poor, she is a beggar when it comes to public
education. To make up for it, Russia is very “rich” when it comes to
expenditure on the feudal state, ruled by landowners, or expenditure on the
police, the army, on rents and on salaries of ten thousand rubles for
landowners who have reached “high” government posts, expenditure on risky
adventures and plunder, yesterday in Korea or on the River Yalu, today in
Mongolia or in Turkish Armenia. Russia will always remain poor and
beggarly in respect of expenditure on public education until the
public educates itself sufficiently to cast off the yoke of feudal
landowners.  

Russia is poor when it comes to the salaries of school teachers. They
are paid a miserable pittance. School-teachers starve and freeze in
unheated huts that are scarcely fit for human habitation. School-teachers
live together with the cattle that the peasants take into their huts in
winter. School-teachers are persecuted by every police sergeant, by every
village adherent of the Black Hundreds, by volunteer spies or detectives,
to say nothing of the hole-picking and persecution by higher
officials. Russia is too poor to pay a decent salary to honest workers in
the field of public education, but Russia is rich enough to waste millions
and tens of millions on aristocratic parasites, on military ad ventures and
on hand-outs to owners of sugar refineries, oil kings and so on.  

There is one other figure, the last one taken from American life,
gentlemen, that will show the peoples oppressed by the Russian landowners
and their government, how the people live who have been
able to achieve freedom through a revolutionary struggle. In 1870, in
America there were 200,515 school-teachers with a total salary of
37,800,000 dollars, i.e., an average of 189 dollars or 377 rubles
per teacher per annum. And that was forty years ago! In America
today there are 523,210 school-teachers and their total salaries
come to 253,900,000 dollars, i.e., 483 dollars or 966 rubles per
teacher per annum. And in Russia, even at the present

    

level of the productive forces, it would be quite possible at this very
moment to guarantee a no less satisfactory salary to an army of
school-teachers who are helping to lift the people out of their ignorance,
darkness and oppression, if ... if the whole state system of Russia, from
top to bottom, were reorganised on lines as democratic as the American
system.  

Either poverty and barbarism arising out of the full power of the
feudal landowners, arising out of the law and order or disorder of the June
Third law, or freedom and civilisation arising out of the ability and
determination to win freedom—such is the object-lesson
Russian citizens are taught by the estimates put forward by the Ministry of
Public Education.  

So far I have touched upon the purely material, or even financial,
aspect of the matter. Incomparably more melancholy or, rather, more
disgusting, is the picture of spiritual bondage, humiliation, suppression
and lack of rights of the teachers and those they teach in Russia. The
whole activity of the Ministry of Public Education in this field is pure
mockery of the rights of citizens, mockery of the people. Police
surveillance, police violence, police interference with the
education of the people in general and of workers in particular, police
destruction of whatever the people them selves do for their own
enlightenment—this is what the entire activity of the Ministry
amounts to, the Ministry whose estimate will be approved by the landowning
gentry, from Rights to Octobrists inclusive.  

And in order to prove the correctness of my words, gentlemen
of the Fourth Duma, I will call a witness that even you, the
landowners, cannot object to. My witness is the Octobrist
Mr. Klyuzhev, member of the Third and Fourth Dumas, member of the
supervisory council of the Second and Third Women’s Gymnasia in Samara,
member of the school committee of the Samara City Council, member of the
auditing board of the Samara Gubernia Zemstvo, former inspector of public
schools. I have given you a list of the offices and titles (using the
official reference book of the Third Duma) of this Octobrist to
prove to you that the government itself, the landowners
themselves in our landowners’ Zemstvo, have given Mr. Klyuzhev
most important posts in

    

the “work” (the work of spies and butchers) of our Ministry of Public
Stultification.  

Mr. Klyuzhev, if anybody, has, of course, made his entire career as a
law-abiding, God-fearing civil servant. And, of course, Mr. Klyuzhev, if
anybody, has by his faithful service in the district earned the confidence
of the nobility and the landowners.  

And now here are some passages from a speech by this most thoroughly
reliable (from the feudal point of view) witness; the speech was made in
the Third Duma in respect of the estimate submitted by the
Ministry of Public Education.  

The Samara Zemstvo, Mr. Klyuzhev told the Third Duma,
unanimously adopted the proposal of Mr. Klyuzhev to make
application for the conversion of some village two-year schools into
four-year schools. The regional supervisor, so the law-abiding and
God-fearing Mr. Klyuzhev reports, refused this. Why? The official
explanation was: “in view of the insignificant number of children of
school age.  

And so Mr. Klyuzhev made the following comparison:
we (he says of landowner-oppressed Russia) have not a
single four-year school for the 6,000 inhabitants of the Samara
villages. In the town of Serdobol (Finland) with 2,800 in
habitants there are four secondary (and higher than secondary)
schools.  

This comparison was made by the Octobrist, the most worthy
      Peredonov[1]

... excuse the slip, the most worthy Mr. Klyuzhev in the Third Duma. Ponder
over that comparison, Messrs. Duma representatives, if not of the people,
then at least of the landowners. Who made application to open schools?
Could it be the Lefts? The muzhiks? The workers? God forbid! It was the
Samara Zemstvo that made the application unanimously, that is, it
was the Samara landowners, the most ardent Black-Hundred adherents
among them. And the government, through its supervisor, refused the request
on the excuse that there was an “insignificant” number of
children of school age! Was I not in every way right when I said that the
government hinders public education in Russia, that the government
is the biggest enemy of public education in Russia?  
 

The culture, civilisation, freedom, literacy, educated women and so on
that we see in Finland derive exclusively from there being
no such “social evil” as the Russian Government in Finland, Now you
want to foist this evil on Fin land and make her, too, an enslaved
country. You will not, succeed in that, gentlemen! By your attempts to
impose political slavery on Finland you will only accelerate the awakening
of the peoples of Russia from political slavery!  

I will quote another passage from the Octobrist witness,
Mr. Klyuzhev. “How are teachers recruited?” Mr. Klyuzhev asked in his
speech and himself provided the following answer: 


   “One prominent Samara man, by the name of Popov,
   bequeathed the necessary sum to endow a Teachers’ Seminary for Women.” And
   who do you think was appointed head of the Seminary? This is what the
   executor of the late Popov writes: “The widow of a General of the
   Guard, was appointed head of the Seminary and she herself admitted
   that this was the first time in her life she had heard of the existence of
   an educational establishment called a Teachers’ Seminary for Women”!  


Don’t imagine that I took this from a collection of Demyan Bedny’s
fables, from the sort of fable for which the magazine
Prosveshcheniye was fined and its editor imprisoned. Nothing of
the sort. This fact was taken from the speech of the Octobrist Klyuzhev,
who fears (as a God-fearing and police-fearing man) even to ponder
the significance of this fact. For this fact, once again, shows beyond all
doubt that there is no more vicious, no more implacable enemy of the
education of the people in Russia than the Russian Government. And
gentlemen who bequeath money for public education should realise that they
are throwing it away, worse than throwing it away. They desire to bequeath
their money to provide education for the people, but actually it
turns out that they are giving it to Generals of the Guards and
their widows. If such philanthropists do not wish to throw their
money away they must understand that they should bequeath it to the
Social-Democrats, who alone are able to use that money to provide
the people with real education that is really independent of
“Generals of the Guards”—and of timorous and law-abiding Klyuzhevs.


Still another passage from the speech of the same Mr. Klyuzhev.  
 


   “It was in vain that we of the Third Duma desired free
   access to higher educational establishments for seminar pupils. The
   Ministry did not deem it possible to accede to our wishes.” “Incidentally
   the government bars the way to higher education, not to seminar pupils
   alone, but to the children of the peasant and urban petty-bourgeois social
   estates in general. This is no elegant phrase but the truth,” exclaimed
   the Octobrist official of the Ministry of Public Education. “Out of the
   119,000 Gymnasium students only 18,000 are peasants. Peasants constitute
   only 15 per cent of those studying in all the establishments of the
   Ministry of Public Education. In the Theological Seminaries only 1,300 of
   the 20,500 pupils are peasants. Peasants are not admitted at all to the
   Cadet Corps and similar institutions.” (These passages from Klyuzhev’s
   speech were, incidentally, cited in an article by K. Dobroserdov in
   Nevskaya Zvezda No. 6, for 1912, dated May 22, 1912.)  


That is how Mr. Klyuzhev spoke in the Third Duma. The depositions of
that witness will not be refuted by those who rule the roost in the Fourth
Duma. The witness, against his own will and despite his
wishes, fully corroborates the revolutionary appraisal of the
present situation in Russia in general, and of public education in
particular. And what, indeed, does a government deserve that, in the words
of a prominent government official and member of the ruling party of
Octobrists, bars the way to education for the peasants and urban
petty bourgeois?  

Imagine, gentlemen, what such a government deserves from the point of
view of the urban petty bourgeoisie and the peasants!  

And do not forget that in Russia the peasants and the urban petty
bourgeoisie constitute 88 per cent of the population, that is, a little
less than nine-tenths of the people. The nobility constitute only
one and a half per cent. And so the government is taking money
from nine-tenths of the people for schools and educational establishments
of all kinds and using that money to teach the nobility,
barring the way to the peasant and urban petty bourgeois! Is it
not clear what this government of the nobility deserves? This government
that oppresses nine-tenths of the population in order to preserve the
privileges of one-hundredth of the population—what does it
deserve?  

And now, finally, for the last quotation from my witness, the Octobrist
official of the Ministry of Public Education, and member of the Third (and
Fourth) Dumas, Mr. Klyuzhev: 
 


   “In the five years from 1906 to 1910,” said
   Mr. Klyuzhev, “in the Kazan area, the following have been removed from
   their posts:

   21 head masters of secondary and primary schools, 32 inspectors of
   public schools and 1,054 urban school-teachers; 870
   people of these categories have been transferred. Imagine it,”
   exclaimed Mr. Klyuzhev, “how can our school-teacher sleep peacefully?
   He may go to bed in Astrakhan and not be sure that he will not be in
   Vyatka the next day. Try to understand the psychology of the pedagogue
   who is driven about like a hunted rabbit!”  


This is not the exclamation of some “Left” school-teacher, but of an
Octobrist. These figures were cited by a diligent civil servant. He is
your witness, gentlemen of the Right, nationalists and Octobrists!
This witness of “yours” is compelled to admit the most scandalous, most
shameless and most disgusting arbitrariness on the part of the government
in its attitude to teachers! This witness of yours, gentlemen who
rule the roost in the Fourth Duma and the Council of State, has been forced
to admit the fact that teachers in Russia are “driven” like
rabbits by the Russian Government!  

On the basis provided by this fact, one of thousands and thousands of
similar facts in Russian life, we ask the Russian people and all the
peoples of Russia: do we need a government to protect the privileges of the
nobility and to “drive” the people’s teachers “like rabbits”?
Does not this government deserve to be driven out by the people?


Yes, the Russian people’s teachers are driven like rabbits. Yes, the
government bars the way to education to nine-tenths of the population of
Russia. Yes, our Ministry of Public Education is a ministry of police
espionage, a minis try that derides youth, and jeers at the people’s thirst
for knowledge. But far from all the Russian peasants, not to mention the
Russian workers, resemble rabbits, honourable members of the
Fourth Duma. The working class were able to prove this in 1905, and they
will be able to prove again, and to prove more impressively, and much more
seriously, that they are capable of a revolutionary struggle for real
freedom and for real public education and not that of Kasso or of
the nobility.  

 

Notes
 

[1]
Peredonov—a type of teacher-spy and dull lout from Sologub’s novel
The Petty Imp.  —Lenin
 



[2]
Lenin prepared this draft speech for a Bolshevik deputy to the Duma;
the speech was delivered on June 4 (17), 1913 by A. E. Badayev during the
debate on the Budget Committee’s report on estimates of the Ministry of
Education for 1913. The greater part of Lenin’s draft was read almost word
for word by Badayev, but he did not finish the speech. When he read the
sentence “Does not this government deserve to be driven out by the
people?” he was deprived of the right to speak.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Controversial Issues









Lenin: Controversial Issues








V. I.  

      Lenin
Controversial Issues
AN OPEN PARTY AND THE ISTS




Published:
Pravda Nos. 85, 95, 1 10, 122, 124 and 126; April 12, 28, May 15, 29, 31, and June 2, 1913.

      Signed: V. I..

      Published according to the Pravda text, collated with that of the pamphlet Marxism, and Liquidationism, Part II, St. Petersburg, 1914.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 147-169.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

      
• README



Contents






I. THE DECISION OF 1908
  149



II. THE DECISION OF 1910
  153



III. THE ATTITUDE OF THE LIQUIDATORS TO THE DECISIONS OF 1908 AND 1910
  156



IV. THE CLASS SIGNIFICANCE OF LIQUIDATIONISM
  159



V. THE SLOGAN OF “STRUGGLE FOR AN OPEN PARTY”
  163



VI
  166

 
 
 

Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Decision of 1908









Lenin: 1913/ci: I. THE DECISION OF 1908







V. I.  

      Lenin
Controversial Issues
AN OPEN PARTY AND THE ISTS



    

    
 

I. THE DECISION OF 1908

To many workers the struggle that is now going on between
Pravda and Luch appears unnecessary and not very
intelligible. Naturally, polemical articles in separate issues of the
newspaper on separate, sometimes very special questions, do not give a
complete idea of the subject and content of the struggle. Hence the
legitimate dissatisfaction of the workers.  

Yet the question of liquidationism, over which the struggle is now
being waged, is at the present time one of the most important and most
urgent questions of the working-class movement. One cannot be a
class-conscious worker unless one studies the question in detail and forms
a definite opinion on it. A worker who wishes to participate independently
in deciding the destiny of his Party will not waive aside
polemics, even if they are not quite intelligible at first sight, but will
earnestly seek until he finds the truth.  

How is the truth to be sought? How can one find one’s way through the
tangle of contradictory opinions and assertions?  

Every sensible person understands that if a bitter struggle is raging
on any subject, in order to ascertain the truth, he must not confine
himself to the statements made by the disputants, but must examine the
facts and documents for him self, see for himself whether
there is any evidence to be had from witnesses and whether this
evidence is reliable.  

This, of course, is not always easy to do. It is much “easier” to
take for granted what comes to hand, what you happen to hear, what
is more “openly” shouted about, and so on. But people who are satisfied
with this are dubbed “shallow”, feather-brained people, and no one takes
them seriously. The truth about any important question cannot be found

    

unless a certain amount of independent work is done, and anyone
who is afraid of work cannot possibly arrive at the truth.  

Therefore, we address ourselves only to those workers who are not
afraid of this work, who have decided to get to the bottom of the matter
themselves, and try to discover facts, documents, the evidence
of witnesses.  

The first question that arises is—what is liquidationism? Where did
this word come from, what does it mean?  

Luch says that the liquidation of the Party, i.e., the
dissolution, the break-up of the Party, the renunciation of the Party, is
merely a wicked invention. The “factionalist” Bolsheviks, it alleges,
invented this charge against the Mensheviks!  

Pravda says that the whole Party has been condemning and
fighting liquidationism for over four years.  

Who is right? How to discover the truth?  

Obviously, the only way is to seek for facts and documents of the
Party’s history in the last four years, from 1908 to 1912, when
the liquidators finally split away from the Party.  

These four years, during which the present liquidators were
still in the Party, constitute the most important period for
discovering where the term liquidationism came from and how it
arose.  

Hence, the first and basic conclusion: whoever talks of liquidationism,
but avoids the facts and Party documents of the 1908–11
period, is hiding the truth from the workers.  

What are these facts and Party documents?  

First of all there is the Party decision adopted in December
1908. If the workers do not wish to be treated like children who are
stuffed with fairy-tales and fables, they must ask their advisers, leaders
or representatives, whether a Party decision was adopted on the
question of liquidationism in December 1908 and what that decision was.


The decision contains a condemnation of liquidationism and an
explanation of what it is.  

Liquidationism is “an attempt on the part of a group of Party
intellectuals to liquidate
[i.e, dissolve, destroy, abolish, close down] the
existing organisation of the Party and to replace it at all costs, even at
the price of downright renunciation
    

of the programme, tactics, and traditions of the Party [i.e., past
experience], by a loose association functioning legally [i.e., in
conformity with the law, existing “openly”]”.  

Such was the Party’s decision on liquidationism, adopted more
than four years ago.  

It is obvious from this decision what the essence of liquidationism is
and why it is condemned. Its essence is the renunciation of the
“underground”, its liquidation and replacement at all costs by
an amorphous association functioning legally. Therefore, it is not
legal work, not insistence on the need for it that the Party condemns. The
Party condemns—and unreservedly condemns—the replacement of
the old Party by something amorphous, “open , something which cannot be
called a party.  

The Party cannot exist unless it defends its existence, unless it
unreservedly fights those who want to liquidate it, destroy it, who do not
recognise it, who renounce it. This is self-evident.  

Anyone who renounces the existing Party in the name of some new party
must be told: try, build up a new party, but you cannot remain a member of
the old, the present, the existing Party. Such is the meaning of the Party
decision adopted in December 1908, and it is obvious that no other decision
could have been taken on the question of the Party’s existence.  

Of course, liquidationism is ideologically connected with
renegacy, with the renunciation of the programme and
tactics, with opportunism. This is exactly what is indicated
in the concluding part of the above-quoted decision. But liquidationism is
not only opportunism. The opportunists are leading the Party on to
a wrong, bourgeois path, the path of a liberal-labour policy, but they
do not renounce the Party itself, they do not liquidate
it. Liquidationism is that brand of opportunism which goes to the
length of renouncing the Party. It is self-evident that the Party
cannot exist if its members include those who do not recognise its
existence. It is equally evident that the renunciation of the underground
under existing conditions is renunciation of the old Party.  

The question is, what is the attitude of the liquidators towards this
Party decision adopted in 1908?  
 

This is the crux of the matter, this puts the sincerity and political
honesty of the liquidators to the test.  

Not one of them, unless he has taken leave of his senses, will deny
that such a decision was adopted by the Party and has not been rescinded.


And so the liquidators resort to evasions; they either avoid the
question and withhold from the workers the Party’s decision of
1908, or exclaim (often adding abuse) that this was a decision carried by
the Bolsheviks.  

But abuse only betrays the weakness of the liquidators. There are
Party decisions that have been carried by the Mensheviks,
for example, the decision concerning municipalisation, adopted in Stockholm
in
1906.[1] This is common knowledge. Many Bolsheviks do not agree with
that decision. But not one of them denies that it is a Party
decision. In exactly the same way the decision of 1908 concerning
liquidationism is a Party decision. All attempts to side step this
question only signify a desire to mislead the workers.  

Whoever wants to recognise the Party, not merely in words, will not
permit any sidestepping, and will insist on getting at the truth concerning
the Party’s decision on the question of liquidationism. This
decision has been supported ever since 1909 by all the pro-Party
Mensheviks,[2] headed by Plekhanov who, in his Dnevnik and
in a whole series of other Marxist publications, has repeatedly and quite
definitely explained that nobody who wants to liquidate the Party can be a
member of the Party.  

Plekhanov was and will remain a Menshevik. Therefore, the liquidators’
usual references to the “Bolshevik” nature of the Party’s 1908 decision
are doubly wrong.  

The more abuse the liquidators hurl at Plekhanov in Luch and
Nasha Zarya, the clearer is the proof that the liquidators are in
the wrong and that they are trying to obscure the truth by noise, shouting
and squabbling. Some times a novice can be stunned at once by such methods,
but for all that the workers will find their bearings and will soon come to
ignore this abuse.  

Is the unity of the workers necessary? It is.  

Is the unity of the workers possible without the unity of the workers’
organisation? Obviously not.  
 

What prevents the unity of the workers’ party? Disputes over
liquidationism.  

Therefore, the workers must understand what these disputes are about in
order that they themselves may decide the destiny of their Party
and defend it.  

The first step in this direction is to acquaint themselves with the
Party’s first decision on liquidationism. The workers must know
this decision thoroughly and study it care fully, putting aside all
attempts to evade the question or to side-track it. Having studied this
decision, every worker will begin to understand the essence of
liquidationism, why it is such an important and such a “vexed” question,
why the Party has been faced with it during the four years and more of the
period of reaction.  

In the next article we shall consider another important Party decision
on liquidationism which was adopted about three and a half years ago, and
then pass on to facts and documents that show how the question stands at
present.  
 

Notes
 
 



[1]
The reference is to the Menshevik agrarian municipalisation programme
adopted at the Fourth (Unity) Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. Lenin criticised
this programme in his “Report on the Unity Congress of the R.S.D.L.P.”

and “The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in the First Russian
Revolution, 1905–07” (see Vol. 13).





[2]
Pro-Party Mensheviks—a small group of Mensheviks led by
Plekhanov that broke with the Menshevik liquidators and opposed
liquidationism in the 1908–12 period.



 
  


|

II. THE DECISION OF 1910

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Decision of 1910









Lenin: 1913/ci: II. THE DECISION OF 1910







V. I.  

      Lenin
Controversial Issues
AN OPEN PARTY AND THE ISTS



    

II. THE DECISION OF 1910

In our first article (Pravda No. 289) we quoted the first and
basic document with which those workers who wish to discover the truth in
the present disputes must make themselves familiar, namely, the Party
decision of December 1908 on liquidationism.  

Now we shall quote and examine another, no less important Party
decision on the same question adopted three and a half years ago, in
January 1910. This decision is especially important because it was carried
unanimously: all the Bolsheviks, without exception, all the
Vperyod group, and finally (this is most important) all
the Mensheviks and the present liquidators without exception, and also all
the “national” (i.e., Jewish, Polish and Latvian) Marxists accepted this
decision.  

We quote here in full the most important passage in this decision: 


   “The historical situation of the Social-Democratic
   movement in the period of bourgeois counter-revolution inevitably gives
   rise, as a manifestation of bourgeois influence over the proletariat, on
   the one hand, to the renunciation of the illegal Social-Democratic
   Party,

    

   the belittling of its role and importance, attempts to curtail the
   programmatic and tactical tasks and slogans of consistent Social-Democracy,
   etc.; on the other hand, it gives rise to the renunciation of
   Social-Democratic activities in the Duma and of the utilisation of legal
   possibilities, to failure to understand the importance of both, to
   inability to adapt consistent Social-Democratic tactics to the peculiar
   historical conditions of the given moment, etc.  

   “It is an integral part of Social-Democratic tactics
   under such conditions to overcome both deviations by broadening and
   deepening Social-Democratic work in all spheres of proletarian class
   struggle and to explain the danger of such
   deviations.”[1] 


This decision clearly shows that three and a half years ago all the
Marxists, as represented by all the trends without exception, were obliged
unanimously to recognise two deviations from Marxist
tactics. Both deviations were recognised as dangerous. Both
deviations were explained as being due, not to accident, not to the evil
will of certain individuals, but to the “historical situation”
of the working-class movement in the present period.  

Moreover, this unanimous Party decision points to the class
origin and significance of these deviations. For Marxists do not confine
themselves to bare and hollow references to disruption and
disintegration. That sense of confusion, lack of faith, despondency and
perplexity reign in the minds of many adherents of democracy and socialism
is obvious to all. It is not enough to admit this. It is necessary to
understand the class origin of the discord and disintegration, to
understand what class interests emanating from a non-proletarian
environment foster “confusion” among the friends of the proletariat.


And the Party decision adopted three and a half years ago gave an
answer to this important question: the deviations from Marxism are
generated by “bourgeois counter revolution”, by “bourgeois influence
over the proletariat”.  

What are these deviations that threaten to surrender the proletariat to
the influence of the bourgeoisie? One of these deviations, connected with
the Vperyod line and renouncing Social-Democratic activities in
the Duma and the utilisation of legal possibilities, has almost
completely disappeared. None of the Social-Democrats in Russia now
preach these erroneous non-Marxian views. The Vperyod
    

group (including Alexinsky and others) have begun to work in
Pravda alongside the pro-Party Mensheviks.  

The other deviation indicated in the Party decision is
liquidationism. This is obvious from the reference to the
“renunciation” of the underground and to the “belittling” of its role
and importance. Finally, we have a very precise document, published
three years ago and refuted by no one, a document emanating from
all the “national” Marxists and from Trotsky (better witnesses
the liquidators could not wish for). This document states directly that
“in essence it would be desirable to call the trend indicated in the
resolution liquidationism, a trend which must be
combated...  

Thus, the fundamental and most important fact that must be known by
everyone who wants to understand what the present controversy is about is
the following—three and a half years ago the Party unanimously
recognised liquidationism to be a “dangerous” deviation from
Marxism, a deviation which must be combated and which expresses
“bourgeois influence over the proletariat”.  

The interests of the bourgeoisie, whose attitude is against democracy,
and, generally speaking, counter-revolutionary, demand the
liquidation, the dissolution of the old Party of the
proletariat. The bourgeoisie are doing everything they can to spread and
foster all ideas aimed at liquidating the party of the working
class. The bourgeoisie are trying to encourage renunciation of the old
tasks, to “dock” them, cut them back, prune them, sap them of meaning, to
substitute conciliation or an agreement with the Purishkeviches and Co. for
the determined destruction of the foundations of their power.  

Liquidationism is, in fact, the spreading of these bourgeois ideas of
renunciation and renegacy among the proletariat.  

Such is the class significance of liquidationism as indicated
in the Party decision unanimously adopted three and a half years
ago. It is in this that the entire Party sees the greatest harm and the
danger of liquidationism, its pernicious effect on the working-class
movement, on the consolidation of an independent (not merely in word but in
deed) party of the working class.  

Liquidationism means not only the liquidation (i.e., the dissolution,
the destruction) of the old party of the working

    

class, it also means the destruction of the class independence of
the proletariat, the corruption of its class-consciousness by
bourgeois ideas.  

We shall give an illustration of this appraisal of liquidationism in
the next article, which will set forth in full the most important arguments
of the liquidationist Luch. Now let us sum up briefly what we have
stated. The attempts of the Luch people in general, and of
Messrs. F. Dan and Potresov in particular, to make it appear that
“liquidationism” is an invention, are astonishingly mendacious
subterfuges based on the assumption that the readers of Luch are
completely uninformed. Actually, apart from the Party decision of 1908,
there is the unanimous Party decision of 1910, which gives a
complete appraisal of liquidationism as a bourgeois deviation from the
proletarian path, a deviation that is dangerous and disastrous to the
working class. Only the enemies of the working class can conceal or evade
this Party appraisal.  
 

Notes
 
 



[1]
Lenin quotes from the decision condemning liquidationism and otzovism
adopted by the January 1910 Plenary Meeting of the Central Committee of the
R.S.D.L.P. on the question: “The State of Affairs in the Party”.



 
  

I. THE DECISION OF 1908

|

III. THE ATTITUDE OF THE LIQUIDATORS TO THE DECISIONS OF 1908 AND 1910

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Attitude of the
      Liquidators









Lenin: 1913/ci: III. THE ATTITUDE OF THE LIQUIDATORS TO THE DECISIONS OF 1908 AND 1910







V. I.  

      Lenin
Controversial Issues
AN OPEN PARTY AND THE ISTS



    

III. THE ATTITUDE OF THE LIQUIDATORS TO THE DECISIONS OF 1908 AND
1910

In the preceding article [Pravda No. 95 (299)], we quoted the
exact words of the unanimous Party decision on liquidationism, which define
it as a manifestation of bourgeois influence over the proletariat.  

As we have pointed out, this decision was adopted in January
1910. Let us now examine the behaviour of those liquidators who are
brazenly assuring us that there is not, and never has been, any such thing
as liquidationism.  

In February 1910, in No. 2 of the magazine Nasha Zarya, which
had only just begun to appear at that time, Mr. Potresov wrote bluntly that
“there is no Party in the shape of an integral and organised
hierarchy” (i.e., ladder, or system of “institutions”) and that it was
impossible to liquidate “what in reality no longer exists as an
organised body”. (See Nasha Zarya, 1910, No. 2, 61.)  

This was stated a month or even less after the unanimous
decision of the Party!  

And in March 1910, another liquidationist journal, namely
Vozrozhdeniye,[3] having the same set of
contributors—Potresov,

    

Dan, Martynov, Yezhov, Martov, Levitsky and Co.—stressed and gave a
popular explanation of Mr. Potresov’s words: 


   “There is nothing, to liquidate and—we for our part
   [i.e., the editors of Vozrozhdeniye] would add—the dream of
   re-establishing this hierarchy in its old, underground form is simply a
   harmful, reactionary utopia indicating a loss of political intuition by
   members of a party which at one time was the most realistic of all.”
   (Vozrozhdeniye, 1910, No. 5, p. 51.)  


There is no party, and the idea of re-establishing it is a harmful
utopia—these are clear and definite words. Here we have a plain and
direct renunciation of the Party. The renunciation (and the invitation to
the workers to renounce) came from people who had deserted the underground
and were “longing for” an open party.  

This desertion from the underground was, moreover, quite definitely and
openly supported by P. B. Axelrod in 1912, both in Nevsky
Golos[4] (1912, No. 6) and in Nasha Zarya (1912, No. 6).



   “To talk about non-factionalism in the conditions now
   obtaining,” wrote P. B. Axelrod, “means behaving like an ostrich, means
   deceiving oneself and others.” “Factional organisation and consolidation
   is the manifest responsibility and urgent duty of the supporters of Party
   reform, or to be more exact, of a revolution in the Party.”  


Thus P. B. Axelrod is openly in favour of a Party revolution,
i.e., the destruction of the old Party and the formation of a new one.


In 1913, Luch No. 101, in an unsigned editorial stated plainly
that “among the workers in some places there is even a revival and growth
of sympathy for the underground” and that this was “a regrettable
fact”. L. Sedov, the author of that article, admitted himself
(Nasha Zarya, 1913, No. 3, p. 49) that the article had “caused
dissatisfaction”, even among the supporters of Luch
tactics. L. Sedov’s explanations, furthermore, were such as to cause
renewed dissatisfaction on the part of a Luch supporter, namely
An, who has an item in No. 181 of Luch, opposing Sedov. He
protests against Sedov’s assumption that the “underground is an obstacle
to the political organisation of our movement, to the

    

building up of a workers’ Social-Democratic Party. An ridicules L. Sedov
for his “vagueness” as to whether the underground is desirable or not.


In their long comment on the article the editors of Luch came
out in favour of Sedov and stated An to be “mistaken in his
criticism of L. Sedov”.  

We will examine the arguments of the Luch editors and the
liquidationist mistakes of An himself in their proper place. That is not
the point we are discussing here. What we must go into carefully at the
moment is the fundamental and principal conclusion to be drawn from the
documents quoted
above.[1]


The entire Party, both in 1908 and in 1910, condemned and rejected
liquidationism, and explained the class origin and the danger of this trend
clearly and in detail. All the liquidationist newspapers and
journals—Vozrozhdeniye (1909-10), Nasha Zarya
(1910-13), Nevsky Golos (1912), and Luch
     (1912–13)[2]
all of them, after the most definite and even unanimous decisions
of the Party, reiterate thoughts and arguments of an obvious
liquidationist nature.  
 

Even “Luch” supporters are forced to
declare that they disagree with these arguments, with this preaching. That
is a fact. Therefore, to shout about the “baiting” of liquidators, as
Trotsky, Semkovsky and many other patrons of liquidationism do, is
downright dishonesty, for it is an absolute distortion of the truth.  

The truth proved by the documents I have quoted, which cover a period
of more than five years (1908-13), is that the liquidators,
flouting all Party decisions, continue to abuse and bait the Party, i.e.,
the “underground”.  

Every worker who himself wants to examine seriously the
controversial and vexed questions of the Party, who wants to decide these
questions for himself, must first of all assimilate this truth,
making an independent study and verification of these Party decisions and
of the liquidator arguments. Only those who carefully study, ponder over
and reach an independent decision on the problems and the fate of
their Party deserve to be called Party members and builders of the workers’
party. One must not be indifferent to the question of whether it is the
Party that is “guilty” of “baiting” (i.e., of too trenchant and
mistaken attacks on) the liquidators or whether it is the
liquidators who are guilty of flagrantly violating Party
decisions, of persistently advocating the liquidation, i.e., the
destruction of the Party.  

Clearly, the Party cannot exist unless it fights with might and main
against those who seek to destroy it.  

Having quoted the documents on this fundamental question, we shall, in
the next article, pass on to an appraisal of the ideological
content of the plea for an “open party”.  
 

Notes
 

[1]
In the symposium Marxism and Liquidationism Lenin substituted
for this paragraph, up to the word “fundamental”, the following text
(reproduced from the manuscript): 

“In No. 8 of Zhivaya Zhizn (July 19, 1913) Vera Zasulich
repeating dozens of liquidationist arguments wrote: ‘It is difficult to say
whether the new organisation [the Social-Democratic Party]... helped or
hindered the work.’  Clearly these words are tantamount to renunciation of
the Party. Vera Zasulich justifies desertion from the Party by saying: the
organisations lost their members ‘because at that time there was nothing to
do in them’. Vera Zasulich is creating a purely anarchist theory about ‘a
broad section’ instead of a party. See the detailed analysis of
this theory in Prosveshcheniye No. 9, 1913. (See pp. 394–416 of
this volume.—Ed.)  

“What then constitutes the ...”—Ed.  

[2]
The symposium Marxism and Liquidationism adds “and Novaya
Rabochaya Gazeta (1943–14)” with the following footnote: 

“See, for example, Novaya Rabochaya Gazeta No. 1, 1914, the
New Year’s leading article: ‘The road to an open political party of action
is also the road to party unity’ [to the unity of the builders of an open
party?]. Or No. 5, 1914: ‘surmounting [all the obstacles that are placed in
the way of organising workers’ congresses] is nothing more nor less than a
most genuine struggle for the right of association, i.e., for the legality
of the working-class movement, closely connected with the struggle for the
open existence of the Social-Democratic Labour
Party.’”—Ed.  
 



[3]
Vozrozhdeniye (Regeneration)—a legal journal
published by Menshevik liquidators in Moscow from December 1908 to
July 1910.





[4]
Nevsky Golos (Neva Voice)—a legal newspaper
published by Menshevik liquidators in St. Petersburg from May to August
1912.



 
  

II. THE DECISION OF 1910

|

IV. THE CLASS SIGNIFICANCE OF LIQUIDATIONISM

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Class Significance of
      Liquidationism









Lenin: 1913/ci: IV. THE CLASS SIGNIFICANCE OF LIQUIDATIONISM







V. I.  

      Lenin
Controversial Issues
AN OPEN PARTY AND THE ISTS



    

IV. THE CLASS SIGNIFICANCE OF LIQUIDATIONISM

In the preceding articles (Pravda Nos. 289, 299 and 314) we
showed that all the Marxists, both in 1908 and in 1910, irrevocably
condemned liquidationism as renunciation of the past. The Marxists
explained to the working class that liquidationism is the spreading of
bourgeois influence among the proletariat. And all the
liquidationist publications, from 1909 up to 1913, have flagrantly violated
the decisions of the Marxists.  
 

Let us consider the slogan, an “open workers’ party”, or “a struggle
for an open party”, which the liquidators are still advocating in
Luck and Nasha Zarya.  

Is this a Marxist, proletarian slogan, or a liberal, bourgeois slogan?


The answer must be sought not in the attitude or plans of the
liquidators or of other groups, but in an analysis of the relation of
social forces in Russia in the present period. The significance of slogans
is determined not by the intentions of their authors, but by the relation
of forces of all the classes in the country.  

The feudal-minded land owners and their “bureaucracy” are
hostile to all changes making for political liberty. This is
understandable. The bourgeoisie, because of its economic position in a
backward and semi-feudal country, must strive for freedom. But the
bourgeoisie fears the activity of the people more than it fears
reaction. This truth was demonstrated with particular clarity in 1905; it
is fully under stood by the working class, but not by opportunist and
semi-liberal intellectuals.  

The bourgeoisie are both liberal and counter-revolutionary. Hence their
ridiculously impotent and wretched reformism. They dream of
reforms and fear to settle accounts in real earnest with the feudal-minded
landowners who not only refuse to grant reforms, but even withdraw those
already granted. They preach reforms and fear the popular movement. They
strive to oust the landowners, but fear to lose their support and
fear to lose their own privileges. It is upon this relation of
classes that the June Third system has been built up, which gives unlimited
power to the feudal landowners and privileges to the bourgeoisie.  

The class position of the proletariat makes it altogether impossible
for it to “share” privileges or be afraid of anyone losing
them. That is why selfishly narrow, miserable and dull-witted reformism is
quite foreign to the proletariat. As to the peasant masses—on the one
hand they are immeasurably oppressed, and instead of enjoying privileges
suffer from starvation; on the other hand, they are undoubtedly petty
bourgeois—hence, they inevitably vacillate between the liberals and the
workers.  

Such is the objective situation.  
 

From this situation it clearly follows that the slogan of an open
working-class party is, in its class origin, a slogan of the
counter-revolutionary liberals. It contains nothing save reformism; it does
not contain even a hint that the proletariat, the only thoroughly
democratic class, is conscious that its task is one of fighting the
liberals for influence over democrats as a whole; there is not even a
suggestion of removing the foundation of all the privileges of the
feudal-minded landowners, of the “bureaucracy”, etc.; there is not a
thought of the general basis of political liberty or of a democratic
Constitution; instead, this slogan implies the tacit renunciation of the
old, and consequently, renegacy and the dissolution (liquidation) of the
workers’ party.  

In brief. In a period of counter-revolution this slogan spreads among
the workers the advocacy of the very thing the liberal bourgeoisie
are themselves practising. Therefore, had there been no
liquidators, the clever bourgeois Progressists would have had to
find, or hire, intellectuals to advocate this to the working class!  

Only the foolish people will seek to compare the words of the
liquidators with their motives. Their words must be
compared with the deeds and the objective position of the liberal
bourgeoisie.  

Look at these deeds. In 1902, the bourgeoisie was in
favour of the underground. It commissioned Struve to publish the
underground Osvobozhdeniye. When the working-class movement led to
October 17, the liberals and the Cadets abandoned the underground, then
repudiated it, and declared it to be useless, mad, sinful and godless
  (Vekhi).[1]
Instead of the underground, the liberal bourgeoisie favoured a
struggle for an open party. This is an historical fact, confirmed
by the incessant attempts at legalisation made by the Cadets (1905–07) and
the Progressists (1913).  

Among the Cadets we see “open work and its secret organisation”; the
kind-hearted, i.e., unwitting, liquidator,

    

A. Vlasov, has only retold the deeds of the Cadets “in his own words”.


Why did the liberals renounce the underground and adopt the slogan of
“a struggle for an open party”? Was it because Struve is a traitor? No,
just the opposite. Struve went over to the other side because the entire
bourgeoisie took a turn. And the bourgeoisie turned
(1) because it obtained privileges on December 11,
1905,[2] and even on June 3, 1907 obtained the status of a
tolerated opposition;
(2) because it was it self mortally afraid of the popular movement. The
slogan of “a struggle for an open party”, translated from the language of
“high politics” into plain and intelligible language, means the
following: 

“Landowners! Don’t imagine that we want to make life impossible for
you. No, just move up a little and make room for us bourgeois [an open
party 1, we shall then defend you five times more ’intelligently’,
ingenuously, ’scientifically’ than the Timoshkins and Sabler’s parsons
did.”[3] 

The petty-bourgeois
Narodniks,[4] in imitation of the Cadets, took up the slogan of “a
struggle for an open party”. In August 1906, Messrs. Peshekhonov and
Co. of Russkoye Bogatstvo renounced the underground, proclaimed
the “struggle for an open party”, and cut the consistently democratic
“underground” slogans out of their programme.  

Thanks to their reformist chatter about a “broad and open party”,
these philistines have been left, as all can see, without any
party, without any contact with the masses, while the Cadets have
even stopped thinking of such contacts.  

Only in this way, only by analysing the position of the classes, by
analysing the general history of the counter revolution, is it possible to
understand the nature of liquidationism. The liquidators are
petty-bourgeois intellectuals, sent by the bourgeoisie to sow liberal
corruption among the workers. The liquidators are traitors to Marxism and
traitors to democracy. The slogan of “a struggle for an open party” in
their case (as in the case of the liberals and the Narodniks) only serves
to camouflage their renunciation of the past and their rupture with the
working class. This is a fact that has been proved both by the
elections in the worker curia for the Fourth Duma and by the history of the
founding of the workers’ paper Pravda. It is obvious

    

to all that contact with the masses has been maintained only by those who
have not renounced the past and who know how to make use of “open work”
and of all and sun dry “possibilities” exclusively in the spirit of
that past, and for the purpose of strengthening, consolidating and
developing it.  

In the period of the June Third system it could not be otherwise.  

“Curtailment” of the programme and tactics by the liquidators (i.e.,
liberals) will be discussed in our next article.  
 

Notes
 

[1]
In the symposium Marxism and Liquidationism the word
Vekhi is omitted and the following footnote is given: 

“There is a fine book Vekhi which has gone through numerous
editions and contains an excellent compilation of these ideas of
counter-revolutionary liberalism”.—Ed.  
 



[2]
Lenin refers to the law, promulgated on December 11 (24),
1905, on the convening of a “legislative” State Duma; the law was
promulgated by the tsarist government when the Moscow insurrection was at
its height. The First Duma, elected under this law, had a Cadet majority.





[3]
By “Sabler’s parsons” Lenin means the orthodox priests who
were drawn into active participation in the election to the Fourth Duma on
instructions issued by the reactionary Sabler, Procurator General of the
Synod, to ensure the election of deputies amenable to the tsarist
government.





[4]
Narodniks—supporters of Narodism, the petty-bourgeois trend
in the Russian revolutionary movement in the sixties to the eighties of the
last century. The Narodniks campaigned for the abolition of the autocracy
and the transfer of landed estates to the peasants. They denied that in
accordance with the regular laws of capitalism, capitalist relations and a
proletariat were developing in Russia and, as a consequence of this,
considered the peasantry to be the chief revolutionary force; they regarded
the village commune as an embryonic form of socialism. The Narodniks,
therefore, went out to the villages to arouse the peasants to struggle
against the autocracy. The Narodniks proceeded from a false premise on the
role of the class struggle in history, believing that history is made by
heroes, who are passively followed by the masses. The Narodniks adopted
terrorist tactics in their struggle against tsarism.  

In the eighties and nineties of the nineteenth century the Narodniks
adopted a conciliatory policy towards tsarism, began to fight for the
interests of the kulaks and conducted a stubborn struggle against Marxism.



 
  

III. THE ATTITUDE OF THE LIQUIDATORS TO THE DECISIONS OF 1908 AND 1910

|

V. THE SLOGAN OF “STRUGGLE FOR AN OPEN PARTY”

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Slogan of









Lenin: 1913/ci: V. THE SLOGAN OF 'STRUGGLE FOR AN OPEN PARTY'







V. I.  

      Lenin
Controversial Issues
AN OPEN PARTY AND THE ISTS



    

V. THE SLOGAN OF “STRUGGLE FOR AN OPEN PARTY”

In the preceding article (Pravda No. 122) we examined the
objective significance (i.e., the significance that is determined by the
relations of classes) of the slogan “an open party” or “a struggle for
an open party”. This slogan is a slavish repetition of the tactics of the
bourgeoisie, for whom it correctly expresses their renunciation of the
revolution, or their counter-revolutionary attitude.  

Let us consider some of the attempts most frequently made by
liquidators to defend the slogan of “a struggle for an open
party”. Mayevsky, Sedov, Dan and all the Luch writers try to
confuse the open party with open work or activity. Such
confusion is downright sophistry, a trick, a deception of the reader.  

In the first place, open Social-Democratic activity in the period
1904–13 is a fact. An open party is a phrase used by
intellectuals to cover up renunciation of the Party. Secondly, the Party
has repeatedly condemned liquidationism i.e., the slogan of an open
party. But the Party, far from condemning open activities, has, on the
contrary, condemned those who neglected or renounced them. In the third
place, from 1904 to 1907, open activities were especially
developed among all the Social-Democrats. But not a
single trend, not a single faction of Social-Democracy at
that time advanced the slogan of “a struggle for an open party”!  

This is an historical fact. Those who wish to understand
liquidationism must give thought to this fact.  

Did the absence of the slogan “a struggle for an open party” hamper
open activities in the 1904–07 period? Not in the least.  
 

Why did no such slogan arise among the Social-Democrats at that
time?  Precisely because at that time there was no raging
counter-revolution to draw a section of the Social Democrats into extreme
opportunism. It would have been only too clear at the time that
the slogan “a struggle for an open party” was an opportunist phrase, a
renunciation of the “underground”.  

Gentlemen, try to grasp the meaning of this historical change. During
the 1905 period, when open activities were splendidly developed, there was
no slogan of “a struggle for an open party”; during the period
of counter-revolution, when open activities are less developed, a section
of the Social-Democrats (following the bourgeoisie) has taken up the slogan
of renunciation of the “underground” and “a struggle for an open
party”.  

Are the meaning and the class significance of this change still not
clear?  

Finally, the fourth and most important circumstance. Two kinds
of open activity, in two diametrically opposite directions, are possible
(and are to be seen)—one in defence of the old and entirely in the
spirit of the old, on behalf of its slogans and tactics; and
another against the old, on be half of its renunciation, of
belittling its role, its slogans, etc.  

The existence of these two kinds of open activity, hostile and
irreconcilable in principle, is a most indisputable historical fact of the
period from 1906 (the Cadets and Messrs. Peshekhonov and Co.) to 1913
(Luch, Nasha Zarya). Can one restrain a smile when one
hears a simpleton (or one who for a while plays the simpleton) asking: what
is there to argue about if both sides carry on open activities. What the
argument, my dear sir, is about is whether these activities should be
carried on in defence of the “underground” and in its spirit, or in
belittlement of it, against it and not in its spirit! The dispute is
only—only!—about whether this particular open work is conducted in the
liberal or in the consistently democratic spirit, The dispute is “only”
about whether it is possible to confine oneself to open
work—recall Mr. Liberal Struve who did not confine himself to it in 1902,
but has wholly “confined himself” to it in the years 1906–13!  

Our Luch liquidators just cannot understand that the slogan
“a struggle for an open party” means carrying into

    

the midst of the workers liberal (Struve) ideas, decked out in the rags of
“near-Marxist” catchwords.  

Or take, for instance, the arguments of the Luch editors
themselves, in their reply to An (No. 181): 


   “The Social-Democratic Party is not limited to those few
   comrades whom the realities of life force to work underground. If the
   entire party were limited to the underground, how many members
   would it have? Two to three hundred? And where would those thousands if not
   tens of thousands of workers be, who are actually bearing the brunt of all
   Social-Democratic work?”  


For any man who thinks, this argument alone is enough to identify its
authors as liberals. First, they are telling a deliberate untruth about the
“underground”. It numbers far more than “hundreds”. Secondly, all over
the world the number of Party members is “limited”, as compared
with the number of workers who carry on Social-Democratic work. For
example, in Germany there are only one million members in the
Social-Democratic Party, yet the number of votes cast for the
Social-Democrats is about five million, and the proletariat numbers about
fifteen million. The proportion of Party members to the number of
Social-Democrats is determined in various countries by the differences in
their historical conditions. Thirdly, we have nothing that could
be a substitute for our “underground”. Thus, in opposing the
Party, Luch refers to the non-Party workers, or those who
are outside the Party. This is the usual method of the liberal who
tries to separate the masses from their class-conscious
vanguard. Luch does not understand the relation between
Party and class, just as the Economists of 1895–1901
failed to understand it. Fourthly, so far our “Social-Democratic work” is
genuine Social-Democratic work only when it is conducted in
the spirit of the old, under its slogans.  

The arguments of Luch are the arguments of liberal
intellectuals, who, unwilling to join the actually existing Party
organisation, try to destroy that organisation by inciting the
non-Party, scattered, unenlightened mass against it. The German liberals do
the same when they say that the Social-Democrats do not represent the
proletariat since their “Party” comprises “only” one-fifteenth of the
proletariat!  
 

Take the even more common argument advanced by Luch:
“we” are for an open party, “just as in Europe”. The liberals and the
liquidators want a constitution and an open party “as in Europe”
today, but they do not want the path by which Europe reached that
today.  

Kosovsky, a liquidator and Bundist, teaches us in Luch to
follow the example of the Austrians. But he forgets that the Austrians have
had a constitution since 1867, and that they could not have had it
without
(1) the movement of 1848;
(2) the profound political crisis of 1859–66, when the weakness
of the working class allowed Bismarck and Co. to extricate
themselves by means of the famous “revolution from above”. What then
follows from the precepts of Kosovsky, Dan, Larin and all the Luch
writers? Only that they are helping to solve our crisis in the spirit of
“revolution from above” and in no other spirit! But such work of
theirs is precisely the “work” of a Stolypin workers’
party.[1] 

No matter where we look—we see the liquidators renouncing both
Marxism and democracy.  

In the next article we shall examine in detail their arguments on the
need to tone down our Social-Democratic slogans.  
 

Notes
 
 



[1]
Stolypin—Minister of the Interior and Chairman of the
Council of Ministers from 1906 to 1911. With his name are connected the
suppression of the First Russian Revolution (1905–07) and the period of
brutal political reaction that followed.  

Stolypin workers’ party—was the name given by the Russian
workers to the Menshevik liquidators who adapted themselves to the Stolypin
regime and, at the cost of renouncing the programme and tactics of the
R.S.D.L.P., attempted to obtain the sanction of the tsarist government to
establish an open, legal, allegedly working-class party.



 
  

IV. THE CLASS SIGNIFICANCE OF LIQUIDATIONISM

|

VI

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## notitle









Lenin: 1913/ci: VI







V. I.  

      Lenin
Controversial Issues
AN OPEN PARTY AND THE ISTS



    

VI

We must now consider the toning down of Marxist slogans by the
liquidators. For this purpose it would be best to take the decisions of
their August Conference, but for obvious reasons these decisions can be
analysed only in the press published abroad. Here we are obliged to quote
Luch, Issue No. 108 (194), which, in the article by
L. S.[1] gave a remarkably precise exposition of the whole essence, the
whole spirit of liquidationism.  

Mr. L. S. writes as follows: 


   “Deputy Muranov so far recognises only three partial
   demands, which, as is known, were the three pillars of the election
   platform of the Leninists: the complete democratisation of the state
   system, an eight-hour day and the transfer of the land to the
   peasants. Pravda, too, continues to maintain this point of
   view. Yet we, as well as the whole of European Social-Democracy
   [read—“we, and also Milyukov, who assures us that, thank God, we have a
   constitution”], see in partial demands a method of agitation which may be
   crowned with success only if it takes into account the everyday struggle of

    

   the working masses. We think that only things that, on the one hand, are of
   fundamental importance to the further development of the working-class
   movement, and on the other hand, may acquire urgency for the masses, should
   be advanced as the partial demand upon which the Social-Democrats should
   concentrate their attention at the present moment. Of the three demands
   advanced by Pravda, only one—the eight-hour day—plays and can
   play a part in the everyday struggle of the workers. The other two demands
   may at the present moment serve as subjects for propaganda, but not for
   agitation. Concerning the difference between propaganda and agitation, see
   the brilliant pages of G. V. Plekhanov’s pamphlet The Struggle Against
   Famine. [L. S. is knocking at the wrong door; it is “painful” for
   him to recall Plekhanov’s controversy in 18994902 with the Economists whom
   he is copying!]  

   “Apart from the eight-hour day, the demand for the right
   of association, the right to form any kind of organisation, with the
   corresponding freedom of assembly and freedom of speech, both the oral and
   the printed word, is a partial demand advanced both by the requirements of
   the working-class movement and by the entire course of Prussian life.”
   


Here you have the tactics of the liquidators. What L. S. describes by
the words “complete democratisation, etc.”, and what he calls the
“transfer of the land to the peasants” are not, you see, of
“urgency for the masses”, they are not “advanced by the
requirements of the working-class movement” and “the entire course of
Russian life”! How old these arguments are and how familiar they are to
those who remember the history of Russian Marxist practice, its
many years of struggle against the Economists, who renounced the tasks of
democracy! With what talent Luch copies the views of Prokopovich
and Kuskova, who in those days tried to entice the workers on to
the liberal path!  

But let us examine the Luch arguments more closely. From the
standpoint of common sense they are sheer madness. Can anyone in his right
mind really affirm that the above-mentioned “peasant” demand (i.e., one
designed to benefit the peasants) is not “urgent for the
masses”, is not “advanced both by the requirements of the
working-class movement and by the entire course of Russian life?” This is
not only an untruth, it is an obvious absurdity. The entire history of
nineteenth-century Russia, the entire “course of Russian life”
produced that question, made it urgent, even most urgent;
this has been reflected in the whole of the legislation of
Russia. How could Luch arrive at such a monstrous untruth?  
 

It had to arrive at it, because Luch is in bondage to
liberal policy, and the liberals are true to themselves when they
reject (or, like Luch, put aside) the peasant demand. The liberal
bourgeoisie does so, because its class position forces it to
humour the landowners and to oppose the people’s movement.  

Luch brings to the workers the ideas of the liberal land
owners and is guilty of treachery to the democratic peasantry.  

Further. Can it be that only the right of association is of
“urgency”? What about inviolability of person? or the abolition of
despotism and tyranny, or universal, etc., suffrage, or a single chamber,
etc.? Every literate worker, everyone who remembers the recent past, knows
perfectly well that all this is urgent. In thousands of articles and
speeches all the liberals acknowledge that all this is urgent. Why then did
Luch declare urgent only one of these liberties, albeit
one of the most important, while the fundamental conditions of political
liberty, of democracy and of a constitutional system were struck out, put
aside, relegated to the archives of “propaganda”, and excluded from
agitation?  

The reason, and the only reason is, that Luch does not accept
what is unacceptable to the liberals.  

From the standpoint of urgency for the masses, the requirements of the
working-class movement and the course of Russian life, there is no
difference between the three demands of Muranov and of Pravda (or,
to put it briefly, the demands of consistent Marxists). Working-class,
peasant and general political demands are all of equal urgency for
the masses, are equally brought to the forefront both by the
requirements of the working-class movement and by “the entire course of
Russian life”. All three demands are also alike because they are the
partial demands dear to our worshipper of moderation and precision; they
are “partial” compared with the final aims, but they are of a very high
level compared, for example, with “Europe” in general.  

Why then does Luch accept the eight-hour day and reject the
rest? Why did it decide on behalf of the workers that the
eight-hour day does “play a part” in their everyday struggle, whereas the
general political and peasant demands do not play such a part? The
facts show, on the one hand, that the workers in their daily struggle
advance both the general political and the peasant demands—and, on the
other hand,

    

that they often fight for more moderate reductions of the working
day.  

What is the trouble, then?  

The trouble lies in the reformism of Luch, which, as usual,
attributes its own liberal narrow-mindedness to the masses to the
“course of history”, etc.  

Reformism, in general, means that people confine them selves to
agitating for changes which do not require the removal of the main
foundations of the old ruling class, changes that are compatible
with the preservation of these foundations. The eight-hour day is
compatible with the preservation of the power of capital. The Russian
liberals, in order to attract the workers, are themselves prepared to
endorse this demand (“as far as possible”). Those demands for which
Luch does not want to “agitate” are incompatible with
the preservation of the foundations of the pre-capitalist period, the
period of serfdom.  

Luch eliminates from agitation precisely what is not
acceptable to the liberals, who do not want to abolish the power of the
landlords, but want only to share their power and privileges. Luch
eliminates precisely what is incompatible with the point of view of
reformism.  

That’s where the trouble lies!  

Neither Muranov, nor Pravda, nor any Marxist rejects partial
demands. That is nonsense. Take insurance, for example. We reject the
deception of the people by idle talk about partial demands, by
reformism. We reject liberal reformism in present-day
Russia as being utopian, self-seeking and false, as based on constitutional
illusions and full of the spirit of servility to the landlords. That is the
point which Luch tries to confuse and hide by phrases about
“partial demands” in general, although it admits itself that neither
Muranov nor Pravda rejects certain “partial demands”.  

Luch tones down the Marxist slogans, tries to fit them to the
narrow, reformist, liberal yardstick, and thus spreads bourgeois ideas
among the workers.  

The struggle the Marxists are waging against the liquidators is nothing
but an expression of the struggle the advanced workers are waging against
the liberal bourgeoisie for influence over the masses of the people, for
their political enlightenment and education.  
 

Notes
 
 



[1]
L. S. (L. Sedov)—pseudonym of the Menshevik
liquidator B. A.  Ginsburg.



 
  

V. THE SLOGAN OF “STRUGGLE FOR AN OPEN PARTY”

|


  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Letter to M. S. Olminsky (Vitimsky)









Lenin: Letter to M. S. Olminsky (Vitimsky)







V. I.  

      Lenin
Letter to M. S. Olminsky (Vitimsky)




Written: Written June 3 (16), 1913 

Published:

      First published in 1930 in the second and third editions of V. I. Lenin’s Collected Works, Vol. XVI.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 170-172.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Dear Colleague, 

First let me congratulate you on your two articles that, in my opinion,
were particularly well done—one about the liberals and the
conference of Pravda and Luch with liberal editors, and
the other in No. 123, about
Pravda.[2] 

In respect of the question of An and Vlasov that you have raised, I
cannot agree with you. I think you have taken the superficial,
external aspect that is immediately visible, and are prepared to forget
what is more important, what is basic. And that is dangerous in the highest
degree.  

You say that An and Vlasov “attack the Luch editors” and
that “this has not been used”.  

You are wrong. An and Vlasov accept what is basic in
Luch, i.e., the slogan of “the struggle for an open party”, or
the slogan of peace (or unity) with the liquidators. That is
basic. That is what Luch wants. The very thing Luch
wants is to represent itself, not as an organ of the liquidators,
but as an organ of both liquidators and Party
people. This is a deception that cannot be allowed, it is more dangerous
than anything. And it is the deception Trotsky and Semkovsky are gambling
on.  

To continue—it is not quite true to say “this has not been
used”. How should it be used? To say that An and Vlasov “attack
the Luch editors and vindicate the Pravda line”? That
would be untrue. An and Vlasov do not vindicate the fundamental
line of Pravda, they either reject it (An) or do not understand it
(Vlasov).  

Or should it be used in this way—the fact of Sedov’s
liquidationism is admitted not only by the enemies but also

    

by the supporters of Luch? That would be true. And that is what
has been done, incidentally, in my article (“Controversial Issues” No. 3,
in Pravda
      No. 11O).[1]


“You should divide and not unite your enemies”, you write
reproachfully to the tactless V. I., who, you say, “unites” them.  

Permit me a few words in my defence.  

One should divide and not unite one’s enemies—that is
indisputable. Suppose, however, it is to the advantage of one’s
enemies to pretend that they are “divided”, that they have on
their side not only liquidators but “also” the Letts, “and” Trotsky,
“and” the Bund, “and” An? It is this essence of
liquidationist tactics that you have not noticed—perhaps because you have
not read or have not heard everything about the August Conference. This,
indeed, is the essence and the substance of the entire
tactics of “saving” the liquidators, i.e., saving the freedom of
liquidationist lies and liberalism to operate from inside the
Party.  

This is the only way a further attempt at saving the liquidators can be
made. And that adroit diplomat An (with the year-old babe Vlasov toddling
after him) is engaged in a very subtle game. You don’t know An! I
have studied his diplomacy for years and know how he hoodwinks the
whole of the Caucasus with it! An has a real talent for diplomacy
(I have known him since 1903)—it is, unfortunately, badly employed. He
wants to pretend he is against Luch and in this way save
Luch! This is quite obvious to anyone who has a good knowledge of the
history of the Party, especially during January 1910 and
August 1912! An chided Dan over petty issues and gave in to him on
the main thing (the slogan of the struggle for an open party),
because he wanted to show “his side” that he too is against the
liquidators. No mistake could be more disastrous than to take
An’s bait. You do not know (and that is understandable) all the
ins and outs of the relations between Trotsky, An, the Bund, Braun, etc.,
and Luch—but I do. There is nothing that could help the
liquidators more than to recognise An as an anti-liquidator. This
is a fact. An is their one “reliable” support. That

    

is also a fact. Warmest regards. My best wishes for your health, keep in
good spirits. Write to me, I shall always be glad to chew things over with
you.  

Yours,

V. I. 

P.S. I hear there are many rumours in St. Petersburg to the effect that
An (Chkheidze as well) “wanted to take” Luchaway from Dan
... but did not. I believe this “wanting to take” was for show
and it ended in an apparent compromise that was actually surrender
to Dan! Dan is an enemy battery poorly masked. An is another battery of the
same enemy, but skilfully masked. I assure you that I know this from my own
experience in the matter.  

 

Notes
 

[1]
See pp. 156–59 of this volume.—Ed.  
 



[2]
The articles referred to were published by M. S. Olminsky (Vitimsky) in
Pravda No. 106 and No. 123 on May 10 and May 30, 1913 under the
heading “Who Is on Whose Side?” and “The Truth”.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Question of Mr. Bogdanov and the Vperyod Group









Lenin: The Question of Mr. Bogdanov and the Vperyod Group







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Question of Mr. Bogdanov and the Vperyod Group[2]
(FOR THE EDITORS OF PRAVDA)




Written: Written June 3 (16), 1913 

Published:

      First published in 1930 in the second and third editions of V. I. Lenin’s Collected Works, Vol. XVI.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 173-174.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The action of the editors in respect of Mr. Bogdanov’s
distortion of Party history is so scandalous that, to tell the truth, one
does not know whether it is possible after this to remain a contributor.


What actually happened?  

In my article there was not a word against Mr. Bogdanov (who
is not a member of the Vperyod group); there was not a word of
censure in general.  

As cautiously as possible I stated a fact—that the trend condemned
unanimously by the entire Party was “connected with the Vperyod
     line”.[1]


Not a word more. Nor could Mr. Bogdanov quote anything more
himself!  

The question arises—can this fact be evaded? It cannot, for the Party
simultaneously condemned both liquidationism and
otzovism.[3] Anyone who tried to avoid this fact when speaking of Party
history in respect of liquidationism would be swindling. I dare
say the editors do not demand that I should engage in swindling. I have to
believe this, especially in view of the editorial board’s having announced
its agreement with No. 95!  

Is the fact true? The editors agree that it is. It would be
difficult not to agree since the Vperyod group itself
declared that otzovism was a “legitimate tendency”!  

If the fact is true, then how could they possibly allow (“for tile
sake of impartiality”) Mr. Bogdanov to lie about it? The only
explanation I can think of is that the editors lack

    

knowledge of the Vperyod group’s history (unless someone has been
affected by an absolutely blinding enthusiasm for the reactionary trash
that philosopher Bogdanov teaches the workers).  

The editors probably do not know that the Vperyod group is
disintegrating completely. Mr. Bogdanov left them a long time ago—his
“philosophy” was condemned in the press by Alexinsky of the
Vperyod group. That same Alexinsky condemned “proletarian
culture” (from the Vperyod platform) in the press. Does
the editorial board not know this?  

Bogdanov,
Domov,[4] Lyadov,
Volsky[5] and
Stepinsky[6] have now left the Vperyod group (and
Lunacharsky is on the point of leaving—see the new leaflets in
Paris). Does the editorial board not know this?  

The editors are supporting the worst (hopeless) elements among the
bourgeois liars from the Vperyod group against the best
(like Alexinsky) who have broken with Mr. Bogdanov!  

The devil alone knows what this all means! This is a mockery of the
truth, of the Party.  

I demand categorically that the enclosed article be print ed in
full. I have always permitted the editors to make changes in a
comradely manner, but after Mr. Bogdanov’s letter, I do not grant
any right to alter or do anything else of that kind with this article. If
you do not print it, pass it on to Prosveshcheniye; I insist on
having complete freedom to fight against the distortion of Party
history. We are struggling against liquidationism and concealing
otzovism—this is such a despicable position that I can only assume that
the blunder was due to lack of knowledge in the matter.  

The editorial board must state that it has convinced itself that
Mr. Bogdanov expounded the Vperyod platform incorrectly
and gave the facts incorrectly.  

I insist on an immediate reply. I cannot continue to con tribute
articles in face of Mr. Bogdanov’s despicable lying.  

At your service, V. Ilyin 

 

Notes
 

[1]
See p. 154 of this volume.—Ed.  
 



[2]
This letter to the editors of Pravda was evoked by the
publication of a declaration by A. Bogdanov in Pravda No. 120 on
May 26, 1913. Bogdanov tried to deny Lenin’s point that the renunciation of
work in the Duma and the use of other legal possibilities were connected
with the Vperyod line (see p. 154 of this volume). In a comment to
Bogdanov’s letter made by the editors, it was stated that Bogdanov’s
declaration had been published for “purposes of objectivity”; this Lenin
vehemently objected to.  

In answer to this comment Lenin sent, together with this letter, an
article (unpublished at that time and not found since) against Bogdanov’s
distortion of Party history. On a number of occasions Lenin warned the
editorial board that Bogdanov’s collaboration with a Bolshevik newspaper
was impermissible. On Lenin’s demand Bogdanov was excluded from the list of
Pravda contributors after he had written an article, “Ideology”,
which contained open propaganda of Machist views.





[3]
Otzovism (from otozvat—to recall)—-an opportunist
trend that took shape among Bolsheviks after the defeat of the Revolution
of 1905–07. The otzovists believed that under the conditions obtaining in
the period of reaction the Party should conduct only under ground work;
they demanded the recall of the Social-Democratic deputies from the Duma
and refused to participate in trade unions and other legal and semi-legal
working-class organisations. The policy advocated by the otzovists would
have alienated the Party from the masses and converted it into an isolated
sect.





[4]
Domov—pseudonym of M. N. Pokrovsky.





[5]
Volsky, Stanislav—pseudonym of A. V. Sokolov.





[6]
Stepinsky—pseudonym of V. R. Menzhinsky.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Has Pravda Given Proof of Bundist Separatism?









Lenin: Has Pravda Given Proof of Bundist Separatism?







V. I.  

      Lenin
Has Pravda Given Proof of Bundist Separatism?




Published:
Pravda No. 127, June 5, 1913.

      Signed: V. I..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 175-176.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Pravda No. 104 (308) published an article “Separatists in
Russia and Separatists in
      Austria”.[1]

Now Mr. V. Kosovsky has published an article in Luch No. 119 (205)
refuting it, or, to be more exact, containing a mass of vituperation
against Pravda for that article. All we can do is draw the
attention of the workers, who are interested in the fate of their
own, organisation, to these slanging attacks by the Luch
gentlemen, who evade the controversial questions.  

What proof did Pravda offer of Bundist separatism?  

1) The Bund left the Party in 1903. Mr. Kosovsky’s invective
did nothing to disprove this fact. The Kosovskys scold because they are
powerless to disprove the facts.  

2) Jewish workers have joined and are still joining the Party
everywhere in spite of the Bund.  

This poor defender of the Bund cannot say a word against that either!


3) The Bund has deliberately contravened the Party decision on
the unity of workers of all nationalities in local organisations,
a decision that was taken in 1906 and given special confirmation in 1908.


Mr. Kosovsky could not say a word against that!  

4) The Bundist
Medem admitted that Bund members had never put
into effect this unity in local organisations, that is, had always been
separatists.  

Again not a single objection from Mr. Kosovsky!  

Just think of it, reader; what is the gentleman to do but scold and
rage when he cannot say a single word against the
four chief points in Pravda?  
 

Pravda, furthermore, gave an exact quotation from the organ of
the Czech separatists in Austria, who have been unanimously condemned for
their separatism by the entire International. That organ
praises Mr. Kosovsky (his article in the liquidators’ Nasha
Zarya) for his “turn for the better” in respect of the separatists.


Now what, Mr. Kosovsky? Is our quotation not correct? Mr. Kosovsky
knows that it is, and is malicious in his impotence: “a review in some
Czech news-sheet”.  

Don’t lie, Mr. separatist and Jewish liberal! Lies will not help you,
for you will be exposed.  

Not “a review” and not in “some Czech news-sheet”, but a
special article in the German organ of the Czech
separatists.[2] This is a fact, and you have not refuted it.  

I do not defend the separatists, says Mr. Kosovsky to justify himself,
summarising his article in Nasha Zarya.  

Is that so? Then the Czech separatists have
misunderstood you?  The poor liberal leaders of the Bund! Not only
their enemies, even their friends “misunderstood” them!


Any worker, however, will understand well enough that a petty liar who
has been caught red-handed is seeking salvation in evasion and
imprecation. You will not scare the workers that way, gentlemen.  

Pravda has proved that the Bundists are separatists. Mr.
V. Kosovsky has failed to refute it.  

Messrs. Kosovsky, Medem & Co., are a group of liberal intellectuals
that is corrupting the Jewish workers with bourgeois nationalism and
separatism. For this reason Pravda has fought against and will
continue to fight against the Bund.  

Jewish Social-Democratic workers are joining the working-class party in
spite of the Bund and against the Bund.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
See pp. 87–88 of this volume.—Ed.  
 



[2]
The publication referred to is Der &chatechoslavische
Sozialdemokrat.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Liberals as Defenders of the Fourth Duma









Lenin: Liberals as Defenders of the Fourth Duma







V. I.  

      Lenin
Liberals as Defenders of the Fourth Duma




Published:
Pravda No. 128, June 6, 1913.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 177-179.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

From the very inception of the Third Duma, the Marxists pointed
out—not in an article here and an article there, but in a formal
decision—that the June Third system had deliberately created two
possible Duma majorities—Right-Octobrist and
   Octobrist-Cadet.[1]

Both are reactionary in nature, both are necessary to the
government in the same way as the support of the bourgeoisie is necessary
to the landowners.  

And now we have lived long enough to ,see the liberals systematically
defending the Fourth Duma and demanding “popular and public
support” for it.  

Improbable as it is, it is a fact. The quoted words are in the leading
article of Rech No. 139. This leading article is more deserving of
the title “historical” than is the voting in the Fourth Duma on the
budget estimate of the Ministry of the Interior. This leading article is
truly programmatic. The question of the attitude of the Duma to the country
and of the country to the Duma—presented broadly and splendidly
explained—is an object-lesson to democrats.  


   “We will leave it to the Social-Democrats to assert,”
   writes the chief liberal newspaper, “that the Duma is only a decoration,
   that the work of the Duma is deception and hypocrisy, and that the
   ideologists of the Duma only deceive the people and feed them
   constitutional illusions.”  


Our congratulations to the new ideologists of the Duma, of the
Fourth Duma! It is only a pity that they are such ignoramuses. The
Social-Democratic Party has never assert ed that the Third and Fourth Dumas
are only a decoration,

    

but has always pointed to the mistake made by the Left Narodniks in
thinking and saying so; the Party has always given proof that the Third and
Fourth Dumas signify the foundation of a serious and business-like alliance
of the counter-revolutionary forces.  


   “While awaiting [?] the social forces that are still
   conspicuous only by their absence in the arena of social struggle,”
   writes Rech, “the Duma is a social force.”  


It is indisputable that the Duma, liberal gentlemen, is a force. But
what kind of force? It is a landowners’ and bourgeois counter-revolutionary
force. And if the Cadets “notice” only the “absence” of democratic
forces in the arena, there is nothing left for us to do but remind them of
that wise saying: there are none so blind as those who will not
see.  

Let us cite here a little historical parallel; eighteen years ago, in
1893 and 1896, a movement of tens of thousands of workers was noticed,
noticed very much indeed, by liberal society. At the present
moment that same “society” notices only the “absence” of a quantity ten
times greater. There are none so blind as those who will not see.


This unwillingness to see is to he explained by the class interests of
the Octobrist and Cadet bourgeoisie, who have turned away from democracy.



   “We call upon public opinion,” says Rech, “to
   see in the Duma its own force ... the direct manifestation of the
   social will to create interest in the Duma on the part of society,” etc.,
   etc.  


To what disgraceful depths, into what baseness and filth did the
liberals and Cadets have to fall in order to laud the Octobrists and the
Octobrist Duma in this manner! Here you have for the hundredth and
thousandth time proof that the Cadets are those same Octobrists painted
pink to deceive simpletons.  

Let us conclude with another historical parallel. Half a century ago
the Prussian Octobrists and
Cadets[2] “fought” against Bismarck, not only with formulations
demanding reforms, but also by refusing him credits. And what happened? In
Prussia, the “Third Duma” election law predominates to this day. To this
(lay Prussia stands as art example of a country in which the amazing
economic might of the bourgeoisie

    

is combined with its amazing servility towards the landowners.  

Not support for the Cadet-Octobrist bloc in the Duma, but an
explanation of its internal rottenness and of the independent tasks of
democracy—that is what the interests of the working class and of all
democracy demand.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
See present edition, Vol. 13, p. 144.—Ed.  
 



[2]
By “Prussian Octobrists and Cadets” Lenin meant the
Progressives, the party of the Prussian liberal bourgeoisie.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Question of the (General) Agrarian Policy of the Present Government









Lenin: The Question of the (General) Agrarian Policy of the Present Government







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Question of the (General) Agrarian Policy of the Present Government[1]




Written: Written not later than June 7 (20), 1918 

Published:

      First published in 1930 in the second and third editions of V. I. Lenin’s Collected Works, Vol. XVI.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 180-196.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The agrarian policy of the government has radically changed
in character since the Revolution of 1905. Formerly, the autocracy followed
the line of Katkov and Pobedonostsev and tried to appear in the eyes of the
masses of the people as standing “above classes”, safeguarding the
interests of the peasant masses, safeguarding them from loss of land and
from ruin. Needless to say, this hypocritical “concern” for the muzhik in
reality masked a purely feudal policy which the above-mentioned “public
men” of old pre-revolutionary Russia were conducting with pig-headed
directness in all spheres of public and state life. Autocracy in those days
relied entirely on the backwardness, ignorance and lack of
class-consciousness on the part of the peasant masses. By posing as a
champion of the “inalienability” of the peasants’ allotments, as an
advocate of the “village
commune”,[2] the autocracy, in the pre-revolutionary period, tried to
find support in the economic immobility of Russia, in the deep political
slumber of the masses of the peasant population. At that time the land
policy was through and through that of the feudal aristocracy.  

The Revolution of 1905 caused a change in the entire land policy of the
autocracy. Stolypin, punctiliously carrying out the dictates of the Council
of the United Nobility, decided, as he himself expressed it, to “bank on
the strong”. This means that our government was no longer able to
pose as a champion of the weak after the mighty awakening
of the proletariat and the broad strata of the democratic peasantry which
the Revolution of 1905 brought about in Russia. The people, having
succeeded in making the first (though

    


    

as yet inadequate) breach in the old feudal state system of Russia, proved
thereby that they had so far awakened from their political slumber, that
the tale of the government protecting the “village commune” and the
“inalienability of allotments”, of the defence of the weak by a
government standing above classes—that this tale had finally lost
credence among the peasants.  

Up to 1905 the government had been able to entertain the hope that the
downtrodden state and inertness of the peasants in the mass, of people
incapable of ridding them selves of the age-long political prejudices of
slavery, patience and obedience, would serve as a prop for it. As long as
the peasants remained obedient and downtrodden, the government
could pretend that it “banked on the weak”, i.e., was taking
care of the weak, although, in fact, it was concerned exclusively with the
feudal landowners and the preservation of its own absolute power.  

After 1905, the collapse of the old political prejudices was so
profound and widespread that the government and the “Council of the United
Feudalists” that controlled it saw that they could no longer gamble on the
ignorance and the sheep-like obedience of the muzhik. The government saw
that there could be no peace between it and the masses of
the peasant population it had ruined and reduced to complete destitution
and starvation. It was this consciousness of the impossibility of “peace”
with the peasants that caused the “Council of the United Feudalists” to
change its policy. The Council decided to try at all costs to split the
peasantry and to create out of it a stratum of “new landowners”,
well-to-do peasant proprietors, who would “conscientiously”
protect from the masses the peace and security of the huge landed
estates, which, after all, had suffered somewhat from the onslaught of the
revolutionary masses in 1905.  

Therefore, the change in the entire agrarian policy of the government
after the revolution was by no means accidental. On the contrary,
from the class point of view, this change was a necessity
for the government and for the “Council of the United Feudalists”. The
government could find no other way out. The government saw that there could
be no “peace” with the masses of the peasants, that the peasantry had
awakened from its age-long slumber of serfdom. The government

    

had no alternative but to try by frantic efforts to split the
peasantry, no matter how much this might ruin the villages, to surrender
the countryside to “plunder and exploitation” by the kulaks and the
well-to-do muzhiks, and to seek support in an alliance between the
feudal nobles and the “new landowners”, i.e., an alliance with the rich
peasant proprietors, with the peasant bourgeoisie.  

Stolypin himself, who served the “Council of the United Feudalists”
faithfully and well and carried out their policy, said “Give me twenty
years of quiet and I shall reform Russia.” By “quiet” he meant the
quiet of a graveyard, the quiet suffering of the countryside
silently enduring like sheep the unprecedented ruin and destitution that
had overtaken it. By “quiet” he meant the quiet of the land
owners who would like to see the peasants utterly inert, down trodden,
offering no protest, ready to starve peacefully and amiably, to give up
their land, to abandon their villages, to be ruined, as long as it were
convenient and pleasing to the landed gentry. By the reform of Russia,
Stolypin meant a change that would leave in the villages only contented
landowners, contented kulaks and bloodsuckers, and scattered, downtrodden,
weak and helpless farm labourers.  

Quite naturally and understandably Stolypin, as a land owner, wanted
twenty years of this graveyard quiet in Russia, wanted it with all his
heart. But we now know, we now all see and feel, that the result of it has
been famine affecting thirty million peasants and neither “reform” nor
“quiet”, that there has been an unparalleled (unparalleled even in
long-suffering Russia) intensification of destitution and ruin, and
extremely great bitterness and ferment among the peasantry.  

To make clear the causes of the failure of the government’s
so-called “Stolypin” agrarian policy, the policy which the State Duma is
invited once more to approve by sanctioning the budget (and which
undoubtedly will be approved by the landowners’ parties in the Duma), I
shall dwell at somewhat greater length on the two principal, so to
say, trump cards of our “new” agrarian policy: 

First, on the resettlement of the peasants, and, secondly, on the
notorious farmsteads.  
 

As far as resettlement is concerned, the Revolution of 1905 revealed to
the landowners the political awakening of the peasantry and forced them to
“open” the safety valve a little and, instead of hampering migration as
they had done before, to try to pack off as many restless
peasants as possible to Siberia in an attempt to render the atmosphere less
“tense” in Russia.  

Did the government achieve success? Did it achieve any
pacification of the peasantry, any improvement in the peasants’
conditions in Russia and in Siberia? Just the opposite. The government only
brought about a new sharpening and worsening of the conditions of the
peasants both in Russia and in Siberia.  

I shall prove this to you in a moment.  

In the explanatory memorandum of the Minister of Finance on the budget
for 1913 we find the usual official optimism and applause for the
“successes” of the government’s policy.  

The settlers, we are told, transform the unsettled regions into
“civilised localities”, the settlers are growing rich, improving their
farms, and so on and so forth. The usual official panegyric. The old, old
“everything is all right”, “all quiet on
Shipka”.[3] 

The only pity is that the explanatory memorandum completely
ignored the statistics of returned settlers! A strange and significant
silence!  

Yes, gentlemen, the number of settlers increased after 1905 to
an average of half a million a year. Yes, by 1908, the migration wave
reached its highest point—665,000 settlers in one year. But later the
wave began rapidly to recede, and in 1911 dropped to
189,000. Is it not clear that the highly praised government
“arrangements” for the settlers have turned out to be bluff? Is
it not clear that only six years after the revolution the government is
back where it started?  

And the statistics of the number of returned settlers—so prudently
ignored by the Minister of Finance in his “explanatory” (or rather,
confusing) memorandum—these statistics reveal a monstrous
increase in the number of returned settlers—up to 30 or 40 per cent
in 1910, and up to 60 per cent in 1911. This gigantic wave of
returning settlers reveals the desperate suffering, ruin and destitution of
the peasants who

    

sold everything at home in order to go to Siberia, and who are now forced
to come back from Siberia completely ruined and pauperised.  

This enormous stream of destitute returned settlers reveals with
irrefutable clarity the complete failure of the government’s
resettlement policy. To produce tables of figures showing the improvement
in the farms of the settlers who remained in Siberia for a long time (as
was done in the explanatory memorandum on the estimates of the resettlement
administration) and to hush up the complete and utter ruin of
tens of thousands of returned settlers simply means distorting the
facts! This means presenting the Duma deputies with castles in Spain and
fairy-tales about general well being, whereas in fact we observe ruin and
destitution.  

Gentlemen, the fact that the Minister of Finance’s explanatory
memorandum conceals the figures of the returned settlers, their
desperate, destitute condition, their utter ruin, signifies
frantic attempts on the part of the government to conceal the
truth. The attempts are in vain. The truth will out! The truth will
have to be admitted. The destitution of the ruined peasants who
returned to Russia, the destitution of the ruined old inhabitants
of Siberia, will have to be spoken about.  

In order to explain graphically the conclusion I have drawn concerning
the complete failure of the government’s resettlement policy, I shall quote
another opinion, that of a civil servant, who for twenty-seven
years—twenty-seven years, gentlemen!—served in the Forestry
Department in Siberia, an official who has studied resettlement conditions,
an official who was unable to bear all the abominations that are
committed in our resettlement administration.  

This civil servant is State Councillor A. I. Komarov, who, after
serving for twenty-seven years, was compelled to acknowledge that the
notorious journey made to Siberia in 1910 by Stolypin and Krivoshein, the
Prime Minister and the Chief Administrator of Agriculture and Land
Settlement respectively, was a “clownish tour”—such is
literally the expression used by a State Councillor, a civil servant of
twenty-seven years’ standing!  This official resigned the service,
lie could not tolerate the deception of all Russia that was being practised
by means of such “clownish tours”,

    

and he published a special pamphlet containing a truthful account of all
the thefts and embezzlement of government funds, the utter absurdity,
brutality and wastefulness of our resettlement policy.  

The pamphlet is entitled The Truth About the Resettlement
Scheme and was published in St. Petersburg in the present year, 1913,
price sixty kopeks—not expensive, considering the wealth of revealing
material it contains. As usual our government, in resettlement, as in all
other “affairs” and “branches of administration”, is exerting every
effort to conceal the truth, and fears lest “its dirty linen be washed in
public”. Komarov had to lie low as long as he was in the service,
he had to write his letters of exposure to the news papers under an
assumed name, and the authorities tried to “catch” the
correspondent. Not all civil servants are able to leave the service and
publish pamphlets that reveal the truth! But one such pamphlet enables us
to judge what rottenness, what an abomination of desolation reigns in
general in this “dark realm”.  

The civil servant A. I. Komarov is not a revolutionary, nothing like
one. He himself tells us about his loyal hostility to the theories of both
the Social-Democrats and the Socialist-Revolutionaries. He is just an
ordinary, very loyal, Russian civil servant, who would be quite satisfied
with elementary, rudimentary honesty and decency. He is a man who is
hostile to the Revolution of 1905 and ready to serve the
counter-revolutionary government.  

It is all the more significant, therefore, that even such a man has
left, has abandoned the service, shaking its dust from his feet. He could
not stand “the complete disruption of all hat is called
rational forestry” (p. 138) by our resettlement policy. He could not
stand the “expropriation of the arable land of the old
inhabitants” which leads to the “gradual impoverishment of the
old inhabitants” (pp. 137 and 138). He could not stand “state
spoilation or, rather, devastation of Siberian lands and
forests that makes the plunder of the Bashkirian lands that once
took place seem trivial indeed” (p. 3).  

The following are Komarov’s conclusions: 


   “Absolute unpreparedness of the Chief
   Resettlement Administration for work on a large scale ... absolute lack of
   planning in the work

    

   and its bad quality ... allotment of plots with soil unsuitable for
   agriculture, where there is no water at all, or with no drinking
   water” (p. 137).  


When the tide of migration rose, the officials were caught
napping. They “tore to pieces areas of state forest that had been surveyed
only the day before ... took whatever they first laid eyes on, anything so
long as they could accommodate, get rid of, the scores of emaciated
exhausted people hanging around the resettlement centre and standing
for long hours outside the resettlement office...” (p. 11).  

Here are a few examples. The Kurinsky area is set apart for
settlers. This area consists of land that had been taken from the native
population near the Altai salt works. The natives have been robbed. The new
settlers get salt water unfit for drinking purposes! The government wastes
money endlessly on digging wells—but without success. The new settlers
have to drive 7 or 8 (seven or eight!) versts for water! (p. 101).  

The Vyezdnoi area in the upper reaches of the River Mann, where thirty
families were settled. After seven haard years the new settlers finally
became convinced that farming was impossible there. Nearly all of
them fled. The few who remained engage in hunting and fishing (p. 27).


The Chuna-Angara region: hundreds of plots are mapped
out—900 plots, 460 plots, etc. There are no settlers. Impossible to live
there. Mountain ridges, marshes, undrinkable water.  

And now the civil servant, A. I. Komarov, tells about those returned
settlers whom the Minister of Finance did not mention the truth
the government finds unpleasant.  


   “There are hundreds of thousands of them,”
   writes civil servant Komarov, referring to the ruined and
   destitute returning settlers. “Those returning are the sort who,
   in the future revolution, if it takes place, are destined to play a
   terrible role.... The man who is returning is not the one who all his life
   has been a farm labourer ...
   but the one who until recently was a property-owner, a man who never
   dreamed that he and the land could exist apart. This man is justifiably
   exasperated, to him it is a mortal offence that he has not been provided
   for, but, on the contrary, has been ruined—this man is a menace to any
   political system” (p. 74).  


Thus writes Mr. Komarov, a civil servant who is terrified of the
revolution. Komarov is mistaken in thinking that

    

only landowner “political systems” are possible. In the best and
most civilised states they manage to get along even without the
landowners. Russia could also manage without them to the advantage of the
people.  

Komarov exposes the ruin of the old inhabitants. “Crop
failures”—what he really means is famine—arising from the plunder of
the old inhabitants, began to visit even the “Siberian Italy”—Minusinsk
Uyezd. Mr. Komarov exposes the way in which the contractors rob the
Treasury, the absolute fiction, the falsity of the reports and plans drawn
up by the officials, the worthlessness of their work which swallowed up
millions, such as the Ob-Yenisei Canal, the waste of hundreds of
millions of rubles.  

All our resettlement schemes, states this God-fearing modest official,
are “nothing but one long and unpleasant anecdote” (p. 134).


Such is the truth concerning the returned settlers
that has been hushed up by the Minister of Finance! Such in
reality is the complete failure of our resettlement
policy! Ruin and destitution both in Russia and in
Siberia. Plunder of lands, the destruction of forests, false
reports and official mendacity and hypocrisy.  

Let us pass on to the question of the farmsteads.  

On this question, too, the explanatory memorandum of the Minister of
Finance gives us the same, general, meaningless, official, hypocritical
data (or rather alleged data) as on the question of migration.


We are informed that by 1912 over one and a half million families had
definitely abandoned the village commune; that over a million of these
families have been established on farmsteads.  

There is not a single truthful word anywhere in the
government reports about the real state of the farmsteads!  

Yet we know already, from the descriptions given of the new land
settlements by honest observers (like the late Ivan Andreyevich Konovalov)
and from our own observations of the countryside and of peasant life, that
there are farmstead peasants of two altogether different
categories. The government, by confusing these categories, by giving data
of a general kind, is only deceiving the people.  

One category, an insignificant minority, are the well-to-do

    

peasants, the kulaks, who even before the new land settlement schemes were
introduced, lived very well. Such peasants, by leaving the village commune
and buying up the allotments of the poor, are undoubtedly enriching them
selves at other people’s expense, and still further ruining and enslaving
the masses of the population. But, I repeat, there are very few
farmstead peasants of this type.  

The other category predominates, and predominates to an overwhelming
degree—that of the ruined destitute peasants, who set up farmsteads out
of sheer need, because they had nowhere else to go. These peasants say:
“Nowhere to go, then let us set up a farmstead.” Starving and toiling on
their beggarly farms, they clutch at anything for the sake of the
resettlement grant, for the sake of the loan they can obtain by settling on
a farmstead. On these farmsteads they suffer untold hardships; they sell
all their grain in order to pay the bank the instalment on the loan; they
are always in debt; they live like beggars in a state of dire distress;
they are driven from the farmsteads for defaulting with their
instalments and they are finally transformed into vagabonds.  

Now, if instead of handing us meaningless pictures of fictitious
prosperity, official statistics bad truthfully in formed us of the number
of these destitute farmsteaders who are living in dug-outs, who
keep cattle in their own miser able quarters, who never have enough to eat,
whose children are sick and in rags—then we would hear the
“truth about the farmsteads”.  

But the point is that the government does its utmost to conceal this
truth. Independent, detached observers of peasant life are persecuted and
sent out of the villages. Peasants writing to the newspapers come up
against tyranny, oppression and persecution by the authorities and the
police, of a nature unparalleled even in Russia.  

A handful of rich farmsteaders are represented as masses of thriving
peasants!  The official lie about the kulaks is represented as the truth
about the countryside! But the government will not succeed in concealing
the truth. The attempts of the government to conceal the truth about the
ruined and starving countryside only call forth legitimate anger
and indignation among the peasants. The fact that tens of millions
of peasants are starving, as was the case

    

last year and the year before, reveals better than any lengthy
argumentation the mendacity and hypocrisy of the tales about the beneficial
influence of the farmsteads. This fact shows most clearly that even
after the change in the government’s agrarian policy, and
after the notorious Stolypin
reforms,[4] the Russian countryside is just as much overwhelmed by
oppression, exploitation, destitution, lack of human rights as it was under
serfdom. The “new” agrarian policy of the Council of the United
Nobility left untouched the old serf-owners and the oppression on
their estates of thousands and tens of thousands of dessiatines. The
“new” agrarian policy enriched the old landowners and a handful
of the peasant bourgeoisie, and ruined the masses of the peasants to a
still greater extent.  

“We bank on the strong,” exclaimed the late Stolypin in explanation
and justification of his agrarian policy. These words are well worth noting
and remembering as extraordinarily truthful, exceptionally truthful words
for a minister. The peasants have fully understood and learned through
their own bitter experience the truthfulness of these words, which mean
that the new laws and the new agrarian policy are laws
for the rich and made by the rich, a policy for the
rich and carried out by the rich. The peas ants have
understood the “simple” game, that the Duma of the master class
makes laws for the master class—that the government is the instrument of
the will of the feudal landowners and of their rule over Russia.  

If Stolypin wanted to teach this to the peasants by means of
his “famous” (shamefully famous) dictum, “we bank on the strong”, we
are sure he has found and will find apt pupils among the masses of the
ruined and embittered who, having learned on whom the government
banks, will understand so much the better on whom they themselves
should bank—on the working class and on its struggle for freedom.  

In order not to make unsupported statements, I shall quote a few
examples drawn from real life by so able an observer, one so boundlessly
devoted to his work, as Ivan Andreyevich Konovalov. (Ivan Konovalov,
Sketches of the Modern Village, St. Petersburg, 1913. Price 1
ruble 50 kopeks. In the quotations the pages are indicated.)  

In Livny Uyezd, Orel Gubernia, four estates have been

    

divided into farmsteads: that of Grand Duke Andrei Vladimirovich—5,000
dessiatines, of Polyakov—900 dessiatines, of Nabokov—400 dessiatines,
of Korf—600 dessiatines. The total is about 7,000 dessiatines. The size
of the farmsteads is fixed at 9 dessiatines each and only in exceptional
cases at 12 dessiatines. Thus, there are in all a little over 600
farmsteads.  

In order to explain the significance of these figures more graphically,
I shall quote the official statistics of 1905 for Orel
Gubernia. Five nobles in this gubernia owned 143,446
dessiatines, i.e., an average of 28,000 dessiatines each. It is
obvious that such monstrously big estates are not wholly cultivated by the
owners; they only serve for oppression and enslavement of the peasants. The
number of former serfs of landowners in Orel Gubernia in 1905 with holdings
not exceeding 5 dessiatines per farm was 44,500, owning a total of 173,000
dessiatines of land. The landowner has 28,000 dessiatines and the
“landowner’s” muzhik of the poorer
class—4 dessiatines.  

In 1905, the number of nobles in Orel Gubernia owning 500 dessiatines
of land and over was 378, the total amount of land in their
possession being 592,000 dessiatines, i.e., an average of over
1,500 dessiatines each; while the number of “former serfs of
landowners” in Orel Gubernia having up to 7 dessiatines per household
was 124,000 giving them a total of 647,000 dessiatines, i.e., an
average of 5 dessiatines per household.  

One may judge by this to what extent the Orel peasants are oppressed by
the feudal estates and what a drop in the ocean of misery and destitution
were the four estates in Livny Uyezd that were divided into
farmsteads. But how do the farmstead peasants live on their 9 dessiatine
plots?  

The land has been valued at 220 rubles per dessiatine. They have to pay
118 rubles and 80 kopeks per annum (i.e., about 20 rubles per dessiatine of
sown area). A poor peasant is incapable of paying so much. He lets a part
of the land cheaply just to get some ready cash. He sells all his grain to
pay the instalment due to the bank. He has nothing left, either for seed or
for food. He borrows, enslaves himself again. He has only one horse, he has
sold his cow. His implements are old. Improving the farm is out of the
question.

    

“The kids have simply forgotten the colour, let alone the taste, of milk”
(p. 198). This sort of farmer falls into arrears with his instalments and
is driven off his plot; his ruin is then complete.  

In his explanatory memorandum, the Minister of Finance complacently
tried to gloss over this ruin of the peasants by the new land settlement,
or rather land unsettlement.  

On page 57 of the second part of the explanatory memorandum the
Minister gives official figures for the number of peasants who had sold
their land by the end of 1911. The number is 386,407 families.


And the Minister “consoles” us by saying: the number of
buyers (362,840) “is very close to the number of sellers”
(385,407). For each seller we get on an average 3.9 dessiatines, for each
buyer—4.2 dessiatines (p. 58 of the explanatory memorandum).  

What is consoling in this? In the first place, even these official
figures show that the number of buyers is less than the number of
sellers. This means that the ruin and destitution of the countryside is
increasing. And secondly, who does not know that the buyers of allotments
evade the law, which forbids the purchase of land above a small number of
dessiatines, by buying in the name of wife, relations, or of some other
person? Who does not know that the selling of land under the guise of
various other transactions, such as a lease, etc., is very widely practised
by the peasants out of sheer necessity? Read, for instance, the works of
the semi Cadet, semi-Octobrist Prince Obolensky in Russkaya Mysl,
and you will see that even this landowner, who is thoroughly imbued with
the views of his class, admits the fact that the allotments are bought up
to an enormous extent by the rich, and that these purchases are
masked by means of evasions of the law in thousands of different
ways!  

And so, gentlemen, the “new” agrarian policy of the government and
the nobles was all the honourable nobles could produce, leaving
their property and their revenues intact (often they even
increased their revenues by inflating the price of the
land for sale and by means of the thousands of favours the Peasant Bank
extends to the nobility).  

And the “all” of these nobles proved to be
nothing. The countryside is even more destitute, even more
angered.

    

Terrible anger reigns in the villages. What is called hooliganism is due
mainly to the incredible anger of the peasants, and is their
primitive form of protest. No persecution, no increasing
of punishments will allay this anger and stop this protest by millions of
hungry peasants who are flow being ruined by the “redistribution” of the
land with unprecedented rapidity, roughness and brutality.  

No, the nobles’ or Stolypin’s agrarian policy is not the way out; it is
only a very painful approach towards a new solution of
the agrarian problem in Russia. What this solution should be is shown
indirectly even by the fate of Ireland where, in spite of a thousand
delays, hindrances and obstacles placed in the way by the landowners, the
land has after all passed into the hands of the farmers.  

The essence of the agrarian problem in Russia is most strikingly
revealed by the figures for the big landed estates. These figures are given
in the official government statistics of 1905, and anyone who is seriously
concerned about the fate of the Russian peasantry and the state of affairs
in the entire field of politics of our country should study them with great
attention.  

Let us consider the big landed estates in European Russia:
27,833 landowners own over 500 dessiatines each, giving them a
total of 62,000,000 dessiatines of land! Adding to these the land
owned I)y the imperial family and the enormous estates of the manufacturers
in the Urals, we get 70,000,000 dessiatines owned by less than
30,000 land owners. This gives on an average over 2,000
dessiatines to each big landed proprietor. The size the biggest estates
attain in Russia is seen from the fact that 699 proprietors own more than
10,000 dessiatines each, giving them a total of 20,798,504
dessiatines. On an average these magnates possess almost 30,000
(29,754) dessiatines each!  

It is not easy to find in Europe, or even in the entire world, another
country where big feudal landownership has been preserved on such a
monstrous scale.  

And the most important point is that capitalist farming, i.e., the
cultivation of the soil by hired labourers with the implements and tools of
the owners, is being conducted only on a part of these lands. For the most
part, farming is being conducted on feudal lines, i.e., the
landowners enslave the

    

peasants as they did one hundred, three hundred, and five hundred years
ago, forcing the peasants to cultivate the estate land with their
own horses, with their own implements.  

This is not capitalism. This is not the European method of farming,
gentlemen of the Right and Octobrists; take note of this, you who are
boasting of your desire to “Europeanise” (i.e., refashion in the European
way) agriculture in Russia! No, this is not European at all. This is the
old Chinese way. This is the Turkish way. This is the
feudal way.  

This is not up-to-date farming, it is land usury. It is the old, old
enslavement. The poor peasant, who even in the best year remains a pauper
and is half-starved, who owns a weak, scrawny nag and old, miserable,
wretched implements, is becoming the slave of the landowner, of the
“master”, because he, the muzhik, has no alternative.  

The “master” will neither lease his land, nor give right of way, nor
watering-places for animals, nor meadows, nor timber, unless the peasant
enslaves himself. If a peasant is caught “illegally” felling wood in the
forests, what happens? He is beaten up by the foresters, Circassians, etc.,
and then the “master”, who in the Duma delivers fervent speeches
on the progress of our agriculture and on the necessity of copying
Europe—this same master offers the following alternative to the beaten
muzhik: either go to prison or cultivate, plough, sow and harvest two or
three dessiatines! The same thing happens when the peasants’ cattle
trespass on the landowners’ estates. The same for the winter loan of
grain. The same for the use of meadows and pastures, and so on without end.


This is not big landowner farming. It is the enslavement of
the muzhik. It is feudal exploitation of millions of impoverished
peasants-by means of estates of thousands of dessiatines, the estates of
the landowners who have been squeezing and stifling the muzhik in all
directions.  

The farmsteads are helping out a handful of rich peasants. But the
masses continue to starve as before. Why is it, you landowning gentlemen,
that Europe has not known famine for a long time? Why is it that terrible
famines, such as that which raged in our country in 1910–11, occurred in
Europe only under serfdom?  
 

Because in Europe there is no serf bondage. There are rich and middle
peasants and there are labourers in Europe, but not millions of ruined,
destitute peasants, driven to despair by perennial suffering and hard
labour, disfranchised, downtrodden, dependent on the “master”.  

What is to be done? What is the way out?  

There is only one way out: the liberation of the country side from the
oppression of these feudal latifundia, the transfer of these seventy
million dessiatines of land from the land ed proprietors to the
peasants, a transfer that must be effected without any compensation.  

Only such a solution can make Russia really resemble a European
country. Only such a solution will enable the millions of Russian peasants
to breathe freely and recover. Only such a solution will make it possible
to transform Russia from a country of perennially starving, destitute
peasants, crushed by bondage to the landowner, into a country of “European
progress”, from a country of illiterate people into a literate country,
from a country of backwardness and hopeless stagnation into a country
capable of developing and going forward, from a disfranchised country, a
country of slaves, into a free country.  

And the party of the working class, knowing that without free,
democratic institutions there is not and cannot be a road to socialism,
points, as a way out of the blind alley into which the government with its
agrarian policy has again led Russia, to the free transfer of all the
landed estates to the peasants, to the winning of full political liberty by
a new revolution.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Lenin prepared this speech for, a Bolshevik deputy to the Duma. It was
delivered by N. B. Shagov on June 9 (22), 1913, during the debate on the
Budget Committee’s report on the estimates of the Department of State
Lands. The speech aroused shouts from the Right deputies and the speaker
was several times warned by the chairman that he would be deprived of the
right to speak for breaking the rule prohibiting the reading of
speeches. Shagov was forced to leave out a number of passages from Lenin’s
text; about half the speech was delivered.





[2]
The village commune in Russia was a communal form of peasant
land tenure characterised by compulsory crop rotation and undivided

   

woods and pastures. Its principal features were collective liability
(compulsory collective responsibility of the peasants for making their
payments in full and on time, and the performance of various services to
the state and the landowners), the regular reallotment of the land with no
right to refuse the allotment given, the prohibition of its purchase and
sale.  

The Russian village commune dates back to ancient times and in the
course of historical development gradually became one of the mainstays of
feudalism in Russia. The landowners and the tsarist government used the
village commune to intensify feudal oppression and to squeeze redemption
payment and taxes out of the people. Lenin pointed out that the village
commune “does not save the peasant from turning into a proletarian, yet in
practice acts as a medieval barrier dividing the peasants, who are, as it
were, chained to small associations and to categories which have lost all
‘reason for existence’\thinspace”.



The problem of the village commune aroused heated arguments and brought
an extensive economic literature into existence. Particularly great
interest in the commune was displayed by the Narodniks, who saw in it the
guarantee of Russia’s socialist evolution by a special path. By
tendentiously selecting facts and falsifying them and employing so-called
“average figures”, the Narodniks sought to prove that the commune
peasantry in Russia possessed a special sort of “stability”, and that the
peasant commune protected the peasants against the penetration of
capitalist relations into their lives, and saved them from ruin and class
differentiation. As early as the 1880s, G. V. Plekhanov had shown that the
Narodnik illusions about “commune socialism” were unfounded, and in the
1890s Lenin completely refuted the Narodnik theories. Lenin brought forward
a tremendous amount of statistical material and innumerable facts to show
how capitalist relations were developing in the Russian village, and how
capital, by penetrating the patriarchal village commune, was splitting the
peasantry into two antagonistic classes, the kulaks and the poor peasants.


In 1906 the tsarist Minister Stolypin issued a law favouring the kulaks
that allowed the peasants to leave the commune and sell their
allotments. This law laid the basis for the official abolition of the
village commune system and intensified the differentiation among the
peasants. In the nine years following the promulgation of the law, over two
million peasant families withdrew from the communes.





[3]
This expression originated during the Russo-Turkish War,
1877–78. There was heavy fighting in the Shipka Pass but the headquarters
of the Russian Army issued communiqués stating “All quiet on
Shipka”. The expression was used ironically in respect of those who tried
to hide the true state of affairs.




[4]
The Stolypin reforms were agrarian laws promulgated in 1906 and
1907. On November 9 (22), 1906 a law was published giving peasants

   

the right to withdraw from the communes and giving them the title to their
allotment lands. Before this (on August 12 [25]) a law was passed on the
sale of some of the crown lands and (August 27 [September 9]) on the sale
of state lands through the Peasant Bank. Later, on November 15 (28), a law
was passed permitting loans to peasants from the Peasant Land Bank on the
security of peasant allotments.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Capitalism and Taxation









Lenin: Capitalism and Taxation







V. I.  

      Lenin
Capitalism and Taxation




Published:
Pravda No. 129, June 7, 1913.

      Signed: V. Ilyin.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 197-200.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Novy Ekonomist (No. 21 for 1913), a journal published by
Mr. P. Migulin, with the Octobrists and Cadets jointly collaborating,
carries an interesting note about income tax in the United States.  

The bill exempts from taxation all incomes up to 4,000 dollars (8,000
rubles). Taxation is envisaged at the rate of one per cent on all incomes
exceeding 4,000 dollars, two per cent on all incomes exceeding 20,000
dollars and so on, with slight increases in the percentage as incomes
increase. Thus the plan is for a progressive income tax, but with an
exceedingly slow rate of progression, so that the owner of a mil lion
dollar income generally pays less than three per cent.  

The plan estimates that the 425,000 people whose incomes exceed 4,000
dollars will pay 70 million dollars in taxes (about 140 million rubles) and
the Octobrist-Cadet editors of Novy Ekonomist note with reference
to this: 


   “Compared with the 700 million rubles import duty and
   the 500 million rubles excise duty, the expected revenue of 140 million
   rubles from income tax is negligible and will not change the significance
   of indirect taxation.”  


It is a pity that our bourgeois liberal economists who are in words
prepared to accept a progressive income tax and have even recorded it in
their programme, have evinced no desire to make a definite and precise
statement on what rates of income tax they consider to be
obligatory.  

Such rates that the significance of indirect taxation would merely be
changed, and if so to what extent? Or such rates that indirect taxation
would be completely abolished?  

The American statistics that Novy Ekonomist touches upon
provide an instructive illustration to this question.  

It can be seen from the bill that the total income of 425,000
capitalists (if the tax provides 70 million dollars)

    

is estimated at 5,413,000,000 dollars. This is an obvious understatement; a
hundred persons are shown as having an income of over a million
dollars and their income is shown as 150,000,000 dollars. We know that a
dozen American multimillionaires have incomes incomparably
greater. The Secretary of the Treasury in America wants to be “polite” to
the multimillionaires....  

But even these figures, excessively “polite” to the capitalists, show
a noteworthy picture. Statistics in America record only 16,000,000
families. Of these, therefore, less than hall a million are
counted as capitalists. The remaining mass of people are wage-slaves or
petty farmers oppressed by capital, etc.  

The statistics fix the size of the income enjoyed by the working masses
in America quite accurately for a number of categories. For instance,
6,615,046 industrial workers received (in 1910) 3,427,000,000 dollars,
i.e., 518 dollars (1,035 rubles) per worker. Then, 1,699,420 railway
workers received 1,144,000,000 dollars (673 dollars per worker). Further,
523,210 public school-teachers received 254,000,000 dollars (483 dollars
per teacher).  

Combining this mass of working people and rounding off the figures we
get: workers—8,800,000 with a total income of 4,800,000,000 dollars or
550 dollars each; capitalists—500,000 with a total income of
5,500,000,000 dollars or 11,000 dollars each.  

Half a million capitalist families receive an income that is
greater than that of almost 9,000,000 workers’ families. What,
might we ask, is the role of indirect taxation and of the planned income
tax?  

Indirect taxation brings in 1,200,000,000 rubles, i.e., 600,000,000
dollars. The amount of indirect taxation is 75 rubles (37.50 dollars) per
family in America. Let us compare the way in which the incomes of
capitalists and workers are taxed: 





 
Million families
Total income
Total indirect taxes
% of income paid as taxes


(million dollars)




Workers . . .     
8.8
4,800
330
7


Capitalists . . . 
0.5
5,500
19
0.36



 

We see that the workers pay seven kopeks to the ruble in indirect taxes
while the capitalists pay one-third of a kopek. The workers pay,
proportionally, twenty times more than the capitalists. A system
of indirect taxes inevitably creates such an “order” (a very disorderly
order) in all capitalist countries.  

If the capitalists were to pay the same percentage in taxes as the
workers, the tax imposed would be 385,000,000 and not 19,000,000
dollars.  

Does a progressive income tax of the sort planned in America
change much? Very little. From the capitalists 19,000,000 dollars indirect
taxes plus 70,000,000 dollars income tax would be obtained, that is,
altogether 89,000,000 dollars or only one and a half percent of
income!  

Let us divide the capitalists into middle (income 4,000 to 10,000
dollars, i.e., 8,000-20,000 rubles) and wealthy (with an income over 20,000
rubles). We get the following:
middle capitalists—304,000 families with a total income of 1,813,000,000
dollars, and wealthy capitalists—121,000 families with a total income of
3,600,000,000 dollars.  

If the middle capitalists paid as much as the workers pay, i.e., 7 per
cent of income, the revenue would be about 130,000,000 dollars. Fifteen per
cent from the income of wealthy capitalists would produce 540,000,000
dollars. The total would more than cover all indirect taxes. After
the deduction of this tax the middle capitalists would still have an income
of 11,000 rubles each and the wealthy an income of 50,000 rubles each.


We see that the demand put forward by the Social-Democrats—the
complete abolition of all indirect taxes and their replacement by
a real progressive income tax and not one that merely plays at it—is
fully realisable. Such a measure would, without affecting the
foundations of capitalism, give tremendous immediate relief to nine-tenths
of the population; and, secondly, it would serve as a gigantic impetus to
the development of the productive forces of society by expanding the home
market and liberating the state from the nonsensical hindrances to economic
life that have been introduced for the purpose of levying indirect taxes.


The capitalists’ advocates usually point to the difficulty of assessing
big incomes. Actually, with banks, savings societies,

    

etc., at their present level of development, this is a purely imaginary
difficulty. The one difficulty is the class-avarice of the
capitalists and the existence of undemocratic institutions in the political
structure of bourgeois states.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Economic Strikes in 1912 and in 1905









Lenin: Economic Strikes in 1912 and in 1905







V. I.  

      Lenin
Economic Strikes in 1912 and in 1905




Published:
Pravda No. 130, June 8, 1913.

      Signed: V. I..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 201-202.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The statistics on economic strikes compiled by the
Association of Factory Owners in the Moscow Area enable us to draw some
parallels between 1912 and 1905. In doing so we shall have to limit
ourselves to three groups of industries—metalworking, textile and
“others”, because the factory owners’ association does not give a more
detailed classification in its statistics.  

Here are the parallel figures: 





 
Number of strikers
    participating in economic
    strikes


1905
1911
1912




Metalworkers . . . . .  
230,216
17,920
78,195


Textile workers . . . .  
559,699
59,950
89,540


Others . . . . . . . . .  
230,527
18,880
43,860


Totals . . . . . . . 
1,020,442
96,750
211,595




The figures for 1905 include only purely economic strikes;
those with mixed motives, both economic and political, have been
omitted. The figures for 1911 and 1912 seem to be far from complete.  

If we take the 1905 figures as the starting-point, a comparison of
these figures shows us that in 1911 the strike effort of the textile
workers was greater than that of the metal-workers and
“others”. In 1911 more than half the total number of strikers were
textile workers; their number was more than three times that of the
metalworkers. In 1905 the number of textile workers on strike was only two
and a half times the number of metalworkers.  
 

As far as the “others” are concerned, the number of strikers in these
branches was about the same as the number of striking metalworkers in both
1905 and 1911.  

In 1912, however, the metalworkers made an astounding advance, leaving
the “others” far behind and almost catching up with the textile workers.


The number of metalworkers who took part in strikes in 1912 was more
than four times the number for 1911. In the same period the number
of strikers among the textile workers increased by only 50 per cent (60,000
and 89,000), while that of the “others” increased by just 150 per cent.


It follows, therefore, that the metalworkers made good use of the
favourable market conditions of 1912. Encouraged by the victories of 1911,
they went over to a more extensive and more determined offensive.  

Workers in the “other” branches of industry were also in a favourable
position in 1912. Their economic struggle was still more successful than
that of the metalworkers, but they did not make such good use of their
favourable position as the metalworkers did.  

The position of the textile workers in 1912 was worse than that of
workers in any other branch of industry; their economic struggle was the
least successful. In view of this the number of strikers among them
increased more slowly than in other branches.  

The factory owners of the Moscow area hope that the wave of strikes
will be weaker in 1913. We read in their report for 1912: “The situation
in the textile industry is clear enough; until the state of the new harvest
is known the mills will work at a slower rate and for the workers to strike
under these conditions would be very imprudent.”  

We shall see to what extent this assumption is justified. In any case
both the year of 1912 and the beginning of 1913 have shown that
economic strikes constitute only a small part of the
entire “strike wave 

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Growth of Capitalist Wealth









Lenin: The Growth of Capitalist Wealth







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Growth of Capitalist Wealth




Published:
Pravda No. 131, June 9, 1913.

      Signed: V. I..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 203-205.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Capitalists are not inclined to be frank about their in
comes. “Commercial secrets” are strictly guarded and it is very difficult
for the uninitiated to penetrate the “mysteries” of how riches are piled
up. Private property is sacred—no body is permitted to meddle in the
affairs of its owner. Such is the principle of capitalism.  

Capital, however, has long since overstepped the bounds of private
property and introduced joint-stock companies. Hundreds and thousands of
shareholders who do not know each other make up a single enterprise; and
these property-owners are quite often diddled by smart businessmen who
empty the pockets of their business partners using “commercial secrets”
as a cover.  

Sacred private property has been forced to sacrifice a bit of its
sacredness; laws have had to be made compelling joint-stock companies to
keep proper books and publish the chief results of their accountancy. This,
of course, has not prevent ed the public being swindled; the swindling has
merely taken new forms and become more subtle than before. Big capital,
gathering around itself small sums of shareholders’ capital from all over
the world, has become more powerful still. Through the joint-stock company,
the millionaire now has at his disposal not only his own million, but
additional capital of, say, 800,000 rubles that may have been gathered from
8,000 petty proprietors.  

This makes the absurdity of capitalism much clearer to the masses of
the population.  

Take, for example, the published reports of insurance companies in
Russia over a period of ten years, from 1902 to 1911.  
 

In 1902 share capital amounted to 31.3 million rubles (in 21
joint-stock companies), and in 1911 (in the same 21 companies) it was 34.8
million rubles. The greater part of the capital usually belongs to a
handful of millionaires. Ten or twenty magnates perhaps hold shares for
eighteen million rubles, which, gives them a majority vote, and they can,
without any control, dispose of the other thirteen or sixteen million
rubles belonging to “small” shareholders.  

The professors who defend capitalism chatter about the increase in the
number of property-owners when they see a growth in the number of small
shareholders. What actually happens is that the power (and the income) of
the millionaire magnates over the capital of the “small fry” is
increased.  

Just see how our insurance kings have expanded in the course of this
ten years, The average dividend on share capital for the ten years
was more than 10 per cent! Not a bad profit, eh? In the worst year
of the decade they “earned” six kopeks in the ruble, and in the best year
twelve kopeks!  

Reserve capital was doubled—in 1902 it amounted to 152,000,000 rubles
and in 1911 to 327,000,000 rubles. Property was almost doubled as well—in
1902 it was valued at 44,000,000 rubles and in 1911 at 76,000,000 rubles.


The result—in ten years in twenty-one companies, 32,000,000 rubles’
worth of new property!  

Who “earned” this property?  

Those who did not work, the shareholders, and first and foremost the
millionaire magnates who hold most of the shares.  

The work was done by hundreds of employees, who canvassed insurance
clients, inspected their property and laboured over the accounts. These
employees remained employees. They do not receive anything more than their
salaries (which, as we know, are in the majority of cases insufficient even
to maintain a family decently). They cannot accumulate any property.  

If any of the magnates did a bit of “work” as a director, he
received special remuneration in the form of a ministerial salary
and bonuses.  
 

The gentlemen holding the shares grew rich for not
working. During the decade they received on the average three millions a
year net profit for the “toil” of clipping coupons, and accumulated
additional capital to the tune of thirty-two million rubles.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Peasantry and the Working Class









Lenin: The Peasantry and the Working Class







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Peasantry and the Working Class




Published:
Pravda No. 152, June 11, 1913.

      Signed: V. I..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 206-208.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

In the Narodnik newspapers and magazines we often meet with
the assertion that the workers and the “working” peasantry belong to the
same class.  

The absolute incorrectness of this view is obvious to any one who
understands that more or less developed capitalist production predominates
in all modern states—i.e., capital rules the market and transforms the
masses of working people into wage-workers. The so-called “working”
peasant is in fact a small proprietor, or a petty bourgeois, who
nearly always either hires himself out to work for somebody else or hires
workers himself. Being a small proprietor, the “working” peasant also
vacillates in politics between the masters and the workers, between the
bourgeoisie and the proletariat.  

Statistics on wage-labour in agriculture provide one of the
most striking proofs of this property-owning, or bourgeois, nature of the
“working” peasant. Bourgeois economists (including the Narodniks) usually
praise the “vitality” of small production in agriculture, by which they
mean farming without wage-labour. But they are not at all fond of precise
figures on wage-labour among the peasantry!  

Let us examine data on this question gathered by the most recent
agricultural censuses—the Austrian census of 1902 and the German of 1907.


The more developed a country, the more extensively is wage-labour
employed in agriculture. In Germany, out of a total of 15,000,000
wage-workers, it is estimated that 4,500,000, or 30 per cent, are employed,
in agriculture; and in Austria, the figure is 1,250,000, or 14 per cent,
out of a total of 9,000,000. But even in Austria, if we take farms usually regarded as peasant (or “working” peasant) farms, i.e., those from 2 to
20 hectares (one hectare equals nine-tenths of a dessiatine), we will find
that wage-labour plays an important part. Farms from 5 to 10 hectares
number 383,000; of these 126,000 employ wage-workers. Farms from 10 to 20
hectares number 242,000; of these 142,000, or nearly three-fifths, employ
wage-workers.  

Thus, small (“working”) peasant farming exploits hundreds of
thousands of wage-workers. The larger the peasant farm, the larger the
number of wage-workers employed, together with a larger contingent of
family workers. For example, in Germany, for every 10 peasant farms, there
are: 





Size of farm
Family workers
Wage- workers
Total




2 to 5 hectares 
25
4
29


5 to 10 ”      
31
7
38


10 to 2O ”     
34
17
51




The more affluent peasantry, who have more land and a larger number of
“their own” workers in the family, employ in addition a larger
number of wage-workers.  

In capitalist society, which is entirely dependent on the market, small
(peasant) production on a mass scale is impossible in agriculture
without the mass employment of wage-labour. The sentimental catchword,
“working” peasant, merely deceives the workers by concealing
this exploitation of wage-labour.  

In Austria, about one and a half million peasant farms (from 2 to 20
hectares) employ half a million wage-workers. In Germany, two
million peasant farms employ more than one and a half million
wage-workers.  

And what about the smaller farmers? They hire them selves out! They are
wage-workers with a plot of land. For example, in Germany there are over
three and a third mil lion (3,378,509) farms of less than two hectares. Of
these less than hall a million (474,915) are independent
farmers, and only a little less than two million (1,822, 792) are
wage-workers!  

The very position of the small farmers in modern society, therefore,
inevitably transforms them into petty bourgeois. They are eternally
hovering between the wage-workers and

    

the capitalists. The majority of the peasants live in poverty, are ruined
and become proletarians, while the minority trail after the capitalists and
help keep the masses of the rural population dependent upon the
capitalists. That is why the peasants in all capitalist countries have so
far mostly kept aloof from the workers’ socialist movement and have joined
various reactionary and bourgeois parties. Only an independent organisation
of wage-workers which conducts a consistent class struggle can wrest the
peasantry from the influence of the bourgeoisie and explain to them the
absolute hopelessness of the small producers’ position in capitalist
society.  

In Russia the position of the peasants in relation to capitalism is
just the same as in Austria, Germany, etc. Our “specific feature” is our
backwardness: the peasant is still confronted, not with the capitalist, but
with the big feudal landowner, who is the principal bulwark of the
economic and political backwardness of Russia.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Child Labour in Peasant Farming









Lenin: Child Labour in Peasant Farming







V. I.  

      Lenin
Child Labour in Peasant Farming




Published:
Pravda No. 133, June 12, 1913.

      Signed: V. I..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 209-212.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
Unknown
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (1901).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

In making a proper appraisal of the conditions in which
capitalism places small agricultural production the most important things
to study are the conditions of the worker, his earnings, the amount of
labour he expends, his conditions of life; then the way the livestock is
kept and tended, and, finally, the methods of cultivating and fertilising
the soil, the waste of its fertility, etc.  

It is not difficult to understand that if these questions are ignored
(as they often are in bourgeois political economy) a totally distorted
picture of peasant farming is obtained, for the real “viability”
of the latter depends precisely on the conditions of the worker, on the
condition of his livestock, and on the way he tends his land. To assume
without proof that in this respect small production is in the same position
as large-scale production is merely begging the question. It means at once
adopting the bourgeois point of view.  

The bourgeoisie wants to prove that the peasant is a sound and viable
“proprietor”, and not the slave of capital, crushed in the same way as
the wage-worker, but more tied up, more entangled than the latter. If one
seriously and conscientiously wants the data required to solve
this controversial problem, he must look for the regular and objective
indicators of the conditions of life and labour in small and
large-scale production.  

One of these indicators, and a particularly important one, is the
extent to which child labour is employed. The more child labour is
exploited the worse, undoubtedly, is the position of the worker, and the
harder his life.  

The Austrian and German agricultural censuses give the number of
children and adolescents employed in agriculture

    

in relation to the total number of persons employed in agriculture. The
Austrian census gives separate figures for all workers, male and female,
under 16 years of age. Of these, there were 1,200,000 out of a
total of 9,000,000, i.e., 13 per cent. The German census gives figures only
for those of 14 years of age and under; of these there were six
hundred thousand (601,637) out of fifteen million (15,169,549), or 3.9
per cent.  

Clearly, the Austrian and German figures are not
comparable. Nevertheless, the relative numbers of proletarian,
peasant and capitalist farms they reveal are quite comparable.  

By proletarian farms we mean the tiny plots of land (up to two hectares
or almost two dessiatines per farm) which provide the wage-worker with
supplementary earnings. By peasant farms we mean those from 2 to 20
hectares; in these, family labour predominates over wage-labour. Finally,
there are the capitalist farms; these are big farms, in which wage-labour
predominates over family labour.  

The following are the figures on child labour in the three types of
farms.  





Type of farm
Group according to size of farm
Children employed
    (% of total number of workers)


Austria (under 16) 
Germany (under 14




Proletarian { { 
Less than half a hectare . . . 
8.8
2.2


1/2 to 2 hectares . . . . . .  
12.2
3.9


Peasant { { { 
2 ” 5 ” . . . . . .          
15.3
4.6


5 ” 10 ” . . . . . .         
15.6
4.8


10 ” 20 ” . . . . . .        
12.8
4.5


Capitalist { { 
20 ” 100 ” . . . . . .       
11.1
3.4


100 hectares and over . . . .  
4.2
3.6


Total . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  . . . . 
13.0
3.9




We see from the above that in both countries the exploitation of child
labour is greatest in peasant farms in general, and among
the middle peasant farms (5 to 10 hectares, i.e., 4.5 to
9 dessiatines) in particular.  

Thus, not only is small production worse-off than large-scale
production, we also see that the peasant farms, in

    

particular, are worse-off than the capitalist farms and even than the
proletarian farms.  

How is this to be explained?  

On the proletarian farm, farming is conducted on such an insignificant
plot of land that, strictly speaking, it can not seriously be called a
“farm”. Here farming is a secondary occupation; the principal
occupation is wage-labour in agriculture and in industry. In general, the
influence of industry raises the standard of life of the worker, and in
particular, it reduces the exploitation of child labour. For example, the
German census shows the number of persons under the age of 14 employed in
industry to be only 0.3 per cent of the total (i.e., one-tenth of that in
agriculture) and those under 16 years of age only 18 per cent.  

In peasant farming, however, the influence of industry is felt least of
all, while the competition of capitalist agriculture is felt most of
all. The peasant is unable to keep going without almost working himself to
death and compelling his children to work as hard. Want compels the peasant
to make up for his lack of capital and technical equipment with his own
muscles. The fact that the peasant’s children work hardest also indicates
that the peasant’s cattle work hard and are fed worse: the necessity of
exerting the utmost effort and of “economising” in everything inevitably
affects every side of the farm.  

German statistics show that among wage-workers the largest percentage
of children (3.7 or nearly 4 per cent) is to be found in the big capitalist
farms (of 100 dessiatines and over). But among family workers, the largest
percent age of children is to be found among the peasants—about five
per cent (4.9 per cent to 5.2 per cent). As many as 9 per cent of
temporary wage-workers employed in big capitalist enterprises are
children; but among the peasants as many as 16.5 to 24.4 per cent of the
temporary family workers are children!  

In the busy season the peasant suffers from a shortage of workers; he
can hire workers only to a small extent; he is compelled to employ the
labour of his own children to the greatest extent. The result is that in
German agriculture, in general, the percentage of children among family
workers is nearly hall as big again as that among wage-workers—

    

children among family workers—4.4 per cent; among wage workers—3
per cent.  

The peasant has to work harder than the wage-worker. This
fact, confirmed by thousands of independent observations, is now fully
proved by statistics for whole countries. Capitalism condemns the peasant
to extreme degradation and ruin. There is no other salvation for him than
through joining the class struggle of the wage-workers. But before the
peasant can arrive at this conclusion he will have to experience many years
of being disillusioned by deceptive bourgeois slogans.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Results of Strikes in 1912 as Compared with Those of the Past









Lenin: The Results of Strikes in 1912 as Compared with Those of the Past







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Results of Strikes in 1912 as Compared with Those of the Past




Published:
Pravda No. 133, June 12, 1913.

      Signed: N..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 213-215.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The Association of Factory Owners in the Moscow Area has
issued statistics on the results of strikes during the last seven months of
1912. These statistics embraced 131,625 workers out of a total of 211,595
who participated (according to the factory owners’ figures, undoubtedly
reduced) in economic strikes over the whole year of 1912.  

We have the figures for the results of strikes in previous years in the
official publications of the Ministry of Commerce and Industry covering the
decade preceding the revolution (1895–1904) and the three revolutionary
years (1905–07).  

The data, unfortunately, are not similar weights, and those gathered by
the factory owners’ association are not so well processed. Official
statistics on the results of strikes divide them into three categories:
(1) ending to the advantage of the workers,
(2) to the advantage of the owners and
(3) in a compromise. The statistics of the factory owners divide them into:
=

(1) ending in the defeat of the workers,
(2) the complete or partial satisfaction of the workers and
(3) strikes whose results are unspecified.  

The two sets of data may be compared (even relatively) only in the
following way. The workers taking part in strikes that ended in a
compromise or whose results are unspecified, are divided into two equal
parts between the strikes won and lost, obtaining as a
result only these two headings (approximate, of course). Here are the
results of the comparison: 
    

    




 
Number of strikers 
Number of strikers in strikes won (thousands)
Percentage won 




For ten years before the revolution . . . . . 
1895-1904 
424
159
37.5


Three revolutionary years   . . . . . . . { { {
  
1905 
1,439
705
48.9


1906 
458
233
50.9


1907 
200
59
29.5


For all . . . . . . .
1911 
96
49
51.0


For last 7 months of . .
1912 
132
55
41.6




All these figures refer only to economic strikes, and the data for 1911
and 1912, furthermore, are incomplete. The number of workers for the whole
of 1912 who took part in economic strikes (212,000) exceeded the
number for 1907.  

As can be seen, the year 1911 was a record year for the success of
economic strikes, even surpassing the most successful revolutionary year of
1906. In 1906 the percentage of strikers who won their strikes was 50.9
per cent and in 1911 it was 51 per cent.  

Strikes in 1912 were less successful than they were in 1905
(1905—48.9 per cent won, 1912—41.6 per cent won), but they were more
successful than were, on the average, those of the decade
1895-1904 (37.5 per cent), to say nothing of 1907 (29.5 per cent won), 

It is interesting to compare these figures with those of Western
Europe. In Germany, during the entire first decade of the twentieth century
(1900–09) there were 1,897,000 strikers (in Russia the two years
of the revolution alone, counting only economic strikes, yielded
as many). Of these, 698,000 or 36.8 per cent won their strikes, i.e.,
somewhat less than in Russia in the decade preceding the revolution. In
Britain for the ten years, 1900-09, the number of strikers was
1,884,000. Out of 1,234,000 strikers, 588,000, or 47.5 per cent, won their
strikes, i.e., many more than in Russia in the pre-revolutionary decade,
but fewer than in 1905 1906 and 1911. (The number of strikers winning their
strikes was calculated for Germany and Britain on the same basis as for
Russia.)  
 

The number of strikers in Russia who won their strikes in 1905
alone, was greater than the number for ten years
in Germany or Britain. One may judge from this how much of the
proletariat’s latent strength is still untapped.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## In Australia









Lenin: In Australia







V. I.  

      Lenin
In Australia




Published:
Pravda No. 134, June 13, 1513.

      Signed: W..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 216-217.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

A general election recently took place in Australia. The
Labour Party, which had a majority in the Lower House—44 seats out of
75—was defeated. It now has only 36 seats out of 75. The majority has
passed to the Liberals, but this majority is a very unstable one, because
30 of the 36 seats in the Upper House are held by Labour.  

What sort of peculiar capitalist country is this, in which the workers’
representatives, predominate in the Upper house and, till
recently, did so in the Lower House as well, and yet the capitalist system
is in no danger?  

An English correspondent of the German labour press recently explained
the situation, which is very often misrepresented by bourgeois writers.


The Australian Labour Party does not even call itself a socialist
party. Actually it is a liberal-bourgeois party, while the so-called
Liberals in Australia are really Conservatives.  

This strange and incorrect use of terms in naming par ties is not
unique. In America, for example, the slave-owners of yesterday are called
Democrats, and in France, enemies of socialism, petty bourgeois, are called
Radical Socialists!  In order to understand the real significance of
parties, one must examine not their signboards but their class character
and the historical conditions of each individual country.  

Australia is a young British colony.  

Capitalism in Australia is still quite youthful. The country is only
just taking shape as an independent state. The workers are for the most
part emigrants from Britain. They left the country at the time when the
liberal-labour policy held almost undivided sway there, when the masses of
the British workers were Liberals. Even now the majority of the
skilled factory workers in Britain are Liberals or semi-Liberals.

    

This is the results of the exceptionally favourable, monopolist position
enjoyed by Britain in the second half of the last century. Only now are the
masses of the workers in Britain turning (but turning slowly) towards
socialism.  

And while in Britain the so-called Labour Party is an alliance
between the non-socialist trade unions and the extremely opportunist
Independent Labour Party, in Australia the Labour Party is the
unalloyed representative of the non-socialist workers’ trade
unions.  

The leaders of the Australian Labour Party are trade union officials,
everywhere the most moderate and “capital serving” element, and in
Australia, altogether peaceable, purely liberal.  

The ties binding the separate states into a united Australia are still
very weak. The Labour Party has had to concern itself with developing and
strengthening these ties, and with establishing central government.  

In Australia the Labour Party has done what in other countries was done
by the Liberals, namely, introduced a uniform tariff for the whole country,
a uniform educational law, a uniform land tax and uniform factory
legislation.  

Naturally, when Australia is finally developed and consolidated as an
independent capitalist state, the condition of the workers will change, as
also will the liberal Labour Party, which will make way for a
socialist workers’ party. Australia is an illustration of the
conditions under which exceptions to the rule are possible. The
rule is: a socialist workers’ party in a capitalist country. The exception
is:
a liberal Labour Party which arises only for a short time by virtue of
specific conditions that are abnormal for capitalism in general.  

Those Liberals in Europe and in Russia who try to “teach” the people
that class struggle is unnecessary by citing the example of Australia, only
deceive themselves and others. It is ridiculous to think of transplanting
Australian conditions (an undeveloped, young colony, populated by liberal
British workers) to countries where the state is long established and
capitalism well developed.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## May Day Action by the Revolutionary Proletariat









Lenin: May Day Action by the Revolutionary Proletariat







V. I.  

      Lenin
May Day Action by the Revolutionary Proletariat




Published:
Sotsial-Demokrat No. 31, June 15 (28), 1913.

      Published according to the Sotsial-Demokrat text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 218-227.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription:
R. Cymbala
HTML Markup:
B. Baggins and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (1996).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

A year has passed since the Lena events and the first,
decisive upsurgence in the revolutionary working-class movement since the
June Third coup. The tsar’s Black Hundreds and the landowners, the mob of
officials and the bourgeoisie have celebrated the 300th anniversary of
plunder, Tatar incursions, and the disgracing of Russia by the
Romanovs. The Fourth Duma has convened and begun its “work”, though it
has no faith in that work and has quite lost its former
counter-revolutionary vigour. Confusion and tedium have beset liberal
society, which is listlessly making appeals for reforms while
admitting the impracticability of anything even approximating reform.  

And now comes a May Day action by Russia’s working class, who first
held a rehearsal in Riga, then went into resolute action in St. Petersburg
on May 1. (0.S.); this action has rent the dun and dreary atmosphere like a
thunderbolt. The tasks of the approaching revolution have come to the fore
again in all their grandeur, and the forces of the advanced class leading
it stand out in bold relief before hundreds of old revolutionaries, whom
persecution by hang men and desertion by friends have not defeated or
broken, and before millions of people of the new generation of democrats
and socialists.  

Weeks before May Day, the government appeared to have lost its wits,
while the gentlemen who own factories behaved as if they had never had any
wits at all. The arrests and searches seemed to have turned all the
workers’ districts in the capital upside down. The provinces did not lag
behind the centre. The harassed factory owners called

    

conferences and adopted contradictory slogans, now threatening the workers
with punishment and lock-outs, now making concessions in advance and
consenting to stop work, now inciting the government to commit atrocities,
now reproaching the government and calling on it to include May Day in the
number of official holidays.  

But even though the gendarmes showed the utmost zeal, even though they
“purged” the industrial suburbs, even though they made arrests right and
left according to their latest “lists of suspects”, it was no use. The
workers laughed at the impotent rage of the tsar’s gang and the capitalist
class and derided the governor’s menacing and pitiful “announcements”;
they wrote satirical verses and circulated them by hand or passed them on
by word of mouth; they produced, as if from nowhere fresh batches of small,
poorly printed “leaflets”, short and plain, but very instructive, calling
for strikes and demonstrations, and reminding the people of the old,
uncurtailed, revolutionary slogans of the Social-Democrats, who in 1905 led
the first onslaught of the masses against the autocracy and against
monarchy.  

A hundred thousand on strike on May Day, said the government press the
next day. Bourgeois newspapers, using the first telegraphed information,
reported a hundred and twenty-five thousand (Kievskaya Mysl). A
correspondent of the central organ of the German Social-Democrats wired
from St. Petersburg that it was a hundred and fifty thousand. And the day
after the whole bourgeois press quoted a figure of
200,000–220,000. Actually the number of strikers reached 250,000!


But, apart from the number of May Day strikers, much more
impressive—and much more significant—were the revolutionary street
demonstrations held by the workers. Everywhere in and around the capital
crowds of workers singing revolutionary songs, calling loudly for
revolution and carrying red flags fought for several hours against police
and security forces frantically mobilised by the government. And those
workers made the keenest of the tsar s henchmen feel that the struggle was
in earnest, that the police were not faced with a handful of individuals
engaged in a trivial Slavophil
affair,[2] that it was actually the masses of the capital’s
working class who had risen.  
 

This was a really brilliant, open demonstration of the proletariat’s
revolutionary aspirations, of its revolutionary forces steeled and
reinforced by new generations, of revolutionary appeals to the people and
the peoples of Russia. Last year the government and the manufacturers were
able to take comfort from the fact that the Lena explosion could not have
been foreseen, that they could not have made immediate preparations to
combat its consequences; this time, however, the monarchy had displayed
acute foresight, there had been ample time for preparation and the
“measures” taken were most “vigorous”; the result was that the tsarist
monarchy revealed its complete impotence when faced with a
revolutionary awakening of the proletarian masses.  

Indeed, one year of strike struggle since Lena has shown, despite the
pitiful outcries of the liberals and their yes-men against the “craze for
striking”, against “syndicalist” strikes, against combining economic
with political strikes and vice versa—this year has shown what a great
and irreplaceable weapon for agitation among the masses, for rousing them,
for drawing them into the struggle the Social-Democratic proletariat had
forged for itself in the revolutionary epoch. The revolutionary mass-scale
strike allowed the enemy neither rest nor respite. It also hit the enemy’s
purse, and in full view of the whole world it trampled into the mud the
political prestige of the allegedly “strong” tsarist government. It
enabled more and more sections of the workers to regain at least a small
part of what had been achieved in 1905 and drew fresh sections of the
working people, even the most backward, into the struggle. It did not
exhaust the capacity of the workers, it was frequently demonstrative action
of short duration, and at the same time it paved the way for further, still
more impressive and more revolutionary open action by the masses in the
shape of street demonstrations.  

During the last year, no country in the world has seen so many people
on strike for political ends as Russia, or such perseverance, such variety,
such vigour in strikes. This circumstance alone shows to the full the
pettiness, the contemptible stupidity of those liberal and liquidationist
sages who tried to “adjust” the tactics of the Russian workers in
1912–13, using the yardstick of “European” constitutional

    

periods, periods that were mainly devoted to the preparatory work of
bringing socialist education and enlightenment, to the masses.  

The colossal superiority of the Russian strikes over those in the
European countries, the most advanced countries, demonstrates, not the
special qualities or special abilities of Russia’s workers, but the
special conditions in present-day Russia, the existence of a
revolutionary situation, the growth of a directly revolutionary
crisis. When the moment of a similar growth of revolution approaches in
Europe (there it will be a socialist and not a bourgeois-democratic
revolution, as in our country), the proletariat of the most developed
capitalist countries will launch far more vigorous revolutionary strikes,
demonstrations, and armed struggle against the defenders of wage-slavery.


This year’s May Day strike, like the series of strikes in Russia during
the last eighteen months, was revolutionary in character as distinguished
not only from the usual economic strikes but from demonstration strikes and
from political strikes demanding constitutional reforms, like, for
instance, the last Belgian
strike.[3] Those who are in bond age to a liberal world outlook and no
longer able to consider things from the revolutionary standpoint, cannot
possibly understand this distinctive character of the Russian strikes, a
character that is due entirely to the revolutionary state of Russia. The
epoch of counter-revolution and of free play for renegade sentiment has
left behind it too many people of this kind even among those who would like
to be called Social-Democrats.  

Russia is experiencing a revolutionary situation because the oppression
of the vast majority of the population—not only of the proletariat but of
nine-tenths of the small producers, particularly the peasants—has
intensified to the maximum, and this intensified oppression, starvation,
poverty, lack of rights, humiliation of the people is, further more,
glaringly inconsistent with the state of Russia’s productive forces,
inconsistent with the level of the class consciousness and the demands of
the masses roused by the year 1905, and inconsistent with the state of
affairs in all neighbouring not only European but Asian—countries.  

But that is not all. Oppression alone, no matter how

    

great, does not always give rise to a revolutionary situation in a
country. In most cases it is not enough for revolution that the lower
classes should not want to live in the old way. It is also necessary
that the upper classes should be unable to rule and govern in the
old way. This is what we see in Russia today. A political crisis is
maturing before our very eyes. The bourgeoisie has done everything
in its power to back counter-revolution and ensure “peaceful development”
on this counter-revolutionary basis. The bourgeoisie gave hangmen and
feudal lords as much money as they wanted, the bourgeoisie reviled the
revolution and renounced it, the bourgeoisie licked the boots of
Purishkevich and the knout of Markov the Second and became their lackey,
the bourgeoisie evolved theories based on “European” arguments, theories
that revile the Revolution of 1905 as an “intellectualist” revolution and
describe it as wicked, criminal, treasonous, and so on and so forth.  

And yet, despite all this sacrificing of its purse, its honour and its
conscience, the bourgeoisie—from the Cadets to the Octobrists—itself
admits that the autocracy and land owners were unable to ensure
“peaceful development”, were unable to provide the basic
conditions for “law” and “order”, without which a capitalist country
cannot, in the twentieth century, live side by side with Germany and the
new China.  

A nation-wide political crisis is in evidence in Russia, a crisis which
affects the very foundation of the state system and not just parts
of it, which affects the foundation of the edifice and not an
outbuilding, not merely one of its storeys. No matter how many glib phrases
our liberals and liquidators trot out to the effect that “we have, thank
God, a constitution” and that political reforms are on the order
of the day (only very limited people do not see the close connection
between these two propositions), no matter how much of this reformist
verbiage is poured out, the fact remains that not a single liquidator or
liberal can point to any reformist way out of the situation.  

The condition of the mass of the population in Russia, the aggravation
of their position owing to the new agrarian policy (to which the feudal
landowners had to snatch at as their last means of salvation), the
international situation, and the nature of the general political crisis
that has taken

    

shape in our country—such is the sum-total of the objective conditions
making Russia’s situation a revolutionary one because of the impossibility
of carrying out the tasks of a bourgeois revolution by following the
present course and by the means available to the government and the
exploiting classes.  

Such is the social, economic, and political situation, such is the
class relationship in Russia that has given rise to a specific type of
strike impossible in modern Europe, from which all sorts of renegades would
like to borrow the example, not of yesterday’s bourgeois revolutions
(through which shine gleams of tomorrow’s proletarian revolution), but of
today’s “constitutional” situation. Neither the oppression of the lower
classes nor a crisis among the upper classes can cause a revolution; they
can only cause the decay of a country, unless that country has a
revolutionary class capable of transforming the passive state of oppression
into an active state of revolt and insurrection.  

The role of a truly advanced class, a class really able to rouse the
masses to revolution, really capable of saving Russia from decay, is played
by the industrial proletariat. This is the task it fulfils by means of its
revolutionary strikes. These strikes, which the liberals hate and the
liquidators cannot understand, are (as the February resolution of the
R.S.D.L.P. puts it) “one of the most effective means of overcoming the
apathy, despair, and disunion of the agricultural proletariat and the
peasantry, ... and drawing them into the most concerted,
simultaneous, and extensive revolutionary
   actions”.[1]


The working class draws into revolutionary action the masses of the
working and exploited people, who are deprived of basic rights and driven
to despair. The working class teaches them revolutionary struggle, trains
them for revolutionary action, and explains to them where to find the way
out and how to attain salvation. The working class teaches them, not merely
by words, but by deeds, by example, and the example is provided not by the
adventures of solitary heroes but by mass revolutionary action combining
political and economic demands.  
 

How plain, how clear, how close these thoughts are to every honest
worker who grasps even the rudiments of the theory of socialism and
democracy! And how alien they are to those traitors to socialism and
betrayers of democracy from among the intelligentsia, who revile or deride
the “underground” in liquidationist newspapers, assuring naive simpletons
that they are “also Social-Democrats”.  

The May Day action of the proletariat of St. Petersburg, supported by
that of the proletariat of all Russia, clearly showed once again to those
who have eyes to see and ears to hear the great historic importance of the
revolutionary underground in present-day Russia. The only R.S.D.L.P. Party
organisation in St. Petersburg, the St. Petersburg Committee, compelled
even the bourgeois press, before the May Day action as well as on the eve
of January 9, and on the eve of the Tercentenary of the Romanovs as well as
on
April 4,[4] to note that St. Petersburg Committee leaflets had appeared
again and again in the factories.  

Those leaflets cost colossal sacrifices. Sometimes they are quite
unattractive in appearance. Some of them, the appeals for demonstration on
April 4, for instance, merely announce the hour and place of the
demonstration, in six lines evidently set in secret and with extreme haste
in different printing shops and in different types. We have people (“also
Social-Democrats”) who, when alluding to these conditions of
“underground” work, snigger maliciously or curl a contemptuous lip and
ask: “If the entire Party were limited to the underground, how many
members would it have? Two or three hundred?” [See No. 95 (181) of
Luch, a renegade organ, in its editorial defence of
Mr. Sedov, who has the sad courage to be an outspoken liquidator. This
issue of Luch appeared five days before the May Day action, i.e.,
at the very time the underground was preparing the leaflets!]


Messrs. Dan, Potresov and Co., who make these disgraceful statements,
must know that there were thousands of proletarians in the Party ranks as
early as 1903, and 150 thousand in 1907, that even now thousands and tens
of thousands of workers print and circulate underground leaflets,
as members of underground R.S.D.L.P. cells. But the liquidationist
gentlemen know that they are protected by Stolypin

    

“legality” from a legal refutation of their foul lies and their
“grimaces”, which are fouler still, at the expense of the underground.


See to what extent these despicable people have lost touch with the
mass working-class movement and with revolutionary work in general! Use
even their own yardstick, deliberately falsified to suit the liberals. You
may assume for a moment that “two or three hundred” workers in
St. Petersburg took part in printing and distributing those underground
leaflets.  

What is the result? “Two or three hundred” workers, the flower of the
St. Petersburg proletariat, people who not only call themselves
Social-Democrats but work as Social-Democrats, people who are esteemed and
appreciated for it by the entire working class of Russia, people
who do not prate about a “broad party” but make up in actual fact the
only underground Social-Democratic Party existing in Russia, these people
print and circulate underground leaflets. The Luch liquidators
(protected by Stolypin censors) laugh contemptuously at the “two or three
hundred”, the “underground” and its “exaggerated” importance, etc.


And suddenly, a miracle occurs! In accordance with a decision drawn up
by half a dozen members of the Executive Commission of the
St. Petersburg Committee—a leaflet printed and circulated by “two or
three hundred”—two hundred and fifty thousand people rise as
one man in St. Petersburg.  

The leaflets and the revolutionary speeches by workers at meetings and
demonstrations do not speak of an “open working-class party”, “freedom
of association” or reforms of that kind, with the phantoms of which the
liberals are fooling the people. They speak of revolution as the only way
out. They speak of the republic as the only slogan which, in contrast to
liberal lies about reforms, indicates the change needed to ensure freedom,
indicates the forces capable of rising consciously to defend it.  

The two million inhabitants of St. Petersburg see and hear these
appeals for revolution which go to the hearts of all toiling and oppressed
sections of the people. All St. Petersburg sees from a real, mass-scale
example what is the real way out and what is lying liberal talk about
reforms. Thousands

    

of workers’ contacts—and hundreds of bourgeois news papers, which are
compelled to report the St. Petersburg mass action at least in
snatches—spread throughout Russia the news of the stubborn strike
campaign of the capital’s proletariat. Both the mass of the peasantry and
the peasants serving in the army hear this news of strikes, of the
revolutionary demands of the workers, of their struggle for a republic and
for the confiscation of the landed estates for the benefit of the
peasants. Slowly but surely, the revolutionary strikes are stirring,
rousing, enlightening, and organising the masses of the people for
revolution.  

The “two or three hundred” “underground people” express the
interests and needs of millions and tens of millions, they tell
them the truth about their hopeless position, open their eyes to the
necessity of revolutionary struggle, imbue them with faith in it, provide
them with the correct slogans, and win these masses away from the influence
of the high-sounding and thoroughly spurious, reformist slogans of the
bourgeoisie. And “two or three” dozen liquidators from among the
intelligentsia, using money collected abroad and among liberal merchants to
fool unenlightened workers, are carrying the slogans of that bourgeoisie
into the workers’ midst.  

The May Day strike, like all the revolutionary strikes of 1912–13, has
made clear the three political camps into which present-day Russia is
divided. The camp of hangmen and feudal lords, of monarchy and the secret
police. It has done its utmost in the way of atrocities and is already
impotent against the masses of the workers. The camp of the bourgeoisie,
all of whom, from the Cadets to the Octobrists, are shouting and moaning,
calling for reforms and making fools of themselves by thinking that reforms
are possible in Russia. The camp of the revolution, the only camp
expressing the interests of the oppressed masses.  

All the ideological work, all the political work in this camp is
carried out by underground Social-Democrats alone, by those who know how to
use every legal opportunity in the spirit of Social-Democracy and who are
inseparably hound up with the advanced class, the proletariat. No one can
tell beforehand whether this advanced class will succeed in leading the
masses all the way to a victorious revolution.

    

But this class is fulfilling its duty—leading the masses to that
solution—despite all the vacillations and betrayals on the part of the
liberals and those who are “also Social-Democrats”. All the living and
vital elements of Russian socialism and Russian democracy are being
educated solely by the example of the revolutionary struggle of the
proletariat, and under its guidance.  

This year’s May Day action has shown to the whole world that the
Russian proletariat is steadfastly following its revolutionary course,
apart from which there is no salvation for a Russia that is suffocating and
decaying alive.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
See present edition, Vol. 18, p. 457.—Ed.  
 



[2]
This refers to the Slavophil demonstrations organised by reactionary
nationalist elements in St. Petersburg on March 17, 18 and 24 (March 30 and
31 and April 6), 1913 on the occasion of the Serbo Bulgarian victories over
the Turks during the first Balkan War. The reactionaries tried to use the
national liberation struggle of the Balkan peoples in the interests of the
expansionist, Great-Power politics of Russian tsarism in the Near East.





[3]
The strike referred to here took place in Belgium from April 14 to
April 24 (N. S.), 1913. It was a general strike of the Belgian proletariat
demanding a constitutional reform—the introduction of universal
suffrage. Of the more than one million Belgian workers, between 400,000 and
500,000 took part in the strike. The development of the strike was
regularly reported in Pravda, and lists of Russian workers’
contributions in aid of the strike were also printed.





[4]

April 4, 1913 was the first anniversary of the shooting of workers in
the Lena Goldfields; it was marked by a one–day strike of St. Petersburg
workers in which over 85,000 people participated.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Notes of a Publicist (June 15, 1913)









Lenin: Notes of a Publicist (June 15, 1913)







V. I.  

      Lenin
Notes of a Publicist (June 15, 1913)




Published:
Sotsial-Demokrat No. 31, June 15 (28), 1913.

      Published according to the Sotsial-Demokrat text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 228-232.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The political ignorance of the people of Russia is to be
seen, in part, in their inability to look for exact proofs concerning
controversial and important historical questions, and in the na\"ive
credence they give to shouting and expostulation, and to the assurances and
vows made by people with interests at stake.  

The question of liquidationism is confused precisely be cause the
people with interests at stake (i.e., the liquidators themselves) are not
too lazy to make assurances and vows, while the “public” are too lazy to
look for exact proofs.  

What is the substance of the matter? It is the attitude to the
revolution and to the underground, the effort to create a mass
working-class movement.  

Well, are there no exact proofs to offer on the factual aspect of these
issues?  

Of course, there are. One has only to get out of the habit of taking on
trust what the loud-mouthed and the liberals say.  

The “issue” of the underground. Should not those who are interested
in this question ask: “Who works in the underground?
Who belongs to the underground organisations?” Is it not clear
that underground organisations that do not make their presence felt are
nothing, are a deception?  

In St. Petersburg there are two newspapers—one is anti
liquidationist, the other is the liquidationist Luch, “also
Social-Democratic”. In other cities there are not yet any working-class
newspapers.  

Should it not be assumed that the liquidators are stronger in
St. Petersburg than elsewhere? But who works in the Party in
St. Petersburg?  
 

Take the evidence of the bourgeois press. You will find there the news
that leaflets were distributed by the St. Petersburg Committee
before January 9, and on the occasion of the Tercentenary of the Romanovs,
and on the eve of April 4 and on the eve of May Day.  

Have you any reason to doubt the bourgeois press on such a question of
fact?  

No sensible person would risk expressing such doubt. And anyone who is
at all close to the Social-Democratic movement will have seen the
St. Petersburg Committee’s leaflets.  

Not a single newspaper mentioned any leaflets issued by the
liquidators’ “initiative group” in St. Petersburg in connection with
these dates that are famous for the great revolutionary acts of the
proletarian masses in St. Petersburg.  

And no matter how the Luch people may “vow” that they are
“also Social-Democrats”, “also for the underground”, and that the
“Leninists” and Plekhanov are wrong in “harassing” them, etc., we shall
not stop pointing to facts that disprove the fables and lies told
by Luch.  

Find us a bourgeois newspaper that reported the appearance of leaflets
issued by the liquidators in St. Petersburg on the eve of January 9, on the
eve of April 4, or on the eve of May Day. There is none. There were no
leaflets. The liquidators are not working in the underground. It is
not the liquidators who constitute the underground organisations
of the Party. There are no liquidators on the St. Petersburg Committee. The
liquidators are outside the Party because there is no
other Party but that of the underground, and no other organisation in
St. Petersburg except the one led by the St. Petersburg Committee.  

We have deliberately avoided mentioning the leaflets of the Central
Committee and the Organising
Committee,[2] because it is difficult to prove that they are
distributed locally, while from the Organising Committee for almost a whole
year we have seen only the Vienna May Day leaflet, which has
nothing to do with work in St. Petersburg or in Russia.  

The liquidators evade direct answers to the question of “the
underground” because they are not there. Oath-taking

    

and vows, shouts and curses will not disprove that fact.  

Trotsky, doing faithful service to liquidators, assured himself and the
na\"ive “Europeans” (lovers of Asiatic scandal-mongering) that the
liquidators are “stronger” in the legal movement. And this lie, too, is
refuted by the facts.  

Take the Duma elections. In the Second Duma the Bolsheviks had 47
per cent of the worker curia; in the Third they had 50 per cent and in the
Fourth, 67 per cent. Should these facts be believed, or should one believe
Trotsky and the liquidators?  

Take the working-class press. In 1912 the anti-liquidationist newspaper
comes into being at a much earlier date and is supported by a considerably
greater number of workers’ groups (according to the published data on
collections). There were 620 workers’ groups for Pravda and 89 for
Luch.  

1913. Party people are already collecting funds for two newspapers, the
liquidators have a deficit and their one newspaper lives on foreign and
undefined (bourgeois) support. Pravda is supported by 402 workers’
groups, a Moscow workers’ paper of the same trend by 172 workers’ groups,
and Luch by 167 workers’ groups.  

Should one believe these facts or the vows made by Luch,
Trotsky, F. D. & Co.?  

The Metalworkers’ Union in St. Petersburg. At the first open
election where
platforms[3] were put forward, ten out of the fourteen were
Pravda supporters. In the same way as a thief, caught red-handed,
shouts “Stop thief!” so the liquidators are shouting “Beware of a
split!”  

In May 1910 the liquidators were told publicly and clearly
(Diskussionny Listok
No. 2[4]) that they were legalist-independents who had seceded from the
=

Party.[1]

Since then three years have passed and only people who are
completely wrapped up in their own lies, or who are absolutely ignorant,
could deny the facts that fully confirm those words.  

The liquidators are parasites on the Social-Democratic organism. To
“Europe” (the Organising Committee’s German pamphlet and Mr. Semkovsky in
=

Kampf[5]) they boast of strikes, but in Russia they write
disgusting articles in Luch
    

against strikes, about the “strike craze” and about the
“syndicalism” of revolutionary strikes. To Europe (and to naive An, also)
they claim to be in favour of the underground. Actually,
there are none of them in the underground. Powerless in the working class,
they are strong in the moral (and, of course, not only moral)
support they receive from the bourgeoisie. One has to be as na\"ive as An,
whom the Luch editors laugh at as they would at a little child
(No. 95), to recognise the slogan of an “open party” while defending the
under ground! That means surrendering the content to the
liquidators and fighting them over the form! Let An ponder over
whether the complete acceptance of the “open party” slogan by a
bourgeoisie hostile to the underground is fortuitous!  

The “open party” slogan is the slogan of reformism, a slogan
that means—given the present alignment of class and political forces in
Russia—rejection of the revolution. The slogan of the
underground is the slogan of revolution.  

The bourgeoisie cannot influence the workers directly in
contemporary Russia. As a result of 1905 the workers jeer at the
bourgeoisie and its liberalism. The word “Cadet” has become an
expletive. And so the role of the bourgeoisie among the workers is played
by the liquidators. Their objective significance is that they are the
vehicle of bourgeois influence, bourgeois reformism and bourgeois
opportunism.  

All F.D.’s articles in Luch, all the tactical premises of the
liquidators are based on reformism, on rejection of the revolution. You
have not proved the inevitability of revolution—such is the liquidator’s
usual answer. Your “forecast” of the revolution is one-sided—trills
Mr. Semkovsky, playing up to the liquidators.  

That can be answered in a few words. The onset of the revolution,
Messrs. Liberals, can be demonstrated only by the onset of the
revolution. And when the revolution begins, both cowardly liberals and even
purely casual people and adventurists are capable of becoming
“revolutionaries”. October and November 1905 proved this to the hilt.


A revolutionary is not one who becomes revolutionary with the onset of
the revolution, but one who defends the principles and slogans of the
revolution when reaction is most violent and when liberals and democrats
vacillate to

    

the greatest degree. A revolutionary is one who teaches the masses
to struggle in a revolutionary manner and nobody can possibly foresee (make
a “forecast” of) the results of that “teaching”.  

The situation in Russia is a revolutionary one. The proletariat, with
whom only anti-liquidators co-operate and march in step, is
training the masses for revolution, is preparing the revolution,
and is using any and every legal possibility for it. In the matter
of preparing the revolution, or, which is the same thing, in the matter of
the consistent democratic education of the masses, in the matter of
fulfilment of our socialist duty (since outside of democracy there
is no socialism), the revolutionary Social-Democrats are making a
positive contribution, while the liquidators’ contribution is
negative.  

True Social-Democratic work is possible in Russia only when conducted
against reformism, against the liquidators.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
See present edition, Vol. 16, pp. 238–51.—Ed.  
 



[2]
The Organising Committee was the Menshevik guiding centre; it was
formed at the liquidators’ conference in August 1912 and functioned until
the election of the Central Committee of the Menshevik Party in August
1917.





[3]
The elections to the Executive of the St. Petersburg Metalworkers’
Union took place on April 21 (May 4), 1913. The election meeting was
attended by 800 metalworkers and 400 others were unable to crowd into the
premises where the meeting was held. The Bolsheviks proposed a list of
candidates that had been published in Pravda No. 91 and
distributed beforehand among those attending the meeting. Despite the
insistence on the part of the liquidators that candidates he elected
irrespective of political allegiance, the overwhelming majority of those
present voted for the Pravda list. Ten members out of fourteen
were elected to the Executive from the Pravda list.





[4]
Diskussionny Listok (The Discussion
Bulletin)—supplement to the newspaper Sotsial-Demokrat,
Central Organ of the R.S.D.L.P., published in accordance with a decision
taken by the January (1910) Plenary Meeting of the Central Committee of the
R.S.D.L.P. from March 1910 to April 1911 in Paris. There were three issues.



Diskussionny Listok No. 2, published on May 25 (June 7), 1910 contained
the final part of Lenin’s “Notes of a Publicist”. (See
Vol. 16, pp. 195–259.)





[5]
Der Kampf (The Struggle)—a monthly published
by the Austrian Social-Democratic Party; it was opportunist, centrist in trend,
and concealed its betrayal of the cause of the proletarian revolution and its
service to the counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie by Leftist phrases; it was
published in Vienna from 1907 to 1938.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Apropos of One Untruth









Lenin: Apropos of One Untruth







V. I.  

      Lenin
Apropos of One Untruth
(LETTER TO THE EDITORS)




Published:
Pravda No. 136, June 15, 1913.

      Signed: V. Ilyin.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 233-234.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

We should have welcomed, from all points of view, the appearance of
L. Martov’s articles in Luch, promising an analysis of the
question of “the tactical essence of the present dispute”, if the very
first article had not contained a blatant untruth. My words to the effect
that the dispute with the liquidators had nothing to do with the
organisational
       question[1]

were declared to be “unexpected” by L. Martov. “Just look at this!” he
exclaimed. “All of a sudden, with the help of God, we have a change”, and
so on.  

Yet L. Martov knows full well that there has been no change at all,
that nothing whatever unexpected has happened. In May 1910, over three
years ago, I wrote in a Paris publication, which Martov knows quite well,
“about a group of legalist-independents” (the ideas of Nasha
Zarya and Vozrozhdeniye) and said that it had “definitely
rallied together and definitely broken with the
      Party”.[2]


It is obvious that here, too, the dispute does not concern the
organisational question (how to organise the Party?) but the
question of the existence of the Party, of the secession of the
liquidators from the Party, of their complete breakaway from the
Party. Martov must realise that this is not a dispute on the question of
organisation.  

In October 1911, in a publication equally well known to Martov, signed
also by me, it was said: “In reality, it is by no means the organisational
question that is now in the forefront”, but of the “existence”
of the
       Party.[3]

 

The affairs of the liquidators must be in a bad way if Martov, to evade
an examination of the Party’s precise decisions, is telling fairy-tales and
publishing a blatant untruth.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
See p. 109 of this volume.—Ed.  

[2]
See present edition, Vol. 16, p. 244.—Ed.  

[3]
See present edition, Vol. 17. p. 260.—Ed.  
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Working Class and NeoMalthusianism









Lenin: The Working Class and NeoMalthusianism







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Working Class and NeoMalthusianism




Published:
Pravda No. 137, June 16, 1913.

      Signed: V. I..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 235-237.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
S. Ryan
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (1901).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

At the Pirogov Doctors’ Congress much interest was aroused
and a long debate was held on the question of abortions. The report was
made by Lichkus, who quoted figures on the exceedingly widespread practice
of destroying the foetus in present-day so-called civilised states.  

In New York, 80,000 abortions were performed in one year and there are
36,000 every month in France. In St. Petersburg the percentage of abortions
has more than doubled in five years.  

The Pirogov Doctors’ Congress adopted a resolution saying that there
should never be any criminal prosecution of a mother for performing an
artificial abortion and that doctors should only be prosecuted if the
operation is performed for “purposes of gain”.  

In the discussion the majority agreed that abortions should not be
punishable, and the question of the so-called neomalthusianism (the use of
contraceptives) was naturally touched upon, as was also the social side of
the matter. Mr. Vigdorchik, for instance, said, according to the report in
Russkoye
Slovo,[1] that “contraceptive measures should be welcomed” and
Mr. Astrakhan exclaimed, amidst thunderous applause: 


   “We have to convince mothers to bear children so that
   they can be maimed in educational establishments, so that lots can be drawn
   for them, so that they can be driven to suicide!”  


If the report is true that this exclamation of Mr. Astrakhan’s was
greeted with thunderous applause, it is a fact that does not surprise
me. The audience was made up of bourgeois, middle and petty bourgeois, who
have the psychology

    

of the philistine. What can you expect from them but the most banal
liberalism?  

From the point of view of the working class, however, it would hardly
be possible to find a more apposite expression of the completely
reactionary nature and the ugliness of “social neomalthusianism” than
Mr. Astrakhan’s phrase cited above.  

... “Bear children so that they can be maimed” ... For that alone?
Why not that they should fight better, more unitedly, consciously
and resolutely than we are fighting against the present-day conditions of
life that are maiming and ruining our generation?  

This is the radical difference that distinguishes the psychology of the
peasant, handicraftsman, intellectual, the petty bourgeois in general, from
that of the proletarian. The petty bourgeois sees and feels that he is
heading for ruin, that life is becoming more difficult, that the struggle
for existence is ever more ruthless, and that his position and that of his
family are becoming more and more hopeless. It is an indisputable fact, and
the petty bourgeois protests against it.  

But how does he protest?  

He protests as the representative of a class that is hopelessly
perishing, that despairs of its future, that is depressed and
cowardly. There is nothing to be done ... if only there were fewer children
to suffer our torments and hard toil, our poverty and our
humiliation—such is the cry of the petty bourgeois.  

The class-conscious worker is far from holding this point of view. He
will not allow his consciousness to be dulled by such cries no matter how
sincere and heartfelt they may be. Yes, we workers and the mass of small
proprietors lead a life that is filled with unbearable oppression and
suffering. Things are harder for our generation than they were for our
fathers. But in one respect we are luckier than our fathers. We have
begun to learn and are rapidly learning to fight—and to fight not as
individuals, as the best of our fathers fought, not for the slogans of
bourgeois speechifiers that are alien to us in spirit, but for our slogans,
the slogans of our class. We are fighting better than our fathers did. Our
children will fight better than we do, and they will be
victorious.  
 

The working class is not perishing, it is growing, becoming stronger,
gaining courage, consolidating itself, educating itself and becoming
steeled in battle. We are pessimists as far as serfdom, capitalism and
petty, production are concerned, but we are ardent optimists in what
concerns the working-class movement and its aims. We are already laying the
foundation of a new edifice and our children will complete its
construction.  

That is the reason—the only reason—why we are unconditionally the
enemies of neomalthusianism, suited only to unfeeling and egotistic
petty-bourgeois couples, who whisper in scared voices: “God grant we
manage somehow by our selves. So much the better if we have no children.”


It goes without saying that this does not by any means prevent us from
demanding the unconditional annulment of all laws against abortions or
against the distribution of medical literature on contraceptive measures,
etc. Such laws are nothing but the hypocrisy of the ruling classes. These
laws do not heal the ulcers of capitalism, they merely turn them into
malignant ulcers that are especially painful for the oppressed
masses. Freedom for medical propaganda and the protection of the elementary
democratic rights of citizens, men and women, are one thing. The social
theory of neomalthusianism is quite another. Class-conscious workers will
always conduct the most ruthless struggle against attempts to impose that
reactionary and cowardly theory on the most progressive and strongest class
in modern society, the class that is the best prepared for great changes.


 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Russkoye Slovo (Russian Word)—a bourgeois
liberal daily published in Moscow from 1895 to November 1917; it appeared again
for several months in 1918 under the title Nashe Slovo (Our Word).










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Liberal Appeals to Support the Fourth Duma









Lenin: Liberal Appeals to Support the Fourth Duma







V. I.  

      Lenin
Liberal Appeals to Support the Fourth Duma




Published:
Pravda No. 139, June 20, 1913.

      Signed: V. I..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 238-240.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The question of the State Duma’s attitude to the government
and the country is becoming an ever more frequent subject for discussion in
the press and is arousing quite a lot of interest. The June Third election
law created two possible majorities—Right-Octobrist and
Octobrist-Cadet. This latter, the “liberal” majority if you will, was
also formed on a number of occasions in the Third Duma.  

In the present Fourth Duma the Octobrist-Cadet majority occurs still
more frequently. It must not be forgotten, however, that this is not only
due to an Octobrist shift to the left but also to a Cadet shift to the
right, which is expressed by the secession of part of the Cadets to
the Progressists, on the one hand, and the constant deals between the
Octobrists and the Cadets with the Progressists as intermediaries, on the
other.  

There is no doubt that the more frequent oppositionist decisions
carried in the Fourth Duma by the Octobrist-Cadet majority are evidence of
the growing political crisis in Russia, are evidence that the June Third
system has entered a blind alley and has not satisfied even the
bourgeoisie, who were prepared to sacrifice, for the benefit of that
system, for the strengthening of the counter-revolution, their money, their
honour and their conscience.  

It is typical that even such an out-and-out, implacable reactionary as
the German historian Schiemann, who knows Russian and writes for the organ
of the German Purishkeviches, comes to the conclusion that the crisis in
Russia is growing—either in the form of a system that is purely
Plehve[2] in spirit (surely we have already entered that “system”?) or
in the form of what this German historian calls upheavals.  
 

What conclusions in practical politics, may we ask, emerge from these
increasingly frequent liberal Duma decisions?  

The Cadets have already drawn their conclusion on the Octobrists’
condemnation of the policy pursued by the Ministry of the Interior. Their
conclusion is to demand “the support of the people and society” for the
Fourth Duma, to call upon “public opinion” to “see in the Duma one’s
own strength, the direct manifestation of the public will”, etc. (See
Pravda No. 128.)  

We have already spoken of the complete ineffectiveness of such a
     conclusion.[1]

The voting on the Ministry of Public Education estimates was an exceedingly
clear confirmation of our appraisal.  

The Duma adopted three formulations:
(1) a nationalistic, arch-reactionary formulation passed by the votes of
the Rights and the Octobrists,
(2) an Octobrist formulation passed by the Cadet vote (it expresses the
wish, disgusting in its hypocrisy and absolutely impermissible for
democrats or even honest liberals, that the Ministry of Public Education
will “not be distracted by irrelevant political considerations”); lastly,
=

(3) the wish of the peasant group, which was most likely passed not only
with the help of the Constitutional-Democrats but of all democrats,
including the Social-Democrats. The wish expressed by the peasants received
137 votes for and 134 against with 4 abstaining.  

There can scarcely be any doubt that the error of the Social-Democrats,
if they voted for the peasant formulation, was in not presenting their own
statement or declaration. It was right to vote in favour, but they should
also have added a proviso expressing their disagreement with, for instance,
point five of the peasant formulation. That point speaks of the native
language in elementary schools. Democracy cannot confine itself to
elementary schools. And in general, it cannot be admitted that the wishes
of the peasants are consistently democratic.  

It was right to vote in favour, because in the peasant formulation
there are no points in support of the government, and no hypocrisy, but it
was essential to express disagreement

    

with the inconsistency and timidity of peasant democracy. Silence on the
relationship between the school and the church, for instance, is absolutely
impermissible for Social-Democrats, etc.  

That, however, is en passant.  

The main thing is that the Fourth Duma, after the Cadets’
appeals to support it, adopted the formulation of the nationalists!  

Only a blind man could fail to see that support for the Fourth Duma is
support for the wavering Octobrists.  

The Cadets boast that they are pushing the Octobrists into opposition
by their support. Let us suppose for a moment that that is so. On what
basis is this Octobrist opposition founded? At best, when they are
in opposition they undoubtedly support the point of view of
counter-revolutionary liberalism. That they continue to depend on
the ministers and to gratify them, was demonstrated even by the
“progressist” N. Lvov, who was surely pursuing a policy of
gratification when he banned Shchepkin from two sittings because
of an expression a hundred times milder than the usual expressions of the
Rights.  

When they call on the people to support the wavering Octobrists, the
Cadets are trying to make democrats follow in the wake of the worst of the
liberals.  

The democrats, however, have seen from hundreds of more impressive
examples just what our liberals are worth. Democracy would be enfeebled and
deprived of leadership if it were again to follow the liberals.  

The clash between the bourgeoisie and the government is not an
accident, it is an indication of the profound crisis that is maturing on
all sides. It is, therefore, imperative to keep a close watch on these
clashes. But democracy will be able to achieve something better for Russia
only if it does not for one moment forget its duty—to do everything to
develop in the population a consciousness of the independent nature of the
tasks of democracy as distinct from liberalism, in contrast to liberalism
and regardless of liberalism’s vacillations.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
See pp. 177–79 of this volume.—Ed.  
 



[2]
Plehve, V. K. (1846-1904)—a reactionary statesman; from 1867 he
served in the Department of Justice; as public prosecutor he con ducted the
investigation for and took part in the Narodnaya Volya trial. In 1902 he became
Minister of the Interior and Chief of the Gendarmerie, in which posts he did
everything possible to stifle the growing revolutionary movement, dealing
ruthlessly with workers’ strikes and demonstrations and with the peasant
movement; he tried to break up the working-class movement by means of
provocations, etc. In 1904 he was assassinated by the Socialist-
 Revolutionary Sazonov.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Bourgeois Financial Magnates and Politicians









Lenin: Bourgeois Financial Magnates and Politicians







V. I.  

      Lenin
Bourgeois Financial Magnates and Politicians




Published:
Pravda No. 142, June 23, 1913.

      Signed: M..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 241-242.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The British Labour press is continuing its exposure of the connection
between financial “operations” and high politics. These revelations
deserve the attention of the workers of all countries because they expose
the very basis of state administration in capitalist society. The words of
Karl Marx that the government is a committee for managing the affairs of
the capitalist
class[1] are confirmed to the full.  

The Labour Leader No. 24 (June 12, N.S.) devotes a whole page
to listing the names of British Ministers (7 names), ex-Ministers
(3 names), Bishops and Archdeacons (12 names), Peers (47 names), Members of
Parliament (18 names), big newspaper owners, financiers and bankers, who
are shareholders or directors in joint-stock companies dealing mainly in
munitions.  

The author of the article, Walton Newbold, collected all this
information from official banking, commercial and industrial, financial and
other sources, from the reports of patriotic organisations (like the
Navy League), etc.  

We get a picture quite similar to that once drawn from Russian data by
Rubakin, who showed how many big land owners in Russia were members of the
Council of State, high dignitaries—now we may add, members of the State
Duma, shareholders or directors of joint-stock companies, etc. It is high
time to bring Rubakin’s facts up to date by using the latest reference
books, particularly adding data on participation in financial, commercial
and industrial undertakings.  

Our liberals (especially the Cadets) have a strong aversion for the
“theory” of the class struggle, and particularly insist

    

aon their view that the governments of modern states can stand
outside classes or above classes. But what can you do,
gentlemen, if the “theory” which is so distasteful to you corresponds
exactly to reality? If all the fundamentals of con temporary
legislation and contemporary politics clearly show us the class character
of the structure and administration of all contemporary states? If even
information about the personalities of prominent politicians, members of
parliament, high officials, etc., reveals the inseparable connection
existing between economic rule and political rule?  

The denial or concealment of the class struggle is the worst form of
hypocrisy in politics; is banking on the ignorance and prejudices of the
least developed strata of the people, the small proprietors (peasants,
handicraftsmen, etc.), who are furthest removed from the most acute, and
direct struggle of classes, and cling as before, as of old, to their
patriarchal views. But what is ignorance and backwardness in the peasant is
a subtle method of corrupting the people and keeping them in slavery on the
part of the liberal intellectuals.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
See K. Marx and F. Engels, “Manifesto of the Communist
Party”, Selected Works, Vol. I, Moscow, 1955, p. 36.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Theses on the National Question









Lenin: Theses on the National Question







V. I.  

      Lenin
Theses on the National Question[1]




Written: Written in June 1913 

Published:

      First published in 1925 in the Lenin Miscellany III.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 243-251.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

1. The article of our programme (on the self-determination of nations)
cannot be interpreted to mean anything but political
self-determination, i.e., the right to secede and form a separate state.


2. This article in the Social-Democratic programme is
absolutely essential to the Social-Democrats of Russia = 

a) for the sake of the basic principles of democracy in general; 

b) also because there are, within the frontiers of Russia and, what
is more, in her frontier areas, a number of nations with sharply
distinctive economic, social and other conditions; furthermore, these
nations (like all the nations of Russia except the Great Russians) are
unbelievably oppressed by the tsarist monarchy; 

c) lastly, also in view of the fact that throughout Eastern Europe
(Austria and the Balkans) and in Asia—i.e., in countries bordering on
Russia—the bourgeois-democratic re form of the state that has everywhere
else in the world led, in varying degree, to the creation of independent
national states or states with the closest, interrelated national
composition, has either not been consummated or has only just begun; 

d) at the present moment Russia is a country whose state system is more
backward and reactionary than that of any of the contiguous
countries, beginning—in the West—with Austria where the fundamentals of
political liberty and a constitutional regime were consolidated in 1867,
and where universal franchise has now been introduced, and ending—in the
East—with republican China. In all their propaganda, therefore, the
Social-Democrats of Russia must

    

insist on the right of all nationalities to form separate states or to
choose freely the state of which they wish to form part.  

3. The Social-Democratic Party’s recognition of the right of all
nationalities to self-determination requires of Social-Democrats that they
should.  

a) be unconditionally hostile to the use of force in any form
whatsoever by the dominant nation (or the nation which constitutes the
majority of the population) in respect of a nation that wishes to secede
politically; 

b) demand the settlement of the question of such secession only on the
basis of a universal, direct and equal vote of the population of the given
territory by secret ballot; 

c) conduct an implacable struggle against both the Black
Hundred-Octobrist and the liberal-bourgeois (Progressist, Cadet, etc.)
parties on every occasion when they defend or sanction national oppression
in general or the denial of the right of nations to self-determination in
particular.  

4. The Social-Democratic Party’s recognition of the right of all
nationalities to self-determination most certainly does not mean that
Social-Democrats reject an independent appraisal of the advisability of the
state secession of any nation in each separate case. Social-Democracy
should, on the contrary, give its independent appraisal, taking into
consideration the conditions of capitalist development and the oppression
of the proletarians of various nations by the united bourgeoisie of all
nationalities, as well as the general tasks of democracy, first of all and
most of all the interests of the proletarian class struggle for socialism.


From this point of view the following circumstance must be given
special attention. There are two nations in Russia that are more civilised
and more isolated by virtue of a number of historical and social conditions
and that could most easily and most “naturally” put into effect their
right to secession. They are the peoples of Finland and Poland. The
experience of the Revolution of 1905 has shown that even in these two
nations the ruling classes, the landowners and bourgeoisie, reject the
revolutionary struggle for liberty and seek a rapprochement with
the ruling classes of Russia and with the tsarist monarchy because of
their fear of the revolutionary proletariat of Finland and Poland.

 

Social-Democracy, therefore, must give most emphatic warning to the
proletariat and other working people of all nationalities against direct
deception by the nationalistic slogans of “their own” bourgeoisie, who
with their saccharine or fiery speeches about “our native land” try to
divide the proletariat and divert its attention from
their bourgeois intrigues while they enter into an economic and political
alliance with the bourgeoisie of other nations and with the tsarist
monarchy.  

The proletariat cannot pursue its struggle for socialism and defend its
everyday economic interests without the closest and fullest alliance of the
workers of all nations in all working-class organisations without
exception.  

The proletariat cannot achieve freedom other than by revolutionary
struggle for the overthrow of the tsarist monarchy and its replacement by a
democratic republic. The tsarist monarchy precludes liberty and
equal rights for nationalities, and is, furthermore, the bulwark of
barbarity, brutality and reaction in both Europe and Asia. This monarchy
can be overthrown only by the united proletariat of all the nations of
Russia, which is giving the lead to consistently democratic elements
capable of revolutionary struggle from among the working masses of all
nations.  

It follows, therefore, that workers who place political unity with
“their own” bourgeoisie above complete unity with the proletariat of all
nations, are acting against their own interests, against the interests of
socialism and against the interests of democracy.  

5. Social-Democrats, in upholding a consistently democratic state
system, demand unconditional equality for all nationalities and struggle
against absolutely all privileges for one or several nationalities.  

In particular, Social-Democrats reject a “state” language. It is
particularly superfluous in Russia because more than seven-tenths of the
population of Russia belong to related Slav nationalities who, given a free
school and a free state, could easily achieve intercourse by virtue of the
demands of the economic turnover without any “state” privileges for any
one language.  

Social-Democrats demand the abolition of the old administrative
divisions of Russia established by the feudal

    

landowners and the civil servants of the autocratic feudal state and their
replacement by divisions based on the requirements of present-day economic
life and in accordance, as far as possible, with the national composition
of the population.  

All areas of the state that are distinguished by social peculiarities
or by the national composition of the population, must enjoy wide
self-government and autonomy, with institutions organised on the basis of
universal, equal and secret voting.  

6. Social-Democrats demand the promulgation of a law, operative
throughout the state, protecting the rights of every national minority in
no matter what part of the state. This law should declare inoperative any
measure by means of which the national majority might attempt to establish
privileges for itself or restrict the rights of a national minority (in the
sphere of education, in the use of any specific language, in budget
affairs, etc.), and forbid the implementation of any such measure by making
it a punishable offence.  

7. The Social-Democratic attitude to the slogan of
“cultural-national” (or simply “national”) “autonomy” or to plans for
its implementation is a negative one, since this slogan
(1) undoubtedly contradicts the internationalism of the class struggle of
the proletariat,
(2) makes it easier for the proletariat and the masses of working people to
be drawn into the sphere of influence of bourgeois nationalism, and
(3) is capable of distracting attention from the task of the consistent
democratic transformation of the state as a whole, which transformation
alone can ensure (to the extent that this can, in general, be ensured under
capitalism) peace between nationalities.  

In view of the special acuteness of the question of cultural-national
autonomy among Social-Democrats, we give some explanation of the situation.


a) It is impermissible, from the standpoint of Social-Democracy, to
issue the slogan of national culture either directly or
indirectly. The slogan is incorrect because already under capitalism, all
economic, political and spiritual life is becoming more and more
international. Socialism will make it completely
international. International culture,

    

which is now already being systematically created by the proletariat of all
countries, does not absorb “national culture” (no matter of what national
group) as a whole, but accepts from each national culture
exclusively those of its elements that are consistently democratic
and socialist.  

b) Probably the one example of an approximation, even though it is a
timid one, to the slogan of national culture in Social-Democratic
programmes is Article 3 of the Br\"unn Programme of the Austrian
Social-Democrats. This Article 3 reads: “All self-governing regions of one
and the same nation form a single-national alliance that has complete
autonomy in deciding its national affairs.”  

This is a compromise slogan since it does not contain a shadow of
extra-territorial (personal) national autonomy. But this slogan, too, is
erroneous and harmful, for it is no business of the Social-Democrats of
Russia to unite into one nation the Germans in Lodz, Riga, St. Petersburg
and Saratov. Our business is to struggle for full democracy and the
annulment of all national privileges and, to unite the German
workers in Russia with the workers of all other nations in upholding and
developing the international culture of socialism.  

Still more erroneous is the slogan of extra-territorial (personal)
national autonomy with the setting up (according to a plan drawn up by the
consistent supporters of this slogan) of national parliaments and national
state secretaries (Otto Bauer and Karl Renner). Such institutions
contradict the economic conditions of the capitalist countries, they have
not been tested in any of the world’s democratic states and are the
opportunist dream of people who despair of setting up consistent democratic
institutions and are seeking salvation from the national squabbles of the
bourgeoisie in the artificial isolation of the proletariat and the
bourgeoisie of each nation on a number of (“cultural”) questions.  

Circumstances occasionally compel Social-Democrats to submit for a time
to some sort of compromise decisions, but from other countries we must
borrow not compromise decisions, but consistently Social-Democratic
decisions. It would be particularly unwise to adopt the unhappy Austrian
compromise decision today, when it has been a complete failure

    

in Austria and has led to the separatism and secession of the Czech
Social-Democrats.  

c) The history of the “cultural-national autonomy” slogan in Russia
shows that it has been adopted by all Jewish bourgeois parties and
only by Jewish bourgeois parties; and that they have been
uncritically followed by the Bund, which has inconsistently rejected the
national-Jewish parliament (sejm) and national-Jewish state
secretaries. Incidentally, even those European Social-Democrats who accede
to or defend the compromise slogan of cultural-national autonomy, admit
that the slogan is quite unrealisable for the Jews (Otto Bauer and Karl
Kautsky). “The Jews in Galicia and Russia are more of a caste than a
nation, and attempts to constitute Jewry as a nation are attempts at
preserving a caste” (Karl Kautsky).  

d) In civilised countries we observe a fairly full (relatively)
approximation to national peace under capitalism only in
conditions of the maximum implementation of democracy throughout
the state system and administration (Switzerland). The slogans of
consistent democracy (the re public, a militia, civil servants elected by
the people, etc.) unite the proletariat and the working people, and, in
general, all progressive elements in each nation in the name of the
struggle for conditions that preclude even the slightest national
privilege—while the slogan of “cultural-national autonomy” preaches the
isolation of nations in educational affairs (or “cultural” affairs, in
general), an isolation that is quite compatible with the retention of the
grounds for all (including national) privileges.  

The slogans of consistent democracy unite in a single whole
the proletariat and the advanced democrats of all nations (elements that
demand not isolation but the uniting of democratic elements of the nations
in all matters, including educational affairs), while the slogan of
cultural-national autonomy divides the proletariat of the
different nations and links it up with the reactionary and bourgeois
elements of the separate nations.  

The slogans of consistent democracy are implacably hostile to the
reactionaries and to the counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie of all nations,
while the slogan of cultural-national autonomy is quite acceptable to the
reactionaries

    

and counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie of some nations.  

8. The sum-total of economic and political conditions in Russia
therefore demands that Social-Democracy should unite
unconditionally workers of all nationalities in all proletarian
organisations without exception (political, trade union, co-operative,
educational, etc., etc.). The Party should not be federative in structure
and should not form national Social-Democratic groups but should unite the
proletarians of all nations in the given locality, conduct propaganda and
agitation in all the languages of the local proletariat, promote
the common struggle of the workers of all nations against every kind of
national privilege and should recognise the autonomy of local and regional
Party organisations.  

9. More than ten years’ experience gained by the R.S.D.L.P. confirms
the correctness of the above thesis. The Party was founded in 1898 as a
party of all Russia, that is, a party of the proletariat of all the
nationalities of Russia. The Party remained “Russian” when the Bund
seceded in 1903, after the Party Congress had rejected the demand to
consider the Bund the only representative of the Jewish
proletariat. In 1906 and 1907 events showed convincingly that there were no
grounds for this demand, a large number of Jewish proletarians continued to
co-operate in the common Social-Democratic work in many local
organisations, and the Bund re-entered the Party. The Stockholm Congress
(1906) brought into the Party the Polish and Latvian Social-Democrats, who
favoured territorial autonomy, and the Congress, furthermore, did
not accept the principle of federation and demanded unity of
Social-Democrats of all nationalities in each locality. This principle has
been in operation in the Caucasus for many years, it is in operation in
Warsaw (Polish workers and Russian soldiers), in Vilna (Polish, Lettish,
Jewish and Lithuanian workers) and in Riga, and in the three last-named
places it has been implemented against the separatist Bund. In
December 1908, the R.S.D.L.P., through its conference, adopted a special
resolution confirming the demand for the unity of workers of all
nationalities, on a principle other than federation. The splitting
activities of the Bund separatists in not fulfilling

    

the Party decision led to the collapse of all that “federation of the
worst
type”[2] and brought about the rapprochement of the Bund and
the Czech separatists and vice versa (see Kosovsky in Nasha Zarya
and the organ of the Czech separatists, Der &chatechoslavische
Sozialdemokrat No. 3, 1913, on Kosovsky), and, lastly, at the August
(1912) Conference of the liquidators it led to an undercover
attempt by the Bund separatists and liquidators and some of the Caucasian
liquidators to insert “cultural-national autonomy” into the Party
programme without any defence of its substance!  

Revolutionary worker Social-Democrats in Poland, in the Latvian Area
and in the Caucasus still stand for territorial autonomy and the
unity of worker Social-Democrats of all nations. The
Bund-liquidator secession and the alliance of the Bund with
non-Social-Democrats in Warsaw place the entire national question,
both in its theoretical aspect and in the matter of Party structure, on
the order of the day for all Social-Democrats.  

Compromise decisions have been broken by the very people who introduced
them against the will of the Party, and the demand for the unity of worker
Social-Democrats of all nationalities is being made more loudly than ever.


10. The crudely militant and Black-Hundred-type nationalism of the
tsarist monarchy, and also the revival of bourgeois
nationalism—Great-Russian (Mr. Struve, Russkaya
Molva,[3] the Progressists, etc.), the Ukrainian, and Polish (the
anti-Semitism of Narodowa
“Demokracja”[4]), and Georgian and Armenian, etc.—all this makes it
particularly urgent for Social-Democratic organisations in all parts of
Russia to devote greater attention than before to the national question and
to work out consistently Marxist decisions on this subject in the spirit of
consistent internationalism and unity of proletarians of all nations.  



α) The slogan of national culture is incorrect and expresses only
the limited bourgeois understanding of the national question. International
culture.  

β) The perpetuating of national divisions and the promoting of
refined nationalism—unification, rapprochement, the

    

mingling of nations and the expression of the principles of a
different, international culture.  

γ) The despair of the petty bourgeois (hopeless struggle against
national bickering) and the fear of radical-democratic reforms and the
socialist movement—only radical-democratic reforms can establish national
peace in capitalist states and only socialism is able to terminate national
bickering.  

δ) National curias in educational
affairs.[5] 

ε) The Jews.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
These theses were written by Lenin for his lectures on the
national question delivered on July 9, 10, 11 and 13 (N. 5.), 1913 in the Swiss
towns of Zurich, Geneva, Lausanne and Berne.





[2]
The decisions of the Prague Conference (1912) called the
relations that the national Social-Democratic organisations had with the
R.S.D.L.P. from 1907 to 1911 “federation of the worst
type”. Although the Social-Democratic organisations of Poland, Lithuania and the Latvian Area, and also the Bund, belonged to the R.S.D.L.P., they
actually held themselves aloof. Their representatives did not take part in
guiding all-Russian Party work; directly or indirectly they promoted the
anti-Party activities of the liquidators. (See Vol. 17, pp. 464–65 and Vol. 18,
pp. 411–12.)





[3]
Russkaya Molva (Russian Tidings)—a bourgeois
daily, organ of the Progressists, founded in 1912. Lenin called the Progressists a mixture of Octobrists and Cadets. The paper appeared in St. Petersburg
in 1912 and 1913.





[4]
Narodowa Demokracja (National Democracy)—a
reactionary, chauvinist party of the Polish bourgeoisie, founded in
1897. Afraid

   

of the growing revolutionary movement, the party changed its original demand for
Polish independence to one for limited autonomy within the framework of the
autocracy. During the 1905–07 Revolution, Narodowa Demokracja was the main party
of Polish counter-revolution, the Polish Black Hundreds, to use Lenin’s
expression. They supported the Octobrists in the State Duma.


In 1919 the party changed its name to Zwiazek Ludowo-Narodowy
(National-Popular Union) and from 1928 it became the Stronnictwo Narodowe
(National Party). After the Second World War, individuals from this party,
having no longer any party of their own, attached themselves to
Mikolajczyk’s reactionary party, the Polske Stronnictwo Ludowo (Polish
Popular Party).





[5]
This refers to the segregation of the schools according to
nationality, one of the basic demands of the bourgeois-nationalist programme
for “cultural-national autonomy”










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Instructive Speeches









Lenin: Instructive Speeches







V. I.  

      Lenin
Instructive Speeches




Written: Written at the beginning of July 1913 

Published:

      First published in 1925 in the magazine Krasnaya Nov No 1.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 252-255.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Mr. Izgoyev, the well-known renegade, who was a
Social-Democrat until 1905, but rapidly “grew wiser” ... until he reached
a Right-liberal position after October 17, frequently turns his benevolent
attention to Social-Democracy in Russkaya Mysl, the chief organ of
“Octobrist” or counter-revolutionary liberalism.  

We can only recommend workers who wish to gain a full understanding of
the serious problems of working-class politics to read Mr. Izgoyev’s
article in the last issue of Russkaya Mysl for June of this year.


It is worth while thinking again and again over the exuberant praises
of liquidationist ideology and tactics (i.e., the basic
principles of liquidationism) that Mr. Izgoyev so generously dispenses. The
liberals are bound to praise the principles and tactics of liberal
working-class politicians!  

It is worth while thinking again and again over the independent
tactical considerations of Mr. Izgoyev, who sympathises whole-heartedly
with the liquidators, and who has, after all, been through “the Marxist
elementary school” and understands the necessity of seeking the serious
roots of the serious struggle of Party members against the liquidators.


Unfortunately we must confine ourselves here to quoting very brief
passages from Mr. Izgoyev’s instructive article and to giving them the
briefest and most incomplete explanation.  

In Mr. Izgoyev’s opinion, the success of Bolshevism depends on “what
hopes there are for the peaceful development of Russia on constitutional
lines, even if it is only of the German type. Was it not found possible in
Germany to have a

    

monarchist constitution with civil liberties, without additional security
measures and with a widely developed Social-Democratic workers’ party? Is
this possible in Russia or not? As the scales turn to one side or the
other, so the chances of the liquidators and the Bolsheviks rise and
fall....  

“If no limit is set to the pressure of reaction, and if the
constitutional forces in Russia do not prove sufficient for peaceful state
reforms, Bolshevism will undoubtedly be victorious and will drive the
liquidators into the back ground.” Mr. Izgoyev himself considers the
Bolsheviks to be anarchists and the liquidators “true Social-Democrats”,
who quite reasonably discarded the first two points of the Bolshevik
platform and replaced them by freedom of association!  

“The storm will pass,” writes Mr. Izgoyev, “the time for positive
work will come and the liquidators will again (!!?) stand at the head of
the working class.” Such are the dreams of Mr. Izgoyev. The tactics of the
liquidators will, he says, be magnificent when “the storm passes”.... And
here are his “ideas on tactics”: 


   “If we think deeply over Bolshevik tactics we have to
   admit that they are based on the conviction that the struggle for the
   monarchist constitution in Russia ... [Mr. Izgoyev’s dots] ended on
   June 3. The struggle may, perhaps, go on for direct or consistent
   democracy, but, given the cardinal Russian historical basis, there cannot
   be any other constitution than that of June 3. Russian constitutionalists
   can only count on a constitution without civil liberties, but containing
   exceptional conditions. We consider the Bolshevik point of view, although
   at the opposite pole, to he related to that of the Black Hundreds, and to
   be erroneous and politically harmful. It cannot be denied, however, that it
   has some content. The continuing inability of the Russian
   constitutionalists to give the country a guarantee of a system based on law
   may, in the future, even justify the pessimism of the Bolsheviks. But so
   far, as Luch correctly notes ... [of course!]
   ...  it leads only to mingling with semi-anarchist elements (here
   Mr. Izgoyev, gasping with admiration for Luch, follows up with
   quotations from liquidationist articles).  


Mr. Izgoyev calls pessimism in respect of the landowners and
the bourgeoisie pessimism in general. Is not such pessimism
inseparably connected with optimism in respect of, first and
foremost, the proletariat, and secondly, of the petty-bourgeois working
masses—this is something Mr. Izgoyev is afraid to consider. Of course, he
has good reason to be afraid!  
 

The strangest thing about the kisses this renegade bestows on the
liquidators, the most instructive thing in the speeches of this liberal, is
that while he sympathises whole-heartedly with the liquidators he will
not risk denying the content of Bolshevik tactics! He, a
supporter of “peaceful” development and liquidationist opportunism, is
quite unable to promise that such a development will be
victorious! He, a rabid enemy of Bolshevism, who showers invective upon us
(anarchists, Blanquists, indulging in self-praise, etc., etc.), he, the
bosom friend of the liquidators, is compelled to admit that
Bolshevism will be victorious if “the constitutional forces in Russia do
not prove sufficient” (i.e., if they prove to be just what they are
today...)!  

The very angry Mr. Izgoyev, who has a good knowledge of
Social-Democratic affairs, is not very bright and did not notice that all
these
    considerations[1]

 . . . . . . . .  removed the fig-leaf from Messrs. F. D., L. S.,
Yezhov, Larin, Martov, Potresov & Co.  

Thank you, thank you very much, Mr. Izgoyev, you who are so angry with
the Bolsheviks! The truth hurts. And you have accidentally hurt
your liquidator friends with the truth. You have embraced them so
“gently” that they are being strangled in your embrace.  

Just a few words on a purely historical question. Why is it that the
constitution which was “found possible” in Germany is more to the liking
of counter-revolutionary liberalism than the French constitution? Only
because, my angry but not very bright Mr. Izgoyev, that constitution turned
out to be the mathematical resultant of the efforts of Bismarck
and the liberals, who feared civil liberties for the workers, and of the
efforts of the workers who were struggling for the lull
democratisation of Germany in the forties, in the fifties and in the
sixties. The German workers proved weak at that time. Therefore
Bismarck and the Prussian liberals were one-half victorious. If
the German workers had been stronger, Bismarck would have been one-quarter
victorious. If they had been still stronger, Bismarck would not have been
victorious at all. Germany obtained civil liberties despite Bismarck,
despite the Prussian liberals and

    

only because of the persistent and stubborn efforts of the working
class (partly, also, of the petty-bourgeois democrats, but only to a very
small extent) to achieve the fullest possible democratisation.  

Don’t you understand anything, Mr. Izgoyev? Don’t you understand that
history justified “Bolshevik” tactics in Germany, too? Be less angry with
the Bolsheviks, be less “kind” to the liquidators, and perhaps you will
come to understand.  

V. I.
 (or unsigned) 

P. S. If this is not suitable please pass it on to
Prosveshcheniye. I think it would be better printed as a satirical
piece in Pravda.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
The next page of the manuscript has not been found.—Ed.

 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Pictures From Life









Lenin: Pictures From Life







V. I.  

      Lenin
Pictures From Life




Published:
Pravda No. 149, July 2, 1913.

      Signed: T—in.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 256-257.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Any mention of serfdom in Russian life in general, and in
the Russian countryside in particular, calls forth a protest from our
liberals, especially from those liberals who love to picture themselves as
almost Marxists. What sort of serfdom, they say, is there in
twentieth-century Russia! It is simply nothing but “agitation”....  

Nevertheless amazingly clear pictures of serfdom are to be met with in
the contemporary Russian countryside at every step, and only the accursed
inertness of the Russian man in the street, who has “got used to it”,
makes him pass these pictures by indifferently.  

Here is one of them that we have borrowed from the official register of
decisions passed by Chernigov Gubernia Zemstvo Assembly for the ten years
1900–09.  


   “Leaving intact until the present time the
   archaic method of main taming rural roads by compulsory service is a dark
   stain on our Zemstvo...” writes Mr. Khizhnyakov on this subject
   (Russkoye Bogatstvo). “To say nothing of the great injustice of
   this being a service performed exclusively by the peasants ... the very way
   in which it is done is shameful. After the snow has melted and after
   torrential rains, the village elders, usually under a threatening order
   from the police sergeant, ‘drive out the people’, as we put it, to mend the
   road. The work is done without any sort of organisation, with no levelling
   or any technical instructions. I happened to see such work being done with
   unusual energy, to the accompaniment of menacing shouts from the police
   sergeants and with blows of a whip to urge on the slower
   workers. It was at the end of summer, just before the governor was due
   to pass that way.... About five hundred men and women with spades were
   driven out to work on a stretch of about three versts. On the orders of the
   police they dug ditches that were absolutely unnecessary and that later had
   to be filled in again.... And our Zemstvo, in the course of its almost
   fifty years’ existence, has not only failed to remove this burden from the
   peasant population but has even increased it....”  

 

That Zemstvo, like all Russian Zemstvos, is a landowners’ Zemstvo.


And so the landowners are continuing to increase the old “service”
performed by the peasants. When so instructed by the landowners, the police
and the elders “drive out the people”, compelling hundreds of peasants to
leave the work on their farms and “dig absolutely unnecessary ditches”,
“with out any sort of organisation” and “with blows of a whip to
urge on the slower workers”.  

That is where the roots of the power of the Purishkeviches, Markovs
& Co., lie. And how disgustingly hypocritical are our smooth, sedate,
well-intentioned reformist liberal programmes when compared with such
roots!  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Adjourned Duma and the Embarrassed Liberals









Lenin: The Adjourned Duma and the Embarrassed Liberals







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Adjourned Duma and the Embarrassed Liberals




Published:
Pravda No. 151, July 5, 1913.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 258-259.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

More than a week has passed since the Fourth
Duma[1] adjourned, but reviews and appraisals of its work still continue
to appear in the newspapers. Everybody admits that there is general
dissatisfaction with the Fourth Duma. It is not only the liberals, not only
the “responsible” (to the landowners) opposition that are
dissatisfied. The Octobrists, too, are dissatisfied. And the Rights are
dissatisfied.  

Undoubtedly, this dissatisfaction with the reactionary Duma on the part
of the reactionary landowners and the bourgeoisie is extremely typical and
portentous. These classes have done everything possible to
guarantee what they call “peaceful, constitutional” development.  

They did everything—and now they have realised that
nothing has come of it! Hence the general dissatisfaction in the
camp of the landowners and the bourgeoisie themselves. Neither the Rights
nor the Octobrists show that rapture and enthusiasm for the June Third
system that was typical of the Third Duma epoch.  

Our so-called “upper” classes, the social and political summit”
cannot rule Russia in the old way, despite the fact that all the
fundamentals of the state system and of the government of Russia have been
determined exclusively by them and arranged in their
interests. But the “lower” classes are full of the desire to change this
form of government.  

The coincidence of this inability of the “upper” classes to
administer the state in the old way, and this increased reluctance on the
part of the “lower” classes to put up with such administration of the
state, makes up precisely what

    

is called (admittedly somewhat inaccurately) a political crisis on a
nation-wide scale.  

The growth of this crisis before our eyes is a fact, and a fact that
can scarcely be open to doubt.  

It would seem that from this it should be clear to democrats and even
to intelligent liberals that the centre of gravity of this desire for
improvement is not in the Duma, and that the Duma is in this respect only
an inaccurate indicator.  

But our liberals have for a long time been letting them selves
slide. “Both the Third and the Fourth Dumas are a parody of popular
representation,” said a Rech leading article, “but they
do exist and hic Rhodus, hic salta” (a Latin expression that
means literally “Here is Rhodes, here jump”, i.e., here is the main
thing, here is the essence, here prove what you’ve got to prove, here
fight).  

You are mistaken, gentlemen! Rhodes is not here and
you will not “jump” from here since the beginning was
not here.  

Only the lackeys of the landowners and the money-bags could take the
Fourth Duma as a Rhodes for democracy, could forget that in
addition to the Duma there “exists”, for example, a
working-class movement of nation-wide significance, no matter how the
liberals may keep quiet about that significance and no matter how the
liberal working-class politicians, the liquidators, may try to curtail and
be little that significance.  


   “Have we done everything in our power,” asks
   Rech, “to bring influence to bear on the Duma to compel it to
   follow and fulfil our demands?”  


That is not particularly literate but it is clear
enough. “We”—refers to the landowners and the bourgeoisie. That is the
only “society”, the only “public” opinion, that
Rech sees and only that society interests it.  

Are the more reactionary landowners to be compelled “to fulfil the
demands” of the liberal landowners and liberal bourgeoisie who do not
themselves know what to “demand” or what they want—a change for the
better or a weakening of the working-class movement with its nation-wide
scope that is bringing about that change?  

Poor liberals!  

 

Notes
 
 



[1]
The Fourth Duma adjourned for the summer vacation after the
first session. The summer vacation lasted from June 25 to October 15 (July 8 to
October 28), 1913.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Fifth International Congress Against Prostitution









Lenin: Fifth International Congress Against Prostitution







V. I.  

      Lenin
Fifth International Congress Against Prostitution




Published:
Rabochaya Pravda No. 1, July 13, 1913.

      Signed: W..

      Published according to the Rabochaya Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 260-261.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
S. Ryan
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (1901).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The fifth international congress for the
suppression of the white slave traffic recently ended in London.  

Duchesses, countesses, bishops, priests, rabbis, police officials and
all sorts of bourgeois philanthropists were well to the fore! How many
festive luncheons and magnificent official receptions were given! And how
many solemn speeches on the harm and infamy of prostitution!  

What means of struggle were proposed by the elegant bourgeois delegates
to the congress? Mainly two methods—religion and police. They are, it
appears, the valid and reliable methods of combating prostitution. One
English delegate boasted, according to the London correspondent of the
Leipziger
Volkszeitung,[1] that he had introduced a bill into parliament
providing for corporal punishment for pimps. See the sort he is,
this modern “civilised” hero of the struggle against prostitution!  

One lady from Canada waxed enthusiastic over the police and the
supervision of “fallen” women by policewomen, but as far as raising wages
was concerned, she said that women workers did not deserve better pay.


One German pastor reviled present-day materialism, which, he said, is
taking hold among the people and promoting the spread of free love.  

When the Austrian delegate G\"artner tried to raise the question of the
social causes of prostitution, of the need and poverty experienced by
working-class families, of the exploitation of child labour, of unbearable
housing conditions, etc., he was forced to silence by hostile shouts!  
 

But the things that were said about highly-placed personages—among
groups of delegates—were instructive and sublime. When, for example, the
German Empress visits a maternity hospital in Berlin, rings are placed
on the fingers of mothers of “illegitimate” children in order that
this august individual may not be shocked by the sight of unmarried
mothers!  

We may judge from this the disgusting bourgeois hypocrisy that reigns
at these aristocratic-bourgeois congresses. Acrobats in the field of
philanthropy and police defenders of this system which makes mockery of
poverty and need gather “to struggle against prostitution”, which is
supported precisely by the aristocracy and the bourgeoisie....  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Leipziger Volkszeitung (Leipzig People’s
Newspaper)—the organ of the Left wing of the German
Social-Democratic Party, published daily from 1894 to 1933; for a Dumber of
years it was edited by Franz Mehring and Rosa Luxemburg. From 1917 to 1922 it
was the organ of the German “Independents”, and after 1922 it became
the organ of the Right Social-Democrats.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Word and Deed









Lenin: Word and Deed







V. I.  

      Lenin
Word and Deed




Published:
Rabochaya Pravda No. 3, July 16, 1913.

      Published according to the Rabochaya Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 262-265.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

We are constantly making the mistake in Russia of judging
the slogans and tactics of a certain party or group, of judging its general
trend, by the intentions or motives that the group claims for itself. Such
judgement is worthless. The road to hell—as was said long ago—is paved
with good intentions.  

It is not a matter of intentions, motives or words but of the objective
situation, independent of them, that determines the fate and significance
of slogans, of tactics or, in general, of the trend of a given party or
group.  

Let us approach the analysis of the most important questions of the
contemporary working-class movement from that point of view. The strike in
St. Petersburg on July 1–3 involved over 62,000 workers even according to
the estimates of the bourgeois papers Rech and Russkoye
Slovo, which always give reduced figures in these cases.  

We are, therefore, faced with the fact that a mass, over 60,000 strong,
went into action. As we know, the direct reason for the strike was to
protest against the persecution of the working-class press, the daily
confiscation of newspapers, etc., etc. We also know from reports even in
such newspapers as Novoye Vremya, Rech,
Sovremenka[1] and Russkoye Slovo that workers
stressed, in their speeches and in other ways, the nation-wide significance
of the protest.  

How did the various classes of Russian society react to the event? What
position did they adopt?  

We know that
Rossiya,[2] Zemshchina and similar papers printed the
usual sharply condemnatory statements—often accompanied by the crudest
invective, threats, etc. There is nothing new in that. It is
understandable. It is inevitable.  
    


 

Much “newer” is the amazing indifference of the bourgeoisie, as
reflected in the indifference of the liberal news papers; furthermore, in
many cases this indifference changes to a negative attitude, whereas
working-class actions that were less important, numerically less
significant (17 or 18 years ago), met with the obvious sympathy of
liberal-bourgeois society. Here we undoubtedly have a decisive liberal turn
to the right, away from democracy and against democracy.  

With reference to the events of July 1–3 in St. Petersburg, one of the
most widely circulated, if not the most widely circulated, newspapers in
Russia (the liberal Russkoye Slovo) said: 


   “It is interesting to note the attitude to this strike
   on the part of the Social-Democratic newspapers published in
   St. Petersburg. The Social-Democratic Pravda devotes considerable
   space to yesterday’s [written on July 3] strike, but the organ of the
   so-called liquidators’ group, the newspaper Luch, confines itself
   to a small note on the strike and devotes a leading article to political
   strikes [Luch, July 2], in which the newspaper protests against
   such actions by the workers.” (Russkoye Slovo, July 3, 1913.)
   


Such are the facts. Hostility on the part of the
reactionaries. Indifference and denial by the liberals and
liquidators. Unity of liberalism and liquidationism in deed. Unity of mass
working-class action, possible only in the struggle against the
liquidators.  

The proletariat cannot do its democratic duty, serve as the advanced
contingent, give service to, educate and consolidate the masses of the
people other than by a decisive struggle against the liquidators, who, in
fact, are completely dependent on liberalism.  

The liberals, too, frequently play at being radicals from the Duma
rostrum and do it as well as the various near-Marxist or wavering elements,
hut that does not prevent the liberals from fighting (with the aid of the
liquidators) the democratic aspirations of the masses outside the Duma.


 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Sovremenka refers to Sovremennoye Slovo (Contemporary
Word)—a Cadet daily published in St. Petersburg from 1907 to
1918.





[2]
Rossiya (Russia)—a Black-Hundred daily published in
St. Petersburg from 1905 to 1914. From 1906 onwards it was the organ of the
Ministry of
the Interior. Lenin called it “a venal police news
 paper”










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Cadets on the Question of the Ukraine









Lenin: Cadets on the Question of the Ukraine







V. I.  

      Lenin
Cadets on the Question of the Ukraine




Published:
Rabochaya Pravda No. 3, July 16, 1913.

      Signed: M..

      Published according to the Rabochaya Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 266-267.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

For a long time mention has been made in the press and from
the Duma rostrum (in the speech of the Social-Democrat Petrovsky, for
instance[1]) of the absolute indecency, the reactionary character and
the impudence of statements made by certain influential Cadets (headed by
Mr. Struve) on the Ukrainian question.  

A few days ago we came across an article in Rech, the official
organ of the Constitutional-Democratic Party, written by one of its regular
contributors, Mr. Mikhail Mogilyansky, an article that must not be
ignored.  

This article is real chauvinist badgering of the Ukrainians for
“separatism”. “Reckless adventurism”, “political delirium”, “a
political adventure”—are some of the expressions which fill the article
of Mr. Mikhail Mogilyansky, a Novoye Vremya adherent of the purest
water who hides under a mantle of “democracy”!  Yet the
Constitutional-“Democratic” Party shamelessly provides cover for this
article, publishes it with sympathy and by its silence approves such naked
chauvinism.  

Mr. Mikhail Mogilyansky himself points out that at the All-Ukraine
Student Congress in Lvov some Ukrainian Social-Democrats, Ukrainian
émigrés from Russia, also spoke against the slogan of
political independence for the Ukraine; they spoke against the
Social-Democrat Dontsov, who proposed the resolution on “an independent
Ukraine” that was adopted at the congress by a majority of all present
against two.  

It follows, therefore, that there is no question of all
Social-Democrats agreeing with Dontsov. But the Social-Democrats disputed
the matter with Dontsov, put forward their

    

own arguments, discussed the matter from the same platform and attempted to
convince the same audience.  

Mr. Mikhail Mogilyansky lost all sense of elementary political decency
when he hurled his coarse invective drawn from the lexicon of the Black
Hundreds against Dontsov and against the entire congress of Ukrainian
students, knowing full well that it was impossible for his opponents to
refute the views of Rech, that it was impossible for them to speak
to the Russian audience from the same platform and just as resolutely,
openly and freely.  

They are pitiful democrats, our Cadets! And those who tolerate, without
a violent protest, such sallies by the Cadets are pitiful democrats,
too. Marxists will never allow their heads to be turned by nationalist
slogans whether they are Great-Russian, Polish, Jewish, Ukrainian or any
other. Nor do Marxists ever forget the elementary duty of any democrat to
struggle against any persecution of any nation for “separatism”, the duty
to fight for the recognition of the full and unqualified equality of
nations, and their right to self-determination.  

Views may differ on what this self-determination should be, from the
point of view of the proletariat, in each individual case. One can and must
dispute with social-nationalists of the Dontsov type, but base persecution
for “separatism”, the persecution of people who are unable to defend
themselves, is the very limit of shamelessness on the part of our Cadets.


 
Notes
 
 



[1]
The Bolshevik Deputy, G. I. Petrovsky, spoke at the session
of the State Duma on May 20 (June 2), 1913, during the debate on the estimates
of the Ministry of the Interior. The speech was draft ed by Lenin. In a letter
dated April 18 (May 1), 1913, sent by Nadezhda Krupskaya from Cracow to
St. Petersburg on Lenin’s instructions, she said that every effort must be
made to deliver the speech in full on account of its outstanding importance. The
manuscript of the draft has not been found.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Fresh Data on German Political Parties









Lenin: Fresh Data on German Political Parties







V. I.  

      Lenin
Fresh Data on German Political Parties




Published:
Rabochaya Pravda No. 3 July 16, 1913.

      Signed: V. I..

      Published according to the Rabochaya Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 268-271.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The German statistical office has published some
interesting data on the 1912 parliamentary (Reichstag) elections. It is
particularly instructive to compare the strength of the various parties in
the towns and villages.  

German statistics, like those of most European states, regard all
inhabited centres having less than 2,000 inhabitants as villages, unlike
Russia which still retains the senseless, arbitrary distinction made by
officials and policemen, by which certain inhabited centres are “called”
towns irrespective of the number of inhabitants.  

German statistics regard inhabited centres with a population of between
2,000 and 10,000 as small towns and those with 10,000 or more inhabitants
as big towns.  

There proves to be a strikingly regular correlation between the
progressive nature of a party (“progressive” in the broadest
economic and political sense) and the increase in the strength of
that party in the towns and bigger inhabited centres in general.


Four groups of political parties in Germany stand out clearly in this
respect: 

1) Social-Democrats—the only completely progressive and, in the best
sense of the word, “popular” mass party of wage-workers; 

2) Progressive People’s Party—a petty-bourgeois democratic party,
something like our
Trudoviks[1]


(only under conditions of a fully bourgeois and not a feudal society); 

3) National Liberals—the party of the big bourgeoisie, the German
Octobrist-Cadet party; 

4) all conservative parties, Black-Hundred landowners, clericals,
reactionary urban petty bourgeois and peasants

    

(anti-Semites, “the Centre”, i.e., Catholics, conservatives proper,
Poles, and so on).  


Share of the Votes (% %) Obtained by
  Parties


 
Social- Democrats
Progressists
National Liberals
All conser- vative par- ties
Fragmentary and unde- finded
Totals




In villages . . . . . . .
19.0
8.8
12.8
58.6
0.8
100.0


In small towns . . . .                
35.8
12.1
15.0
36.4
0.7
100.0


In big towns . . . . .                
49.3
15.6
13.8
20.0
1.3
100.0


  All Germany . . . .  
34.8
12.3
13.6
38.3
1.0
100.0




Universal franchise exists in Germany. The above table shows clearly
that the German village, the German peasantry (like those of
allEuropean, constitutional, civilised countries) are still, to
the present day, almost completely en slaved by the landowners and
priests, spiritually and politically.  

In the German villages almost three-fifths (58.6%) of the votes go to
the conservative, i.e., landowner and priest, parties! Everywhere in Europe
the peasant was revolutionary when he fought against the feudals,
the serf-owners and landowners. Once the peasant had obtained his freedom
and a little piece of land he, as a general rule, made his peace
with the landowners and priests and became a reactionary.  

The development of capitalism, however, begins in its turn to pull the
peasant out of the embraces of reaction and leads him to the
Social-Democrats. In 1912, the German Social-Democrats had already
obtained almost one-fifth (19%) of all rural votes.  

The political picture in the German countryside today is, therefore,
the following. One-fifth for the Social-Democrats,
one-fifth for the more or less “liberal” bourgeoisie and
three fifths for the landowners and priests. There is still quite
a lot to be done for the political education of the country side. By
ruining the small peasant and putting the screw on him, capitalism, one
might say, is knocking reactionary prejudices out of his head by force.

 

There is already a different picture in the small towns; the
Social-Democrats have overtaken the liberal bourgeoisie (35.8% of the votes
as compared with 27%) but have not quite caught up with the conservatives,
who obtained 36.4% of the votes. The small towns are the stronghold of the
urban petty bourgeoisie engaged mainly in commerce and manufacturing. The
petty bourgeoisie waver most of all and do not give a stable majority
either to the conservatives, or to the socialists or to the liberal
bourgeoisie.  

in the big towns there has been a Social-Democratic victory. The
Social-Democrats have a following of half the population (49.3% of
the votes), as many as the conservatives and liberals combined
(15.6+13.8+20=49.4%). The conservatives here are supported by only
one-fifth of the population, the liberal bourgeoisie by
three-tenths and the Social-Democrats by a half. If we
were to take the biggest towns there would be an incomparably wider
predominance of Social-Democracy.  

We know that towns in all modern states and even in Russia grow more
rapidly than villages, that the towns are centres of the economic,
political and spiritual life of the people and are the chief vehicles of
progress. The predominance of Social-Democracy in the towns gives a clear
demonstration of its significance as the party of the advanced masses.


Of Germany’s population of 65,000,000 only 25,900,000 people were
living in rural areas in 1912; 12,300,000 were living in small towns and
26,800,000 in the bigger towns. In recent decades, since Germany became a
completely capitalist state, relatively free and possessing a stable
constitution and universal franchise, the urban population has grown more
rapidly than that of the countryside. In 1882, only 18,900,000 of the
45,000,000 population lived in towns, i.e., 41.8%; in 1895 the total
population was 52,000,000, the urban population 26,000,000, i.e., 49.8%; in
1907 out of the 62,000,000 population, 36,000,000 lived in towns, i.e.,
58.1%. The population of the biggest towns, those with 100,000 or more
inhabitants, was in the same years 3,000,000 7,000,000 and 12,000,000
respectively, i.e., 7.4%, 13.6% and 19.1% of the total population. In the
course of twenty-five years the entire population has increased by 36.5%,
the

    

urban population by 89.6% and the population of the biggest towns by
254.4%.  

Finally, it is interesting to note that the purely bourgeois parties in
present-day bourgeois Germany are supported by a minority of the
population. In 1912, the Social-Democrats obtained in the whole of Germany
more than one-third of the total number of votes cast (34.8%), the
conservatives (mainly the landowners and priests) somewhat less than
two-fifths (38.3%), and all the liberal-bourgeois parties only
one-quarter of the votes cast (25.9%).  

How is this to be explained? Why is it that in bourgeois Germany, in a
country in which capitalism is developing with particular rapidity, more
than sixty years after the revolution (the bourgeois revolution of 1848),
landowners’ and clerical parties and not purely bourgeois political parties
predominate?  

The key to the explanation of this phenomenon was provided by Karl Marx
as far back as 1848—the German bourgeoisie, frightened of the
independence of the proletariat and seeing that the workers were using
democratic institutions for themselves and against the
capitalists, turned its back on democracy, shamefully betrayed the liberty
that it had previously defended and began to fawn upon the landowners and
clericals.[2] We know that since 1005 the Russian bourgeoisie has been
developing these slavish political inclinations and these slavish political
ideas more zealously than the German bourgeoisie.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Trudoviks, Trudovik group—also known as
the peasant group; a group of petty-bourgeois democrats formed in April 1906 by
peasant deputies to the First Duma. They demanded the abolition of all
social-estate and national restrictions, democratisation of the rural and urban
local government bodies and universal suffrage

   

in elections to the State Duma. Their agrarian programme was based on the
Narodnik principle of equalitarian land tenure and envisaged the formation
of a national land fund to include state, crown and monastery lands, as
well as private holdings exceeding the area that could be tilled by the
owner’s family, with payment of compensation for land alienated from
private owners. The implementation of the land reform was to he entrusted
to local peasant committees.





[2]
Lenin refers here to an article in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung
“The Berlin Debates on the Revolution” (“Die Berliner Debatte \"uber die
Revolution”) (Karl Marx, Friedrich Engels, Werke, Bd. V, Dietz
Verlag, Berlin, 1959).










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Exposure of the British Opportunists









Lenin: Exposure of the British Opportunists







V. I.  

      Lenin
Exposure of the British Opportunists




Published:
Rabochaya Pravda No. 3, July 16, 1913.

      Signed: K. T..

      Published according to the Rabochaya Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 272-274.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

A Parliamentary by-election recently took place in
Leicester, England.  

This election is of enormous importance in principle, and every
socialist interested in the very important question of the attitude of the
proletariat towards the liberal bourgeoisie in general, and the British
socialist movement in particular, should ponder deeply over the Leicester
election.  

Leicester is a two-member constituency and each elector has
two votes. There are only a few constituencies of this kind in
Britain, but they particularly favour a tacit bloc between the
Socialists and the Liberals, as is emphasised by the correspondent in
Britain of the Leipziger Volkszeitung. It was precisely in such
constituencies that the most prominent of the leaders of the so-called
Independent (independent of socialism, but dependent on liberalism) Labour
Party were elected to Parliament. The I.L.P. leaders, Keir Hardie, Philip
Snowden and Ramsay MacDonald, were returned by such constituencies.  

And in these constituencies the Liberals, who are in the ascendancy,
call on their supporters to cast one vote for the Socialist and one for the
Liberal, provided, of course, that the Socialist is a “reasonable”,
moderate, “independent” one and not an irreconciable Social-Democrat,
whom the British Liberals and liquidators, no less than the Russian, know
how to curse as an anarcho-syndicalist, etc.!  

What actually takes place, therefore, is the formation of a bloc
between the Liberals and the moderate, opportunist Socialists. Actually,
the British “independents” (for whom our liquidators express such tender
feelings) depend on the

    

Liberals. The conduct of the “independents” in the British Parliament
constantly confirms this dependence.  

It happened that the I.L.P. member for Leicester, none other than the
party leader, MacDonald, resigned for personal reasons.  

What was to be done?  

The Liberals, of course, put forward their candidate.  

Leicester is a factory town with a predominantly proletarian
population.  

The local I.L.P. organisation called a conference which by 67 votes
against 8 decided to put forward a candidate. No sooner said than
done. Banton, a Town Councillor and prominent member of the I.L.P., was
nominated.  

Then the Executive Committee of this Party, which as signs the money
for the election campaign (and elections in Britain are very costly!),
refused to endorse Banton’s candidature!  

The opportunist Executive Committee opposed the local workers.  

The Leicester branch of the other British socialist party, which is not
opportunist and is really independent of the Liberals, then sent
its representative to the Leicester I.L.P. and invited them to support
its candidate, Hartley, a member of the British Socialist Party, a
very popular figure in the labour movement, an ex-member of the Independent
Labour Party, who left it because of its opportunism.  

The members of the Leicester branch of the I.L.P. were in an awkward
position: they were heart and soul in favour of Hartley, but ... but what
of the discipline in their party, the decision of their Executive
Committee? The Leicester people found a way out: they closed the meeting,
and each in his private capacity declared for Hartley. Next day a
huge meeting of workers endorsed Hartley’s candidature. Banton himself sent
a telegram stating that he would vote for Hartley. The Leicester trade
unions declared for Hartley.  

The I.L.P. Parliamentary group intervened and published a
protest in the Liberal press (which, like our Rech
and Sovremenka, helps the opportunists) against Hartley’s
candidature, against “undermining” MacDonald!  
 

The election, of course, resulted in a victory for the Liberals. They
obtained 10,863 votes, the Conservatives 9,279, and Hartley 2,580.  

Class-conscious workers in various countries quite often adopt a
“tolerant” attitude toward the British I.L.P. This is a great
mistake. The betrayal of the workers’ cause in Leicester by the
I.L.P. is no accident, but the result of the entire opportunist
policy of the Independent Labour Party. The sympathies of all real
Social-Democrats should be with those British Social-Democrats who are
determinedly combating the Liberal corruption of the workers by the
“Independent” Labour Party in Britain.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Ideas of an Advanced Capitalist









Lenin: The Ideas of an Advanced Capitalist







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Ideas of an Advanced Capitalist




Published:
Rabochaya Pravda No. 4, July 17, 1913.

      Signed: W..

      Published according to the Rabochaya Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 275-276.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

One of the richest and most eminent American merchants, a
certain Edward Albert Filene, Vice-Chairman of the International
Congress of Chambers of Commerce, is now touring Paris, Berlin and other
big European centres to make personal contact with the most influential
people of the commercial world.  

At the banquets arranged, as is fitting, by the richest people of
Europe in honour of one of the American rich, the latter is developing his
“new” ideas on the world power of the merchant. Frankfurter
=

Zeitung,[1] the organ of German finance capital, reports in detail
the ideas of this “advanced” American millionaire.  

“We are experiencing a great historic movement,” he proclaims, “that
will end in the transfer of all power over the modern world to
representatives of commercial capital. We are the people who bear the
greatest responsibility in the world and we should, therefore, be
politically the most influential.  

“Democracy is growing, the power of the masses is growing,” argued
Mr. Filene (rather inclined, it seems, to regard those “masses” as
simpletons). “The cost of living is rising. Parliamentarism and the
newspapers, distributed in millions of copies a day, are providing the
masses of the people with ever more detailed information.  

“The masses are striving to ensure for themselves participation in
political life, the extension of franchise, the introduction of an
income-tax, etc. Power over the whole world must pass into the hands of the
masses, that is, into the hands of our employees,” is the
conclusion drawn by this worthy orator.  
 

“The natural leaders of the masses should be the industrialists
and merchants, who are learning more and more to understand the
community of their interests and those of the masses.” (We note in
parenthesis that the cunning Mr. Filene is the owner of a gigantic
commercial house employing 2,500 people, and that he has “organised” his
employees in a “democratic” organisation with profit-sharing, etc. Since
he considers his employees hopeless simpletons, Mr. Filene is sure that
they are completely satisfied and infinitely grateful to their
“father-benefactor” ....)  

“Wage increases, the improvement of labour conditions, that is what
will bind our employees to us,” said Mr. Filene, “that is what will
guarantee our power over the whole world. Everybody in the world who is at
all talented will come to us to enter our service.  

“We need organisation and still more organisation—strong, democratic
organisation, both national and inter national,” the American
exclaimed. He called upon the commercial world of Paris, Berlin, etc., to
reorganise international chambers of commerce. They should unite
the merchants and industrialists of all civilised countries in a
single, mighty organisation. All important international problems should be
discussed and settled by that organisation.  

Such are the ideas of an “advanced” capitalist, Mr. Filene.  

The reader will see that these ideas are a paltry, narrow, one-sided,
selfishly barren approximation to the ideas of Marxism propounded
over sixty years ago. “We” are great masters at upsetting and refuting
Marx; “we”, the civilised merchants and professors of political economy,
have refuted him completely!... And at the same time we steal little bits
and pieces from him and boast to the whole world of our
“progressiveness”....  

My worthy Mr. Filene! Do you really believe that the workers of the
whole world are actually such simpletons?  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Frankfurter Zeitung (Frankfort Newspaper)—a
bourgeois daily published in Frankfort-on-Main from 1856 to 1943.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## What Can be Done for Public Education









Lenin: What Can be Done for Public Education







V. I.  

      Lenin
What Can be Done for Public Education




Published:
Rabochaya Pravda No. 5, July 18, 1913.

      Signed: W..

      Published according to the Rabochaya Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 277-279.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription:
Richard Bos
HTML Markup:
B. Baggins and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (1996).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

There are quite a number of rotten prejudices current in the Western
countries of which Holy Mother Russia is free. They assume there, for
instance, that huge public libraries containing hundreds of thousands and
millions of volumes, should certainly not be reserved only for the handful
of scholars or would-be scholars that uses them. Over there they have set
themselves the strange, incomprehensible and barbaric aim of making these
gigantic, boundless libraries available, not to a guild of scholars,
professors and other such specialists, but to the masses, to the crowd, to
the mob!  

What a desecration of the libraries! What an absence of the “law and
order” we are so justly proud of. Instead of regulations,
discussed and elaborated by a dozen committees of civil servants inventing
hundreds of formalities and obstacles to the use of books, they see to it
that even children can make use of the rich collections; that
readers can read publicly-owned books at home; they regard as the pride and
glory of a public library, not the number of rarities it contains, the
number of sixteenth-century editions or tenth-century manuscripts, but
the extent to which books are distributed among the
people, the number of new readers enrolled, the speed with which the
demand for any book is met, the number of books issued to be read at home,
the number of children attracted to reading and to the use of the
library.... These queer prejudices are widespread in the Western states,
and we must be glad that those who keep watch and ward over us protect us
with care and circumspection from the influence of these prejudices,
protect our rich public libraries from the mob, from the hoi
polloi!  
 

I have before me the report of the New York Public Library for 1911.


That year the Public Library in New York was moved from two old
buildings to new premises erected by the city. The total number of books is
now about two million. It so happened that the first book asked for when
the reading-room opened its doors was in Russian. It was a work by N. Grot,
The Moral Ideals of Our Times. The request for the book was handed
in at eight minutes past nine in the morning. The book was delivered to the
reader at nine fifteen.  

In the course of the year the library was visited by 1,658,376
people. There were 246,950 readers using the reading-room and they took out
911,891 books.  

This, however, is only a small part of the book circulation
effected by the library. Only a few people can visit the library. The
rational organisation of educational work is measured by the number of
books issued to be read at home, by the conveniences available to the
majority of the population.  

In three boroughs of New York—Manhatten, Bronx and Richmond—the New
York Public Library has forty-two branches and will soon have a
forty-third (the total population of the three boroughs is almost
three million). The aim that is constantly pursued is to have a
branch of the Public Library within three-quarters of a verst,
i.e., within ten minutes’ walk of the house of every inhabitant, the branch
library being the centre of all kinds of institutions and
establishments for public education.  

Almost eight million (7,914,882 volumes) were issued to
readers at home, 400,000 more than in 1910. To each hundred members of the
population of all ages and both sexes, 267 books were issued for reading at
home in the course of the year.  

Each of the forty-two branch libraries not only provides for the use of
reference books in the building and the issue of books to be read at home,
it is also a place for evening lectures, for public meetings and for
rational entertainment.  

The New York Public Library contains about 15,000 books in oriental
languages, about 20,000 in Yiddish and

    

about 16,000 in the Slav languages. In the main reading-room there are
about 20,000 books standing on open shelves for general use.  

The New York Public Library has opened a special, central, reading-room
for children, and similar institutions are gradually being opened at all
branches. The librarians do everything for the children’s convenience and
answer their questions. The number of books children took out to read at
home was 2,859,888, slightly under three million (more than a third of the
total). The number of children visiting the reading-room was 1,120,915.


As far as losses are concerned—the New York Public Library assesses
the number of books lost at 70–80–90 per 100,000 issued to be read at
home.  

Such is the way things are done in New York. And in Russia?  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Petty Production in Agriculture









Lenin: Petty Production in Agriculture







V. I.  

      Lenin
Petty Production in Agriculture




Published:
Rabochaya Pravda No. 5, July 18, 1913.

      Signed: V. I..

      Published according to the Rabochaya Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 280-282.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The peasant question in modern capitalist states most
frequently gives rise to perplexity and vacillation among Marxists and to
most of the attacks on Marxism by bourgeois (professorial) political
economy.  

Petty production in agriculture is doomed to extinction and to an
incredibly abased and downtrodden position under capitalism, say the
Marxists. Petty production is dependent on big capital, is backward in
comparison with large-scale production in agriculture, and can only keep
going by means of desperately reduced consumption and laborious, arduous
toil. The frittering away and waste of human labour, the worst forms of
dependence of the producer, exhaustion of the peasant’s family, his cattle
and his land—this is what capitalism everywhere brings the peasant.  

There is no salvation for the peasant except by joining in the
activities of the proletariat, primarily those of the wage-workers.  

Bourgeois political economy, and the Narodniks and opportunists who
champion it (though they may not always be conscious of the fact), on the
contrary, try to prove that petty production is viable and is more
profitable than large-scale production. The peasant, who has a firm and
assured position in capitalist society, must gravitate, not towards the
proletariat, but towards the bourgeoisie; be must not gravitate towards the
class struggle of the wage-workers but must try to strengthen his position
as a proprietor and master—such, in substance, is the theory of the
bourgeois economists.  

We will try to test the soundness of the proletarian and bourgeois
theories by means of precise data. Let us take the data on female
labour in agriculture in Austria and Germany. Full data for Russia are
still lacking because the

    

government is unwilling to take a scientifically based census of all
agricultural enterprises.  

In Austria, according to the census of 1902, out of 9,070,682 persons
employed in agriculture 4,422,981, or 48.7 per cent, were women. In
Germany, where capitalism is far more developed, women constitute the
majority of those employed in agriculture—54.8 per cent. The
more capitalism develops in agriculture the more it employs female labour,
that is to say, worsens the living conditions of the working
masses. Women employed in German industry make up 25 per cent of the total
labour force, but in agriculture they constitute more than 50
per cent. This shows that industry is absorbing the best labour
and leaving the weaker to agriculture.  

In developed capitalist countries agriculture has already become mainly
a women’s occupation.  

But if we examine statistics on farms of various sizes we shall see
that it is in petty production that the exploitation of female
labour assumes particularly large proportions. On the other hand, even in
agriculture, large-scale capitalist production employs mainly male labour,
although in this respect it has not caught up with industry.  

The following are the comparative figures for Austria and Germany: 





Type of farm
Group according to size of farm
Per cent of women employed


Austria
Germany




Proletarian { {
Up to half a

       hectare[1]

52.0
74.1


1/2 to 2 hectares             
50.9
65.7


Peasant { { { 
2 to 5 ” . . . . . .         
49.6
54.4


5 to 10 ” . . . . . .        
48.5
50.2


10 to 20 ” . . . . . .       
48.6
48.4


Capitalist { { 
20 to 100 ” . . . . . .      
46.6
44.8


100 hectares and over . . . . 
27.4
41.0


For all farms . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48.7
54.8




In both countries we see the operation of the same law of capitalist
agriculture. The smaller the scale of production the poorer is the
composition of the labour force, and the greater the number of women among
the total number of persons employed in agriculture.  
 

The general situation under capitalism is the following. On proletarian
farms, i.e., those whose “proprietors” live mainly by means of
wage-labour (agricultural labourers, day-labourers, and wage-workers in
general who possess a tiny plot of land), female labour predominates
over male labour, sometimes to an enormous extent.  

It must not be forgotten that the number of these proletarian or
labourer farms is enormous: in Austria they amount to 1,300,000 out of a
total of 2,800,000 farms, and in Germany there are even 3,400,000 out of a
total of 5,700,000.  

On peasant farms male and female labour is employed in nearly equal
proportions.  

Finally, on capitalist farms, male labour predominates over female
labour.  

What does this signify?  

It signifies that the composition of the labour force in petty
production is inferior to that in large-scale capitalist production.  

It signifies that in agriculture the working woman—the proletarian
woman and peasant woman—must exert herself ever so much more, must strain
herself to the utmost, must toil at her work to the detriment of her health
and the health of her children, in order to keep up as far as possible with
the male worker in large-scale capitalist production.  

It signifies that petty production keeps going under capitalism only by
squeezing out of the worker a larger amount of work than
is squeezed out of the worker in large-scale production.  

The peasant is more tied up, more entangled in the complicated net of
capitalist dependence than the wage-worker. He thinks he is independent,
that he can “make good”; but as a matter of fact, in order to keep going,
he must work (for capital) harder than the wage-worker.  

The figures on child labour in agriculture prove this still
more
       clearly.[2]


 

Notes
 

[1]
One hectare=0.9 of a dessiatine.—Ed.  

[2]
See pp. 209–12 of this volume.—Ed.  
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## A “Fashionable” Branch of Industry









Lenin: A 'Fashionable' Branch of Industry







V. I.  

      Lenin
A “Fashionable” Branch of Industry




Published:
Rabochaya Pravda No. 8, July 21, 1913.

      Signed: N..

      Published according to the Rabochaya Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 283-284.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Capitalist production develops spasmodically, in fits and
starts. At times there is “brilliant” prosperity in industry and then
comes collapse, crisis and unemployment. It cannot be otherwise under a
system of economy in which individual, isolated proprietors, independent of
each other, “work” for an unknown market and have the joint labour of
thousands and thousands of workers in big enterprises at their disposal as
private property.  

An example of a “fashionable” industry that is now developing with
particular rapidity and rushing full steam ahead toward a crash is the
automobile industry. In Germany, for instance, the number of motor vehicles
of all kinds, including motor cycles, was 27,000 in 1907 and 70,000 in
1912.  

In France and Britain motor vehicles are still more wide spread. Here
are the figures for comparison: Germany, 70,000, France, 88,000 and
Britain, 175,000.  

In proportion to the population, therefore, Germany has only
one-quarter the number of motor vehicles that Britain has, while
Russia is lagging behind to an immeasurably greater extent.  

Under the capitalist organisation of economy, motor-cars are available
only to an extremely narrow circle of rich people. Industry could
produce hundreds of thousands of motor vehicles but the poverty of the
masses hampers development and brings about crashes after a few
years of “brilliant” growth.  

In passing. Motor vehicles, provided they were in the service of the
majority of the population, would be of great significance because an
association of united workers could use them instead of a large number of
draught animals in

    

farming and in carting. Such a replacement would enable millions of
dessiatines now used to produce fodder for horses to be used to
produce grain, meat and milk and improve the population’s food supply.


Bourgeois economists are only trying to frighten people when they say
that agriculture cannot produce sufficient grain!  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Dead Liquidationism and the Living Rech









Lenin: Dead Liquidationism and the Living Rech







V. I.  

      Lenin
Dead Liquidationism and the Living Rech




Published:
Rabochaya Pravda No. 10, July 24, 1913.

      Signed: P. Osipov.

      Published according to the Rabochaya Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 285-287.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The first issue of the liquidators’ newspaper Zhivaya
      Zhizn[1]

carried an article by
L. M.[2] entitled “On an Old Theme”. We will leave until another
occasion the little tricks the enthusiastic author got up to in his haste
to “grab by the coat-tails” the Kautsky who argued with Rosa
Luxemburg. L. M. copies the worn-out method of the liberals—that of
exaggerating this sort of dispute and depicting it as important in
principle by maintaining a complete silence on the position of the
German opportunists (reformists)!  

Mr. L. M. likes holding Kautsky by the coat-tails, but when speaking of
“German Social-Democratic literature” he prefers not to mention—out of
modesty, no doubt—the extensive and, indeed, fundamentally important
literature put out by reformists related in type to L. M. and Zhivaya
Zhizn.  

I repeat, this will be dealt with another time.  

L. M. drags the Germans into Russian affairs by the hair, as the saying
goes. The first issue of Zhivaya Zhizn informs us of these affairs
through the lips of L. M.: 


   ...  without a struggle for freedom of association
   “Russian workers cannot get out of the intolerable situation that dooms
   them to run like squirrels in a cage, to spend tremendous effort in
   periodical mass actions of one and the same kind that are rewarded
   neither by organisational growth nor a strengthening of the political
   positions gained”. The efforts of the advanced proletarians (writes
   L. M., outlining the ideas of advanced liberals)
   should be directed toward “making the working class capable of giving
   battle and winning victories, not only in one-day strikes but also in
   all other possible fields”.  

 

These words contain the essence of the “theory” of the liquidators of
the working-class party. “Running like a squirrel in a cage”—those
words will become famous. They should be repeated in every issue of
Zhivaya Zhizn, they should become the motto of its whole
trend. This is the “slogan” of the liquidators!  

In his wisdom, L. M. probably regards making petitions as “other
fields” and not “running like a squirrel in a cage”? Then say so
straight out, don’t be ashamed, gentlemen!  

And here you have the real live newspaper Rech—live be cause
it advocates not the dead doctrine of the liquidators but living class
interests (the interests of the bourgeoisie, of course, and not the
proletariat). Compare the passages from Zhivaya Zhizn of July 11
quoted above with the leading article in Rech of July 6.  

The Rech leading article declares that the working-class
movement in 1905 was “national, but in 1913 is a class movement” and with
ecstatic enthusiasm repeats the attacks made by the liquidators on the
“strike craze”, repeats the statement made by the liquidators that “the
workers can and must struggle for freedom of speech, assembly and
association by other more complicated [really?] political means and not by
strikes alone”.  

It stands to reason that the liberals, like L. M., maintain a modest
silence on precisely what “complicated” means they have in mind. The
liberals, on the other hand, say straight out that with the introduction of
freedom of association and so on, it will be possible, they are convinced,
“to conduct a serious struggle against the chaotic, casual
strikes that disorganise industry” (the same Rech leading
article).  

We shall permit ourselves only one remark—everybody has now
recognised the fact of a new wave of strikes, even purely economic
strikes. There is nothing more ridiculous and pitiful than to speak of them
as “casual”.  

The class position of the liberals is clear. Any worker will
immediately understand their position, will immediately discern the
interests of the bourgeoisie in the vague phrases about “complicated”
methods. The living Rech expresses the interests of the
bourgeoisie. Dead liquidationism in Zhivaya Zhizn is helplessly
limping along behind the

    

liberals and is unable to say anything clear and straight forward about
“other fields” and can only get angry and churn out abuse of the
“running like squirrels in a cage” variety....  

A noteworthy and at the same time shameful slogan that the liquidators
have descended to!  

 
Notes
 

[1]
Literally, “Living Life”.—Ed.  
 



[2]
L. M.—L. Martov, one of the Menshevik leaders.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Mobilisation of Allotment Lands









Lenin: Mobilisation of Allotment Lands







V. I.  

      Lenin
Mobilisation of Allotment Lands




Published:
Rabochaya Pravda No. 12, July 26, 1913.

      Signed: V. I..

      Published according to the Rabochaya Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 288-291.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

A few days ago the official newspaper Rossiya
published the results of an investigation carried out by the Ministry of
the Interior in the summer of 1912 on the question of the mobilisation of
allotment lands, that is, their sale and purchase, their transfer from one
owner to another.  

The Ministry of the Interior selected four gubernias for its
investigation—Vitebsk, Perm, Stavropol and Samara (Nikolayev Uyezd). It
is typical that the gubernias of the Great-Russian agricultural “centre”
of European Russia, the gubernias where the traces of serfdom are the
strongest and where the condition of the peasants is worst and the
oppression by the feudal landowners is greatest, were not included
in the investigation! It is obvious that the Ministry did not wish so much
to investigate as to deceive, did not wish so much to
study the matter as to distort it.  

The statistics collected by the Ministry of the Interior and summarised
in Rossiya are remarkably slipshod, haphazard and primitive; we
have before us the usual “official work” produced by Russian civil
servants, who can be relied on to bungle the simplest task. For the whole
of Russia they examined something like a hundred thousand households but
they could not devise a comprehensive programme, or engage competent
statisticians, or ensure the uniform application of even a partial
consistent programme to all areas!  

The general results of the investigation are the following. In the four
gubernias mentioned, on January 1, 1912, a total of 108,095 peasant
households had left the communes and had acquired titles to their
land. This means that of the total number of title-holding households,
which now probably amounts to 2,000,000 in the whole of Russia (out

    

of a total of 12,000,000–13,000,000 households), something like
one-twentieth have been investigated. Even such an investigation would, of
course, be valuable if it were done conscientiously, that is, if it were
done not by Russian civil servants and not under Russian political
conditions.  

Of the hundred thousand or so households holding titles,
27,588, i.e., more than a quarter (25.5 per cent) sold land. This
huge number of sales by peasant owners shows straight away that in Russia
the notorious “private ownership” of land is primarily a means of
liberating the peasants from the land. In fact, over ten
thousand (10,380) households out of those that sold land were
not engaged in farming at all. They had been artificially bound to the
soil by the old, semi-medieval commune. The demand made by the
Social-Democrats—to grant the right of free exit from the commune—was
the only correct one; that alone could have given the peasants without any
interference on the part of the police, rural
superintendents[1] and similar kindly “authorities” what life in
capitalist society insistently demands. You cannot keep anyone on the land
who cannot farm it, and to try to do so is absurd.  

If the number of title-holding households in the whole of Russia
amounts to two million, the above data lead one to suppose that about
200,000 of them did not engage in farming and immediately sold their
land. “Private owner ship” immediately threw hundreds of thousands of
fictitious farmers out of the countryside! The Ministry of the Interior
statistics do not say a word about the price (probably a nominal one) at
which these poor people sold their land. Pitiful statistics!  

What caused these farmers to sell land to which they had obtained the
title? Out of 17,260 such peasants only 1,791, i.e., a tiny minority, sold
land in order to improve their farms or to buy new lots. The remaining mass
of peasants sold land because they could not remain on it—4,117
house holds sold out to migrate to Siberia; 768 because they were going
over to other types of employment; 5,614 from necessity, “drunkenness”
(as the official statisticians say!) and bad harvests; 2,498 because of
illness, old age and lack of family help; 2,472 for “other” reasons.

 

These unscrupulous statisticians try to make it seem that only 5,614
households “have actually lost their land”! This, of course, is the
despicable kind of trick people who have been ordered to raise a cheer
would use. As we have seen, the vast majority of those who sell land are
ruined and become landless. It is not for nothing that the peasants who
sell out are mostly those owning small plots; even official statistics
recognise this fact although, needless to say, they avoid giving any
precise and complete figures. Pitiful statistics....  

Of the 27,588 title-holders who sold out, more than a half (14,182)
sold all their land, the remainder selling only part of
it. Purchasers of land numbered 19,472. A comparison of the number of
purchasers with the number of sellers clearly shows that a concentration of
land is taking place, that it is being concentrated in the hands of a
smaller number of owners. The poor sell land and the rich buy
it. Despite their efforts, official scribblers are powerless to minimise
the significance of this fact.  

In Stavropol Gubernia, 14,282 title-holders sold land to 7,489
purchasers. Of the latter, 3,290 bought more than 15
dessiatines—580 bought from 50 to 100 dessiatines, 85 bought from
100 to 500 dessiatines and 7 bought from 500 to 1,000 dessiatines. In
Nikolayev Uyezd of Samara Gubernia, 142 purchasers bought from 50 to 100
dessiatines, 102 from 100 to 500 dessiatines and 2 from 500 to 1,000
dessiatines.  

In Perm Gubernia, 201 purchasers bought two or more lots of land; in
Stavropol Gubernia, 2,957 purchasers bought more than two; of these, 562
bought from 5 to 9 lots, and 168 even ten or more!  

The concentration of land is taking place on a grand scale. We can see
clearly how pitiful, senseless and reactionary are the attempts to
curtail the mobilisation of the land made by the Third Duma and
the government and defended by “liberal” civil servants
through the Cadet Party. There is nothing that reveals the retrograde
nature of the Cadets and their civil-service stupidity so much as their
defence of “measures” against the mobilisation of peasant lands.  

The peasant does not sell his land except from dire need. Attempts to
limit this right are despicable hypocrisy and worsen the selling
conditions for the peasant, because in reality such limitations are evaded
in thousands of ways.  
 

The Narodniks, who do not understand the inevitability of land
mobilisation under capitalism, hold a much more democratic view when they
demand the abolition of private property in land. But only an ignoramus
could call such abolition a socialist measure. There is absolutely nothing
socialist in it. In England, one of the most developed capitalist
countries, the farmers (capitalist tenant farmers) farm land belonging to
landlords (big landowners). If this land belonged to the state, capitalism
would develop more freely and extensively in agriculture. There would be no
hindrances from the landowners. There would be no need to withdraw capital
from production to invest in land purchases. The mobilisation of the land,
drawing it into circulation, would be still easier because the
transfer of the land from one person to another would take place more
freely, simply and cheaply.  

The poorer a country is, and the more it is crushed and stifled under
the yoke of feudal landed proprietorship, the more urgent (from the
standpoint of the development of capitalism and the growth of the
productive forces) is the abolition of private property in land, complete
freedom for its mobilisation, and the break-down of the old spirit of
routine and stagnation in agriculture.  

Our Stolypin land legislation, however, far from delivering the peasant
from ruin and his land from mobilisation, makes that ruin a hundred times
more acute and worsens (to a far greater extent than the “general”
capitalist standard) the condition of the peasant, compelling him to accept
worse conditions when selling his land.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Rural superintendent—an administrative post introduced by
the tsarist government in 1889 to increase the power of the landowners over
the peasantry. The rural superintendents, appointed from among the local
landed nobility, were granted tremendous powers, not only administrative,
but juridical, which included the right to arrest peasants and order
corporal punishment.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## How Can per Capita Consumption in Russia be Increased?









Lenin: How Can per Capita Consumption in Russia be Increased?







V. I.  

      Lenin
How Can per Capita Consumption in Russia be Increased?




Published:
Severnaya Pravda No. 3, August 3, 1913.

      Signed: W. Frey.

      Published according to the Severnaya Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 292-294.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

A few days ago the organ of our satraps of industrial capital,
Promyshlennost i Torgovlya, published a leading article under the
above heading. The question they raise is basic, that of the causes of
Russia’s economic (and every other) backwardness. It deserves the most
serious attention.  

Our industrial and commercial satraps declare that “it is at first
glance paradoxical” for Russia to he among the great and advanced powers
as far as her output of iron, oil and a number of other items is concerned,
while her level of per capita consumption (i.e., the total amount
of important items produced per head of the population) “makes her the
neighbour of Spain”, one of the most backward countries.  

In 1911, for instance, the amount of iron consumed per head of the
population was: 233 kilograms in the United States of America, 136 in
Germany, 173 in Belgium and 105 in England, while in Russia it was a
mere 26 kilograms (one and a half poods). In the half century since
the liberation of the peasants the consumption of iron in Russia has
increased fivefold, but Russia still remains an unbelievably,
unprecedentedly backward country, poverty-stricken and half-savage, four
times worse-off than Britain, five times worse-off than Germany and ten
times worse-off than America in terms of modern means of production.  

What is the reason? The journal is forced to admit that the reason lies
wholly in rural living conditions. The rural areas consume a mere quarter
of a pood of iron per head

    

of the population and “the peasant, rural population constitutes
five-sixths of the population of Russia”.  


   “A certain statistician has calculated that if the
   Chinese were to lengthen their national costume by the width of one finger
   it would be sufficient to provide work for all the cotton mills in England
   for a whole year.”  


An apt and eloquent remark!  

What must be done to make the tens of millions of Russian peasants
“lengthen their national costume”, or, putting all metaphors aside,
increase their consumption, cease being beggars and become, at long last,
just a little bit like human beings?  

Our industrial satraps answer with empty phrases—”the general
cultural development of the country”, the growth of industry, of towns,
etc., “increased productivity of peasant labour”, etc.  

Empty phrase-mongering, pitiful excuses! This development, this
“increase” has been going on in Russia for more than half a
century, no one doubts it has been going on. All classes are
shouting their heads off about “culture”. Even the Black
Hundreds and the Narodniks are taking their stand on the side of
capitalism. For a long time the question to raise has been a different
one—why is the development of capitalism and culture proceeding
at a snail’s pace? Why are we falling farther and farther behind? Why does
this increasing backwardness make exceptional speed and “strikes”
necessary?  

Our industrial satraps are afraid to answer this question, which is
quite clear to any politically conscious worker, because they are
satraps. They are not the representatives of capital that is free and
strong, like that of America; they are a handful of monopolists protected
by state aid and by thousands of intrigues and deals with the very
Black-Hundred landowners whose medieval land tenure (about 70 million
dessiatines of the best land) and oppression condemn five-sixths of the
population to poverty, and the entire country to stagnation and decay.


“We must work,” exclaims Mr. I. B—n in the journal of the satraps,
“to approximate the rate of per capita consumption to that of the United
States of America and

    

not that of Spain.” This hired scribbler of the satraps does not want to
see that subservience to the Black-Hundred landowners inevitably
“approximates Russia to Spain” and that approximation to America requires
a ruthless, devoted struggle against that class all along the line.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## August Bebel









Lenin: August Bebel







V. I.  

      Lenin
August Bebel




Published:
Severnaya Pravda No. 6, August 8, 1913.

      Signed: V. I..

      Published according to the Severnaya Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 295-301.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

With the death of Bebel we lost not only the German Social-Democratic
leader who had the greatest influence among the working class, and was most
popular with the masses; in the course of his development and his political
activity, Bebel was the embodiment of a whole historical period in the life
of international as well as German Social-Democracy.  

Two big periods are to be distinguished in the history of international
Social-Democracy. The first period was that of the birth of socialist ideas
and the embryonic class struggle of the proletariat; a long and stubborn
struggle between extremely numerous socialist theories and sects. Socialism
was feeling its way, was seeking its true self. The class struggle of the
proletariat, which was only just be ginning to emerge as something
different from the common mass of the petty-bourgeois “people”, took the
shape of isolated outbursts, like the uprising of the Lyons weavers. The
working class was at that time also only feeling its way.  

This was the period of preparation and of the birth of Marxism, the
only socialist doctrine that has stood the test of history. The period
occupied approximately the first two-thirds of the last century and ended
with the complete victory of Marxism, the collapse (especially after the
Revolution of 1848) of all pre-Marxian forms of socialism, and the
separation of the working class from petty-bourgeois democracy and its
entry upon an independent historical path.  

The second period is that of the formation, growth and maturing of mass
socialist parties with a proletarian class

    

composition. This period is characterised by the tremendous spread of
socialism, the unprecedented growth of all kinds of organisations of the
proletariat, and the all-round preparation of the proletariat in the most
varied fields for the fulfilment of its great historic mission. In recent
years a third period has been making its appearance, a period in which the
forces that have been prepared will achieve their goal in a series of
crises.  

Himself a worker, Bebel developed a socialist world outlook at the cost
of stubborn struggle; he devoted his wealth of energy entirely, withholding
nothing, to the cause of socialism; for several decades he marched shoulder
to shoulder with the growing and developing German proletariat and became
the most gifted parliamentarian in Europe, the most talented organiser and
tactician, the most influential leader of international Social-Democracy,
Social-Democracy hostile to reformism and opportunism.  

Bebel was born in Cologne on the Rhine on February 22, 1840, in the
poor family of a Prussian sergeant. He imbibed many barbarous prejudices
with his mother’s milk and later slowly but surely rid himself of them. The
population of the Rhineland was republican in temper in 1848–49, the
period of the bourgeois revolution in Germany. In the elementary school
only two boys, one of them Bebel, expressed monarchist sympathies and were
beaten up for it by their schoolfellows. “One beaten is worth two
unbeaten” is a Russian saying that freely translates the “moral” Bebel
him self drew when relating this episode of his childhood years in his
memoirs.  

The sixties of the last century brought a liberal “spring tide” to
Germany after long, weary years of counter-revolution, and there was a new
awakening of the mass working-class movement. Lassalle began his brilliant
but short-lived agitation. Bebel, by now a young turner’s apprentice,
hungrily devoured the liberal newspapers published by the old people who
had been active in the 1848 Revolution, and became an ardent participant in
workers’ educational associations. Having got rid of the prejudices of the
Prussian barracks, he had adopted liberal views and was struggling against
socialism.  
 

Life, however, took its course and the young worker, through reading
Lassalle’s pamphlets, gradually found his way to Marx despite the
difficulties involved in getting to know Marx’s writings in a Germany that
had suffered the oppression of the counter-revolution for more than ten
years. The conditions of working-class life, the serious and conscientious
study of the social sciences, pushed Bebel towards socialism. He would have
arrived at socialism himself, but Liebknecht, who was fourteen years older
than Bebel and had just returned from exile in London, helped to accelerate
his development.  

Evil tongues among Marx’s opponents were saying at that time that
Marx’s party consisted of three people—Marx, the head of the party, his
secretary Engels, and his “agent” Liebknecht. The unintelligent shunned
Liebknecht as the “agent” of exiles or foreigners, but Bebel found in
Liebknecht just what he wanted—living contact with the great work done by
Marx in 1848, contact with the party formed at that time, which, though
small, was genuinely proletarian, a living representative of Marxist views
and Marxist traditions. “There is something to be learnt from that man,
damn it!” the young turner Bebel is said to have remarked, speaking of
Liebknecht.  

In the later sixties Bebel broke with the liberals, separated the
socialist section of the workers’ unions from the bourgeois-democratic
section and, together with Liebknecht, took his place in the front ranks of
the Eisenacher party, the party of Marxists that was to struggle for many
long years against the Lassalleans, the other working-class party.  

To put it briefly, the historical reason for the split in the German
socialist movement amounts to this. The question of the day was the
unification of Germany. Given the class relationships then obtaining, it
could have been effected in either of two ways—through a revolution, led
by the proletariat, to establish an all-German republic, or through
Prussian dynastic wars to strengthen the hegemony of the Prussian
landowners in a united Germany.  

Lassale and his followers, in view of the poor
chances for the proletarian and democratic way, pursued unstable tactics
and adapted themselves to the leadership of the Junker Bismarck. Their
mistake lay in diverting the

    

workers’ party on to the Bonapartist-state-socialist path. Bebel and
Liebknecht, on the other hand, consistently supported the democratic and
proletarian path and struggled against any concessions to Prussianism,
Bismarckism or nationalism.  

History showed that Bebel and Liebknecht were right, despite
Germany’s having been united in the Bismarckian way. It was only the
consistently democratic and revolutionary tactics of Bebel and Liebknecht,
only their “unyielding” attitude towards nationalism, only their
“intractability” in respect of the unification of Germany and her
renovation “from above”, that helped provide a sound basis for a
genuinely Social-Democratic workers’ party. And in those days the essential
thing was the basis of the party.  

That the Lassalleans’ flirting with Bismarckism, or their
“accommodations” to it, did not harm the German working-class movement
was due only to the very energetic, ruthlessly sharp rebuff dealt
to their intrigues by Bebel and Liebknecht.  

When the question was settled historically, five years after the
foundation of the German Empire, Bebel and Liebknecht were able to unite
the two workers’ parties and ensure the hegemony of Marxism in the united
party.  

As soon as the German parliament was set up, Bebel was elected to it,
although at the time he was still quite young—only twenty-seven years
old. The fundamentals of parliamentary tactics for German (and
international) Social-Democracy, tactics that never yield an inch to the
enemy, never miss the slightest opportunity to achieve even small
improvements for the workers and are at the same time implacable on
questions of principle and always directed to the accomplishment of the
final aim—the fundamentals of these tactics were elaborated by Bebel
himself or under his direct leadership and with his participation.  

Germany, united in the Bismarckian way, renovated in the Prussian,
Junker way, responded to the successes of the workers’ party with the
Anti-Socialist Law. The legal conditions for the existence of the
working-class party were destroyed and the party was outlawed. Difficult
times were at hand. To persecution by the party’s enemies was added

    

an inner-party crisis—vacillation on the basic questions of tactics. At
first the opportunists came to the fore; they allowed themselves to be
frightened by the loss of the party’s legality, and the mournful song they
sang was that of rejecting full-blooded slogans and accusing themselves of
having gone much too far, etc. Incidentally, one of the representatives of
this opportunist trend, H\"ochberg, rendered financial aid to the party,
which was still weak and could not immediately find its feet.  

Marx and Engels launched a fierce attack from London against
disgraceful opportunist shilly-shallying. Bebel showed himself to be a real
party leader. He recognised the danger in good time, understood the
correctness of the criticism by Marx and Engels and was able to direct the
party on to the path of implacable struggle. The illegal newspaper Der
Sozialdemokrat was established and was published first in Zurich and
then in London; It was delivered weekly in Germany and had as many as
10,000
subscribers.[1] Opportunist waverings were firmly stopped.  

Another form of wavering was due to infatuation with D\"uhring at the
end of the seventies of the last century. For a short time Bebel also
shared that infatuation. D\"uhring’s supporters, the most outstanding of
which was Most, toyed with “Leftism” and very soon slid into
anarchism. Engels’s sharp, annihilating criticism of D\"uhring’s theories
met with disapproval in many party circles and at one congress it was even
proposed to close the columns of the central newspaper to that criticism.


All the viable socialist elements—headed, of course, by Bebel—soon
realised that the “new” theories were rotten to the core and broke away
from them and from all anarchist trends. Under the leadership of Bebel and
Liebknecht the party learned to combine illegal and legal work. When the
majority of the legally-existing Social-Democratic group in parliament
adopted an opportunist position on the famous question of voting
for the shipping subsidy, the illegal Sozialdemokrat
opposed the group and, after a battle four weeks long, proved
victorious.  

The Anti-Socialist Law was defeated in 1890 after having been in
operation for twelve years. A party crisis, very similar to that of the
mid-seventies, again occurred. The

    

opportunists under Vollmar, on the one hand, were prepared to take
advantage of legality to reject full-blooded slogans and implacable
tactics. The so-called “young ones”, on the other hand, were toying with
“Leftism”, drifting towards anarchism. Considerable credit is due to
Bebel and Liebknecht for offering the most resolute resistance to these
waverings and making the party crisis a short-lived and not very serious
one.  

A period of rapid growth set in for the party, growth in both breadth
and depth, in the development of the trade union, co-operative, educational
and other forms of organisation of the forces of the proletariat, as well
as their political organisation. It is impossible to assess the gigantic
practical work carried out in all these spheres by Bebel as a
parliamentarian, agitator and organiser. It was by this work that Bebel
earned his position as the undisputed and generally accepted leader of the
party, the one who was closest to the working-class masses and most popular
among them.  

The last crisis in the German party in which Bebel took an active part
was that of the so-called Bernsteinism. At the very end of the last
century, Bernstein, formerly an orthodox Marxist, adopted purely reformist,
opportunist views. Attempts were made to turn the working-class party into
a petty-bourgeois party of social reforms. This new opportunism found many
supporters among the functionaries of the working-class movement and among
the intelligentsia.  

Bebel expressed the mood of the working-class masses and their firm
conviction that a fight should be put up for full-blooded slogans, when he
revolted with great vigour against this new opportunism. His speeches
against the opportunists at the congresses in Hanover and Dresden will long
remain as a model of the defence of Marxist views and of the struggle for
the truly socialist character of the workers’
party.[2] The period of preparation and the mustering of working-class
forces is in all countries a necessary stage in the development of the
world emancipation struggle of the proletariat, and nobody can compare with
August Bebel as a brilliant personification of the peculiarities and tasks
of that period. Himself a worker, he proved able to

    

break his own road to sound socialist convictions and be came a model
workers’ leader, a representative and participant in the mass struggle of
the wage-slaves of capital for a better social system.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Der Sozialdemokrat (Social-Democrat)—the illegal
organ of the German Social-Democratic Party published from 1879 to 1890.





[2]
The speeches referred to are “The Attack on the Fundamental Views and
Tactics of the Party” delivered at the Congress of the German
Social-Democratic Party in Hanover (October 9-14, 1899); “The Tactics of
the Party” and “Collaboration with the Bourgeois Press” delivered at the
Dresden Congress (September 13-20, 1903).










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Separation of Liberalism from Democracy









Lenin: The Separation of Liberalism from Democracy







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Separation of Liberalism from Democracy




Published:
Severnaya Pravda August 11, 1913.

      Signed: V. I..

      Published according to the Severnaya Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 302-304.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The separation of liberalism from democracy in Russia is
one of the basic questions of the entire emancipation movement.  

What is the cause of the movement’s weakness? Is it because democracy
has been insufficiently aware and definite in separating from
liberalism and has allowed itself to become infected by liberalism’s
importance and wavering? Or is it because democracy separated from
liberalism too soon (or too sharply, etc.) and thus weakened the “force of
the common onslaught”?  

There can scarcely be anybody interested in the cause of freedom who
will argue that this is not a question of fundamental importance. One
cannot be a conscious champion of freedom without giving a definite answer
to this question. To settle it one must understand which social forces,
which classes support liberalism, and which support democracy, and what
political strivings have their roots in the nature of these classes.  

In this article we want to throw some light on this fundamental
question from the point of view of current foreign political events. The
burning question is naturally that of the Second Balkan War, the defeat of
Bulgaria, the Bucharest peace that was so humiliating for her, and Russia’s
unsuccessful attempt to blame France for not having supported “us”, and
to obtain a revision of the peace terms.  

As we know, Novoye Vremya and Rech are in agreement
about these accusations against France, about this attempt to renew
Russia’s “active” policy in the Balkans. This

    

means that there is agreement between the feudal landowners and reactionary
nationalist ruling circles on the one hand, and the most politically
conscious, most organised circles of the liberal bourgeoisie, who have long
been gravitating towards an imperialist policy on the other.  

Apropos of this, Kievskaya Mysl, a provincial newspaper with a
large circulation, which expresses the views of certain sections of
petty-bourgeois democracy, said the following in a very instructive
editorial on August 1: 


   “It is not that the opposition and nationalism have
   changed places [as Mr. Milyukov asserted in his well-known foreign policy
   speech in the Duma] but that liberalism has separated
   [Kievskaya Mysl’s italics] from democracy and has entered, at
   first timidly, with backward glances, and then with head held high, upon
   the same path, the path of political adventure, along which nationalism
   leads the way under the same Slavophile banner.”  


And the newspaper in all justice recalls the generally known
facts—how Rech displayed “chauvinist enthusiasm”, how that
newspaper, permeated, in general, with “imperialist tendencies”, called
for an advance to Armenia, to the Bosphorus.  


   “Liberalism,” said Kievskaya Mysl, “by
   supporting at its own risk Russian foreign policy, which cannot be anything
   but a reaction cry nationalist policy as long as home policy remains such,
   has also taken upon itself political responsibility for that support.”
   


An incontestable truth. It only has to he fully analysed. If
it is true that the Russian foreign political line is deter mined by the
line in home policy (and it undoubtedly is), does this refer only to the
reactionaries?  Obviously not. Obviously it refers to liberalism as well.


Liberalism could not have “separated from democracy” in foreign
policy if it was not separated from democracy in home policy. Kievskaya
Mysl itself has to admit this when it says that “the character of the
political mistake of liberalism ... is evidence of profound organic
disorders”.  

That is just it! We should have put it differently—profound class
interests of the bourgeoisie—instead of using that somewhat high-sounding
and obscure expression. It was these class interests of liberalism that
made it fear

    

(especially in 1905) the democratic movement, and that made it turn to
the right both in home and foreign policy.  

It would be ridiculous for anyone to think of denying the connection
between Cadet imperialism and chauvinism today and the Cadet-Octobrist
slogan to save the Duma in the spring of 1907, between the Cadet vote
against local land committees in the spring of 1908 and the Cadet decision
to enter the Bulygin
Duma[1] in the autumn of 1905. This is the same policy of one
and the same class, which fears revolution more than it does reaction.


One of the main causes of the weakness of the Russian emancipation
movement is the lack of understanding of this truth by the broad sections
of the petty bourgeoisie in general, and by petty-bourgeois politicians,
writers and ideological leaders in particular.  

Contrary to the tales of the liberals who, in order to cover the steps
they were taking towards reconciliation with the Rights, pointed to the
“implacability” of the Lefts, working-class democrats have never lumped
the liberals and Rights together in “one reactionary
mass”,[2] have never refused to use their differences (at the
second stage of the Duma elections, for example) in the interests of the
emancipation movement. But working-class democrats considered—and must
always consider—their task to be one of neutralising the
wavering liberals, who are capable of becoming “infatuated” with
imperialism under Stolypin or Maklakov.  

Russian democracy cannot make a serious advance if it does not
recognise the deep-going class roots that separate liberalism from
democracy, if it does not spread the consciousness of this among the
masses, if it does not learn to neutralise in this way the
waverings of the liberals and their betrayals of the cause of “people’s
freedom”. Without this all talk of the successes of the emancipation
movement is meaningless.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Bulygin Duma—the advisory representative institution that
the tsarist government promised to convene in 1905. The draft of a law
founding an advisory State Duma and the election procedure were elaborated
by a commission under the chairmanship of Minister of the Interior Bulygin
and promulgated on August 6 (19), 1905 The Bolsheviks declared an active
boycott of the Bulygin Duma and put it into effect; the government was
unable to convene the Duma, its attempts to do so being foiled by the
political general strike of October 1905.





[2]
This refers to Lassalle’s well-known thesis that all other classes
constitute one reactionary mass as compared with the working class. The
thesis was included in the programme of the Socialist Workers’ Party of
Germany adopted at the Gotha Congress in 1875.  


Marx criticised this anti-revolutionary thesis in his “Critique of the
Gotha Programme”. (See K. Marx and F. Engels, Selected Works,
Vol. II, Moscow, 1958, pp. 25–27).










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## A Fine Business!









Lenin: A Fine Business!







V. I.  

      Lenin
A Fine Business!




Published:
Severnaya Pravda No. 14, August 18, 1913.

      Signed: I..

      Published according to the Severnaya Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 305-306.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

There are still many corners of Holy Mother Russia where it
is as if serfdom reigned but yesterday. Take the Urals, for
example. Landowners there possess tens of thousands of dessiatines of
land. The factories (i.e., the same land owners) prevent handicraftsmen
from developing small industry. The peasants are still dependent on the
landowners and up to now have not been allotted any land.  

And the Urals is not a tiny “corner”, it is a huge and very rich
region.  

Litigation between the Stroganov factory workers in the Urals and the
management of the factories owned by that very rich landowner over the
allotment of land to the peas ants according to the law of 1862
(eighteen sixty-two!)  dragged on for many years.  

At last an end was put to the case by a decision of the “supreme
institution”, the Senate, taken in the spring of 1909. The Senate directed
the Perm Gubernia authorities to allot land to the peasants, to
apply the law of 1862.  

Thus, forty-seven years after the promulgation of the law the Senate
instructed the landowners to apply it.  

And what happened?  

What happened was that the landowners lodged a complaint with the
landowner Stolypin, who was Minister of the Interior at the time. The
Senate is, by law, higher than the Minister of the Interior, but Stolypin
“clamped down on the law” and sent the Governor of Perm a
telegram—suspend fulfilment of the Senate’s instructions!  

The Governor suspended it. More correspondence ensued, more red tape.


At last the Council of State agreed with the opinion of the Senate and
the decision of the Council of State was

    

“granted supreme sanction”, i.e., was confirmed by the highest authority.


And what happened?  

What happened was that the landowners applied to the landowner
N. A. Maklakov, who had become Minister of the Interior in place of
Stolypin. A deputation from the Urals landowners “convinced” the
Minister. The Minister declared that the decision of the Senate and the
Council of State was “unclear”.  

More correspondence ensued, more red tape.  

In May 1913 the Senate again adopted a decision that was not in the
Minister’s favour.  

The Urals landowners again wrote to the Minister....  

That is how the matter still stands. Although more than half a century
has elapsed since the promulgation of the law of 1862 allotting land to the
Urals workers, the land has not been allotted.  

In relating this instructive story the liberal newspapers come to the
conclusion that all is not right with the “rule of law” in Russia. That
is true, but it is not the whole truth.  

It is ridiculous to speak of “law” when the landowners both make the
laws and in practice apply or annul them. There is, therefore, a class that
itself creates the “law” and itself annuls it. Liberal speeches about
“law” and “reforms”, therefore, are empty chatter.  

The landowners are also in favour of “law”, but it is landowners’
law, their own law, the law of their class that they favour.  

If the liberals still renounce the “theory” of the class struggle,
call it a mistake, etc., in face of these instructive facts, it only goes
to show that the liberal conscience is not clear. Do not the liberals want
to share privileges with the landowners? If so, it is
understandable that they do not like the “theory” of the class struggle!


But in what way are the workers to blame if their “theory” is proved
correct by real events?  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Nationalisation of Jewish Schools









Lenin: The Nationalisation of Jewish Schools







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Nationalisation of Jewish Schools




Published:
Severnaya Pravda No. 18, August 18, 1913.

      Signed: V. I..

      Published according to the Severnaya Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 307-308.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
Unknown
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (1901).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The politics of the government are soaked in the spirit of
nationalism. Attempts are made to confer every kind of privilege upon the
“ruling”, i.e., the Great-Russian nation, even though the Great Russians
represent a minority of the population of Russia, to be exact,
only 43 per cent.  

Attempts are made to cut down still further the rights of all the other
nations inhabiting Russia, to segregate one from the other and stir up
enmity among them.  

The extreme expression of present-day nationalism is the scheme for the
nationalisation of Jewish schools. The scheme emanated from the educational
officer of Odessa district, and has been sympathetically considered by the
Ministry of Public “Education”. What does this nationalisation mean?


It means segregating the Jews into special Jewish schools
(secondary schools). The doors of all other educational
establishments—both private and state—are to be completely closed to
the Jews. This “brilliant” plan is rounded off by the proposal to limit
the number of pupils in the Jewish secondary schools to the notorious
“quota”!  

In all European countries such measures and laws against the Jews
existed only in the dark centuries of the Middle Ages, with their
Inquisition, the burning of heretics and similar delights. In Europe the
Jews have long since been granted complete equality and are fusing more and
more with the nations in whose midst they live.  

The most harmful feature in our political life generally, and in the
above scheme particularly, apart from the oppression and persecution of the
Jews, is the striving to fan the flames of nationalism, to segregate the
nationalities

    

in the state one from another, to increase their estrangement, to separate
their schools.  

The interests of the working class—as well as the interests of
political liberty generally—require, on the contrary, the fullest
equality of all the nationalities in the state without exception, and the
elimination of every kind of barrier between the nations, the bringing
together of children of all nations in the same schools, etc. Only by
casting off every savage and foolish national prejudice, only by uniting
the workers of all nations into one association, can the working class
become a force, offer resistance to capitalism, and achieve a serious
improvement in its living conditions.  

Look at the capitalists! They try to inflame national strife among the
“common people”, while they themselves manage their business affairs
remarkably well—Russians, Ukrainians, Poles, Jews, and Germans together
in one and the same corporation. Against the workers the capitalists of all
nations and religions are united, but they strive to divide and weaken the
workers by national strife!  

This most harmful scheme for the nationalisation of the Jewish schools
shows, incidentally, how mistaken is the plan for so—called
“cultural-national autonomy”, i.e., the idea of taking education out of
the hands of the state and handing it over to each nation separately. It is
not this we should strive for, but for the unity of the workers of all
nations in the struggle against all nationalism, in the struggle
for a truly democratic common school and for political liberty
generally. The example of the advanced countries of the world—say,
Switzerland in Western Europe or Finland in Eastern Europe—shows us that
only consistently-democratic state institutions ensure the most peaceable
and human (not bestial) coexistence of various nationalities,
without the artificial and harmful separation of education
according to nationalities.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Iron on Peasant Farms









Lenin: Iron on Peasant Farms







V. I.  

      Lenin
Iron on Peasant Farms




Published:
Severnaya Pravda No. 16, August 21, 1913.

      Signed: N. N..

      Published according to the Severnaya Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 309-310.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Promyshlennost i Torgovlya, the organ of our
industrial millionaires, the organ of the Council of Congresses, recently
gave vent to a sort of foolishly hypocritical or hypocritically foolish
sigh because Russia turns out to be the neighbour of one of the most
backward countries, Spain, as far as the per capita consumption of the most
important items of production is concerned.  

With regard to iron, one of the most important products of modern
industry, one of the foundations of civilisation, one might say, Russia’s
backwardness and barbarism is particularly great.  

“A cart with iron tyres is still a rarity in the Russian
countryside,” the organ of the millionaires admitted.  

However, on the question of whether this cultural “rarity” in the
Russian village depends on the incidence of serf relations and the
omnipotence of the feudal landowners (on whom the “aces” of Russian
capitalism fawn), the millionaires maintain a modest silence.  

We greatly love to chatter about culture, about the development of
productive forces, about improving the peasant farm, and so on, and we are
past masters at it. Yet whenever it comes to removing the Stone that lies
in the way of “improving the lot” of millions of impoverished,
downtrodden, hungry, ragged, savage peasants, our millionaires become
tongue-tied.  

Here are some figures from Hungarian agricultural statistics that
clearly show the significance the oppression of the peasantry by the
landowners has in regard to the extent to which iron is used, that
is, in regard to the solidity of the iron foundation of culture in the
country concerned.  

Hungary, of course, is the country closest to Russia, not only
geographically, but on account of the omnipotence

    

of the reactionary landowners, who have retained a tremendous quantity of
land from medieval times.  

In Germany, for instance, there are 23,000 properties out of 5,500,000
that are more than 100 hectares in extent and together they make up less
than a quarter of the total land area; in Hungary there are 24,000 such
properties out of 2,800,000 and they makeup 45 per cent of the country’s
total land area!  Four thousand Hungarian landowners have more than a
thousand dessiatines each, and together they own almost a third of
all the land. As you can see that is not far removed from “Mother
Russia”.  

Hungarian statistics (1895) made a particularly detailed investigation
of the question of iron on peasant farms. It was shown that out of
2,800,000 farms, a million and a half belonging to labourers (or
proletarians, with up to 5 Joch or 2.85 dessiatines) and also one
million small peasant farms (up to 20 Joch, that is, up to 11
dessiatines) have to make do with wooden implements.  

These 2,500,000 farms (out of a total of 2,800,000) no doubt use mainly
ploughs with a wooden shaft, harrows with wooden frames and on almost half
of them the carts in use are without iron tyres.  

There are no complete figures for Russia. The figures available for
separate localities show that the poverty, primitiveness and neglect on
most Russian peasant farms are incomparably greater than on Hungarian
farms.  

And it cannot be otherwise. If the tyred cart is not to be a rarity
there must be a free, educated, bold farmer who is capable of dealing with
the feudal landowners, who is capable of getting away from routine methods
and has all the land in the state at his disposal. “Culture” is as much
to be expected of the peasant who is still oppressed by the Markovs and
Purishkeviches with their landed estates, as humanity is to be expected of
the
Saltykovas.[1] 

The millionaires of our industry prefer to share medieval privileges,
with the Purishkeviches and to sigh about the deliverance of “the
fatherland” from medieval lack of culture....  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Saltykova, Darya Ivanovna (1730-1801)—a serf-owner notorious
for her brutal treatment of her serfs.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Metalworkers' Strikes in 1912









Lenin: Metalworkers' Strikes in 1912







V. I.  

      Lenin
Metalworkers’ Strikes in 1912




Published:
Metallist Nos. 7,8 and 10; August 24, September 18, and October 25, 1913.

      Signed: V. Ilyin.

      Published according to the Metallist text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 311-324.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The Association of Factory Owners in the Moscow Industrial
Area has this year published (Moscow, 1913, P. P. Ryabushinsky’s Press)
something in the nature of a report on its activities for 1912. Perhaps the
most interesting part of the report is that giving data on the strike
movement in various parts of Russia.  
I

The total number of strikers in Russia is estimated by the Association
of Moscow Factory Owners as 96,750 in 1911 and 211,595 in 1912. These
figures are for economic strikes only. The Association estimates
political strikes as affecting 850,000 workers in 1912, 8,000 in 1911 and
4,000 in 1910.  

Note that “for convenient comparison with official information”,
which does not cover enterprises not under the Factory Inspectorate, the
Association of Moscow magnates has omitted the 6,000 Lena strikers. It goes
without saying that we still have no guarantee that such a comparison has
been done correctly—the factory owners decided to copy the bad aspects of
our official statistics and not worry about the completeness of their data
or even about the accuracy of those who compiled them. The summary table of
the number of strikers (page 23 of the report), for instance, is
astonishingly full of crude errors, which we have endeavoured to correct in
giving the totals quoted above. That table assessed the metalworkers
participating in strikes in the Kingdom of Poland for the whole of
1912 as 2,390, and on page 56 we are told that for seven months of
1912

    

a total of 3,790 metalworkers took part in strikes in the Kingdom of
Poland!  

One cannot help wishing that our Kit Kityches would hire writers able
to count or would send their statistics to workers’ trade unions to be
checked and corrected.  

Let us see what role the metalworkers played in the economic strike
movement of 1912 according to the factory owners’ statistics.  

These data distribute the total number of strikers, 211,595, as
follows: metalworkers, 78,195; textile workers, 89,540; workers of all
other branches of industry, 43,860. Since there are far fewer metalworkers
than textile workers in Russia, these figures show immediately that in 1912
the metalworkers conducted a most stubborn and persistent strike
struggle as compared with workers in other branches of industry. To give
this conclusion clearer expression, let us compare the total number of
workers in Russia with the number of strikers in 1912.  





 
Total number of workers in Russia according
    to statistics
Number of strikers in 1912 (according
    to the factory
  owners’ data)


1908 (including miners)
1910 (excluding miners)




Metalworkers . . . . . . . .  
529,274
280,194
78,195


Textile workers . . . . . . . 
823,401
840,520
89,540


Others . . . . . . . . . . .  
901,112
831,241
43,860


Totals . . . . . . .
2,253,787
1,951,955
211,595




These data show dearly that the metalworkers hold first place for the
vigorous nature of their strike struggle; the second place is held by the
textile workers, and the workers in other branches of industry take last
place.  

If the “other” workers had been as energetic in striking as the
metalworkers, the number of strikers would have been increased by some
90,000.  

There is no doubt that the relatively more favourable market conditions
in 1912 facilitated the strike struggle of the metalworkers, but, although
the metalworkers outdid everyone else in persistence, the “others”, as we
shall see later, fared best of all as far as success of the
economic strikes was concerned.  
    

II

The persistence of the strike struggle is determined, among other
things, by the average duration of the strikes. This average is obtained by
dividing the total number of days lost through strikes by the number of
strikers.  

Here are the figures given by the Association of Factory Owners: 





 
Average duration of strike




1895-1904 . . . . . . . . 
4.8 days


1909 . . . . . . . . . .  
6.5 ”


1911 . . . . . . . . . .  
8.2 ”


1912 . . . . . . . .  . . 
13.4 ”




“It turns out that the resistance of the workers,” says the report,
“was almost twice as great in 1912 as that of 1911.” To this we must add
that if we take the last seven months of 1912 (and, indeed, only for this
period are the data in the report under review reasonably well processed),
we get an average of 16 days as the length of a strike.  

It therefore follows that the stubbornness of the workers in the strike
struggle is undoubtedly increasing and is becoming greater as time goes on.


The duration of the strikes in the different branches of industry was
as follows: 





 
1911
1912
The last seven months of 1912




Metalworkers . . . . . . . .  
10.0 days
14.2 days
18.8 days


Textile workers . . . . . . . 
9.2 ”
11.9 ”
14.0 ”


Others . . . . . . . . . . .  
5.0 ”
15.6 ”
16.8 ”


All industries . . .
8.2 ”
13.4 ”
16.0 ”




From this we see that as far as concerns the duration of strikes,
metalworkers held first place in 1911 and in the second half of 1912; it
was only in the first half of 1912 that the “others” took first place and
the metalworkers found themselves in the second place. Throughout the whole
of the period under review the textile workers have been in the second
place as far as the duration of their strikes is concerned.  
    

III

The factory owners assess the general outcome of the strikes by a
computation of “losses to industry” from strikes. Our
capitalists do not wish to compute what the working class has gained,
through strikes! Here is a summary of the factory owners’ statistics: 





Branches of industry
Direct losses to industry from strikes
  (economic)
Loss of workers’ wages
Loss to country in underproduc- tion


(thousand rubles)




Metal . . . . . . . . . . . .
558
1,145
4,959


Textiles . . . . . . . . . . . .
479
807
6,010


Others . . . . . . . . . . . .
328
529
3,818


   Totals for 1912 . . . . .
1,365
2,481
14,787


   ” ” 1911 . . . . . . . . . . . 
402
716
4,563




We see from this table that in 1912 the capitalists’ losses were
three times greater than in 1911.  

Representatives of bourgeois political economy will object—but, they
will say, did not the “country” lose three times as much and were not the
workers’ wage losses three times as much, and are not the workers’ losses
in wages of more significance than the factory owners’ losses?  

According to factory owners’ statistics, and bourgeois logic, too,
these foolish workers are only doing themselves harm with their strikes,
and the solicitous authorities and capitalist benefactors who persecute
them for striking are only acting in the interests of the workers....  

The same factory owners tell us that they have succeeded in assessing
the results of the 1911 strikes in respect of 96,730 strikers.  

In the strike struggle 47,369 workers (49 per cent) were
defeated and 49,361 (51 per cent) achieved the complete or partial
satisfaction of their demands, i.e., were successful.  

This is the result of strikes that factory owners’ statistics and
bourgeois economy prefer not to take into account! And, indeed, it cannot
be reckoned in rubles; for apart from the workers’ direct gain in increased
wages

    

when a strike is successful, there is still another “gain”. The entire
working class, and, therefore, the entire country (the country of
the working masses and not of the bourgeois minority) gains from the
resistance offered by striking workers to the exploiters. Without that
resistance the workers would have become downright paupers, crushed by the
high cost of living; without that resistance they would be transformed from
human beings into the hopeless slaves of capital.  

According to the factory owners’ statistics, strikes were less
successful in the second half of 1912; 52 per cent of the workers on strike
suffered defeat, only 36 per cent were successful, and
for 11 per cent the outcome was not determined. At this point we must make
a more thorough examination of the role of striking metalworkers in Russia
in general and in the various districts in particular.  
IV

The Association of Moscow Factory Owners provides fairly well processed
information on strikes, as we have said, only for the last seven months of
1912. The information covers five areas of Russia—the Moscow,
St. Petersburg, Baltic and Southern areas, and the Kingdom of Poland.  

The metalworkers striking during these months are distributed by areas
as follows: 





Area
Number of strikers in the last seven months of 1912


Total
Metalworkers




Moscow . . . . . . . . .
48,140
3,760


St. Petersburg . . . . . 
35,390
15,160


Baltic . . . . . . . . . 
13,210
1,160


Southern . . . . . . . .  
22,195
16,605


Kingdom of Poland . . . . 
12,690
3,790


Totals . . . . . . . .   
131,625
40,475




In the Southern area, therefore, metalworkers predominate among the
total number of strikers, In the St. Petersburg

    

area they constitute a very significant section of the strikers (over 40
per cent) and are second only to the textile workers (16,770 strikers in
the St. Petersburg area). In the Moscow, Baltic and Polish areas, the
metalworkers were but a small minority among the strikers.  

By comparing the first five months of 1912 with the last seven months
we get: 





 
Number of strikers:


First 5 months 
Last 7 months


1912




Metalworkers . . . .        
37,720
40,475


Textile workers . . .       
22,950
60,590


Others . . . . . . . .      
19,300
24,560


Totals  . . . . .  
79,970
131,625




In the second half of the year the vigour with which the metalworkers
engaged in strikes was somewhat less—the strike movement greatly
increased among the textile workers while that of workers in other branches
of Industry remained at approximately the same level.  
V

To assess the outcome of strikes the Moscow Association of Factory
Owners divides strikers into three groups—those defeated, those
successful (whose demands were wholly or partially acceded to) and those
whose strikes ended without definite results.  

This is one of the most interesting of all questions of strike
statistics. The millionaires’ association has handled the question badly;
for example, there are no data on offensive strikes (when the workers
demand an improvement in their living and working conditions) and
defensive strikes (when workers resist changes introduced by the
capitalists worsening living and working conditions). Nor is there
any detailed information on the causes of strikes (such information is
given even in our official statistics), etc.  
 

The way the Association of Moscow Factory Owners have handled what
information they do give is, furthermore, extremely unsatisfactory. There
are even obvious cases of out-and-out distortion of figures; in the Moscow
area, for instance, the number of metalworkers successful in strikes is
assessed at 40 (with 3,420 defeated and 300 with undetermined results).


But in the letterpress of the report, page 35, we find that at the
beginning of July 1912, there was a strike of workers in a number of art
metalware workshops involving more than 1,200 workers in
15 enterprises. It was an offensive strike—the workers demanded a
nine-hour day with a seven-hour day on the eve of holidays, as well as
higher wages and better sanitary conditions. The owners of the workshops
tried to organise resistance and decided unanimously not to make
concessions and not to accept orders from the shops on strike. The workers
had apparently chosen a favourable moment—it was the height of the
building season, “it was hard to find unengaged workers. By the end of
July the owners of the majority of work shops made concessions”.


This is what the report says! And in the statistical table the number
of metalworkers winning strikes is shown as 40 (forty!). One
begins to wonder whether the factory owners’ statisticians were not only
too willing “to forget” the victories of the workers. Did they
not strive—unwittingly, of course—to please the Kit Kityches by
understating the number of victorious workers?  

In any case, organised, class-conscious workers must approach the
factory owners’ statistics with caution and scepticism and must persist in
their attempts to compile their own, workers’ strike statistics.


The overall figures on the outcome of strikes given by the factory
owners are: 





Number of strikers
Metal- workers
Textile workers
Others
Totals




Defeated . . . . . . . .   
19,990
43,085
7,150
70,225


Successful . . . . . . .   
17,860
20,285
9,520
47,665


Outcome unknown . . .      
2,625
3,220
7,890
13,735


Totals. . . . . . 
40,475
66,590
24,560
131,625



 

We see from this that the most successful of all were workers in
other branches of industry—more workers won their strikes than
lost them. Second place is held by the metalworkers; the number of
successful strikers is nevertheless very considerable—over 40 per cent of
the total. The textile workers had the worst results—their losses were
more than twice as great as their gains.  
VI

Taking them by and large, the results of the strike struggle in 1912
were not bad, although they were not so good as those of 1911. To make it
easier to compare the data for different years let us divide the number of
strikers, the outcome of whose strikes is unknown, equally between the
successful and unsuccessful strikers. In this way we obtain for the last
seven months of 1912, a total of 77,000 unsuccessful (i.e., 58.4 per cent)
and 55,000 successful (i.e., 41.6 per cent) strikers out of 132,000.  

It cannot be guaranteed that these figures are identical in kind with
those of official statistics for previous years. We shall, however, quote
these figures so that workers will be able to judge the general
outcome of strikes in Russia in the best and worst years of the
working-class movement.  





 
Number of strikers (thousands)


Suc- cessful
%
Unsuc- cessful
%
Totals




1895–1904 (total for ten years)   
159
37.5
265
62.5
424


1905  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
705
48.9
734
51.1
1,439


1906  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
233
50.9
225
49.1
458


1907  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
59
29.5
141
70.5
200


1908  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
—
—
—
—
—


1909  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
—
—
—
—
—


1910  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
—
—
—
—
—


1911  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
49
51.0
47
49.0
96


1912 (seven months) . . . . . . . 
55
41.6
77
58.4
132




Thus, the results of the strikes in the second half of 1912 were
not so good as those of 1905, 1906, and 1911 but better
than those of 1895–1004 and better than those of 1907. We must
repeat that the figures at our disposal for the

    

various years are probably not fully comparable, but they can give some
idea of the situation.  

Let it be noted that according to British strike statistics for the ten
years 1900–09 the average annual percentage of workers winning strikes was
26.8, defeated 31.7, and ending their strikes in a compromise 41.3. If the
last figure is divided equally between successful and unsuccessful strikers
we get: successful, 47.5 per cent, unsuccessful, 52.3
per cent. Strikes in Russia in 1905 and 1906, and again in 1911, were more
successful than the average British strikes despite the tremendous
advantages possessed by the British workers in respect of organisation and
political liberty.  
VII

It is rather interesting to compare the results of metalworkers’
strikes in different parts of Russia.  

The Moscow and St. Petersburg areas differ from all others in this
respect. The strikes of both metalworkers and all other workers were, in
general, relatively unsuccessful in the last seven months of 1912 in the
Moscow and St. Petersburg areas. The opposite is true of other areas.  

Here are the figures for the Moscow and St. Petersburg areas.  





 
Number of striking metal workers
    in the last seven months of 1912


Moscow area 
St. Petersburg area




Defeated . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    
3,420
10,840


Successful . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
40
4,170


Outcome unknown . . . . . . . . . . . .   
300
150


Totals  . . . . . . . . . . . .  
3,760
15,160




The number of defeated is much greater than the number of successful
strikers. The same is true of the textile workers in both areas and of
“the others” in St. Petersburg. Only in the Moscow area did “the
others” show a greater number of successful (4,380) than unsuccessful
strikers (1,230).  
 

Apparently there were certain general conditions in the Moscow and
St. Petersburg districts that were unfavourable to workers’ strikes in
nearly all branches of industry.  

In the South, on the contrary, and in the Baltic and Polish districts,
the strikes of all workers in general, and of metalworkers in particular,
were successful.  





 
Number of striking metalworkers in the
    last seven months of 1912


South
Baltic area
Kingdom of Poland




Defeated . . . . . . . . . . . . 
4,390
440
900


Successful . . . . . . . . . . . 
10,040
720
2,890


Outcome unknown . . . . . . . .  
2,175
—
—


   Totals . . . . . . . . . 
16,605
1,160
3,790




The metalworkers had their greatest success in Poland; in general, the
economic conditions for a strike movement in that district turned out most
favourable for the workers. They were successful there in all
branches of industry (in the South “the others” suffered a defeat and in
the Baltic area the textile workers’ struggle ended in “a draw”—there
were 1,485 each successful and unsuccessful strikers). Even the textile
workers, who were, in general, most severely defeated throughout Russia in
the second half of 1912 (43,000 defeated and 20,000 successful) scored a
brilliant victory in the Kingdom of Poland—only 390 defeated as compared
with 8,060 successful.  

In the West and South of Russia the workers attacked the capitalists
and scored big victories; in Moscow and St. Petersburg they also attacked
but in most cases their at tacks were warded off. Unfortunately, the data
we are analysing are too scanty to permit a comparison with 1911 and it is
impossible to draw a definite conclusion as to the causes of the
difference.  
VIII

As we have seen, the metalworkers come first as far as the persistence
of their strikes is concerned and the textile workers are in the last
place. It is interesting to compare

    

the persistence of the successful strikes of metalworkers with that of the
unsuccessful. Here are the figures: 





 
Number of metalworker strikers
Number of days lost  (thousands) 
Average number of days lost per striker




Defeated . . . . . . . . .      
19,990
230.7
11.5


Successful . . . . . . . .      
17,860
387.3
21.7


Outcome unknown . . . . .       
2,625
145.3
55.4


   Totals . . . . . . . . 
40,475
763.3
18.8




We see that the distinguishing feature of successful metalworkers’
strikes is that they were almost twice as persistent as the unsuccessful
strikes (21.7 days as compared with 11.5 days). Victory was not easily
achieved. Only by tremendous vigour and persistence was it possible to
break the resistance of the capitalists. The strikes whose outcome was not
clearly defined were apparently those in which the strength of the
“contestants” was more or less equal and the struggle was extraordinarily
stubborn; the average length of strikes leading to indefinite results was
55.4 days.  

Be it noted that among “the other” workers we also observe greater
stubbornness in successful strikes and among textile workers we see the
opposite—the unsuccessful strikes of the latter were the most stubborn.


A comparison of the persistence of metalworkers’ strikes in the
different areas of Russia gives the following results: 





 
Average length of strikes per striking metalworker


Moscow area
St. Petersburg  area
Baltic area 
South
Kingdom of Poland




Defeated . . . . . . . . . .  
11.5
12.1
5.9
12.0
5.2


Successful . . . . . . . . .  
1.5
37.2
23.7
14.9
22.4


 Outcome unknown . . . . . . . 
12.0
261.3
—
47.1
—


   Totals . . . . . . . 
11.5
21.4
17.0
18.4
18.3




First place for duration of strikes among the metalworkers in general
is taken by the St. Petersburg area; next comes the South, then the Polish
and Baltic areas and,

    

lastly, the Moscow area. With the exception of the Moscow area all other
successful strikes were more stubborn than the unsuccessful.  

Judging by the persistence of their strikes and also by the percentage
of workers participating in the strike struggle, the St. Petersburg
metalworkers play the role of vanguard to the metalworkers of all
Russia. And the metalworkers in general play the same role to the workers
of the other branches of industry.  
IX

Extreme brevity is the distinguishing feature of the descriptions of
individual strikes in the report by the Moscow Association of Factory
Owners. We shall quote a few of these descriptions so that metalworkers may
see how the gentlemen who compile reports for factory owners
depict their struggle.  

In the Moscow area the strike of 1,200 workers in art metalware
workshops is a remarkable case. We have already mentioned this.  

The factory owners regard the strike at Siemens and Halske, lasting 14
weeks and ending on August 19, as one of the most stubborn in the
St. Petersburg area. The Factory Owners’ Association reports that 1,600
workers took part. The factory management did not agree to withdraw the
fine imposed for May Day but “in exchange expressed the wish to pay the
workers a Christmas bonus of three rubles. Then the factory management
agreed to include May Day in the list of holidays if the government did not
put any obstacles in the way” (page 38 of the report). “During the
strike,” we read in the report, “there were several cases of workers
attacking the newly employed with the help of whom work was partially
resumed.”  

Most noteworthy of the metalworkers’ strikes in the South was that of
3,886 Nikolayev shipyard workers that caused the loss of more than 155,000
working days. The workers demanded the eight-hour day, a fifty per cent in
crease in wages, the annulment of fines and all overtime, and the
institution of elected shop stewards, etc. The strike

    

lasted all the month of June. “At the end of June an agreement was reached
between the workers and the shipyard management under which all workers
returned to their places; the shipyard recognised the shop stewards, a
messroom was opened and wages were increased by 18 per cent.” There were
clashes between strikers and blacklegs.  

The strike that broke out at a locomotive works in Kharkov in November
involving 2,000 workers was exceptionally stubborn. The works had urgent
government orders to fulfil and “suffered heavy losses on account of the
stoppage”.  

Among the strikes in the Urals area, which were completely
omitted from the Association of Factory Owners’ statistics, we must
make special mention of the strike at the Sysert factories. The workers won
a wage increase. “At the government munitions factory in Zlatoust the
strike was caused by the death of three workers from injuries inflicted by
machines. The strikers demanded the installation of safety devices and also
an increase in wages.”  
X

Even a cursory glance at the scanty figures provided by the factory
owners’ statistics must reveal the following.  

Strike statistics that are complete, accurate, intelligently processed
and published in good time have tremendous importance, both theoretical and
practical, for the workers. They provide valuable information that
illuminates every step of the great road the working class is travelling
towards its world-wide goals, and also the closer, current tasks of the
struggle.  

In countries that are to some extent democratic and free, tolerable
government statistics are possible. This is out of the question in
Russia. Our government statistics are poor, they are absurdly split up
among “departments”, they are unreliable and their publication is
delayed. The factory owners’ statistics are little better and still less
complete, although sometimes they are published somewhat earlier than those
of the sleepy Russian civil servant.  

The workers must consider producing their own, workers’ strike
statistics. The difficulties involved in compiling such

    

statistics are, of course, exceedingly great in view of the persecution of
workers’ associations and the working-class press in Russia. It is
impossible to overcome these difficulties at once. Workers, however, are
not accustomed to showing fear of persecution or retreating in face of
difficulties.  

Even partial strike statistics by workers, i.e., those that cover
separate areas, separate branches of industries and relatively short
periods, will be of great value. Such statistics will teach the workers how
to compile something fuller and better and will at times enable them to
compare the factory owners’ or civil servants’ picture with their own.


We therefore permit ourselves to conclude this analysis of factory
owners’ statistics with the wish that workers should, despite all the
obstacles, again and again attempt to compile their own, workers’ strike
statistics. Two or three class-conscious workers could compile an accurate
description of each strike, the time it begins and ends, the number of
participants (with distribution according to sex and age wherever
possible), the causes and the results of the strike. Such a description
should be sent in one copy to the headquarters of the workers’ association
concerned (trade union or other body, or the office of the trade union
newspaper); a second copy should be sent to the central workers’ newspaper;
lastly, a third copy should be sent to a working-class deputy of the State
Duma for his information.  

Both factory owners’ and government statistics will always
contain not only gaps but also distortions. Even in the press that
sympathises with the workers we often come across monstrously false, absurd
appraisals of strikes as manifestations of “a craze”, etc., appraisals
permeated with the bourgeois spirit.  

Only by getting down to business themselves will the workers—in time,
after stubborn work and persistent effort—be able to help towards a
better understanding of their own movement and thus ensure bigger successes
for that movement.  

 

Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Russian Bourgeoisie and Russian Reformism









Lenin: The Russian Bourgeoisie and Russian Reformism







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Russian Bourgeoisie and Russian Reformism




Published:
Severnaya Pravda No. 21, August 27, 1913; Nash Put No. 3, August 28, 1913.

      Signed: V. Ilyin.

      Published according to the Severnaya Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 325-327.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The working-class press has already reported and given its
appraisal of the appeal to the Prime Minister made by Mr. Salazkin in
Nizhni-Novgorod on behalf of the merchants of Russia in respect of the
“urgent necessity” for radical political reforms. It is, however, worth
while re turning to the subject on account of two important circumstances.


How rapidly the United Nobility and the merchants of Russia have
exchanged roles! For forty years or more, prior to 1905, the nobility
played at liberalism and made respectful references to a constitution,
while the merchants seemed more satisfied, less oppositional.  

After 1905 the situation was reversed. The nobility turned
arch-reactionary. The June Third constitution left them quite satisfied and
they desired changes only insofar as they were farther to the right. The
merchants, on the contrary, became a definitely liberal opposition.  

All at once Russia became, as it were, “Europeanised”, i.e., fitted
into the usual European relations between feudals and bourgeoisie. It
stands to reason that this happened only because purely capitalist
relations had long been the basis of political grouping in Russia. They had
been maturing since 1861 and rapidly reached full maturity in the fires of
1905. All the Narodnik phraseology about Russia’s fundamental
exceptionalism and all attempts to argue about Russian politics and Russian
economics from a supra-class or extra-class position immediately lost all
their interest and became boring, inept, ridiculously old-fashioned
rubbish.  
 

A step forward has been made; the harmful self-deception has been got
rid of; the childish hope of achieving anything worth while and serious
without class battles has been got rid of. Take the side of one class or
another, help the consciousness and development of one class policy or
another—such is the stern but useful lesson taught in an affirmative form
by the year 1905 and confirmed in a negative form by the experience of the
June Third system.  

The extra-class nonsense of the liberal intellectuals and
petty-bourgeois Narodniks has been swept aside from the path of
history. And a good thing too. It should have been done long ago!  

On the other hand, take a look at the reformism of the liberal
merchants of Russia. They announce the “urgent necessity for the reforms”
recorded in the Manifesto of October Seventeenth. Everybody knows that the
Manifesto speaks of “the unshakable foundations of civil liberty”, “real
inviolability of person”, “freedom of conscience, speech, assembly and
association”, and also “the further development of the principle of
universal franchise”.  

Obviously, this is really a list of radical political
reforms. Obviously, the implementation of even one of those reforms alone
would constitute a great change for the better.  

And now all the merchants of Russia, economically the most
powerful class in capitalist Russia, demand all these reforms. Why
is it that these demands have been treated by everyone with complete
indifference, why does everyone think they lack seriousness—everyone,
from the Prime Minister who listened to them, ate and drank, replied, ex
pressed his thanks and went away, down to that Moscow merchant who said
that Salazkin’s words were excellent but would not amount to anything?


Why is this?  

It is because Russia is in that peculiar historical situation, which
for a long time the big European states have not experienced (but which, at
some time or other, occurred in each one of them), when reformism is
particularly dull, ridiculous, impotent and, therefore, repellent. There is
no doubt that the implementation of any of the reforms demand ed by the
merchants—either freedom of conscience or freedom of association or any
other freedom—would mean a

    

great change for the better. Every advanced class—first and foremost the
working class—would grasp with both hands the slightest reformist
possibility of effecting any change for the better.  

That is a simple truth that the opportunists just cannot understand
when they make such a fuss about their sapient “partial demands”,
although the example of the excellent way the workers seized upon the
“partial” (though real) insurance reform should have been a lesson to
everybody.  

But the point is that there is nothing “real” in the
reformism of the liberals as far as political reforms are concerned. In
other words—everybody knows full well, both the merchants and the
Octobrist-Cadet majority in the Duma, that there is not and cannot be the
tiniest reformist path to any one of the reforms demanded by
Salazkin. Everybody knows, understands and feels it.  

For this reason there is more historical realism, historical reality
and efficacy in a simple indication of the absence of a reformist path than
there is in widely-broad cast, inflated, high-sounding nonsense about any
reforms you like. He who knows that there is no reformist path and passes
that knowledge on to others is doing a thousand times more in deed
to utilise insurance and any other “possibility” for purposes of
democratic progress than those who chatter about reforms and do not believe
what they themselves say.  

The truth that reforms are possible only as a by-product of a movement
that is completely free of all the narrowness of reformism has been
confirmed a hundred times in world history and is particularly
true for Russia today. That is why liberal reformism is so dead. That is
why the contempt for reformism on the part of democrats and of the working
class is so much alive.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Role of Social Estates and Classes in the Liberation Movement









Lenin: The Role of Social Estates and Classes in the Liberation Movement







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Role of Social Estates and Classes in the Liberation Movement




Published:
Severnaya Pravda No. 22, August 28, 1913; Nash Put No. 4, August 29, 1913.

      Signed: V. Ilyin.

      Published according to the Severnaya Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 328-331.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Statistical data on crimes against the state in Russia have
been published in a legal journal. The statistics are very instructive,
they provide precise figures on the question of the role of the social
estates and classes in the liberation movement at different historical
epochs.  

Unfortunately, the data are incomplete. The epochs dealt with are:
1827–46 (the epoch of serfdom); 1884–90 (the epoch of the
raznochintsi[1]

movement, the merging of the bourgeois-liberal and liberal-Narodnik
movements). Lastly there is the epoch immediately preceding the revolution
(1901–03) and the revolutionary epoch (1905–08), that is, the epochs of
the bourgeois-democratic and proletarian movements.  

The figures on the role played by the social estates are the following;
out of one hundred persons charged with crimes against the state there
were: 





Epoch
Nobility
Urban petty bourgeoisie and peasants
Clergy
Merchants




1827–46 
76
23
?
?


1884–90 
30.6
46.6
6.4
12.1


1901–03 
10.7
80.9
1.6
4.1


1905–08 
9.1
87.7
?
?




From these figures it can be seen how rapidly the nineteenth-century
liberation movement became democratised

    

and how sharply its class composition changed. The epoch of serfdom
(1827–46) saw the absolute predominance of the nobility. That is the epoch
from the Decembrists to Herzen. Feudal Russia is downtrodden and
motionless. An insignificant minority of the nobility, helpless without the
support of the people, protested. But, these, the best of the nobility,
helped to awaken the people.  

In the epoch of the raznochintsi or the bourgeois-liberal
epoch (1884–90), the nobility were already a smaller group in the
liberation movement. If, however, we add to them the clergy and merchants
we get 49 per cent, i.e., almost a half. The movement still
remains half a movement of the privileged classes—of the nobility and the
top-level bourgeoisie. Hence the impotence of the movement, despite the
heroism of individuals.  

The third (1901–03) and fourth (1905–08) epochs are those of the
peasant and proletarian democrats. The role of the nobility is a very small
one. The urban petty bourgeoisie and the peasantry make up eight-tenths of
the whole before the revolution and nine-tenths during the revolution. The
masses have awakened. Hence the two results:
(1) the possibility of obtaining something of a serious nature and
(2) the liberals’ hatred of the movement (the appearance of
counter-revolutionary liberalism).  

Still more interesting are the data on occupations, avail able only for
the last three epochs. Out of each hundred participants in the liberation
movement (charged with state crimes) there are people engaged in: 





Epoch
Agricul- ture
Industry and commerce
Liberal professions and students
No definite occupation or no occupation




1884–90 . . . . . 
7.1
15.1
53.3
19.9


1901–03 . . . . . 
9.0
46.1
28.7
8.0


1905–08 . . . . . 
24.2
47.4
22.9
5.5




These are extraordinarily instructive figures. The role of the
raznochintsi in the epoch of the Narodniks and the Narodnaya Volya
Party (1884-90) is immediately revealed; the majority of the
participants (53.3 per cent) were students or people following liberal
professions. A mixed

    

bourgeois-liberal and liberal-Narodnik movement with students and
intellectuals playing an outstanding role—such is the class essence of
the parties and the movement of that time. The peasants (‘agriculture”)
and industrial workers (“industry and commerce”) provided a small
minority (7 and 15 per cent). The so-called declassed people, that is,
those who have been squeezed out of their own class and have lost contact
with any definite class—this group of people constitutes
one-fifth (19.9 per cent), they are more numerous than the
peasants and more numerous than the workers!  

This accounts for the peculiar forms taken by the movement, the
magnificence of its heroism, and its impotence.  

Then we come to the pre-revolutionary epoch (1901–03). The leading
role is played by the urban workers (“industry and commerce”). Although
they were a minority of the population they provided almost a half
(46.1 per cent) of the participants. The intelligentsia and the students
were already in the second place (despite the fables of the
liberals and liquidators about the workers’ party). The role of the
peasants was insignificant (“agriculture” 9 per cent) but was growing.


The last epoch, 1905–08. The proportion of the urban workers increased
from 46.1 to 47.4 per cent. They had already aroused the peasant masses,
whose share in the movement increased more than that of all other
classes—from 9 to 24.2 per cent, that is, by almost three
times. The peasantry had now outstripped the liberal intellectuals and
the students (22.9 per cent). The role of the declassed elements, those who
had been ejected from their own class, was very insignificant (5.5
per cent). The deliberately libellous character of the liberal theory on
the “intellectual” nature of our revolution here stands out in bold
relief.  

The proletariat and bourgeois democrats (the peasantry)—these were
the social forces of the movement. But the peasantry, who constitute an
overwhelming majority of the population as compared with the workers and
town dwellers, lagged a long way behind and provided only a
quarter (24.2 per cent) of the participants because so far they
had been only slightly aroused.  
 

All that remains is to end on a note of praise for the June Third
(Stolypin) agrarian policy that is very successfully, rapidly and
energetically arousing the others....  

 
Notes
 

[1]
Raznochintsi (sing. raznochinets)—professional class not
drawn from the nobility many of whom took part in the revolutionary
democratic movement—Ed.  
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Class War in Dublin









Lenin: Class War in Dublin







V. I.  

      Lenin
Class War in Dublin




Published:
Severnaya Pravda No. 23, August 29, 1913; Nash Put No. 5, August 30, 1913.

      Signed: V..

      Published according to the Severnaya Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 332-336.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

In Dublin, the capital of Ireland—a city of a not highly industrial
type, with a population of half a million—the class struggle, which
permeates the whole life of capitalist society everywhere, has become
accentuated to the point of class war. The police have positively gone
wild; drunken policemen assault peaceful workers, break into houses,
torment the aged, women and children. Hundreds of workers (over 400) have
been injured and two killed—such are the casualties of this
war. All prominent workers’ leaders have been arrested. People are thrown
into prison for making the most peaceful speeches. The city is like an
armed camp.  

What has happened? How could such a war have flared up in a peaceable,
cultured, civilised free state?  

Ireland is something of a British Poland, only rather more like Galicia
than the Poland represented by Warsaw, Lodz and Dombrowski. National
oppression and Catholic reaction have turned the proletarians of this
unhappy country into paupers, the peasants into toilworn, ignorant and dull
slaves of the priesthood, and the bourgeoisie into a phalanx, masked by
nationalist phrases, of capitalists, of despots over the workers; finally,
the administration has been turned into a gang accustomed to every kind of
violence.  

At the present moment the Irish nationalists (i.e., the Irish
bourgeoisie) are the victors. They are buying up the lands of the English
landlords; they are getting national self-government (the famous
Home Rule for which such a long and stubborn struggle has been going on
between Ire land and England); they will freely govern “their own”
country jointly with “their own” Irish priests.  
 

Well, this Irish nationalist bourgeoisie is celebrating its
“national” victory, its maturity in “affairs of state” by declaring a
war to the death on the Irish labour movement.  

An English Lord-Lieutenant lives in Dublin, but in fact he has less
power than the Dublin capitalist leader, a certain Murphy, publisher of the
Independent (“Independent”—my eye!), principal shareholder and
director of the Dublin tramways, and a shareholder in many capitalist
enterprises in Dublin. Murphy has declared, on behalf of all the Irish
capitalists, of course, that he is ready to spend three-quarters of a
million pounds (nearly seven million rubles) to destroy the Irish trade
unions.  

And these unions have begun to develop magnificently. The Irish
proletariat, awakening to class-consciousness, is pressing the Irish
bourgeois scoundrels engaged in celebrating their “national” victory. It
has found a talented leader in the person of Comrade Larkin,
Secretary of the Irish Transport Workers’ Union. Larkin is a remarkable
speaker, a man of seething Irish energy, who has performed miracles among
the unskilled workers—that mass of the British proletariat which in
Britain is so often cut off from the advanced workers by the cursed
petty-bourgeois, liberal, aristocratic spirit of the British skilled
worker.  

A new spirit bas been aroused in the Irish workers’ unions. The
unskilled workers have brought unparralleled animation into the trade
unions. Even the women have begun to organise—a thing hitherto unknown in
Catholic Ireland. So far as organisation of the workers is concerned Dublin
looks like becoming one of the foremost towns in the whole of Great
Britain. The country that used to be typified by the fat, well-fed Catholic
priest and the poor, starving, ragged worker who wore his rags even on
Sunday because he could riot afford Sunday clothes, that country, though it
bears a double and triple national yoke, has begun to turn into a country
with an organised army of the proletariat.  

Well, Murphy proclaimed a crusade of the bourgeoisie against Larkin and
“Larkinism”. To begin with, 200 tramwaymen were dismissed in order to
provoke a strike during the exhibition and embitter the whole
struggle. The Transport

    

Workers’ Union declared a strike and demanded the reinstatement of the
discharged men. Murphy engineered lock-outs. The workers retaliated by
downing tools. War raged all along the line. Passions flared up.  

Larkin—incidentally, he is the grandson of the famous Larkin executed
in 1867 for participating in the Irish liberation movement—delivered
fiery speeches at meetings. In these speeches he pointed out that the party
of the English bourgeois enemies of Irish Home Rule was openly calling for
resistance to the government, was threatening revolution, was organising
armed resistance to Home Rule and with absolute impunity was flooding the
country with revolutionary appeals.  

But what the reactionaries, the English chauvinists Car son,
Londonderry and Bonar Law (the English Purishkeviches, the nationalists who
are persecuting Ireland), may do the proletarian socialist may not. Larkin
was arrested. A meeting called by the workers was banned.  

Ireland, however, is not Russia. The attempt to suppress the right of
assembly evoked a storm of indignation. Larkin had to be tried. At
the trial Larkin became the accuser and, in effect, put Murphy in the
dock. By cross-questioning witnesses Larkin proved that Murphy had had long
conversations with the Lord-Lieutenant on the eve of his, Larkin’s,
arrest. Larkin declared the police to be in Murphy’s pay, and no one dared
gainsay him.  

Larkin was released on bail (political liberty cannot be abolished at
one stroke). Larkin declared that he would appear at a meeting no matter
what happened. And indeed, he came to one disguised, and began to speak to
the crowd. The police recognised him, seized him and beat him up. For two
days the dictatorship of the police truncheon raged, crowds were clubbed,
women and children were brutally treated. The police broke into workers’
homes. A worker named Nolan, a member of the Transport Workers’
Union, was beaten to death. Another died of injuries.  

On Thursday, September 4 (August 22, 0. S.), Nolan’s funeral took
place. The proletariat of Dublin followed in a procession 50,000 strong
behind the body of their comrade. The police brutes lay low, not daring to
annoy the crowd, and exemplary order prevailed. “This is a more

    

magnificent demonstration than when they buried Parnell” (the celebrated
Irish nationalist leader), said an old Irishman to a German correspondent.


The Dublin events mark a turning-point in the history of the labour
movement and of socialism in Ireland. Murphy has threatened to destroy the
Irish trade unions. He has succeeded only in destroying the last remnants
of the influence of the Irish nationalist bourgeoisie over, the Irish
proletariat. He has helped to steel the independent revolutionary
working-class movement in Ireland, which is free of nationalist prejudices.


This was seen immediately at the Trades Union Congress which opened on
September 1 (August 19, 0. S.), in Manchester. The Dublin events inflamed
the delegates—despite the resistance of the opportunist trade union
leaders with their petty-bourgeois spirit and their admiration for the
bosses. The Dublin workers’ delegation was given an ovation. Delegate
Partridge, Chairman of the Dublin branch of the Engineers’ Union, spoke
about the abominable out rages committed by the police in Dublin. A young
working girl had just gone to bed when the police raided her house. The
girl hid in the closet, but was dragged out by the hair. The police were
drunk. These “men” (if one may call them such) beat up ten-year-old lads
and even five-year-old children!  

Partridge was twice arrested for making speeches which the judge
himself admitted were peaceful. “I am sure,” said Partridge, “that I
would now be arrested if I were to recite the Lord’s Prayer in public.”


The Manchester Congress sent a delegation to Dublin. The bourgeoisie
there again took up the weapon of nationalism (just like the bourgeois
nationalists in Poland, or in the Ukraine, or among the Jews!) declaring
that “Englishmen have no business on Irish soil!” But,
fortunately, the nationalists have already lost their influence
over the
       workers.[1]


Speeches delivered at the Manchester Congress were of a kind that had
not been heard for a long time.

    

A resolution was moved to transfer the whole Congress to Dublin, and to
organise a general strike throughout Britain. Smillie, the Chairman of the
Miners’ Union, stated that the Dublin methods would compel all British
workers to resort to revolution and that they would be able to learn the
use of arms.  

The masses of the British workers are slowly but surely taking a new
path—they are abandoning the defence of the petty privileges of the
labour aristocracy for their own great heroic struggle for a new system of
society. And once on this path the British proletariat, with their energy
and organisation, will bring socialism about more quickly and securely than
anywhere else.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
The Irish nationalists are already expressing the fear that Larkin will
organise an independent Irish workers’ party, which will have to be
reckoned with in the first Irish national parliament.  —Lenin
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## New Land “Reform” Measures









Lenin: New Land 'Reform' Measures







V. I.  

      Lenin
New Land “Reform” Measures




Published:
Nash Put No. 4, August 29, 1913; Severnaya Pravda No. 24, August 30, 1913.

      Signed: V. Ilyin.

      Published according to the Severnaya Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 337-339.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The government has drafted a new bill on peasant land
tenure. It is proposed to speedily “limit the fragmentation” of
individual farmsteads and non-commune holdings. The landowners want to
“protect small landed properties” from scattering, disintegration and
fragmentation.  

In essence the law prohibits the break-up of medium-sized
peasant holdings—farmsteads and non-commune properties. When such lands
are sold or inherited they must pass into the hands of a single
owner. Co-heirs are to receive a cash “indemnity”, to he assessed by
landowners’ survey commissions.  

Cash, for the indemnity payments is to be advanced on especially
favourable terms by the Peasant Bank with the land as security. The size of
the average (undivided) holdings is to be determined on the basis of the
1861 feudal laws on the size of the decree
allotment.[1] 

The significance of this bill is obvious. The landowners want to create
privileged landed properties protected against capitalism for the peasant
bourgeoisie. Realising that their privileges and their feudal system of
land tenure are shaky, the landowners are trying to win over to their side
the richest section of the peasant bourgeoisie, insignificant in numbers as
it is. I will share a small part of my privileges with you, says the
landowner to the kulaks and rich peasants, I will help you grow richer at
the expense of the masses of peasants, who are being ruined, and you will
protect me from those masses, you will be the bulwark of law and
order. Such is the class meaning of the new bill.  

Here we have absolutely perfect conformity with the general tendency of
the June Third agrarian policy,

    

otherwise known as the Stolypin agrarian policy. It is one and the same
landowners’ policy, and the landowners as a class have not been able to
pursue any other policy in Russia since 1905. There is no other way in
which they can uphold their privileges or even their existence.  

Democrats, both working-class and bourgeois (i.e., the peasantry as a
mass), must recognise this indisputable truth of class relationships and
draw from it the inevitable conclusion. There is nothing more foolish and
reactionary than the bureaucratic point of view held by the liberals and
the Narodniks, who fear the mobilisation of peasant lands, i.e.,
their free sale and purchase. Rech, for instance, in two
editorials, states in reference to the new bill that “the protection of
small landed properties is a necessity”. The trouble, you see, was that
the June Third agrarian policy was adopted “suddenly, as a sharp political
weapon”.  

This is the sapient liberal, in the role of a “supra-class” civil
servant, reproaching Stolypin, the leader of the land owners, for having
used a political weapon for the benefit of the landowners! The cowardly
desire to escape the inevitable class struggle is hidden by whimpering
about the connection between the interests of a class and the politics of a
class. No wonder Stolypin only laughed at such opponents.  

“The protection of small landed properties”, that favourite formula
of the liberals (Russian) and the Narodniks, is a reactionary phrase. The
working class supports the peasantry (and guides it) only when, and only to
the extent that, its actions are democratic, that is, when they are in the
interests of social development and of capitalist development, when they
are in the interests of the country’s deliverance from the yoke of the
feudals and from their privileges. Every curtailment of the mobilisation of
peasant lands is, first, a foolish measure, incapable of halting
capitalism, a measure that can only worsen the condition of the masses,
make their life more difficult and compel them to evade the law. Secondly,
it is a measure that actually creates a small section of
privileged petty bourgeois, the most hidebound and backward
enemies of progress.  

The working class does not counterpose to the class politics of the
feudal landowners phrases in the “supra-class”

    

spirit, it counterposes the interests of the other classes that constitute
nine-tenths of the population. The peasantry, as a petty-bourgeois mass,
will for a long time waver between the consistent democracy of the
proletariat and hopes of obtaining concessions from the landowners, hopes
of sharing their privileges.  

However, the conditions provided by the Russian land owners are so
burdensome for the peasants, starvation for millions is so common under
these conditions, that there can be no doubt whatsoever which side
everything that is alive, viable and politically conscious will follow.


 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Decree allotment—was fixed by the law of February 19,
1861. In the black-earth and non-black-earth regions two sizes of allotment
were fixed, a higher and a lower (the latter being one-third of the
former), but for the steppe areas, because of the abundance of land, only
one type of allotment was fixed by special decree and was known as the
“decree allotment”.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Merchant Salazkin and the Writer F. D.









Lenin: The Merchant Salazkin and the Writer F. D.







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Merchant Salazkin and the Writer F. D.




Published:
Severnaya Pravda No. 26, September 1, 1913.

      Signed: Para-conciliator.

      Published according to the Severnaya Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 340-342.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The speech delivered by the merchant Salazkin is undoubtedly of great
social significance. Gone for ever is that historical epoch, the epoch of
“primitive accumulation”, in which the landed nobility grumbled and
appealed for “faith”, and the merchant bowed and expressed his gratitude.


Gone, too, is the first period of the June Third, counter revolutionary
epoch, when the merchant, terrified to death by the movement of the masses,
gazed upon Stolypin with admiration and tender emotion. The second period
has begun, the period of working-class upswing, “social” revival and
merchant liberalism.  

A correct appraisal of this liberalism, something between Octobrism and
the Cadet Party, is to an increasing extent being forced (by the
course of events) even upon petty-bourgeois
democrats. Severnaya Pravda recently quoted the just arguments of
Kievskaya Mysl (see Severnaya Pravda
No. 9,[1]

August 11) on the separation of liberalism from democracy, on the
rapprochement between the liberalism of the Cadets—to say
nothing of the “Progressists”—and reactionary nationalism.  

There are, however, some writers who lag behind even petty-bourgeois
democracy because they are held in bondage by their own opportunist
doctrine. At the head of these writers, of course, stands the liquidator
F. D.  

In his appraisal of Salazkin’s speech, F. D. wrote (Novaya
Rabochaya Gazeta, August 23) that the Black Hundreds were right to
raise an outcry against Salazkin, “but the

    

Left-wing [meaning liberal] press was also right in pointing out the
organic inability of the bureaucracy to meet the pressing requirements of
the country. Rossiya alone was not right.”  


   “Salazkin’s speech is not to be explained by love for
   radical programmes,” says F. D., “but by the absence of law and
   order. The merchant has revolted.... And if such is the case, no matter how
   hostile the merchant may be towards radical programmes he will be
   compelled, if not today then tomorrow, to combine his efforts with those of
   the more radical sections of the country.”  


Such is F. D.’s appraisal. He goes no further than combining liberalism
with the workers.  

Very original! F. D. does not notice the combination of the efforts of
the merchant with those of the Black-Hundred landowner. He does not notice
that Salazkin is upholding the “fundamentals” of the June Third regime
and within the framework of those fundamentals wants to push Purishkevich
into the background.  

Nor does he notice the difference between the reformist
position of the liberals and Salazkin, and the position of the working
class, which is alien to the wretched narrowness of reformism. The writer
F. D. has overlooked the substance of the present difference between
democracy and liberalism.  

F. D. is interested in one thing alone—“combining” the
liberals and the workers. An interesting ... speciality!  

Regard F. D.’s article as a political document, regard it from the
“all-Europe” point of view (for, indeed, F. D. and his friends are fond
of talking about their Europeanism...). You will see that F. D. shares in
full the position of Lloyd George and the extreme opportunists of the
“workers’ party” (on a British scale); or the position of Combes and
Jaurès (on a French scale); or the position of the Berliner
Tageblatt, the organ of the Left liberals in Berlin, and of Bernstein,
Kolb and Vollmar.  

There is nothing in F. D.’s article that is unacceptable to a Left
Cadet who is doing his best “to combine” “the efforts of the Salazkins
with those of the more radical sections of the country”.  

The Marxist tells the workers—take advantage of the disagreement
between the Salazkins and the Purishkeviches by neutralising the
vacillation of the Salazkins, who are

    

much more closely “combined” with the Purishkeviches than with the
opposition. The liberal tells the workers—the Salazkins will be compelled
to combine their efforts with yours.  

How comes it that the writer F. D. forgot to explain the class roots of
the reformism of the liberals in general and of Salazkin in particular? How
did F. D. even forget to point out the whole absurd, ridiculous, ugly
narrowness of the reformism of Salazkin-type merchants under Russian
conditions?  

Was it not because the writer, despite his Marxist
“signboard”, upholds the very same reformist point of view that the
merchant Salazkin holds in conformity with the interests of his
class and his progressist, i.e., semi-Octobrist, signboard?  

 
Notes
 

[1]
See pp. 302–04 of this volume.—Ed.  
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Struggle for Marxism









Lenin: The Struggle for Marxism







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Struggle for Marxism




Published:
Severnaya Pravda No. 27, September 3, 1913.

      Signed: V. Ilyin.

      Published according to the Severnaya Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 343-347.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Recently there has been a lively discussion in the news
papers about collections made by St. Petersburg workers for the
working-class press. It must be admitted that a most detailed and serious
discussion of this question is essential since it is one of tremendous
importance from the point of view of political principles.  

How does the matter stand? The liquidators (Novaya Rabochaya
Gazeta) insist on the equal division of funds collected. The Marxists
(Severnaya Pravda) demand division according to the wishes of the
workers who contribute their pence. The workers must themselves decide, by
a discussion on the trend represented by each newspaper, for whom
they have made their contributions.  

The resolution of twenty-two Vyborg supporters of the liquidators, the
first document on the question, said simply (see Novaya
Rabochaya Gazeta No. 2, August 9): “Take collections for the benefit
of working-class newspapers on a parity basis.” Then the resolutions of
some of the workers of the Nobel Works and the Putilov Works (ibid.,
Nos. 6, 8, 9, 10) upheld and actually put into practice the division of
collections into three equal parts—one part each for the
Marxists, liquidators and Narodniks. The Novaya Rabochaya Gazeta
editors tacitly approved and defended it in an article by
G. R.[2] (No. 9).  

Severnaya Pravda, on the contrary, showed that equal division
is an incorrect method and one that does not correspond to the aims and
purposes of Marxism.  

Every class-conscious worker, we repeat, must study this question with
care and quite independently.  
 

What are the arguments in favour of equal division? Reference is made
to the “sacred slogan of Marxist workers—Workers of all countries,
unite!”  

The question arises—does this slogan demand the alliance of Marxist
workers, who are members, say, of a Marxist party, with those who support
bourgeois parties? Any worker who gives this a little thought will
agree that it does not.  

In all countries, even in the most advanced, there are workers who
support bourgeois parties—they are for the Liberals in Britain, for the
Radical-Socialists in France, for the Catholics, and the liberal
“people’s” party in Germany, for the Reform (petty-bourgeois) Party in
Italy, etc., including the petty-bourgeois P. S. P. (Polish Socialist
Party) in neighbouring Poland.  

The great slogan calls upon workers to unite in a proletarian,
independent, class party, and not one of the parties mentioned
above is proletarian.  

Take the basic principle of our Narodniks. From the Narodnik point of
view, the abolition of the private ownership of land and its equalitarian
division is socialism or “socialisation”, but it is an erroneous and
bourgeois point of view. Marx long ago showed that the more daring
bourgeois economists can and do demand the abolition of private
property in
land.[3] It is a bourgeois reform that extends
capitalism’s field of action. We support the peas ants as
bourgeois democrats in their struggle for land and freedom against
the feudal-minded landowners.  

However, unity between a proletarian organisation of wage-workers and
petty-bourgeois peasant, democrats is a flagrant violation of the great
Marxist slogan. Attempts at such unity would do great damage to the
working-class movement and always end in an early collapse.  

The history of Russia (in the years 1905, 1906 and 1907) has
demonstrated that there is not and cannot be any mass, class support for
the Narodniks, except that of the Left-wing peasantry.  

The liquidators and the workers who follow them, there fore, have
retreated from Marxism, have left the class path and entered on
the path of non-party unity between wage-workers and a petty-bourgeois
party. For it is, indeed, a

    

non-party alliance when the worker is told: don’t try to find out
which is the proletarian and which is the petty-bourgeois party, fork out
equally for
both![1]


The masses “cannot get at the root of things”, wrote G. R. in
Novaya Rabochaya Gazeta No. 9. That is precisely why we need an
old, tried and tested Marxist newspaper to develop the political
consciousness of the masses who “cannot get at the root of things”,
to help them get at that root and understand it.  

The reference made by G. R. and similar writers who oppose
organised, Marxist unity (but never raise the question of uniting the two
parties!)—their reference to “masses who cannot get at the root of
things” is nothing but the preaching of non-party tendencies, is
a retreat from Marxism, is the underhanded pursuit of
petty-bourgeois views and policies.  

By such a policy the liquidators justify their name, i.e., they are
deserters from the Marxist organisation, its destroyers.  

Another argument (see G. R.’s article and the discussion by the editors
of Novaya Rabochaya Gazeta in No. 6) is that collections taken in
accordance with political trends would disrupt “unanimous opposition to
the reactionaries”, who persecute workers’ newspapers.  
 

When a politically conscious worker has thought this over he will see
that it is the old liberal argument about disrupting “unanimity against
reaction” by the separation of the democrats from the liberals. It is a
bourgeois argument and is profoundly erroneous.  

The non-party masses “who cannot”, as G. R. asserts, “get at the
root of things”, learn splendidly from examples. One who is still ignorant
and not politically conscious, who cannot think or is too lazy to think and
“get at the root of things” will wave his hand and say “I also protest,
give them all an equal share”. But one who begins to think and
“get at the root of things”, will also go to listen to a
discussion on platforms, to the defence of the views of each
trend, and, by listening to those who are more politically
conscious, will himself gradually learn, and his indifference and his broad
sympathy for all will change to a definite, thoughtful attitude to the
newspapers.  

The liquidators have forgotten all these elementary truths that “every
worker should know and remember”. They have proved by their plan
to “divide equally” that they are correctly regarded as the
vehicle of the non-party spirit, as renegades from Marxism and advocates of
the “bourgeois influence over the proletariat” (see the unanimous
decision of the Marxists, January 1910).  

The Marxist organisation unites politically conscious workers
by its common programme, common tactics, common decisions on the attitude
to reaction, capitalists, bourgeois democrats (Narodniks), etc. All these
common decisions—among others, the decisions of 1908, 1912 and
1913 on the absurdity and harmfulness of reformism—are upheld
and are persistently implemented by the Marxists.  

Discussions (talks, debates, disputes) about parties and about common
tactics are essential; without them the masses are disunited; without them
common decisions are impossible and, therefore, unity of action is
also impossible. Without them the Marxist organisation of those
workers “who can get at the root of things” would
disintegrate and the influence of the bourgeoisie on the unenlightened
would thereby be facilitated.  

In advocating collections in accordance with political trends,
collections accompanied by a discussion on

    

platforms, the best St. Petersburg workers are struggling for Marxism
against the champions of a non-party spirit.  

We are confident that the workers will always and every where bend all
their efforts to uphold only the Marxist system of collections and
discussions, which educate the masses.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
The way in which some workers respond to the liquidators’ unprincipled
preaching may also be judged from the following resolution published in
Novaya Rabochaya Gazeta No. 21.  

“We find this decision [to divide collections equally between the
three newspapers] to be necessary and the only just one; first, because all
three newspapers are, as workers’ newspapers, equally subjected to
penalties and persecution and, secondly, the overwhelming majority of
workers, both here and in other parts of the country, have not yet gained a
full understanding of the specifics of the various party trends and cannot
with full knowledge attach themselves to any one of them, but are equally
in sympathy with all of them.”  

The liquidators’ newspaper has never made an attempt to explain to its
readers, has never given them an opportunity of finding out, whether a
Narodnik newspaper may be considered a working-class newspaper, and whether
it should be confused with a Marxist or even with a liquidators’
newspaper. Novaya Rabochaya Gazeta prefers to stick to the
“elemental”, to plod along behind those who do not understand, as long as
it can be “a nuisance” to the Marxists.  —Lenin
 



[2]
G. R. (G. Rakitin)—pseudonym of the Menshevik
liquidator V. 0.  Tsederbaum.





[3]
Karl Marx, Theories of Surplus Value (Theorien \"uber den
Mehrwert. 2. Teil. Dietz Verlag, Berlin, 1959, S. 36).










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## A Week After the Dublin Massacre









Lenin: A Week After the Dublin Massacre







V. I.  

      Lenin
A Week After the Dublin Massacre




Published:
Severnaya Pravda No. 27, September 3, 1913; Nash Put No. 8, September 3, 1913.

      Signed: V..

      Published according to the Severnaya Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 348-349.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

On Sunday, September 7 (August 25, 0. S.), exactly a week
after the police massacre, the Dublin workers organised a huge meeting to
protest against the conduct of the Irish capitalists and the Irish police.


The meeting took place in the same street (O’Connell Street) and at the
same spot where the meeting banned by the police was to have taken place
the previous Sunday. It is a historic spot, a spot where it is most
convenient to organise meetings and where they are most frequently held in
Dublin.  

The police kept out of sight. The streets were filled with
workers. There were crowds of people, but complete order prevailed. “Last
Sunday,” exclaimed an Irish speaker, “the police truncheon reigned here
without reason; today reason reigns without the police truncheon.”  

Britain has a constitution—and the authorities did not dare
to bring their drunken policemen into action for the second time. Three
platforms were put up and six speakers, including representatives of the
English proletariat, condemned the crime perpetrated against the people,
called upon the workers to display international solidarity, to wage a
common struggle.  

A resolution was unanimously adopted demanding freedom of assembly and
association, and calling for an immediate investigation—under the
direction of independent persons and with a guarantee of publicity for all
the proceedings—of the conduct of the police the previous Sunday.  

In London a magnificent meeting was held in Trafalgar Square. Groups of
socialists and workers came with their banners. There were many posters
with cartoons and

    

slogans on topical events. The crowd particularly applauded a poster
depicting a policeman waving a red flag with the inscription, “Silence!”


Outstanding speeches were made by Ben Tillett, who showed that the
“Liberal” government of Britain is no better than a reactionary one, and
Partridge, Dublin Secretary of the Engineers’ Union, who described in
detail the shameless acts of police violence in Dublin.  

It is instructive to note that the principal slogan at the London and
Dublin meetings was the demand for freedom of association. This is quite
understandable. Britain has the foundations of political liberty,
has a constitutional regime, generally speaking. The freedom of
association demanded by the workers is one of the reforms absolutely
necessary and quite achievable under the present constitutional regime
(just as achievable as, say, the partial reform of workers’ insurance in
Russia).  

Freedom of association is equally indispensable to the workers of
Britain and of Russia. And the British workers quite rightly advance this
slogan of a political reform essential to them, perfectly well aware of the
path to be followed for its achievement and of its complete feasibility
under the British Constitution (just as the Russian workers would be right
in advancing the partial demand for amendments to the Insurance Act).  

In Russia, however, precisely those general foundations of political
liberty are absent without which the demand for freedom of
association is simply ridiculous and is merely a current liberal phrase
designed to deceive the people by suggesting that the path of reform is
possible in our country. In Russia the fight for freedom of
association—freedom most urgently needed by both the workers and the
entire people—cannot be conducted without contrasting the
impotent and false reformism of the liberals with the consistent democracy
of the workers, who have no reformist illusions.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Questions of Principle in Politics









Lenin: Questions of Principle in Politics







V. I.  

      Lenin
Questions of Principle in Politics
The Liberal Bourgeoisie and Reformism




Published:
Severnaya Pravda No. 28, September 4, 1913; Nash Put No. 9, September 4, 1913.

      Signed: V. I..

      Published according to the Severnaya Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 350-353.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

In the name of the merchants of all Russia, the millionaire
Salazkin made an appeal for extensive political re forms in a speech at
Nizhni-Novgorod Fair. At a meeting of three thousand metalworkers in
St. Petersburg, the reformists suffered a decisive defeat, receiving only
150 votes for their candidates for membership of the executive
body.[2] 

These two facts, which simply cry out for comparison, make even quite
unprincipled people ask questions of principle concerning present-day
Russian politics. There are masses of people in all classes in Russia that
are interested in politics, but few of them realise the significance of the
theoretical principles involved in the presentation of questions of
politics. Few people realise the significance of political parties that
always give well-considered, precise and properly formulated answers to
these questions. When the parties are connected with definite classes, such
answers are given on the basis of work among the masses and are verified by
years of such work.  

The answers given by the Marxists were precisely of this type when four
and a half years ago they appraised the June Third system and their tasks
in relation to
 it.[1]

Workers who for years and years have been acting conscientiously in the
spirit of those answers in every possible sphere are divided by a deep gulf
from those confused intellectuals who fear any sort of definite answer and
who, at every step, slide into reformism and liquidationism.  
 

One can only pity those people who, watching the struggle of the
Marxists against the liquidators, avoid the issue with miserable words
about the harmfulness of disputes, squabbles, internecine struggles,
factionalism.... Many self-styled Marxists and all “Left” Narodniks
belong to this category!  

Those who, in principle, are champions of the bourgeoisie and enemies
of Marxism, the liberals from the newspaper Rech, have been unable
to ignore the above facts. They repeat all their tired, pitiful phrases in
an editorial article (in issue No. 234), but now they go further.  

The liberals are forced to admit that “the struggle between the
Bolsheviks and the liquidators is going on every where”, and that “it has
percolated all the pores of the working-class organism”.  

So what of it? Could it be accidental?  

No.... 


   “Important disagreements on matters of principle have
   long been apparent; in the final analysis they may be reduced to the
   question of the course to be taken in the further development of the
   country.”  


At last they have thought it out! The Marxists explained this in
December 1908, the liberals have begun to realise it in August 1913. Better
late than never.  


   “Is the path of reforms conceivable,” continues the
   liberal news paper, “or are ‘reforms possible only as a by-product of a
   movement that is completely free of all the narrowness of reformism’
   [quoted from Severnaya Pravda]. That is how the question is
   presented.”  


Precisely! The question of liquidationism is merely part of the
question of the non-party reformists who have broken away from Marxism.


It will be interesting to see how the liberals, the champions of
reformism in principle, defend it.  


   “There is, of course, a great deal of metaphysics and
   fatalism in the opinion that reforms are possible only as a
   ‘by-product’. There can be no reforms without reformers and reformism, even
   if only as a ‘by-product’”....  


There again you have a sample of angry words and an attempt to evade an
answer!  What have metaphysics got to do with it, when historical
experience, the experience of England, France, Germany and Russia, the
experience of

    

all modern history in Europe and Asia, shows that serious reforms have
always been merely the by-product of a movement completely free of the
narrowness of reformism?  

And what has fatalism to do with it, when, that same experience says
clearly that it is the very classes hostile to reformism that have produced
the greatest effect?  

Or perhaps there is more “fatalism” to be observed in the conduct of
the Russian working class in the early years of the twentieth century than
there was in the conduct of the liberal Zemstvo people and bourgeoisie in
the last thirty years of the nineteenth century? You liberal gentlemen make
yourselves ridiculous!  

Can you possibly be such ignoramuses that you do not see the connection
between the interests of the bourgeoisie as a class and their desire to
confine themselves to reformism, between the condition of the working class
and its contrary desire?  

Indeed, gentlemen, you are poor advocates of reformism in general! But
perhaps your defence of reformism in present-day Russia is better?  


   “It must be admitted,” continues Rech, “that
   the situation now obtaining, one that has time and again demonstrated to
   the most modest reformers the futility of their efforts, turns people’s
   thoughts, and especially their feelings, towards the negation of
   reformism.”  


So there you have it! It seems that even you, who make a principle of
advocating reformism, cannot find support either in historical experience
or in “the situation now obtaining” in Russia. Even you have to admit
that the situation is against you!  

What metaphysicians and fatalists you are, gentlemen—or what blind
slaves to the narrow, selfish, cowardly moneybag—if you continue to
uphold the unprincipled position of reformism in contradiction to the
experience of history, in contradiction to the experience of “the
situation now obtaining”! Are not you, who do not believe in reforms
yourselves, actually defending that bourgeoisie that strives to gain profit
at other people’s expense?  

It is understandable that an advanced contingent of the working class
of Russia, the metalworkers of St. Petersburg, have dealt a crushing defeat
to the reformists and liquidators among their number. According to the
figures

    

of the liberal and reformist Rech, the reformist liquidators
obtained 150 out of 2,000 votes, that is, seven and a half per cent of the
total. Does this not show again and again—after the elections of workers
to the Fourth Duma, after the history of the emergence of the working-class
press in St. Petersburg and Moscow—that the liquidators represent only
confused and half-liberal intellectuals, and that the mass of the
politically conscious workers have firmly and resolutely condemned and
rejected them?  

 
Notes
 

[1]
See present edition, Vol. 15, pp. 321–24.—Ed.  
 



[2]
The Executive of the St. Petersburg Metalworkers’ Union was re-elected
on August 25 (September 7), 1913. The meeting was attended by about 3,000
workers. Despite the efforts of the liquidators to turn the meeting against
the Bolshevik Executive of the union, a resolution of thanks to the
Executive for its work was adopted by an overwhelming majority. The list of
candidates, first voted on, put up by the liquidators obtained about 150
votes; the Bolshevik list, published in Severnaya Pravda, was
adopted by a vast majority.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Liberals and Democrats on the Language Question









Lenin: Liberals and Democrats on the Language Question







V. I.  

      Lenin
Liberals and Democrats on the Language Question




Published:
Severnaya Pravda No. 29, September 5, 1913; Nash Put No. 12, September 7, 1913.

      Signed: V. I..

      Published according to the Severnaya Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 354-357.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

On several occasions the newspapers have mentioned the
report of the Governor of the Caucasus, a report that is noteworthy, not
for its Black-Hundred spirit but for its timid “liberalism”. Among other
things, the Governor objects to artificial Russification of non-Russian
nationalities. Representatives of non-Russian nationalities in the Caucasus
are themselves striving to teach their children Russian, as, for
example, in the Armenian church schools, in which the teaching of Russian
is not obligatory.  

Russkoye Slovo (No. 198), one of the most widely circulating
liberal newspapers in Russia, points to this fact and draws the correct
conclusion that the hostility towards the Russian language in Russia
“stems exclusively” from the “artificial” (the right word would have
been “forced”) implanting of that language.  

“There is no reason to worry about the fate of the Russian
language. It will itself win recognition throughout Russia,” says the
newspaper. This is perfectly true, be cause the requirements of economic
exchange will always compel the nationalities living in one state (as long
as they wish to live together) to study the language of the majority. The
more democratic the political system in Russia becomes, the more
powerfully, rapidly and extensively capitalism will develop, the more
urgently will the requirements of economic exchange impel various
nationalities to study the language most convenient for general commercial
relations.  

The liberal newspaper, however, hastens to slap itself in the face and
demonstrate its liberal inconsistency.  
 


   “Even those who oppose Russification,” it says, “would
   hardly be likely to deny that in a country as huge as Russia there must be
   one single official language, and that this language can be only Russian.”
   


Logic turned inside out! Tiny Switzerland has not lost anything, but
has gained from having not one single official language, but
three—German, French and Italian. In Switzerland 70 per cent of the
population are Germans (in Russia 43 per cent are Great Russians), 22
per cent French (in Russia 17 per cent are Ukrainians) and 7 per cent
Italians (in Russia 6 per cent are Poles and 4.5 per cent
Byelorussians). If Italians in Switzerland often speak French in the common
parliament they do not do so because they are compelled by some savage
police law (there are none such in Switzerland), but because the civilised
citizens of a democratic state themselves prefer a language that is under
stood by a majority. The French language does not excite hatred in Italians
because it is the language of a free civilised nation, a language that is
not imposed by disgusting police measures.  

Why should “huge” Russia, a much more varied and terribly backward
country, inhibit her development by the retention of any kind of
privilege for any one language? Should not the contrary be true, liberal
gentlemen? Should not Russia, if she wants to overtake Europe, put an end
to every kind of privilege as quickly as possible, as completely as
possible and as vigorously as possible?  

If all privileges disappear, if the imposition of any one language
ceases, all Slays will easily and rapidly learn to understand each other
and will not be frightened, by the “horrible” thought that speeches in
different languages will be heard in the common parliament. The
requirements of economic exchange will themselves decide which
language of the given country it is to the advantage of the
majority to know in the interests of commercial relations. This decision
will be all the firmer because it will be adopted voluntarily by a
population of various nationalities, and its adoption will be the more
rapid and extensive the more consistent the democracy and, as a consequence
of this, the more rapid will be the development of capitalism.  

The liberals approach the language question in the same way as they
approach all political questions—like

    

hypocritical hucksters, holding out one hand (openly) to democracy and the
other (behind their backs) to the serf-owners and police. We are against
privileges, shout the liberals, and under cover they haggle with the
serf-owners for first one, then another, privilege.  

Such is the nature of all liberal-bourgeois nationalism—not
only Great-Russian (it is the worst of them all because of its violent
character and its kinship with the Purishkeviches) but Polish, Jewish,
Ukrainian, Georgian and every other nationalism. Under the slogan of
“national culture” the bourgeoisie of all nations, both in
Austria and in Russia, are in fact pursuing the policy of
splitting the workers, emasculating democracy and haggling with the
serf-owners over the sale of the people’s rights and the people’s liberty.


The slogan of working-class democracy is not “national culture” but
the international culture of democracy and the world-wide working-class
movement. Let the bourgeoisie deceive the people with various “positive”
national programmes. The class-conscious worker will answer the
bourgeoisie—there is only one solution to the national problem (insofar
as it can, in general, be solved in the capitalist world, the world of
profit, squabbling and exploitation), and that solution is consistent
democracy.  

The proof—Switzerland in Western Europe, a country with an old
culture, and Finland in Eastern Europe a country with a young culture.


The national programme of working-class democracy is:
absolutely no privilege for any one nation or any one language; the
solution of the problem of the political self-determination of nations,
that is, their separation as states by completely free, democratic methods;
the promulgation of a law for the whole state by virtue of which any
measure (Zemstvo, urban or communal, etc., etc.) introducing any privilege
of any kind for one of the nations and militating against the equality of
nations or the rights of a national minority, shall be declared illegal and
ineffective, and any citizen of the state shall have the right to demand
that such a measure be annulled as unconstitutional, and that those who
attempt to put it into effect be punished.  
 

Working-class democracy counterposes to the nationalist wrangling of
the various bourgeois parties over questions of language, etc., the demand
for the unconditional unity and complete solidarity of workers of
all nationalities in all working-class
organisations—trade union, co-operative, consumers’, educational and all
others—in contradistinction to any kind of bourgeois nationalism. Only
this type of unity and solidarity can uphold democracy and defend the
interests of the workers against capital—which is already international
and is becoming more so—and promote the development of mankind towards a
new way of life that is alien to all privileges and all exploitation.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Language of Figures









Lenin: The Language of Figures







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Language of Figures[1]




Published:
Nash Put Nos. 13 and 14, September 8 and 10, 1913.

      Signed: V. Ilyin.

      Published according to the Nash Put text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 358-363.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

I

It is well known that particularly in 1905 and after
factory workers’ wages throughout Russia soared. The factory inspectors’
reports say that the average wages of factory workers in Russia for the
five years 1901–05 were 206 rubles and for the following five years,
1906–10, were 238 rubles.  

The wages of workers in Moscow Gubernia are somewhat below the average
for Russia. According to Factory Inspector Kozminykh-Lanin, they averaged
201 rubles in the 1901–05 period and 235 rubles for the succeeding four
years, 1906–09.  

As a result of 1905, therefore, the wages per worker in Moscow Gubernia
increased by an average of 34 rubles, i.e., by almost 17
per cent. Estimating the number of factory workers in Moscow Gubernia at
between 300,000 and 350,000, this constitutes a total annual gain
for all workers of something like 11,000,000 rubles.  

We see that the sacrifices made by the workers during the strikes of
1905 have been repaid by a considerable improvement in their economic
position.  

Although the victory of the June Third system, i.e., the
counter-revolutionary system, led to the withdrawal of a number of the
workers’ gains, capital did not succeed in reducing workers’ wages to the
former low level. Workers’ wages in Moscow Gubernia averaged about 200
rubles from 1901 to 1905, fluctuating between 197 rubles (1902) and
203 rubles (1905). In 1906, when the results of 1905 first

    

made themselves felt, wages rose to 228 rubles, and in 1907 to 237 rubles;
in 1908 there was a slight drop (236.5 rubles) and in 1909 they again rose
to 237 rubles.  

The figures show that without the gains of 1905–06 the workers would
have been subjected to intolerable poverty since the cost of living has
been rising throughout the past decade.  
II

Wages at the bigger factories in Moscow Gubernia are, as a rule, higher
than those paid at the smaller establishments. The textile workers, who
constitute 68 per cent, i.e., more than two–thirds, of the total number of
factory workers in our gubernia, received the following average annual
wages for the year 1909.  





 
Rubles
Per cent




Factories employing more than 1,000 workers . . 
219
100


” ” from 501 to 1,000 ” . .                  
204
93


” ” ” 101 ” 500 ” . .                      
197
90


” ” ”  51 ” 100 ” . .                      
188
86


” ” ”  21 ”  50 ” . .                      
192
88


” ” ”  2O or less ” . .                     
164
75


   Totals 
211
96




The bigger the factory, the higher the wages. The same is to be found
among the metalworkers. It is easier for the workers at a big factory to
unite, repulse the capitalist and uphold their own demands collectively. To
catch up with their more advanced comrades the workers in small factories
and workshops must unite more strongly in associations (trade union,
educational, co-operative and others) and rally more closely around their
working-class newspaper.  

Strikes are more easily organised and are conducted more successfully
at big factories because of the greater solidarity of the workers. The big
factories took part in the strike movement of 1905 and 1906 to a greater
extent than the small factories.  

We see that on account of this the workers in the biggest factories
gained more from the strikes of those years than the workers at
small establishments. Here are the figures for workers in all industries in
Moscow Gubernia; 
    

    

Average annual wages per worker


Category of factory
Five years 1901–05
Four years 1906–09
Ruble increase




Employing more than 1,000 workers 
196
234
+38


” from 501 to 1,000 ”           
186
231
+45


” ” 101 ” 500 ”               
211
238
+27


” ”  51 ” 100 ”               
215
240
+25


” ”  21 ”  50 ”               
216
241
+25


” ”  20 or less ”              
193
207
+14


Totals 
201
235
+34




First of all we must explain, in respect of these figures, the
(apparent) exception to the rule formulated above, according to which wages
at the bigger factories are higher than at smaller establishments. The
point is that metalworkers, printers and some others earn much more than
textile workers (360 rubles, 310 rubles as compared with 211 rubles,
etc.). The share of the textile workers in the total number of
workers at big factories is much greater than their share at the medium and
small establishments. This accounts for the apparent exception to the rule,
which makes it appear that wages are higher at medium and small than at big
factories.  

What conclusion are we to draw concerning increased wages at big and
small factories since 1905?  

At the big factories (those employing 500 or more workers) the increase
amounts to about 40 rubles a year, that is, about 20 kopeks to a ruble.


At medium and small factories, employing from 21 to 500 workers, the
increase amounts to about 25 rubles, that is, about 12 kopeks to a
ruble.  

At the very smallest factories (20 workers and less) the increase is a
mere 14 rubles, that is, 7–8 kopeks to a ruble.  

Thus the more vigorous and united strike struggle by workers at the big
factories resulted in a greater increase in wages. We have already said
that workers in small factories can catch up with the workers in big
factories in this respect by uniting in associations.  
    

III

Increased wages were not the only gains made by workers in the strike
movement of 1905. The position of the workers has, in general, changed for
the better.  

It is impossible to express the exact extent of this improvement in
figures, but in 1905–06 every worker realised the improvement and felt it
strongly.  

The data given by Factory Inspector Kozminykh-Lanin enable us to
determine the influence of 1905 only on the fining of workers. By
fining workers the capitalist is taking upon himself the role of judge. For
this reason fines are always accompanied by particularly extensive
arbitrary action in respect of the workers and at times even by direct
humiliation of the workers. It is natural that the workers always demand
the annulment of fines, the abolition of the capitalists’ right to
be judges in the workers’ affairs.  

The following are the figures for fines levied on all workers in Moscow
Gubernia year by year.  





Year
Average fine per
    worker (kopeks)




1901 
30


1902 
27


1903 
27


1904 
29


1905 
17


1906 
12


1907 
15


1908 
18


1909 
21




We see how successfully the workers “reduced” the amount of the
fines. Before 1905 the fines amounted to 27–30 kopeks a worker.  

But then comes the year 1905. Fines immediately drop to almost a
hall—to 17 kopeks. In 1906 the results of 1905 are more clearly
demonstrated—fines drop to 12 kopeks.  

The revolution passes. The capitalists grow bolder. The fines again
rise to 15–18–21 kopeks.  

But even in 1909—the year of the longest and deepest lull—the
capitalists did not succeed in raising fines to the former disgraceful
level. No matter how the capitalist

    

may fawn upon Purishkevich, these two “dear friends” have not succeeded
in going back to the good old days—the worker in Russia has
changed. The worker in Russia has learned a thing or two!  

If we compare the total fines with the total wages of the workers—and
such a comparison is essential for it is not the same thing to pay twenty
kopeks out of wages of one ruble as paying twenty kopeks out of wages of a
ruble and a half—the victory of the workers in 1905 becomes still more
obvious.  

Out of every 100 rubles of the workers’ wages, the fines per annum
averaged in kopeks: 





1901 . . . . . 
15


1902 . . . . . 
14


1903 . . . . . 
13


1904 . . . . . 
14


1905 . . . . . 
9


1906 . . . . . 
5


1907 . . . . . 
6


1908 . . . . . 
8


1909 . . . . . 
9




It follows, therefore, that the workers of Moscow Gubernia achieved a
reduction of atrocious fines to one-third as a result of
1905. They will succeed in obtaining the complete abolition of fines.  
IV

In conclusion let us take a brief glance at the question of what share
of his wages the Moscow worker obtains in cash.  

The Moscow workers are in a difficult position in this respect. In 1909
their total wages amounted to 73,000,000 rubles; of this sum they received
61,500,000 rubles, that is, 84.2 per cent, in cash. Almost a tenth of their
wages, 7,200,000 rubles, was paid in the shape of groceries and other
commodities from the factory shops. This type of wages places the workers
in serf-like dependence on the owners and gives those owners
“superprofits”.  

The position of workers in the cotton industry is particularly
bad—over one-fifth of their wages (5,900,000 rubles out of 28,800,000) is
paid in foodstuffs. If the workers were to win for themselves free workers’
co-operatives there would not only be a saving of hundreds of thousands of
rubles for the slaves of capital, but the semi-serf dependence

    

of the workers on the factory owners’ shops would he removed.


To continue: 3,750,000 rubles (5 per cent) of the workers’ wages went
to pay for products they took from the shops of consumers’ associations,
etc. Lastly, 680,000 rubles (0.9 per cent) of the wages went for the
maintenance of workers boarded by factory owners.  

This form of payment, which dooms the workers to a thousand forms of
dependence of a serf character, has been preserved most noticeably in
industries processing silk and flax, and after them in those processing
food and live stock products.  

As for the influence of 1905 on the forms in which wages are paid, we
may say that there have been practically no gains. Here are the figures, as
from 1901: 


Percentages of wages paid in:


Year
Workers’ total
wages (million
rubles)

Cash
Goods from
factory
shops

Goods from
consumers’
associations

Boarding of
workers by
factory owners





1901 . . . . 
53
81.4
8.9
7.3
2.4


1902 . . . . 
54
81.5
9.1
7.0
2.4


1903 . . . . 
57
83.0
8.3
6.6
2.1


1904 . . . . 
55
82.7
9.0
6.5
1.8


1905 . . . . 
57
82.8
9.2
6.5
1.5


1906 . . . . 
64
85.1
7.6
5.8
1.5


1907 . . . . 
71
83.8
9.4
5.3
1.5


1908 . . . . 
73
82.9
10.4
5.2
1.5


1909 . . . . 
73
84.2
9.8
5.1
0.9




Since 1905 payment in cash has increased to an extremely insignificant
extent. The system of boarding workers by factory owners has been reduced
to an equally small extent. And payment of wages through factory shops, on
the contrary, has somewhat increased.  

Taking it by and large, the situation has remained as bad as it was
before. Moscow workers must struggle for the payment of wages in cash and
for the replacement of factory shops by free workers’ consumers’
associations.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
When this article was published in Nash Put (Our
Path) it was accompanied by the following editorial comment: “The
editors offer the author their apologies for the necessary
deletions and amendments to his article.” Exactly what changes were made
is not known since Lenin’s manuscript has not been found.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Bourgeois Gentlemen on “Family” Farming









Lenin: Bourgeois Gentlemen on 'Family' Farming







V. I.  

      Lenin
Bourgeois Gentlemen on “Family” Farming




Published:
Nash Put No. 15, September 11, 1918; Pravda Truda No. 4, September 14, 1913.

      Signed: V. Ilyin.

      Published according to the Pravda Truda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 364-368.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

At the Kiev Agricultural Congress, before an audience of
1,000 landowners from all parts of Russia, Professor Kosinsky read the
first paper, in which he tried to prove that “family farming” had become
paramount in agriculture.  

The question of “family” farming is one of the most important when
one is seeking an explanation of capitalist relations in agriculture. In
Russia, moreover, there is the Narodnik bourgeois party (this includes the
Left Narodniks), which tries to make the workers believe it is a socialist
party and most zealously advocates “family” farming. It is, therefore,
necessary for every class-conscious worker to understand what this
“family” farming is.  

Mr. Bourgeois Professor Kosinsky, producing no data of any kind,
asserted that peasant farming is growing and large-scale farming, which
exploits wage-labour, is collapsing and dying out. The professor 


   “distinguished three forms of peasant farms:
   (1) parcellised (dwarf) farms, when the peasant works at a factory, and at
   home, in his own village, has only a vegetable garden or an allotment
   attached to his house, the cultivation of which provides a small addition
   to his in come;
   (2) subsistence farms, with a somewhat larger allotment, the cultivation of
   which does not meet all the requirements of the family, some members of
   which work elsewhere;
   (3) family farms, peasant farms proper, on which the entire family works.
   

   “Agrarian evolution is leading to the break-up of the
   second category and its replacement by family and parcellised farms. The
   future is assured mainly for the family farms. The average size of these
   farms, expressed in Russian measure, is about 50 dessiatines. The triumph
   of family farming is in no way accompanied by the proletarianisation of the
   rural districts” (Kievskaya Mysl No. 242).  


These, then, are the principles of the bourgeois theory of “family”
farming borrowed by the Narodniks. Every

    

worker who is in any way familiar with political economy will immediately
see that what Mr. Bourgeois calls parcellised or dwarf farms are the
proletarian, labourer farms, the “farms” of wage-workers.  

Evidently by “subsistence” farms he means small peas ant farms which
do not produce mainly for exchange; not commercial farms, but natural
economy farms (on which the peasant produces his own food). In admitting
that these farms are being ousted our uninformed bourgeois professor admits
the victory of capitalism, the growth of exchange, and the squeezing out of
small farming. By what kind of farming is it being ousted? Firstly
by proletarian farming. This is precisely what is called
proletarianisation, Mr. Uninformed Professor! Secondly by “family”
farming, in which the average size of farms is about 50 dessiatines.  

It remains for me to prove to the uninformed professor and to his
Socialist-Revolutionary (Narodnik) pupils that “family”, farming is
precisely petty-bourgeois, capitalist farming.  

What is the principal feature of capitalism? The employment of
wage-labour. It is time our professors and Socialist-Revolutionaries learnt
this truth.  

What do European, scientific statistics tell us about wage-labour in
peasant farming? They tell us that not only 50–dessiatine farms, but even
farms of over 10 hectares (a hectare is about the same as a
dessiatine), in the majority of cases, cannot dispense with
wage-labour!  

Germany. The last census (1907). Number of farms from 10 to 20
hectares—412,741. These employ 711,867 wage-workers. Even the farms from
5 to 10 hectares employ a total of 487,704 wage-workers on 652,798
farms. In other words: even here the number of wage-workers equals more
than half the total number of farms. And everybody knows that in the
overwhelming majority of cases the small farmer does not employ more than
one hired worker.  

Austria. The last census (1902). Number of farms from 10 to 20
hectares—242,293. Of these the majority, 142,272, i.e., nearly
three-fifths, employ wage-workers. We will add that the development of
capitalism in Austria is far behind that of Germany. Taking Austrian
agriculture as a whole, the percentage of wage-workers employed is
half
    

the German percentage (14 per cent as against 30 per cent).  

Switzerland. The last census (1905). Number of farms from 10
to 15 hectares—19,641. Of these, 11,148, i.e., the majority,
employ wage-workers. Of the farms of 5 to 10 hectares about 36 per cent in
Switzerland and 33 per cent in Austria employ wage-workers.  

One can judge from this how profoundly ignorant, or extremely
unconscientious, is the bourgeois professor in whose train the Narodniks
follow, a professor who denies the proletarianisation of the rural
districts and admits that “subsistence” farms are being ousted,
firstly, by proletarian farms, and secondly, by “family” farms, applying
this sentimental catchword to farms employing wage-workers!  

All those who praise the successes of “family” farming under
capitalism (including our Left Narodniks) are bourgeois, Who deceive the
workers. The deception lies, firstly, in painting the bourgeoisie in bright
colours. The exploiter of wage-labour is called a “working” farmer!
Secondly, the deception lies in concealing the gulf that divides the
overwhelming majority of the proletarian farms from the insignificant
minority of capitalist farms.  

The interests of the bourgeoisie demand the embellishment of capitalism
and the concealment of the gulf that divides the classes. The interests of
the proletariat demand the exposure of capitalism and of the exploitation
of wage-labour; they demand that the eyes of the masses be opened to the
immensity of the gulf that divides the classes.  

Here are brief figures taken from the census of 1907, showing the gulf
that divides the classes in German agriculture. Total number of
farms—5,700,000. Of these, proletarian farms (up to two hectares) number
3,400,000. The overwhelming majority of these “farmers” are
wage-workers who possess small plots of land.  

Then follow the petty farmers (2 to 5 hectares per farm; total number
of farms, 1,000,000). These are the poorest peasants. Less than half of
them (495,000) are independent tillers without any other
occupation. The majority are in need of outside employment, i.e., they have
to sell their labour-power. These peasants join the proletariat most
easily.  
 

We will combine these to make up Group I: proletarian and
small peasant farms.  

Group II: middle peasant farms (5 to 10 hectares). As we have seen, a
fairly large number of these exploit wage-workers. The middle peasant is a
petty bourgeois who wavers between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie.


Group III: the rest, i.e., the capitalists (20 hectares and over) and
big peasants (10 to 20 hectares). As we have seen, the majority of
the big peasants exploit wage-workers.  

Thus, Group I consists of proletarian and small peasant farms; Group II
consists of middle peasant farms; Group III consists of big peasant and
pure capitalist farms. Let us see how much land and livestock these groups
own.  





Group  
Number of farms (000,000)
Number of workers (000,000)
Area of land (000,000 hectares)
Number of livestock (in terms of cattle)
    (000,000)
Number of machines (000,000)




I . . . .      
4.4
7.3
5.0
7.0
0.2


II . . . .     
0.6
2.5
4.6
5.1
0.4


III . . . .    
0.7
5.4
22.2
17.3
1.2


Total 
5.7
15.2
31.8
29.4
1.8




Such is the picture of modern agriculture; not the picture drawn by the
professor, or by the Narodniks, but the real picture. Most of the
land, livestock and machines belong to an insignificant minority (less than
one-eighth—0.7 out of 5.7) of capitalists and peasant bourgeois. The
overwhelming majority of the “farmers” (4.4 million out of 5.7
million) have less than two workers, less than two dessiatines and less
than two head of livestock per farm. These are paupers. Their share in the
total agricultural production is insignificant. They are led by the nose
with promises of salvation under capitalism.  

Compare the productivity of labour in the various groups (i.e., the
number of workers per dessiatine of land and per head of livestock), and
you will see a barbarous dissipation and waste of labour on the small
farms. The capitalist farms own nearly all the machines and labour
productivity is high.  

Compare the number of livestock with the amount of land (including
meadow land, land under fodder crops, etc.)

    

in the various groups. You will see starving cattle in the small farms and
capitalist “prosperity” among the small group at the top.  

The Marxists champion the interests of the masses and say to the
peasants: there is no salvation for you except by joining in the
proletarian struggle. The bourgeois professors and the Narodniks are
deceiving the masses with fables about small “family” farming under
capitalism.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Harry Quelch









Lenin: Harry Quelch







V. I.  

      Lenin
Harry Quelch




Published:
Pravda Truda No. 1, September 11, 1913; Nash Put No. 16, September 12, 1913.

      Signed: V. I..

      Published according to the Pravda Truda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 369-371.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

On Wednesday, September 17 (September 4, 0. S.), Comrade
Harry Quelch, leader of the British Social-Democrats, died in London. The
British Social-Democratic organisation was formed in 1884 and was called
the Social Democratic Federation. In 1909 the name was changed to
Social-Democratic Party, and in 1911, after a number of independently
existing socialist groups amalgamated with it, it assumed the name of the
British Socialist Party.  

Harry Quelch was one of the most energetic and devoted workers in the
British Social-Democratic movement. He was active not only as a
Social-Democratic Party worker, but also as a trade-unionist. The London
Society of Compositors repeatedly elected him its Chairman, and he was
several times Chairman of the London Trades Council.  

Quelch was the editor of
Justice,[2] the weekly organ of the British Social-Democrats,
as well as editor of the party monthly journal, the
Social-Democrat.  

He took a very active part in all the work of the British
Social-Democratic movement and regularly addressed party and public
meetings. On many occasions he represented British Social-Democracy at
international congresses and on tile International Socialist
Bureau. Incidentally, when he attended the Stuttgart International
Socialist Congress he was persecuted by the Wurtemburg Government, which
expelled him from Stuttgart (without trial, by police order, as an
alien) for referring at a public meeting to the Hague Conference as a
“thieves’ supper”. When, the day following Quelch’s expulsion, the
Congress resumed its session, the British delegates left empty the chair on
which Quelch had sat, and hung a notice on it bearing the inscription:

    

“Here sat Harry Quelch, now expelled by the Wurtemburg Government.”  

The South Germans often boast of their hatred for the Prussians because
of the Prussian red tape, bureaucracy and police rule, but they themselves
behave like the worst Prussians where a proletarian socialist is concerned.


The historical conditions for the activities of the British
Social-Democrats, whose leader Quelch was, are of a very particular
kind. In the most advanced land of capitalism and political liberty, the
British bourgeoisie (who as far back as the seventeenth century settled
accounts with the absolute monarchy in a rather democratic way) managed in
the nineteenth century to split the British working-class
movement. In the middle of the nineteenth century Britain enjoyed an almost
complete monopoly in the world market. Thanks to this monopoly the profits
acquired by British capital were extraordinarily high, so that it was
possible for some crumbs of these profits to be thrown to the aristocracy
of labour, the skilled factory workers.  

This aristocracy of labour, which at that time earned tolerably good
wages, boxed itself up in narrow, self-interested craft unions, and
isolated itself from the mass of the proletariat, while in politics it
supported the liberal bourgeoisie. And to this very day perhaps nowhere in
the world are there so many liberals among the advanced workers as in
Britain.  

In the last quarter of the nineteenth century, however, things began to
change. Britain’s monopoly was challenged by America, Germany, etc. The
economic basis for the narrow, petty-bourgeois trade-unionism and
liberalism among British workers has been destroyed. Socialism is again
raising its head in Britain, getting through to the masses and growing
irresistibly despite the rank opportunism of the British
near-socialist intelligentsia.  

Quelch was in the front ranks of those who fought steadfastly and with
conviction against opportunism and a liberal-labour policy in the British
working-class movement. True, isolation from the masses sometimes infected
the British Social-Democrats with a certain sectarianism. Hyndman, the
leader and founder of Social-Democracy in Britain, has even slipped into
jingoism. But the party of the
   Social-Democrats[1]
    

has fought him on this, and over the whole of Britain the Social-Democrats,
and they alone, have for decades been carrying on systematic
propaganda and agitation in the Marxist spirit. This is the great
historical service rendered by Quelch and his comrades. The fruits of the
activities of the Marxist Quelch will be reaped in full measure by the
British working-class movement in the next few years.  

In conclusion we cannot refrain from mentioning Quelch’s sympathy for
the Russian Social-Democrats and the assistance he rendered them. Eleven
years ago the Russian Social-Democratic newspaper had to be printed in
London. The British Social-Democrats, headed by Quelch, readily made their
printing-plant available. As a consequence, Quelch himself had to “squeeze
up”. A corner was boarded off at the printing-works by a thin partition to
serve him as editorial room. This corner contained a very small
writing-table, a bookshelf above it, and a chair. When the present writer
visited Quelch in this “editorial office” there was no room for another
chair....  

 
Notes
 

[1]
The party here referred to is the British Socialist Party, founded in
1911.—Ed.  
 



[2]
Justice—a weekly founded in London in 1884 as the central
organ of the Social Democratic Federation of Great Britain; from 1911
onwards it was the organ of the British Socialist Party. When the party was
split in 1916 it became the organ of the minority of social chauvinists; it
continued publication until 1925.  

In 1902 and 1903, Lenin’s Iskra was printed by the
Justice press.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Marxism and Reformism








Lenin: Marxism and Reformism







V. I.  

      Lenin
Marxism and Reformism




Published:
Pravda Truda No. 2, September 12, 1913.

      Signed: V. I..

      Published according to the Pravda Truda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 372-375.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



 

Unlike the anarchists, the Marxists recognise struggle for
reforms, i.e., for measures that improve the conditions of the working
people without destroying the power of the ruling class. At the same time,
however, the Marxists wage a most resolute struggle against the reformists,
who, directly or indirectly, restrict the aims and activities of the
working class to the winning of reforms. Reformism is bourgeois deception
of the workers, who, despite individual improvements, will always remain
wage-slaves, as long as there is the domination of capital.  

The liberal bourgeoisie grant reforms with one hand, and with the other
always take them back, reduce them to nought, use them to enslave the
workers, to divide them into separate groups and perpetuate
wage-slavery. For that reason reformism, even when quite sincere, in
practice becomes a weapon by means of which the bourgeoisie corrupt and
weaken the workers. The experience of all countries shows that the workers
who put their trust in the reformists are always fooled.  

And conversely, workers who have assimilated Marx’s theory, i.e.,
realised the inevitability of wage-slavery so long as capitalist rule
remains, will not be fooled by any bourgeois reforms. Understanding that
where capitalism continued to exist reforms cannot be either enduring or
far-reaching, the workers fight for better conditions and use them to
intensify the fight against wage-slavery. The reformists try to divide and
deceive the workers, to divert them from the class struggle by petty
concessions. But the workers, having seen through the falsity of reformism,
utilise reforms to develop and broaden their class struggle.  
 

The stronger reformist influence is among the workers the weaker they
are, the greater their dependence on the bourgeoisie, and the easier it is
for the bourgeoisie to nullify reforms by various subterfuges. The more
independent the working-class movement, the deeper and broader its aims,
and the freer it is from reformist narrowness the easier it is for the
workers to retain and utilise improvements.  

There are reformists in all countries, for everywhere the bourgeoisie
seek, in one way or another, to corrupt the workers and turn them into
contented slaves who have given up all thought of doing away with
slavery. In Russia, the reformists are liquidators, who renounce our past
and try to lull the workers with dreams of a new, open, legal
party. Recently the St. Petersburg liquidators were forced by Severnaya
=

     Pravda[1]

to defend themselves against the charge of reformism. Their arguments
should be carefully analysed in order to clarify an extremely important
question.  

We are not reformists, the St. Petersburg liquidators wrote, because we
have not said that reforms are everything and the ultimate goal nothing; we
have spoken of movement to the ultimate goal; we have spoken of advancing
through the struggle for reforms to the fulness of
the aims set.  

Let us now see how this defence squares with the facts.  

First fact. The liquidator Sedov, summarising the statements of all the
liquidators, wrote that of the Marxists’ “three pillars” two are no
longer suitable for our agitation. Sedov retained the demand for an
eight-hour day, which, theoretically, can be realised as a reform. He
deleted, or relegated to the background the very things that go beyond
reforms. Consequently, Sedov relapsed into downright opportunism, following
the very policy expressed in the formula: the ultimate goal is
nothing. When the “ultimate goal” (even in relation to democracy) is
pushed further and further away from our agitation, that is reformism.


Second fact. The celebrated August Conference (last year’s) of the
liquidators likewise pushed non-reformist demands further and further
away—until some special occasion—instead of bringing them closer, into
the heart of our agitation.  
 

Third fact. By denying and disparaging the “old” and dissociating
themselves from it, the liquidators thereby confine themselves to
reformism. In the present situation, the connection between reformism and
the renunciation of the “old” is obvious.  

Fourth fact. The workers’ economic movement evokes the wrath and
attacks of the liquidators (who speak of “crazes”, “milling the air”,
etc., etc.) as soon as it adopts slogans that go beyond reformism.  

What is the result? In words, the liquidators reject reformism as a
principle, but in practice they adhere to it all along the line. They
assure us, on the one hand, that for them reforms are not the be-all and
end-all, but on the other hand, every time the Marxists go beyond
reformism, the liquidators attack them or voice their contempt.  

However, developments in every sector of the working-class movement
show that the Marxists, far, from lagging behind, are definitely in the
lead in making practical use of reforms, and in fighting for them. Take the
Duma elections at the worker curia level—the speeches of our deputies
inside and outside the Duma, the organisation of the workers’ press, the
utilisation of the insurance reform; take the biggest union, the
Metalworkers’ Union, etc.,—everywhere the Marxist workers are ahead of
the liquidators, in the direct, immediate, “day-to-day” activity of
agitation, organisation, fighting for reforms and using them.  

The Marxists are working tirelessly, not missing a single
“possibility” of winning and using reforms, and not condemning, but
supporting, painstakingly developing every step beyond reformism in
propaganda, agitation, mass economic struggle, etc. The liquidators, on the
other hand, who have abandoned Marxism, by their attacks on the very
existence of the Marxist body, by their destruction of Marxist discipline
and advocacy of reformism and a liberal-labour policy, are only
disorganising the working-class movement.  

Nor, moreover, should the fact be overlooked that in Russia reformism
is manifested also in a peculiar form, in identifying the fundamental
political situation in present-day Russia with that of present-day
Europe. From the liberal’s point of view this identification is legitimate,
for the liberal believes and professes the view that “thank

    

God, we have a Constitution”. The liberal expresses the interests of the
bourgeoisie when he insists that, after October 17, every step by democracy
beyond reformism is madness, a crime, a sin, etc.  

But it is these bourgeois views that are applied in practice by our
liquidators, who constantly and systematically “transplant” to Russia (on
paper) the “open party” and the “struggle for a legal party”, etc. In
other words, like the liberals, they preach the transplanting of the
European constitution to Russia, without the specific path that in
the West led to the adoption of constitutions and their consolidation over
generations, in some cases even over centuries. What the liquidators and
liberals want is to wash the hide without dipping it in water, as the
saying goes.  

In Europe, reformism actually means abandoning Marxism and replacing it
by bourgeois “social policy”. In Russia, the reformism of the liquidators
means not only that, it means destroying the Marxist organisation and
abandoning the democratic tasks of the working class, it means replacing
them by a liberal-labour policy.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
See pp. 325–27 of this volume.—Ed.  
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Land Question and the Rural Poor









Lenin: The Land Question and the Rural Poor







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Land Question and the Rural Poor




Published:
Pravda Truda No. 3, September 13, 1913.

      Signed: V. Ilyin.

      Published according to the Pravda Truda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 376-378.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

A paper on this important subject was read by Minin, a
Chernigov agronomist, at the All-Russian Agricultural Congress on
September 3 in Kiev.  

Mr. Minin, apparently a Narodnik (who agreed, incidentally, with the
bourgeois professor Kosinsky on the viability of “family” farming),
demonstrated in all justice that agronomy helps the affluent peasant. The
agrarian regulations help the strong and ruin the poor. They are a chariot
in which the strong sit and crush the defeated.  

There can be no doubt that this is an absolute truth. Only people
without a conscience could deny it. But in what does Mr. Minin see
“salvation”?  

He said (according to the report in Kievskaya Mysl No. 244):



   “The only thing that will save the smallest farms after
   the re allocation is for them to form themselves into voluntary
   co-operatives for the joint exploitation (collective tilling) of their own
   land.”  


Obviously, this Narodnik remedy is simply childish. The landowners and
kulaks are driving millions of peasants from the land and ruining millions
more. World capitalism as a whole, the entire power of international
commerce, the might of capital to the tune of thousands of millions in the
hands of the bourgeoisie of all countries are pulling Russia along with
them, sustaining and supporting her bourgeoisie in the towns and in the
countryside, including those within the village communes. And now
we are told that the collective tilling of “their own scraps of land” by
ruined peasants is “salvation”!  This is like trying to beat a railway
train with a wheelbarrow—in speed and carrying capacity.  
 

It won’t work, my Narodnik gentlemen! You are right, of course, when
you say that the railway train is crushing the poor, but wheelbarrows are
not what yow should be thinking about.  

Not backward from the train to the wheelbarrow, but onward from the
capitalist train to that of the united proletarians.  

The innocent dreams of the Narodniks are not only childishly na\"ive,
they are actually harmful because they divert the minds of the poor from
the class struggle. There is no salvation for the rural poor
outside the class struggle of the proletariat against the
bourgeoisie for the reconstruction of the entire capitalist system. All
these unions, co-operatives, associations, etc., can only be of use if they
participate consciously in that class struggle.  

Although it is beyond all shadow of doubt that the development of
capitalism and the proletarianisation of the countryside must inevitably
continue in Russia, as in the rest of the world, it would be the greatest
mistake to con fine oneself to this truth.  

There are various kinds of capitalism—the semi-feudal capitalism of
the landowners with its host of residual privileges, which is the most
reactionary and causes the masses the greatest suffering; there is also the
capitalism of free farmers, which is the most democratic, causes the masses
less suffering and has fewer residual privileges.  

What influence, for example, would the transfer of all the land to the
peasants without compensation have on the development of capitalism in
Russia? That would not be socialism. That would also be capitalism, yet it
would not be Purishkevich-Guchkov but democratic, Narodnik-peasant
capitalism. The development of capitalism would proceed more rapidly, more
extensively, more freely and with less suffering for the masses.  

That is the real substance of the present, existing agrarian
problem in Russia. That is what the advocates of land owners’ solution of
the land question and bourgeois agronomy on the one hand, and the Narodniks
and Left Cadets (such as Shakhovskoi) on the other, were arguing about in
Kiev (without understanding the substance of the issue). They were arguing
about whether bourgeois democrats

    

should leave the Purishkeviches to complete the organisation of the new
Russia on feudal-capitalist lines, or whether they should take that
organisation into their own hands, into the hands of the masses, into the
hands of the peasants, and continue it without the Purishkeviches on free,
democratic, capitalist lines.  

It is not difficult to understand the position of the politically
conscious worker on this issue. We know perfectly well that both the
Stolypin path of development and that of the Narodniks mean the development
of capitalism, which will in any case lead to the triumph of the
proletariat. We shall not lose heart, no matter which turn history
takes. But we shall not, allow history to take any turn without our
participation, without the active intervention of the advanced class. The
working class is not indifferent to the clashes between the Purishkeviches
and the peasant democrats; its attitude is one of heartiest, most devoted
defence of the interests of peasant democracy and democracy for the entire
people in their most consistent form.  

Not the least concession to the alleged socialism (but actually
petty-bourgeois dreaming) of the Narodniks, which is rotten through and
through, but the greatest attention to the peasant democrats, to their
education, to awakening and rallying them, to liberating them from every
kind of stifling prejudice—such is the line taken by the politically
conscious worker.  

Do you want to dream of the victory of the wheelbarrow over, the train?
Then your way is not ours, we are the enemies of banal
Manilovism.[1] Do you want to fight against the Purishkeviches? Then
your way is ours, but remember that the workers will not forgive the
slightest vacillation.  

But the working class treats those who, in obsequious haste, declare
the “complete” success of Stolypin’s solution of the land question with
the contempt that advanced, strong classes hostile to reformism always
display towards opportunists and towards the knights of transient success.


 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Manilov—a character from Gogol’s Dead Souls, a
chatterbox and empty day-dreamer whose name has become a synonym for the
passive, easy-going attitude to reality typical of such characters.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## How Does Bishop Nikon Defend the Ukrainians?









Lenin: How Does Bishop Nikon Defend the Ukrainians?







V. I.  

      Lenin
How Does Bishop Nikon Defend the Ukrainians?




Published:
Pravda Truda No. 3, September 13, 1913.

      Published according to the Pravda Truda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 379-381.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

It is reported in Kievskaya Mysl that Bishop
Nikon, deputy to the State Duma, Right, was the first to put his signature
to the bill on the Ukrainian school and Ukrainian associations submitted to
the Duma.  

The bill says: teaching in elementary schools in the Ukrainian language
shall be permitted; Ukrainian teachers shall be appointed; the teaching of
the Ukrainian language and the history of the Ukraine shall be introduced;
Ukrainian associations shall not be persecuted and they shall not be closed
“at the discretion of the authorities, which is frequently undisguised
lawlessness”.  

Thus Purishkevich’s party comrade, Bishop Nikon, does not like
lawlessness in certain cases.  

Bishop Nikon is quite right in assuming that the question he raises
“is one of outstanding importance, one that concerns the perversion of the
thirty-seven million Ukrainians”; in saying that “the rich, beautiful,
talented, flourishing and poetic Ukraine is being condemned to
degeneration, gradual stultification and slow extinction”.  

The protest against, the oppression of the Ukrainians by the Great
Russians is a perfectly just one. But let us look at the arguments Bishop
Nikon puts forward in defence of the Ukrainian demands.  


   “The Ukrainian people do not seek any of this notorious autonomy,
   re-establishment of the Zaporozhye Sech or something of that kind; the
   Ukrainians are not separatists....  The Ukrainians are not people of
   foreign extraction, they are our own people, our blood brothers, and as
   such should not suffer any limitations in respect of their language and the
   development of their national culture; other wise we equate them, our
   brothers, with the Jews, Poles, Georgians and others, who actually are
   people of foreign extraction.”  

 

And so it boils down to this—the Ukrainian Bishop Nikon and others of
his school of thought are begging the Great-Russian landowners to grant
privileges to the Ukrainians on the grounds that they are their
brothers, while the Jews are people of foreign extraction! To put it simply
and forthrightly—because the Jews and others are of foreign extraction we
agree to oppress them, if you make concessions to us.  

The picture is the familiar one of the defence of “national culture”
by all bourgeois nationalists, from the Black Hundreds to the
liberals, and even to the bourgeois-democratic nationalists!  

What Bishop Nikon refuses to understand is that the Ukrainians cannot
be protected from oppression unless all peoples, without exception, are
protected from all oppression, unless the concept “people of foreign
extraction” is completely expunged from the life of the state, unless the
complete equality of rights of all nationalities is upheld. No one can be
protected from national oppression unless the most extensive local and
regional autonomy and the principle of settling all state
questions in accordance with the will of the majority of the population
(that is, the principle of consistent democracy) are consistently put into
practice.  

Bishop Nikon’s slogan of “national culture” for the Ukrainians means
nothing more than the propagation of Black-Hundred ideas in the Ukrainian
language; it is the slogan of Ukrainian-clerical culture.  

Politically conscious workers have understood that the slogan of
“national culture” is clerical or bourgeois deception—no matter whether
it concerns Great-Russian, Ukrainian, Jewish, Polish, Georgian or any other
culture. A hundred and twenty-five years ago, when the nation had not been
split into bourgeoisie and proletariat, the slogan of national culture
could have been a single and integral call to struggle against feudalism
and clericalism. Since that time, however, the class struggle between the
bourgeoisie and the proletariat has gained momentum everywhere. The
division of the “single” nation into exploiters and exploited has become
an accomplished fact.  

Only the clericals and the bourgeoisie can speak of national culture in
general. The working people can speak only

    

of the international culture of the world working-class movement. That is
the only culture that means full, real, sincere equality of nations, the
absence of national oppression and the implementation of democracy. Only
the unity and solidarity of workers of all nations in all
working-class organisations in the struggle against capital will lead to
“the solution of the national problem”.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Notes of a Publicist (September 13, 1913)









Lenin: Notes of a Publicist (September 13, 1913)







V. I.  

      Lenin
Notes of a Publicist (September 13, 1913)




Published:
Pravda Truda No. 3, September 13, 1913.

      Signed: N—k.

      Published according to the Pravda Truda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 382-387.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

I. NON-PARTY INTELLECTUALS AGAINST ISM

The editors of Novaya Rabochaya Gazeta have come out in
defence of the non-Party agitation to divide collections equally between
the liquidators, the Narodniks and the Marxists.  

When it was pointed out to them that such a division is an absolutely
unprincipled method that undermines the foundations of the Marxist attitude
to petty-bourgeois
       trends,[1]

the editors did not know what to say in reply and tried to pass it off with
a joke. We, they said, don’t know anything about a “Marxist system of
collections”.  

The renegades want to “make amiable jokes” about our old decisions.


The workers, however, will allow no joking on such a question.  

That same twenty-third issue of Novaya Rabochaya Gazeta
informs us that the liquidators’ agitation has attracted two working-class
groups in Russia—a group of printing workers in the town of Dvinsk and a
group at the Nemirov-Kolodkin factory in Moscow. These groups contributed
their collections equally to the liquidators’, Narodniks’ and
Marxist newspapers.  

Let the renegade intellectuals laugh off the question; the workers,
however, must and will decide it.  

To preach the equal division of collections means preaching
non-partisanship and confusing (or equating) news papers that hold the
proletarian class point of view with

    

those of the petty bourgeoisie, the Narodnik newspapers. The “amiable
jokers”, those who write for the liquidators’ newspaper, cannot raise any
objection to this elementary truth, although their jokes and sniggers
probably arouse the admiration of the bourgeois public. A person who has
suffered a complete fiasco among the workers often recompenses himself with
the admiration expressed by the bourgeoisie when he ridicules the very idea
of a consistently Marxist solution to questions of current practice.  

The liquidators have taken comfort—at a meeting of metalworkers they
suffered a complete defeat. At any meeting of the bourgeois gentry the
liquidators are awarded an amiable smile for amiable jokes directed against
the position held by a workers’ newspaper.  

Let everyone have what he wants. Let the liquidators console themselves
with their successes among the bourgeoisie. The workers, however, will
explain to the masses the indubitable truth that to preach the equal
division of workers’ collections is preaching non-partisanship, is
preaching the confusion or the equation of the proletariat’s Marxist
newspaper with an intellectual and petty-bourgeois newspaper, like that of
the Narodniks.  
II. LIBERAL BLINDNESS

The usual method adopted by West-European opportunists, from the time
of Eduard Bernstein, whose views were vigorously rejected by German
Social-Democracy, is the following: 

“Take a look at things as they are,” said Bernstein and the other
opportunists, “have the courage to say outright what is—in Germany we
are all engaged in a struggle for reforms, we are all reformists in
essence, we are a party of reforms. And the abolition of wage-slavery in a
series of crises is all words, an empty utopia.”  

Since then the opportunists have repeated this trick of theirs a
hundred times and the entire bourgeois press (our Cadet Rech above
all) is constantly making use of this argument of the opportunists
against Marxism. Anyone seriously interested in the fate of the
working-class movement

    

should have a proper knowledge of this worn-out manoeuvre of the downright
enemies and false friends of the proletariat.  

In St. Petersburg quite recently (September 4) the not unknown
liquidator D. repeated in the liquidators’ newspaper the all-Europe
bourgeois manoeuvre with a crudeness or arrogance that is worthy of
attention.  

Let the reader judge for himself.  


   “We open, any workers’ newspaper, say even
   Severnaya Pravda,” wrote D., “and what do we see? We read of
   the activities of workers’ organisations, trade unions, clubs and
   co-operatives; of the meetings of the members of those organisations and
   of their leading committees, of insurance agents, etc.; of lectures and
   reports organised by workers; of strikes, and strike committees; of the
   organisation of various collections; of attempts at political action on
   the part of groups of workers in defence of the workers’ press, to
   honour the memory of Bebel or for some other immediate purpose.”  


That is what D. and others like him have “seen” and still “see” in
Severnaya Pravda. And just like Bernstein, of course, he exclaims:
“It will do no harm to look first at what is” (D.’s
italics). Whereupon he comes to the conclusion that all this is the
struggle for freedom of association. “The slogan of struggle for freedom
of association as the most important current demand”, “epitomises
what is” (D.’s italics).  

Bernstein maintained that he was “generalising what is” when he
asserted that the working-class struggle was a struggle for reforms.  

D. maintains that he is “generalising what is” when he asserts that
the working-class movement in Russia is reformist.  

Bernstein tried to give a liberal content to the workers’
struggle for reforms, a struggle filled with a far from reformist
content. D. is acting in literally the same fashion. He sees
nothing but liberal reformism and tries to pass off his blindness
as reality.  

Severnaya Pravda, of course, did fight for even the slightest
improvement in the workers’ life and in the conditions of the workers’
struggle, but did not do it in the liberal way, as gentlemen like D. do!
There was a lot in Severnaya Pravda that they
missed—there was the struggle against reformism, there was defence of the
“old”, defence of full-blooded slogans,

    

etc. Gentlemen like D. are of the opinion that such things are not)
important. They “fail to see” them, they do not want to see
them, just because they are liberals. Like all liberals, they cannot
understand the connection, the close, inseverable connection the
Marxists make between defence of the slightest improvement and defence of
the slogans of their organisation, etc. It is not clear to them that this
connection determines the radical difference between the world outlook of
the liberal (he is also in favour of freedom of association) and that of
the working-class democrat.  

Divorce the struggle for reforms from the struggle for the final
goal—that is what Bernstein’s preaching actually amounts to. Divorce the
struggle for improvements, for freedom of association, etc., from the
struggle against reformism, from the defence of Marxism, from its spirit
and its political trend—that is what the preaching of D. and the other
liquidators actually amounts to.  

They want to impose their liberal blindness (not seeing the connection
with the past, not seeing its trend, not seeing the struggle against
reformism) on the working class. As the meeting of metalworkers on
August 25 showed again and again, advanced workers have already seen
through the liberal nature of D. and his petty group.  
III. A NECESSARY EXPLANATION

In issue No. 24 of Novaya Rabochaya Gazeta we came across an
amusing sally against our description of the Dublin
       events.[2]

It would probably not have been worth while responding to an amusing item
had the liquidators’ newspaper not gone so far as to offer an explanation
that is extremely important and instructive for the workers. Judge for
yourselves. We made a distinction between Britain, where the workers’
demand for the reform of trade union legislation (laws on freedom
of association) is of very serious and real importance because the general
basis of political liberty exists in that country, and Russia, where such a
demand

    

is not serious, is an empty liberal phrase, but where such reforms as
insurance are seriously practicable under the existing political system.


The liquidators do not understand the difference. Let us try to explain
it by asking two questions:
1. Why is a bourgeois-democratic revolution, a revolution for political
liberties, impossible in England?
2. Why was it that in Russia, towards the end of the last century, in 1897,
for example, partial reforms of the factory laws were quite
possible, and nobody disputed the partial demands of the workers in this
sphere, whereas all Marxists in those days considered that the demand for
partial political reforms was a liberal deception?  

When the liquidators have given these questions some thought they may
be able to guess the reasons for taking a different attitude to various
reforms in Russia and in Britain.  

And now for the important explanation given in the liquidators’
newspaper.  


   “But,” it says (No. 24, page 2,
   column 1) “if this basis [i.e., the general basis of
   political liberties] is not necessary for partial changes in
   insurance legislation, why is it necessary for a partial change in the law
   of March 4, 1906 and certain articles of the decree on strikes of
   December 2, 1906?”  


We congratulate you on your frankness and thank you for it! You have
hit the mark—“a partial change in the laws of March 4, 1906 and
December 2,
1905”[3] is quite possible without anything general! Superb.


Only—do you know what?—that “partial change in the laws of
March 4, 1906 and December 2, 1905” is not called “freedom of
association” but Octobrist deception of the people.  

The Novaya Rabochaya Gazeta writers have admitted exactly what
was to be proved.  

By the “freedom of association” that the liberals and liquidators
treat you to, must be understood: 


   “A partial change in the laws of March 4, 1906 and
   December 2, 1905.”  


Once again we thank you for your frankness. And so we shall put it on
record that the main, central, chief, primary, etc., etc., slogan of the
liquidators is, by their own admission,

    

the demand for a partial change in the laws of March 4, 1906 and
December 2, 1906.  

Novaya Rabochaya Gazeta has brilliantly refuted its
association with the liberals, has it not?  

It is not for nothing that the liquidators have been called
Social-Democratic Octobrists!  

 
Notes
 

[1]
See pp. 343–47 of this volume.—Ed.  

[2]
See pp. 348–49 of this volume.—Ed.  
 



[3]
The Law of March 4 (17), 1906—temporary rules for
associations, unions and meetings—permitted their organisation but placed
so

   

many obstacles in their way that the law was practically reduced to
nought. The law granted the Minister of the interior the right to suppress
associations and unions at his own discretion and also to refuse the
registration of new unions.  

The Law of December 2 (15), 1905 was the name given to the
temporary regulations under which strikers were subject to conviction as
criminals.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Civilised Barbarism









Lenin: Civilised Barbarism







V. I.  

      Lenin
Civilised Barbarism




Published:
Pravda Truda No. 6, September 10, 1913.

      Signed: W..

      Published according to the Pravda Truda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 388-389.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Britain and France are the most civilised countries in the
world. London and Paris are the world’s capitals, with populations of six
and three million, respectively. The distance between them is an eight- to
nine-hour journey.  

One can imagine how great is the commercial intercourse between these
two capitals, what masses of goods and of people are constantly moving from
the one to the other.  

And yet the richest, the most civilised and the freest countries in the
world are now discussing, in fear and trepidation—by no means for the
first time!—the “difficult” question of whether a tunnel can be built
under the English Channel (which separates Britain from the European
Continent).  

Engineers have long been of the, opinion that it can. The capitalists
of Britain and France have mountains of money. Profit from capital invested
in such an enterprise would be absolutely certain.  

What, then, is holding the matter up?  

Britain is afraid of—invasion! A tunnel, you see, would, “if
anything should happen”, facilitate the invasion of Britain by enemy
troops. That is why the British military authorities have, not for the
first time, wrecked the plan to build the tunnel.  

The madness and blindness of the civilised nations makes astonishing
reading. Needless to say, it would take only a few seconds with modern
technical devices to bring traffic in the tunnel to a halt, and to wreck
the tunnel completely.  

But the civilised nations have driven themselves into the position of
barbarians. Capitalism has brought about a situation in which the
bourgeoisie, in order to hoodwink

    

the workers, is compelled to frighten the British people
with idiotic tales about “invasion”. Capitalism has brought about a
situation in which a whole group of capitalists who stand to lose “good
business” through the digging of the tunnel are doing their utmost to
wreck this plan and hold up technical progress.  

The Britishers’ fear of the tunnel is fear of themselves. Capitalist
barbarism is stronger than civilisation.  

On all sides, at every step one comes across problems which man is
quite capable of solving immediately, but capitalism is in the
way. It has amassed enormous wealth—and has made men the slaves
of this wealth. It has solved the most complicated technical problems—and
has blocked the application of technical improvements because of the
poverty and ignorance of millions of the population, be cause of the stupid
avarice of a handful of millionaires.  

Civilisation, freedom and wealth under capitalism call to mind the rich
glutton who is rotting alive but will not let what is young live on.  

But the young is growing and will emerge supreme in spite of all.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Black Hundreds









Lenin: The Black Hundreds







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Black Hundreds




Published:
Pravda Truda No. 14, September 26, 1913.

      Published according to the Pravda Truda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 390-391.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

There is in our Black-Hundred movement one exceedingly
original and exceedingly important feature that has not been the subject of
sufficient attention. That feature is ignorant peasant democracy, democracy
of the crudest type but also extremely deep-seated.  

No matter how much the commanding classes try to fence our political
parties off from the people both by means of the June Third election law
and by thousands of “peculiar features” of our political system, reality
has its way. Every political party, even of the extreme Right, has to seek
some sort of link with the people.  

The extreme Rights constitute the party of the landowners. They cannot,
however, confine themselves to links with the landowners alone. They have
to conceal those links and pretend that they are defending the interests of
the entire people, that they stand for the “good old”, “stable” way of
rural life. They have to appeal to the most deep-rooted prejudices of the
most backward peasant, they have to play on his ignorance.  

Such a game cannot be played without risk. Now and again the voice of
the real peasant life, peasant democracy, breaks through all the
Black-Hundred mustiness and cliché. Then the Rights are compelled to
get rid of the “inconvenient” peasant democrat. Naturally this banishment
of the most faithful Black Hundreds, their expulsion from their own camp by
the extreme Rights because of their democracy, is not without its
educational effect on the masses.  

Bishop Nikon, an extreme Right-winger has, for instance, been forced to
abandon his Duma work. Why?  
 

A letter from Bishop Nikon himself, published in Yeniseiskaya
Mysl,[1] gives a clear answer to this. It stands to reason that
Bishop Nikon dare not speak openly about the reasons for his
withdrawal. But Bishop Nikon, quoting a letter from a peasant, does write:
“The land, bread and other important questions of our Russian life and of
the region do not appear to reach either the hands or the hearts of the
authorities or the Duma. These questions and such solution of them as is
possible are regarded as ‘utopian’, ‘hazardous’, untimely. Why do you keep
silent, what are you waiting for? For moods and revolts for which those
same ‘undernourished’, hungry, unfortunate peasants will be shot down? We
are afraid of ‘big’ issues and reforms, we limit ourselves to trivialities
and trifles, good though they may be.”  

That is what Bishop Nikon writes. And that is what very many
Black-hundred peasants think. It is quite understandable why Bishop Nikon
had to be removed from Damn affairs and Duma speeches for such
statements.  

Bishop Nikon expresses his Black-Hundred democracy in arguments that
are, in essence, very far from correct. The land, bread and all other
important questions do reach the hands and hearts (and pockets) of the
“authorities” and the Duma; 

The “authorities” and the Puma provide “such solution” to
these questions “as is possible”—and it is indeed the possible
solution, the one that accords with the interests and power of the
landowners who are dominant among the authorities and in the Duma.  

Bishop Nikon realises that his Black-Hundred views are being undermined
by the real slate of affairs; they are being destroyed by what he observes
in the Puma and in the attitude of the “authorities”, etc. Bishop Nikon,
however, cannot understand the reason for all this, or is afraid
to understand it.  

But reality will win through, and out of ten in any village who think
as Bishop Nikon does, nine will, in the long run, most likely prove less
obtuse in mastering the lessons of life than the bishop.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Yeniseiskaya Mysl (Yenisei Thought)—a daily
bourgeois liberal newspaper published in Krasnoyarsk from 1912 to 1915.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Russian Government and Russian Reforms









Lenin: Russian Government and Russian Reforms







V. I.  

      Lenin
Russian Government and Russian Reforms




Published:
Pravda Truda No. 14, September 26, 1913.

      Signed: Observer.

      Published according to the Pravda Truda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 392-393.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

There is a little magazine called
Grazhdanin[1] compiled by Prince Meshchersky. The Prince, who
has been through fire and water in the various higher civil service
“spheres” of St. Petersburg, usually preaches in this magazine the most
reactionary things.  

The magazine is interesting primarily because in it the talkative
Prince is continually divulging the secrets of the higher administration of
Russia. For Russia is actually administered by those landowner dignitaries
in whose society Prince Meshchersky moved and is still moving. And they
actually do administer Russia in exactly the way, in exactly the spirit, by
exactly the means advised, assumed and suggested by Prince Meshchersky.


In the second place, the magazine is interesting because its courtly
editor, confident that it will never reach the people, often
exposes the Russian administration in the most ruthless manner.  

Here are two interesting admissions made by this princely dignitary:



   “A very typical phenomenon,” he writes. “From time to
   time people come to us from France, or Belgium, or England, nice people who
   show a sympathy for Russia and the Russians, they stay in luxurious
   circumstances in a hotel, submit their letters of introduction to some
   official or another ... and quite soon, in perhaps ten days or so, these
   newly arrived foreigners are received by some minister and are given hopes
   of receiving some concession, which they take off home with them.... Then
   back they come again and a week later they have already acquired a
   concession somewhere in Russia and are counting up the foreseeable profits
   with such energy that they have dreams of millions.”  

 

That is what Prince Meshchersky writes. By way of exception he writes
the truth. Features of Asiatic primitiveness, governmental graft, the
schemes of financiers who share their monopoly incomes with highly-placed
officials, are still boundlessly strong in Russian capitalism. When our
Narodniks fight, and fight with good reason, against such disgusting and
shameless swindles, they often regard it as a war against capitalism. Their
mistake is obvious. They are actually fighting for the
democratisation of capitalism.  


   “When I was abroad,” the arch-reactionary Prince writes
   in an other place, “I was in contact with people in different walks of
   life.... I do not remember that any sort of social or state reforms ever
   constituted the subject of the conversation....  I read the newspapers ...
   but found no articles about reforms.... As soon as I crossed the frontier
   and reached home, I found the reverse; I took up the first Russian
   newspaper I came across and on the first, the second and even the third
   page there were articles about some sort of reforms.”  


Correctly observed. The bourgeoisie does not need reforms in Europe. In
Russia they are necessary. The princely dignitary cannot understand the
reason for this difference—just as some wise people cannot understand
that the strongly anti–reformist tactics of the workers are justified
because of the bourgeoisie’s need for reforms.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Grazhdanin (The Citizen)—a reactionary magazine
published in St. Petersburg from 1872 to 1914. From the 1880s it was the
organ of the extreme monarchists and was edited by Prince Meshchersky and
financed by the government. It had a small circulation but was influential
in bureaucratic circles.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## How Vera Zasulich Demolishes Liquidationism









Lenin: How Vera Zasulich Demolishes Liquidationism







V. I.  

      Lenin
How Vera Zasulich Demolishes Liquidationism




Published:
Prosveshcheniye No. 9, September 1913.

      Signed: V. Ilyin.

      Published according to the Prosveshcheniye text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 394-416.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Zhivaya Zhizn No. 8 (July 19, 1913), carried an
excellent article by Vera Zasulich in defence of liquidationism (“Apropos
of a Certain Question”). We ask all those interested in questions
affecting the working-class movement and democracy to pay careful attention
to this article, which is valuable both because of its contents and because
of the forthrightness of its authoritative author.  
I

In the first place, Vera Zasulich, like all liquidators, does her best
to calumniate the Party, but her frankness as a writer exposes her so
clearly that it is amazing. “The Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party,”
we read in the article, “is an underground organisation of intellectuals
for propaganda and agitation among the workers, which was founded at the
Second Congress, and which split immediately.” Actually, the Party was
founded in 1898 and based itself on the awakening of a mass working-class
movement in the 1895–96 period. Dozens and hundreds of workers (like the
late Babushkin in St. Petersburg) not only attended lectures at study
circles but as early as 1894–95 themselves carried on agitation
and then founded workers’ organisations in other cities (the Ekaterinoslav
organisations founded by Babushkin when he was exiled from St. Petersburg,
etc.).  

The relative dominance of intellectuals in the early days of the
movement was to be observed everywhere and not only in Russia. By using
this fact to slander the workers’

    

party, Vera Zasulich crushes liquidationism among all thinking workers who
experienced the agitation and strikes of 1894–96.  


   “In 1903,” writes Vera Zasulich, “the underground
   study circles engaged in this work were united to form a secret society
   with hierarchical rules. It is difficult to say whether the new
   organisation as such helped or hindered current work....”  


Anyone who does not wish to be accused of having a short memory, must
know that groups of intellectuals and workers, not only in 1903, but
beginning from 1894 (and in some cases even earlier) helped both
in economic and political agitation, in strikes and in propaganda. To
assert publicly that “it is difficult to say whether the new organisation
helped or hindered the work” is not merely stating a tremendous and
obvious historical untruth—it means renouncing the Party.  

What value, indeed, can one place on the Party if it is difficult to
say whether it helped or hindered the work? Is it not clear that the
sabbath was made for man and not man for the sabbath?  

The liquidators have to renounce the Party in retrospect in order to
justify their renunciation of it at the present time.  

Vera Zasulich, speaking of this present time, the June Third epoch,
says: “I have heard retorts of the district branches of the organisation
losing members....”  

There is no disputing that fact. The district and all other branches of
the organisation have lost members. The question is one of how this
phenomenon of flight from the organisation is to be explained, what
attitude is to be adopted towards that phenomenon.  

Vera Zasulich answers: “they lost their members because at that time
there was nothing to do in them.”  

The answer is definite and may be equated with a definite condemnation
of the underground and justification of flight from it. How does Vera
Zasulich prove her statement?
1) There was nothing for propagandists to do because “many workers had
collected whole libraries” of books published in the days of freedom,
“which the police had not yet succeeded in confiscating”.  
 

Vera Zasulich has an interesting knack of not noticing how, she refutes
her own words. If the police were “confiscating” the libraries, it
means that discussions on what had been read, the assimilation of it
and further study was giving rise precisely to underground work!
Vera Zasulich wants to prove that there “was nothing to do”, while her
own admission shows that there was something to do.  

2) “Underground political agitation was out of the question at that
time. Furthermore, it was neither the right, nor the duty of the districts
to take the initiative in such ‘actions’.”  

Vera Zasulich repeats the liquidators’ words without knowing the state
of affairs. That the period under discussion was a difficult one, more
difficult than before, there is no denying. The work of the Marxists,
however, is always “difficult” but the thing that makes them
different from the liberals is that they do not declare what is difficult
to be impossible. The liberal calls difficult work impossible so as to
conceal his renunciation of it. The difficulty of the work compels the
Marxist to strive for greater solidarity among the best elements in order
to overcome the difficulties.  

The objective fact that the work in the period under discussion was
possible and was conducted is proved, for example, by the
elections to the Third and Fourth Dumas, if by nothing else. Surely Vera
Zasulich does not believe that supporters of the underground movement could
have been elected to the State Duma without the participation of
the underground.  

3) “There was nothing to do in the underground groups, but outside
them there was a mass of essential social work to be done.” Clubs, various
associations,congresses, lectures, etc.  

Such is the argument put forward by all liquidators and repeated by
Vera Zasulich. Her article could simply be recommended for use in workers’
circles as an object-lesson on the misadventures of the liquidators!  

The underground was necessary because, among other things, Marxist work
in clubs, associations, at congresses, etc., was connected with it.  

Compare this argument of mine with that of Vera Zasulich. Ask yourself,
what grounds has Vera Zasulich for depicting work in legal
associations as something carried on

    

“outside” the work of the underground groups? Why “outside”
and not “in close contact with”, why not “in the same direction”?  

Vera Zasulich has no factual grounds whatsoever, because everybody
knows that there was probably not a single legal association, etc., in
which members of the underground groups did not take part. The only grounds
Vera Zasulich has for her assertions is the subjective mood of the
liquidators. The liquidators did get the feeling that there was nothing
for them to do in the underground, that they sympathised
only with work that was outside the underground, only if it was
outside the ideological line of the underground. In other words,
Vera Zasulich’s “grounds” amount to justification of the
liquidators’ flight from the underground!  

Pitiful grounds indeed.  

We cannot, however, confine ourselves to pointing out the subjective
grounds for Vera Zasulich’s writings, the errors of fact and logic with
which literally every phrase of her article teems. We must seek the
objective grounds for the undoubted fact that the “districts lost their
members”, that there was a flight from the underground.  

We have not far to look. It is well enough known that the bourgeois and
petty-bourgeois society of Russia at the time under discussion was carried
away to a very great extent by counter-revolutionary temper. It is well
enough known what profound antagonism between the bourgeoisie and the
proletariat came to the surface in the days of freedom and engendered that
counter-revolutionary temper and also confusion, despondency and loss of
spirit among many vacillating friends of the proletariat.  

This objective relationship between classes in the period under
discussion explains fully enough why the bourgeoisie in general and the
liberal bourgeoisie in particular (for domination over the masses of the
people had been snatched out of their hands) were bound to hate
the underground, declare it worthless and “ineffective” (Vera Zasulich’s
expression), condemn and reject underground political agitation and also
the conduct of legal work in the spirit of the under ground, in accordance
with the slogans of the underground and in direct ideological and
organisational contact with it.  
 

The first to flee from the underground were the bourgeois intellectuals
who succumbed to the counter-revolutionary mood, those
“fellow-travellers” of the Social-Democratic working-class movement who,
like those in Europe, had been attracted by the liberating role played by
the proletariat (in Europe—by the plebs in general) in the bourgeois
revolution. It is a well-known fact what a mass of Marxists left the
underground after 1905 and found places for themselves in all sorts of
legal cosy corners for intellectuals.  

No matter what subjective “good” intentions Vera Zasulich may have
had, her repetition of the arguments of the liquidators amounts objectively
to a rehash of the petty ideas of the counter-revolutionary liberals. The
liquidators, who are so loud in their talk of “independent action by the
workers”, etc., actually represent and defend the intellectuals who have
defected from the working-class movement and gone over to the side of the
bourgeoisie.  

The flight of some people from the underground could have been the
result of their fatigue and dispiritedness. Such individuals may only be
pitied; they should be helped because their dispiritedness will pass and
there will again appear an urge to get away from philistinism, away from
the liberals and the liberal-labour policy, to the working-class
underground. But when the fatigued and dispirited use journalism as their
platform and announce that their flight is not a manifestation of fatigue,
or weakness, or intellectual woolliness, but that it is to their credit,
and then put the blame on the “ineffective”, “worthless”, “moribund”,
etc., underground, these runaways then become disgusting renegades,
apostates. These runaways then become the worst of advisers for the
working-class movement and therefore its dangerous enemies.  

When one finds the liquidators defending and lauding such elements and
at the same time coming out with vows and assurances that they, the
liquidators, stand for unity, one can only shrug one’s shoulders and ask
oneself whom they hope to deceive with this blissful idiocy and
hypocrisy. Is it not obvious that a working-class party cannot possibly
exist without a determined struggle against the lauding of defection from
the Party?  
 

The liquidators (with Vera Zasulich following them) enjoy calling these
apostates and runaways “the living forces of the working class”. But
these evasions of the liberal intellectuals have long been refuted by
indisputable facts on a country-wide scale. Of the deputies from the worker
curias 47 per cent were Bolsheviks in the Second Duma, 50 per cent in the
Third Duma and 67 per cent in the Fourth Duma. This is an irrefutable proof
that the workers left the liquidators in the period between 1907 and
1913. The emergence of the first working-class daily newspaper and the
events now to be observed in the trade unions add still further proofs to
this. If we glance at the objective facts and not at the empty, boasting
declarations of the liberal intellectuals, we shall see that the living
forces of the working class are those of the supporters of the underground,
the opponents of the liquidators.  

All Vera Zasulich’s discourse on the past is, however, only the
beginning. There is something better to come. Her defence of renegation and
defection from the Party is only the introduction to her defence of the
destruction of the Party. It is these important sections of her article
that we shall now examine.  
II

“The underground organisation,” we read in the article, “has always
been the weakest feature of Social-Democracy in Russia ...”
(“always”—neither more nor less). Bold historians, our
liquidators. “Always” means in 1882–93, before the mass working-class
movement under the organised leadership of the Party; it means in
1894–1904. And in the 1905–07 period?  


   “But even if it had been ten times better, it would not
   have survived the revolution and counter-revolution. In the history of
   Europe I cannot remember a single revolutionary organisation that, after
   living through a revolution, proved effective in the moment of reaction.”
   


This argument provides such a rich collection of “gems” that one does
not know where to begin sorting them out!  

Zasulich “cannot remember” in European history the case she is
discussing. But can she remember “in the history

    

of Europe” a bourgeois revolution that took place when there were
independent working-class parties with hundreds of thousands, a million
members in neighbouring countries, and with capitalism highly developed and
having created in the country in question a united industrial proletariat
and a working-class movement on a national scale?  

Vera Zasulich cannot “remember” a case of this kind because there has
not been one “in the history of Europe”.  Mass political strikes did not
and could not play a decisive role in any bourgeois revolution in European
history before the twentieth century.  

And so what do we get? We get this. The liquidators refer to “the
history of Europe” as an example, where at the time of the bourgeois
revolutions, there were no independent proletarian parties with
mass strikes; they cite that example for the purpose of renouncing
the tasks, or of belittling, clipping, curtailing, docking the
tasks to be done in a country in which the two above-mentioned basic
conditions (an independent proletarian party and mass strikes of a
political nature) were present and still are present!  

Vera Zasulich fails to understand—and this failure to understand is
extremely typical of the liquidators—that she has repeated the idea
of the liberal Prokopovich, using different words, for a different
reason and approaching the subject from a different angle. That liberal, at
the time when he, as an extreme Economist (1899), was breaking away from
the Social-Democrats, expressed the idea that “the political struggle is
for the liberals, the economic struggle for the workers”.  

All opportunists in the working-class movement of Russia from
1895 to 1913 have been drawn towards this idea and have lapsed into it. It
is in struggle against this idea that the Social-Democratic Party in Russia
has grown; only in struggle against this idea could it have
grown. The struggle against this idea, the liberation of the masses from
the influence of this idea is, in fact, the struggle for an independent
working-class movement in Russia.  

Prokopovich expressed the idea in its application to present tasks,
using the imperative or the desiderative mood.  

Vera Zasulich repeats the idea in the form of an allegedly-historical,
retrospective discourse, or a review of events.  
 

Prokopovich spoke forthrightly, frankly, clearly and sharply—abandon
your idea of political independence, brother workers! Vera Zasulich, not
realising whither liquidationism was leading her, has reached the same
abyss by a zigzag route; the example of Europe also shows you, brother
workers, that you cannot expect to have an “effective” organisation of
your old tested type, of the same type as your organisation in
1905. Since 1905 the liberals have abandoned empty dreams of an
“underground” and have created an “effective” organisation, an open
one, which, although not legalised by the June Third system, is tolerated
by it, retains its parliamentary group, its legal press and its local
committees, which are actually known to everybody. Your old organisation,
brother workers, is ineffective, and according to the lessons taught by
“the history of Europe” was bound to be, but we liquidators
promise you and offer you a new “open party” every day. What more do you
want? Be content with our, the liquidators’, promises, curse your old
organisation in stronger terms, spit upon it, deny it and remain for the
time being (until you get the “open party” we have promised) without
any organisation!  

This is exactly the real meaning of Vera Zasulich’s liquidationist
arguments, the meaning determined not by her will and mind, but by
the relation of the classes in Russia, the objective conditions of the
working-class movement. That is exactly what the liberals want. Vera
Zasulich is only echoing Prokopovich!  

Unlike late eighteenth-century Europe and Europe in the fist half of
the nineteenth century Russia provides an example of a country in which the
old organisation has demonstrated its viability and efficiency. This
organisation has been preserved even in times of reaction despite the
defection of the liquidators and a host of the philistines. This
organisation, while preserving its basic type, has been able to adapt
its form to the changing conditions, has been able to vary that
form to meet the requirements of the moment that marks “another
step in the transformation, into a bourgeois
monarchy”.[4] 

An objective proof of this adaptation of the old organisation is to be
seen—if we take one of the simplest, most obvious proofs, a proof that is
most easily understood by the

    

liberals—in the results of the elections to the Fourth Duma. Two-thirds
of the deputies elected by the worker curias proved to be members of the
old organisation, among them the six from the main industrial gubernias. In
those gubernias there are about a million factory workers. Everything
vital, all those politically conscious and influential among the genuine
masses, the proletarian masses, participated in the elections, and
in so doing changed the form of their old organisation, modifying
the conditions of its activity but preserving its general line,
the ideological and political basis and content of its activity.


Our position is clear. It was delineated irrevocably in 1908. The
liquidators, however—and this is their misfortune—have no position as
long as they have no new organisation. They can do nothing but
sigh over the bad past and dream of a better future.  
III

“Organisation is essential to the Party,” writes Vera Zasulich. She
is not content even with the Stockholm (1906) decision, adopted at a time
when the Mensheviks predominated and were forced to accept the
famous Clause One of the Rules.  

If that is true (and it most certainly is), Vera Zasulich is wrong and
she will have to renounce the Mensheviks’ Stockholm
decision. Organisation is not only “essential to the Party”—that is
recognised by every liberal and every bourgeois who wishes to “use” the
working-class party for politics directed against the working class. The
Party is the sum-total of its organisations linked together in a
single whole. The Party is the organisation of the working class
divided into a long chain of all kinds of local and special, central and
general organisations.  

Here, again, the liquidators find themselves without any position. In
1903, they put forward their idea of Party membership, according to which
not only those belonging to its organisations but those who were working
(outside the organisations) under their control were regarded as Party
members. Vera Zasulich recalls this episode, apparently deeming it
important.  
 


   “... as far back as the Second Congress ten years ago,”
   she writes, “the Mensheviks felt that it was impossible to tack away the
   whole Party in the underground....”  


If the Mensheviks felt a revulsion against the under ground in 1903,
why was it that in 1906, in the period of an immeasurably more
“open” Party, they themselves, having a majority at the
Congress, reversed the Menshevik formulation they had adopted in 1903 and
accepted the Bolshevik formulation? Vera Zasulich writes Party
history in such a way that one comes across an amazing, unbelievable
distortion of the facts at every step!  

It is an indisputable fact that at Stockholm in 1906 the Mensheviks
accepted the Bolshevik definition of the Party as the sum of its
organisations; if Vera Zasulich and her friends have again changed
their views, if they now consider that their 1906 decision was a
mistake, why do they not say so straight out? In general, Vera Zasulich
seems to regard this question as one of importance since she has raised it
herself and herself has recalled the year 1903!  

The reader can see that there is nothing more feeble and confused than
the liquidators’ views on the question of organisation. It is a complete
absence of views. It is a model of characterlessness and confusion. Vera
Zasulich exclaims crossly: “Organisational opportunism is a foolish
expression.” But “being cross” won’t help. Did not Cherevanin
himself say in a published statement that “organisational
anarchy” had been noted among the future liquidators at the meetings of
the Menshevik group in London in 1907. At that time, the most
prominent liquidators found them selves (and find themselves again today)
in the highly original situation of slaying liquidators.  


   “Organisation is essential to the Party,” writes Vera
   Zasulich. “But it will only be possible for the organisation to embrace
   the whole Party for any lengthy period and exist peacefully [!] in one and
   the same form and with one and the same set of rules [listen to this!] when
   Russian social life has achieved and consolidated [if it is ever
   consolidated in Russia] a system of legality and at last travels a smooth
   road, leaving behind the mountainous path that it has been following at an
   accelerating pace for a whole century, at times ascending, at times
   crashing into the abyss of reaction, whence, having recovered from injuries
   received, it starts scrambling uphill again....”  

 

Here is an argument put forward by the liquidators that deserves a
prize as a model of confusion. Try and understand what the author is
getting at.  

A change in the “Rules”? Then for God’s sake, gentlemen, say what
changes in the Rules you are talking about! And don’t make fools of
yourselves, don’t try to prove “philosophically” that the Rules are not
something unchangeable.  

But although she speaks of “one and the same set of Rules”
(incidentally they were changed in
 1912[1]

)

Vera Zasulich proposes no changes at all.  

What does she mean? She means that the Party will become an
organisation when the mountainous path comes to an end and Russia travels a
smooth road. That is an exceedingly respectable idea and it belongs to the
liberals and Vekhi; until the smooth road is reached
everything is nasty and evil, the Party is not a party and politics are not
politics. On the “smooth road” everything will be “in order” and on the
“mountainous path” there is nothing but chaos.  

We read this argument long ago, put forward by the liberals. This
argument is understandable, natural and legitimate from the point of view
of the liberals’ hatred of the underground and the “mountainous
path”. The facts are distorted (for there have been a number of
organised parties in the underground in Russia), but we realise
that the liberals’ hatred of the underground blinds them to the facts.


But again, what does Vera Zasulich mean? Apparently, according to her,
the organised party is impossible in Russia. Therefore? Indistinct ideas
and things left unsaid, the confusion of the issue by long, heavy, tortuous
periods, endless heating about the bush. The only thing one senses is that
the author is worming her way towards renunciation of all organisation. And
as she worms her way closer to this, Vera Zasulich speaks out—here is her
crowning idea: 


   “We have a broad section of workers who would have every
   right to join any socialist party in the West. All our forces are in this
   rapidly growing section of the workers, who lack only the opportunity of
   formally joining a p arty to found one, and no matter what we call this
   section we shall both think of it and speak of it as the party.”  

 

When arguments concern the liquidation of the Party, therefore, we must
realise that by the word party the liquidators mean something
quite different. What do they mean by party?  

Here it is—“a broad section of workers ... who lack only [!] the
opportunity of formally joining a party to found one [!!]”.  

Incomparable! The party consists of those “who lack the opportunity of
formally joining it”. The party is those who remain outside the party.


Truly, Vera Zasulich has gathered some wonderful gems for us by saying
frankly what all the liquidators are wandering about on the verge
of.  
IV

There are about a million Party members in Germany to day. The
Social-Democrats there receive about 4,250,000 votes and there are about
15,000,000 proletarians. Here is a simple and vivid example that will
untangle what the liquidators have tangled. One million—that is the
party, one million in the party organisations; 4,250,000 is the
“broad section”. It is actually much broader because women are
disfranchised, as are many workers who do not possess the residential
qualification, age qualification, etc., etc.  

The “broad section” consists almost entirely of Social-Democrats and
without it the party would be powerless. When any action is taken, this
broad section expands to two or three times that size because on such
occasions a mass of those who are not Social-Democrats follow the party.


Surely this is clear? It really is a little awkward to have to point
out something so elementary!  

In what way does Germany differ from Russia? Certainly not because in
Russia there is no difference between the “party” and the
“broad section”! To understand this let us first look at France. There we
see (approximately—more accurate figures would only strengthen
my argument):

    

    




Party . . . . . . . . . . . .
about
70,000[2]



“Broad section” (voting for the Social-Democrats)
    . . . . .
about 1,000,000


Proletarians . . . . . . . . .
about 10,000,000




And in Russia? Party—150,000 in 1907 (calculated and verified at the
London Congress). Today the number is not known, probably much less, 30,000
or 50,000, we cannot say definitely.  

Our “broad section” is 300,000–500,000 if we add up the number of
those voting for the Social-Democrats. Lastly, proletarians—probably
about 20,000,000. I repeat that these are approximate figures, but any
other figures that anybody might arrive at through closer calculation
would only add strength to my argument.  

My argument is that in all countries, everywhere and always, there
exists, in addition to the party, a “broad section” of people
close to the party and the huge mass of the class that
founds the party, causes it to emerge and nurtures it. By not understanding
this simple and obvious point, the liquidators are repeating the error of
the Economists of 1895–1901; the Economists simply could not understand
the difference between the “party” and the “class”.  

The party is the politically conscious, advanced section of the class,
it is its vanguard. The strength of that vanguard is ten times, a hundred
times, more than a hundred times, greater than its numbers.  

Is that possible? Can the strength of hundreds be greater than the
strength of thousands?  

It can be, and is, when the hundreds are organised.  

Organisation increases strength tenfold. God knows this is no new
verity. But it is not our fault if for the benefit of Vera Zasulich and the
liquidators we have to begin at the beginning.  

The political consciousness of the advanced contingent is,
incidentally, manifested in its ability to organise. By organising it
achieves unity of will and this united will of an advanced
thousand, hundred thousand, million be comes the will of the
class. The intermediary between the

    

party and the class is the “broad section” (broader than the party but
narrower than the class), the section that votes Social-Democrat, the
section that helps, sympathises, etc.  

The relationship of the party to the class differs in
different countries, depending on historical and other conditions. In
Germany, for example, about one-fifteenth of the class is organised in the
party; in France about a hundred-and-fortieth part. In Germany there are
four or five Social-Democrats of the “broad section” to every Party
member; in France there are fourteen. In France there has never actually
been a party 100,000 strong—and this in conditions of “open”
organisation and political liberty.  

Any reasonable person will understand that there are historical
conditions, objective causes, which made it possible to organise
one-fifteenth of the class in the party in Germany, but which make it more
difficult in France, and still more difficult in Russia.  

What would one think of the Frenchman who declared that “our party is
a narrow circle and not a party; you cannot tuck the party away in an
organisation; the party is the broad section, all forces are in
it, etc.”? You would probably express surprise at the fact that this
Frenchman was not in a mental hospital.  

And here in Russia we are expected to take people seriously who feel,
see and know that our path is still mountainous, that is, the
conditions for organisation are more difficult, and nevertheless
declare that they “will think and speak of the broad section [the
unorganised!] as the party”. These people are confused runaways from the
Party, confused Social-Democrats outside the Party or close to
the Party who have not withstood the pressure of the liberal ideas of
decline, despondency and renunciation.  
V


   “For the underground to be a useful force,” writes Vera
   Zasulich in the conclusion to her excellent article, “the underground,
   even if it alone is called the party, must display an attitude towards the
   worker Social-Democrats [i.e., towards the broad section in which Zasulich
   sees “all forces”, and of which she declared: “we shall think of it and
   speak of it as the party”] similar to that of party officials to the
   party.”  

 

Think carefully over this statement, the gem of gems in an article so
rich in gems. First Zasulich knows very well what is meant by a
party in present-day Russia. But dozens of liquidator writers are
continually assuring the public that they do not know it, with the result
that disputes on the liquidation, of the Party are so unbelievably
confused by these gentry. Let readers who are interested in the fate of the
working-class movement and oppose vulgar, commonplace liquidators turn to
Vera Zasulich’s article and gain from it the answer to the question that
has been and is still being obscured—what is a party?  

Secondly, examine Vera Zasulich’s conclusion. The underground’s,
attitude to the broad section should be that of party officials to the
party, she tells us. May we ask what is the essence of the attitude of the
officials of any association to that association? Obviously it is that the
official does not carry out his own will (or that of a group or circle),
but the will of the association.  

How is the will of a broad section of several hundred thousands, or
several million, to be determined? It is absolutely impossible to
determine the wilt of a broad section that is not organised in an
association—even a child would understand that. It is Vera
Zasulich’s misfortune, and that of the other liquidators, that they have
taken a position on the inclined plane of organisational opportunism and
are constantly sliding down into the swamp of the worst anarchism.  

For anarchism is precisely what it is, in the fullest and most accurate
meaning of the word, when Vera Zasulich declares that the liquidators
will think and speak of the broad section as the party, and that
the underground should display the attitude towards it that it would to a
higher organisation, to a supreme arbiter on the question of “officials”,
etc., although she herself admits that the “broad section lacks only the
opportunity of formally joining a party” and therefore “lacks the
opportunity of forming a party”.  

When an appeal is made to broad sections or to the masses
against the organisation and at the same time the impossibility of
organising those sections or masses is admitted, that is pure
anarchism. The anarchists constitute one of the most harmful elements of
the working-class movement because

    

they are always shouting about the mass of the oppressed classes (or even
about the oppressed masses in general), always ruining the good name of any
socialist organisation but are themselves unable to create any
other organisation as an alternative.  

The Marxists have a fundamentally different view of the relation of the
unorganised (and unorganisable for a lengthy period, sometimes decades)
masses to the party, to organisation. It is to enable the mass of a
definite class to learn to understand its own interests and its
position, to learn to conduct its own policy, that there must be an
organisation of the advanced elements of the class, immediately and at all
costs, even though at first these elements constitute only a tiny fraction
of the class. To do service to the masses and express their
interests, having correctly conceived those interests, the advanced
contingent, the organisation, must carry on all its activity among the
masses, drawing from the masses all the best forces without any exception,
at every step Verifying carefully and objectively whether contact with the
masses is being maintained and whether it is a live contact. In this way,
and only in this way, does the advanced contingent train and
enlighten the masses, expressing their interests, teaching them
organisation and directing all the activities of the masses along
the path of conscious class politics.  

If the political activity of the masses as a whole, when directly or
indirectly drawn into elections, or participating in them, should result in
all the elected representatives of the workers being supporters of
the underground and its political line, supporters of the Party, we have an
objective fact proving the viability of our contact with the
masses, proving the right of that organisation to be and to call it self
the sole representative of the masses, and sole vehicle
for the expression of the class interests of the masses. Every
politically conscious worker, or rather, every group of workers, was
able to participate in the elections and direct them one way or the
other; and if the result is that the organisation that is ridiculed, cursed
and treated with disdain by the liquidators has been able to lead the
masses, that means that the attitude of our Party to the masses is
correct in principle, it is the Marxist attitude.  
 

The theory of the “broad section . . . who lack only
the opportunity of formally joining a party to found one” is an anarchist
theory. The working class in Russia cannot consolidate and develop its
movement if it does not struggle with the greatest determination against
this theory, which corrupts the masses and destroys the very concept of
organisation, the very principle of organisation.  

The theory of the “broad section” to replace the party is an
attempt to justify an extremely high-handed attitude towards and
mockery of the mass working-class movement (furthermore, the
mockers never fail to speak of the “masses” in their every phrase and to
use “mass” freely as an adjective in all its cases). Everyone realises
that the liquidators are using this theory to make it appear that
they, their circle of intellectuals, represent and express the
will of the “broad section”. What, they would say, does the “narrow”
party mean to us when we represent the “broad section”! What does an
underground mean to us, an underground that carries with it a million
workers to the polls, when we represent the broad section numbering,
perhaps, millions and tens of millions!  

The objective facts—the elections to the Fourth Duma, the appearance
of workers’ newspapers and the collections made on their behalf, the
Metalworkers’ Union in St. Petersburg, the shop assistants’
congress[5]—serve to show clearly that the liquidators are a group of
intellectuals that have fallen away from the working class. But the
“theory of the broad section” enables the liquidators to get round all
objective facts and fills their hearts with pride in their unacknowledged
greatness....  
VI

Vera Zasulich’s article is such a collection of oddities from the point
of view of logic and of the ABC of Marxism that the reader naturally asks
himself—is it possible that there is no other meaning to all these
meaningless phrases? Our review would be incomplete if we did not point out
that there is a point of view from which the article is quite
comprehensible, logical and correct. That is the point of view of the
split.  
 

The history of the working-class movement is full of examples of
unsuccessful, useless and even harmful parties. Let us suppose for a moment
that our Party is one of them. In that case it is harmful and criminal to
tolerate its existence, and still more so to tolerate its
representatives. It is then obligatory to struggle for the
destruction of that, party and its replacement by a new party.  

From the point of view of a profound conviction of the harmfulness of
the underground, such statements as “it is not known whether it (the
Party) helped or hindered”, whether it now helps or hinders, are natural
and understandable. We shall justify and
praise[3]

those who leave it and put it down to the “ineffectiveness” of the old
party. We shall appeal to non-party people against that old party
so that they will join the new party.  

Vera Zasulich did not express this point of view of the split in
full. Perhaps this fact is subjectively important and noteworthy to the
author. Objectively, however, it is of little importance. If a writer says
A, B, C, and then all the letters of the alphabet except the last,
it is a safe bet that 999 readers out of 1,000 will add (aloud or to them
selves) the last letter. The liquidators are all in this ridiculous
position; they produce a whole collection of arguments for a split and then
either say nothing at all or say that they “favour unity”.  

Apropos of Vera Zasulich’s article and of a dozen similar articles by
L. S., Dan, Levitsky, Yezhov, Potresov and Martov we have only one
answer—the first condition for unity is the absolute condemnation of the
“theory of the broad section in place of the party”, the condemnation of
all acts against the underground, the condemnation of Vera Zasulich’s
article and the definite discontinuance of all such sallies. The party
cannot be “united” without struggling against those who question the
necessity for its existence.  

From the point of view of a split Vera Zasulich’s article is logical
and correct. If the liquidators succeed in founding

    

a new party and if that new party turns out better than the old, Vera
Zasulich’s article (and all the liquidators’ literature) will be justified
historically. It would be foolish sentimentality to deny the founders of a
better, genuine, truly working-class party the right to destroy
the old, in effective, useless party. If the liquidators do not establish
any new party at all, if they do not create any new working-class
organisation, then all their literature and Vera Zasulich’s article will
remain as a monument to the con fusion of those who dropped out of the
Party, of those characterless intellectuals who were carried away by the
counter-revolutionary stream of despondency, disbelief, and philistinism
and went plodding along behind the liberals.  

One thing or the other. There is no middle way. There is nothing here
to “reconcile”; you cannot “slightly bury” the old party and “slightly
create” a new one.  

The specific nature of the time through which Russia is now living is
demonstrated, among other things, by the fact that a relatively small Party
nucleus which was able to hold out during the storm and to remain in
existence despite the breaking of individual organisational ties here and
there, a nucleus that has ensured for itself an uncommonly strong influence
among the overwhelming mass of the workers (not as compared with
present-day Europe, of course, but with the Europe of 1849–59), that this
nucleus is surrounded by a multitude of anti-Party, non-Party, extra-Party
and near-Party Social-Democrats and near-Social-Democrats.  

And that is precisely how matters should stand in a country with the
Mont Blanc of the German Social-Democratic Party next to it, while inside
that country ... inside even the liberals do not see any other road except
the “mountainous path”, Messrs. Struve & Co. having for more than ten
years trained hundreds and thousands of petty-bourgeois intellectuals,
wrapping up their petty liberal ideas in almost Marxist words.  

Take Mr. Prokopovich. A notable figure in journalism and in public
activities in Russia. In essence, undoubtedly, a liberal. There is,
however, reason to fear that he regards himself as a Social-Democrat—an
anti-Party Social-Democrat. Take Mr. Makhnovets (Akimov). A liberal of a
more

    

melancholy temperament and with a more strongly ex pressed love for the
workers. He no doubt considers himself a Social-Democrat—a non-Party
Social-Democrat. Take the writers in Kievskaya Mysl, Nasha
Zarya, Luch, etc. They form a whole collection of extra-Party
and near-Party Social-Democrats. Some of them are engaged mainly in
dreaming about the foundation of a new, open party, but have not yet made a
final decision on the question of whether they will disgrace themselves too
much if they set about fulfilling this plan of genius
“prematurely”. Others specialise in solemnly declaring that they
do not want to liquidate anything, that they are for unity and in complete
agreement with ... the German Social-Democrats.  

Take the Social-Democratic Duma group. One of its most prominent
figures. Chkheidze, whom Nekrasov seems to have had prophetically in mind
when he wrote: 


But at times avoids an issue,

    That is painful, hard to
   solve.[6] 


The years 1911 and 1912 were the most difficult and painful period for
the Social-Democrats in the epoch of the Third and the beginning of the
Fourth Duma. The working-class press—liquidators’ and
anti-liquidators’—took shape. Chkheidze “avoided the issue”. He did not
go with either one or the other. He was a near-Party Social-Democrat. He
seemed to be waiting and watching; on the one hand, there was no party but
the old one, and on the other hand, it might happen that “they” would
bury the party a little bit.... You read his speeches and quite often
applaud a sally against the Rights that is often witty and stinging, his
heat ed and astringent words, his defence of the old traditions, and at the
same time you have to hold your nose when you open a liquidators’ newspaper
that thunders against “crazes”, waves tradition carelessly aside and
teaches the workers disdain for organisation—all apparently with the
approval of Chkheidze, whose name is an ornament to the list of
contributors. You come across an article by An accompanied by a sharp
criticism of him from the Luch editors and cannot help but
wonder—have not our poor Chkheidze and our kindly An suffered a
tragi-comic defeat in their attempt to cast off the yoke of Dan....  
 

There are people who, in the name of the great principle of proletarian
unity, advise the Party to come to an agreement with one of the groups of
near-Party, almost-Social-Democrats, that wants to “avoid”, or is
wavering on, the question of whether to bury or to strengthen the old
organisation. It can well be understood that these people are themselves
wavering or have a very poor acquaintance with the real state of affairs. A
party that wants to exist cannot allow the slightest wavering on the
question of its existence or any agreement with those who may bury
it. There is no end to those who want to act as intermediaries in such an
agreement, but they are all people, who, to use an old, expression, are
burning their oil in vain and wasting their time.  


P.S. 

P. B. Axelrod’s concluding article in No. 13 of Zhivaya Zhizn
(July 25, 1913) headed “Then and Now” provided an amazingly vivid
confirmation of our words. The real essence of this well-padded article is
not, of course, in its amusing boosting of the liquidators’ August
Conference, but in the resurrection of the labour congress question. It
goes without saying that Axelrod prefers to say nothing about his bitter
and painful experience with the idea of a labour congress in 1906 and
1907—why rake up the past? Nor does Axelrod mention the specific
conditions of the present day, when it appears possible to hold
labour congresses of a special character, as it were, and for special
reasons (a shop-assistants’ congress today, perhaps an insurance or trade
union congress tomorrow, etc.). Axelrod is probably not pleased with the
experience of the shop-assistants’ congress, at which the majority (as the
liquidators have been forced to admit in Zhivaya Zhizn) was
against the liquidators.  

Axelrod does not say anything about what has been and what is. He
prefers to let his imagination run wild on the future “thaw”—luckily we
cannot know anything about its concrete conditions! He toys with the idea
of convening “a Social-Democratic labour congress if not of all Russia,
then one of all Russians”—which is then called exactly that, a congress
of all Russians.  
 

Thus there are two changes to the former brilliant plan; first, it is
not merely a labour congress, but a Social-Democratic labour congress. That
is progress. Let us congratulate Axelrod on having taken a step forward in
six years. Let us congratulate him if he has become convinced of the harm
caused by fantastic plans to “unite” with the Left Narodniks. Secondly,
he replaces “all-Russia congress” by “congress of all Russians”. That
signifies rejection of complete unity with workers of non-Russian
nationality in Russia (Axelrod regards the collapse among them of the idea
of a labour congress as being final!). That is two steps backward. That is
the hallowing of separatism in the working-class movement.  

But this is still not the best part. Why was Axelrod dreaming of a
labour congress? This is why: 


   “The labour congress will complete the liquidatory
   process that has been going on during the past few years, the liquidation
   of the old party regime that grew u on the outdated historical basis of the
   feudal state and the hierarchical socio-political regime and at the same
   time will mark the beginning of a completely new epoch in the historical
   life of Russian Social-Democrats, the epoch of development on exactly the
   same lines as the Social-Democratic parties in the West.”  


Everybody knows that “exactly the same lines” are the lines of a
legal party. Speaking without equivocation, this means that the
liquidators need the labour congress to “complete the
liquidation” of the old party and to found a new,
legal party.  

Such, in brief, is the idea behind Axelrod’s long disquisitions.  

Here you have the last word in near-Party Social-Democracy! For the
members of the party to work in the party and strengthen it is an old,
outdated idea that Axelrod has banished to the archives. We are not
liquidating anything, that is libel, we only “stand aside” and shout for
all to hear about the “completion of the liquidation of the Party”. We
vow and swear that tomorrow we shall be excellent members of the future
legal party.  

These sweet near-Party Social-Democrats of 1913 are very much like
those liberals of 1903 who assured us that they were proper
Social-Democrats and would certainly

    

become members of the Social-Democratic Party—when it became legal, of
course.  

We do not for a moment doubt that there will be a period of political
liberty in Russia and that we shall have a legal Social-Democratic
Party. Probably some of those near-Party Social-Democrats of today will
become members of it.  

And so—until we meet again in the ranks of the future, legal party,
our future comrades! In the meantime, excuse us, we are not going the same
way, because as yet you, near-Party Social-Democrats, are carrying on
liberal and not Marxist work.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
See present edition, Vol. 17, p. 482.—Ed.  

[2]
The exact figure given at the last Congress in Brest (1913) was
68,903.[7]
—Lenin

[3]
In passing. This defence of the renegades is implicit in Vera
Zasulich’s phrase “the broad section only lack the opportunity of formally
joining a party to found one”. There are thousands of facts that prove the
opposite. By speaking of “lack of opportunity”, Vera Zasulich is
actually defending philistinism, or worse.  —Lenin
 



[4]
This description of the evolution of tsarism in the period of the
Stolypin reaction is quoted from a resolution of the Fifth (All Russian)
Conference of the R.S.D.L.P., held in 1908.





[7]
The Brest (Tenth) Congress of the French
Socialist Party—was held in the town of Brest, March 23-25, 1913.





[5]
This refers to the Fourth Congress of Commercial and Industrial
Employees held in Moscow, June 29-July 3 (July 12-16), 1913. The Congress
was attended by 378 delegates. The Bolsheviks, who were supported by almost
half the delegates, also had the support of the Left Narodnik section of
the Congress, which gave them the majority. The liquidators were
represented by an insignificant group. Detailed reports of the Congress
were published in Pravda. The Congress was closed by order of the
Minister of the Interior.





[6]
Lenin is here quoting, with some words changed, from Nekrasov’s poem
“A Man of the Forties”:

   But at times avoids an issue,

   That is urgent, that alarms....









Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Resolutions of the Summer, 1913, Joint Conference of the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P. and Party Officials









Lenin: Resolutions of the Summer, 1913, Joint Conference of the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P. and Party Officials







V. I.  

      Lenin
Resolutions of the Summer, 1913, Joint Conference of the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P. and Party Officials[4]




Written: Written September 1913 

Published:

      Published in 1913 in the pamphlet Notification and Resolutions of the Summer, 1913, Joint Conference of the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P. and Party Officials. Issued by the Central Committee.

      Published according to the text of the illegal mimeographed edition of the resolutions collated with the text of the pamphlet.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 417-431.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

    

THE TASKS OF AGITATION IN THE PRESENT SITUATION

1.
The situation in the country is becoming increasingly acute. The rule of
the reactionary landowners is causing increasing discontent even among the
most moderate sect ions of the population. The obstacle to anything like
real political liberty in Russia is still the tsarist monarchy, which is
hostile to all real reform, protects only the power and revenues of the
feudal landowners, and suppresses with exceptional cruelty every
manifestation of the working-class movement.  

2.
The working class continues to act as the leader of the revolutionary
struggle for nation-wide liberation. The mass revolutionary strike movement
continues to grow. The genuine struggle waged by the advanced contingents
of the working class is proceeding under revolutionary slogans.  

Owing to the very circumstances of the struggle the mass economic
movement, which in many cases starts with the most elementary demands, is
to an increasing degree merging with the revolutionary working-class
movement.  

It is the task of the advanced workers to accelerate by their
agitational and educational activities the process of uniting the
proletariat under the revolutionary slogans of the present epoch. Only in
this way will the advanced workers succeed in fulfilling their other task
of rousing the peasant and urban democrats.  

3.
The working-class struggle, which is proceeding under revolutionary
slogans, has compelled the liberal-Octobrist bourgeoisie and a section of
the manufacturer’s to talk volubly about the need for reforms in general,
and for limited freedom of association in particular. While feverishly
organising in employers’ associations, introducing insurance

    

against strikes and calling upon the government to harass the working-class
movement systematically, the bourgeoisie is at the same time urging the
workers to abandon their revolutionary demands and to confine themselves
instead to individual constitutional reforms and a semblance of
freedom of association. The working class should take advantage of every
sign of vacillation on the part of the government as well as of
disagreements between the bourgeoisie and the reactionary camp, to
intensify its attack in both the economic and political fields of
struggle. But to be able to make good use of the situation the working
class must continue to adhere to the platform of full-blooded revolutionary
slogans.  

4.
This being the general state of affairs, the task of the Social-Democrats
is to continue to conduct extensive revolutionary agitation among the
masses for the overthrow of the monarchy and the establishment of a
democratic republic. Vivid examples from real life must be used
continuously to demonstrate all the harmfulness of reformism, i.e., the
tactics of putting demands for partial improvement to the fore
instead of revolutionary slogans.  

5.
In their agitation in favour of freedom of association and for partial
reforms in general, the liquidators descend to liberalism. Actually, they
deny that it is necessary to conduct revolutionary agitation among the
masses, and in their press they frankly declare that the slogans
“democratic republic” and “confiscation of the land” cannot serve as
subjects for agitation among the masses. They advocate freedom of
association as the all-inclusive slogan of the day, and, in fact, urge it
as a substitute for the revolutionary demands of 1905.  

6.
This Conference, giving warning of the pernicious, reformist agitation of
the liquidators, points out again that the R.S.D.L.P. long ago advanced in
its minimum programme the demands for freedom of association, freedom of
speech, freedom of the press, etc., closely linking these demands with the
revolutionary struggle for the overthrow of the tsarist monarchy. This
Conference confirms the resolution of the January 1912 Conference, which
states: “The Conference calls upon all Social-Democrats to explain to the
workers the paramount importance to the proletariat of

    

freedom of association; this demand must always be closely linked up with
our general political demands and our revolutionary agitation among the
      masses.”[1]


The main slogans of the epoch still are: (1) a democratic republic; (2)
confiscation of the landed estates; (3) an 8-hour day. Freedom of
association is included here as part of the whole.  
RESOLUTION ON THE ORGANISATIONAL QUESTION AND ON THE PARTY
CONGRESS

1.
The reports from the localities have shown that the most urgent
organisational task is not only to consolidate the leading Party
organisations in every town, but also to link up the towns with each other.


2.
As a first step towards regional amalgamation this Conference recommends
the organisation of meetings (and where possible conferences) of comrades
from different centres of the working-class movement. Every effort must be
made to have all branches of Party activity represented at these meetings:
political, trade union, insurance, co-operative, etc.  

3.
This Conference affirms that for the purpose of coordinating activities
throughout Russia, the system of having representatives of the Central
Committee is absolutely essential. A beginning has only just been made in
applying the decision on representatives adopted by the February
Conference. Advanced workers in the districts should see to it that such
representatives are appointed at least in every large centre of the
working-class movement, and as many of them as possible.  

4.
This Conference places on the order of the day the question of convening a
Party
congress.[5] The growth of the working-class movement, the maturing of
a political crisis in the country and the need for united working-class
actions on a nation-wide scale, make it necessary and possible to convene
such a congress—after adequate preparations for it have been made.  

5.
This Conference invites the comrades in the districts, when discussing this
subject, to make suggestions for the

    

congress agenda, for the desirable date of convocation, for draft
resolutions, etc.  

6.
This Conference points out that apart from other difficulties, the problem
of meeting the expenses of the congress can also be solved only by the
workers themselves.  

This Conference calls upon the comrades to start a fund for the
convocation of the Party congress.  
THE STRIKE MOVEMENT

1.
This Conference confirms the resolutions of the January 1912 Conference,
and of the February 1913
     Conference,[2]

which contains an appraisal of the strike movement fully borne out by the
experience of the past few months.  

2.
Characteristic of the new stage of revival of the revolutionary strike is
the movement in Moscow and the rising temper in several districts hitherto
unaffected by the movement.  

3.
This Conference welcomes the initiative taken by the St. Petersburg
Committee and by a number of Party groups in Moscow in raising the question
of a general political strike, and in taking steps in this direction in
July and September this
year.[3]


4.
This Conference affirms that the movement is approaching the moment when it
will be opportune to bring up the question of a general political
strike. Systematic agitation in preparation for this strike must be started
everywhere immediately.  

5.
The slogans for these political strikes, which must be vigorously
disseminated, should be the fundamental revolutionary demands of the day: a
democratic republic; an 8-hour day; confiscation of the landed estates.


6.
This Conference calls upon all local Party officials to develop an
extensive leaflet propaganda and to establish the most regular and closest
communication possible

    

between the political and other working-class organisations of the various
cities. It is particularly necessary to secure coordination of activities
primarily between the St. Petersburg and Moscow workers, so that the
political strikes that are likely to arise from various causes (persecution
of the press, strikes to enforce insurance, etc.) may as far as possible
take place simultaneously in both cities.  
THE PARTY PRESS

1.
This Conference points to the vast importance of the legal press for
Social-Democratic agitation and organisation, and therefore calls upon
Party bodies and upon all class-conscious workers to increase their
assistance to the legal press by securing for it the widest possible
circulation, and by organising mass collective subscriptions and regular
collections of contributions. The Conference reaffirms that such
contributions are counted as Party membership dues.  

2.
Special efforts must be made to consolidate the legal workers’ newspaper in
=

Moscow[6] and to issue a workers’ newspaper in the South at the
earliest possible date.  

3.
This Conference expresses the desire that the closest possible contact be
established between the existing legal working-class periodicals by means
of an exchange of information, arrangement of conferences, etc.  

4.
Recognising the importance of a theoretical organ of Marxism and the need
for one, this Conference expresses the desire that all the organs of the
Party and trade union press should make the workers familiar with the
magazine Prosveshcheniye, and urge them to subscribe to it
regularly and to render it their systematic support.  

5.
This Conference draws the attention of Party publishing houses to the great
need to publish an extensive series of popular, Social-Democratic agitation
and propaganda pamphlets.  

6.
In view of the recent intensification of the revolutionary mass struggle,
and of the need to report on it in the fullest detail (which the legal
press cannot do), this Conference calls special attention to the need to
stimulate in every way the development of underground Party publishing
activities; in addition to publishing illegal leaflets,

    

pamphlets, etc., it is absolutely essential to secure the more frequent and
regular issue of the illegal Party organ (the Central
Organ).[7]

SOCIAL-DEMOCRATIC ACTIVITIES IN THE DUMA

Having examined in detail the resolution of the R.S.D.L.P. on the
Social-Democratic group in the Duma, adopted at the December 1908,
Conference, and having discussed all the facts concerning the activities of
the Social-Democrats in the Fourth Duma, this Conference affirms: 

1.
that the aforesaid resolution quite correctly defined the aims and objects
of Social-Democratic activities in the Duma, and that this resolution must
therefore continue to serve as a guide to these activities in the future;


2.
that the last subsection of Point 3 (3 h) of the December resolution (on
voting or abstaining from voting on questions concerning the improvement of
the conditions of the
workers)[8] should be interpreted as follows. If bills, motions, etc.,
concern immediate and direct improvements in conditions for workers, minor
salaried employees and working people generally (for example, reduction of
hours, increase of wages, the removal of even minor evils in the lives of
the workers and of broad sections of the population in general, etc.), the
clauses that provide for such improvements should be voted for.  

In cases when the conditions the Fourth Duma attaches to these
improvements make them dubious, the group should abstain from voting, but
must unfailingly formulate its motives for so doing, after having
first discussed the question with representatives of workers’
organisations.  

This Conference affirms that: 

on all questions, important bills, etc., the Socialist-Democratic group
in the Duma must independently formulate its own motion to pass on to next
business.  

In cases of the group’s vote against the government, after the
Social-Democratic motion has been rejected, coinciding with the vote of
other parties, the group must endeavour to formulate its own motives for
voting for another party’s motion, or part of a motion.  
    

THE SOCIAL-DEMOCRATIC GROUP IN THE DUMA

This Conference is of the opinion that united action on the part of the
Social-Democratic group in the Duma is possible and essential.  

This Conference affirms, however, that the conduct of the seven
deputies gravely jeopardises the unity of the group.  

Taking advantage of their accidental majority of one, the seven
deputies encroach on the elementary rights of the six workers’ deputies,
who represent the overwhelming majority of the workers of Russia.  

The seven deputies, guided by narrow factional interests, deprive the
six deputies of the opportunity to speak in the Duma on very important
questions affecting the lives of the workers. In several cases, when the
Social-Democratic group put up two or more speakers, the six deputies were
not given an opportunity in spite of repeated demands to put up their own
speaker.  

Similarly, in appointing representatives to various Duma committees
(for example, the Budget Committee) the seven deputies refuse to allow the
six to have one of the two places.  

When the group elects representatives to bodies that are of importance
to the working-class movement, the seven deputies, by a majority of one,
deprive the six of all representation. The staff that serves the group is
always elected in a biased manner (for example, the demand for a second
secretary was rejected).  

This Conference is of the opinion that such conduct on the part of the
seven deputies inevitably gives rise to friction in the group, which
hinders united action and threatens to split the group.  

This Conference protests most emphatically against this conduct on the
part of the seven deputies.  

The six deputies represent the overwhelming majority of the workers of
Russia and act in complete harmony with the political line of its organised
vanguard.  

This Conference is therefore of the opinion that united action on the
part of the Social-Democratic group in the Duma is possible only if the two
sections of the group enjoy equal rights, and if the seven deputies abandon
their steam roller tactics.  
 

Notwithstanding irreconcilable disagreements in spheres of activity
outside as well as inside the Duma, this Conference demands that the group
should maintain unity on the basis of the aforesaid equality of rights of
its two sections.  

This Conference invites class-conscious workers to express their
opinion on this important question and to exert all efforts to help
preserve the unity of the group on the only possible basis, that of equal
rights for the six workers’ deputies.  
WORK IN LEGAL ASSOCIATIONS

1.
In the present period of revival of the economic and political struggle of
the working class it is particularly necessary to intensify activities in
all the legal working-class associations (trade unions, clubs, sick benefit
societies, co-operative societies, and so forth).  

2.
All activities in legal working-class associations must be conducted not in
a neutral spirit, but in keeping with the spirit of the decisions of the
London Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. and of the International Congress in
Stuttgart.[9] Social-Democrats should recruit members for all
working-class associations from the widest possible working-class circles,
and urge all workers to join them irrespective of their party opinions. But
the Social-Democrats in these associations should form themselves into
Party groups and by prolonged and systematic activities secure the
establishment of the closest relations between the associations and the
Social-Democratic Party.  

3.
The experience of the international and of our Russian working-class
movement teaches that it is necessary from the very inception of such
working-class organisations (trade unions, co-operative societies, clubs,
etc.) to strive to convert every one of them into a stronghold of the
Social-Democratic Party. This Conference urges all Party members to bear
this important task in mind, for it is a particularly urgent one in Russia,
where the liquidators are making systematic efforts to utilise the legal
societies against the Party.  

4.
This Conference is of the opinion that in electing delegates to the sick
benefit societies, in all trade union activities, etc., it is necessary,
while upholding the complete

    

unity of the movement and the submission of the minority to the majority,
to pursue the Party line, secure the election of supporters of the Party
for all responsible posts, etc.  

5.
For the purpose of summing up the experience of practical activities in
legal working-class societies it is desirable to arrange more frequent
conferences with active participants in the work of local legal
working-class organisations and to invite to general Party conferences as
large a number as possible of representatives of Party groups operating in
these legal societies.  
RESOLUTION ON THE NATIONAL QUESTION

The orgy of Black-Hundred nationalism, the growth of nationalist
tendencies among the liberal bourgeoisie and the growth of nationalist
tendencies among the upper classes of the oppressed nationalities, give
prominence at the present time to the national question.  

The state of affairs in the Social-Democratic movement (the attempts of
the Caucasian Social-Democrats, the Bund and the liquidators to annul the
Party
Programme,[10] etc.) compels the Party to devote more attention than
ever to this question.  

This Conference, taking its stand on the Programme of the R.S.D.L.P.,
and in order to organise correctly Social-Democratic agitation on the
national question, advances the following propositions: 

1.
Insofar as national peace is in any way possible in a capitalist society
based on exploitation, profit-making and strife, it is attainable only
under a consistently and thoroughly democratic republican system of
government which guarantees full equality of all nations and languages,
which recognises no compulsory official language, which provides the people
with schools where instruction is given in all the native languages, and
the constitution of which contains a fundamental law that prohibits any
privileges whatsoever to any one nation and any encroachment whatsoever
upon the rights of a national minority. This particularly calls for wide
regional autonomy and fully democratic local self-government, with the
boundaries of the self-governing and autonomous regions determined by the
local

    

inhabitants themselves on the basis of their economic and social
conditions, national make-up of the population, etc.  

2.
The division of the educational affairs of a single state according to
nationalities is undoubtedly harmful from the standpoint of democracy in
general, and of the interests of the proletarian class struggle in
particular. It is precisely this division that is implied in the plan for
“cultural-national” autonomy, or for “the creation of institutions that
will guarantee freedom for national development” adopted in Russia by all
the Jewish bourgeois parties and by the petty-bourgeois, opportunist
elements among the different nations.  

3.
The interests of the working class demand the amalgamation of the workers
of all the nationalities in a given state in united proletarian
organisations—political, trade union, co-operative, educational,
etc. This amalgamation of the workers of different nationalities in single
organisations will alone enable the proletariat to wage a victorious
struggle against international capital and reaction, and combat the
propaganda and aspirations of the landowners, clergy and bourgeois
nationalists of all nations, who usually cover up their anti-proletarian
aspirations with the slogan of “national culture”. The world
working-class movement is creating and daily developing more and more an
international proletarian culture.  

4.
As regards the right of the nations oppressed by the tsarist monarchy to
self-determination, i.e., the right to secede and form independent states,
the Social-Democratic Party must unquestionably champion this right. This
is dictated by the fundamental principles of international democracy in
general, and specifically by the unprecedented national Oppression of the
majority of the inhabitants of Russia by the tsarist monarchy, which is a
most reactionary and barbarous state compared with its neighbouring states
in Europe and Asia. Furthermore, this is dictated by the struggle of the
Great-Russian inhabitants themselves for freedom, for it will be impossible
for them to create a democratic state if they do not eradicate
Black-Hundred, Great-Russian nationalism, which is backed by the traditions
of a number of bloody suppressions of national movements

    

and systematically fostered not only by the tsarist monarchy and all the
reactionary parties, but also by the Great-Russian bourgeois liberals, who
toady to the monarchy, particularly in the period of counter-revolution.


5.
The right of nations to self-determination (i.e., the constitutional
guarantee of an absolutely free and democratic method of deciding the
question of secession) must under no circumstances be confused with the
expediency of a given nation’s secession. The Social-Democratic Party must
decide the latter question exclusively on its merits in each particular
case in conformity with the interests of social development as a whole and
with the interests of the proletarian class struggle for socialism.  

Social-Democrats must moreover bear in mind that the landowners, the
clergy and the bourgeoisie of the oppressed nations often cover up with
nationalist slogans their efforts to divide the workers and dupe them by
doing deals behind their backs with the landowners and bourgeoisie of the
ruling nation to the detriment of the masses of the working people of all
nations.  
 *     *  * 

This Conference places on the agenda of the Party congress the question
of the national programme. It invites the Central Committee, the Party
press and the local organisations to discuss (in pamphlets, debates, etc.)
the national question in fullest detail.  
THE NARODNIKS

1.
The London Congress, in summing up the activities of the Narodnik
parties—including, among others, the Socialist-Revolutionary Party—in
the period of revolution, definitely stated that these parties constantly
vacillated between submission to the hegemony of the liberals and deter
mined struggle against landed proprietorship and the feudal state; and it
also pointed to the pseudo-socialist character of their propaganda, which
tones down the antagonism between the proletarian and the small proprietor.

 

2.
The period of reaction has brought out these features still more strongly,
for, on the one hand, the Socialist-Revolutionary Party has abandoned a
consistently democratic policy, and certain elements in it are even
criticising the revolution, thereby following in the footsteps of the
liberals; on the other hand, this party has been reduced to a mere group of
intellectuals divorced from the life of the masses.  

3.
The Socialist-Revolutionary Party officially continues to advocate
terrorism, the history of which in Russia has fully confirmed the
correctness of Social-Democratic criticism of this form of struggle, and
which ended in complete defeat. Furthermore, its boycott of the elections
and the complete inability of this organisation of intellectuals to
exercise systematic influence on the course of the social development of
the country have brought it about that no where has this party been in the
slightest degree a factor in the new revival of the revolutionary movement.


4.
The petty-bourgeois socialism of the Narodniks reduces itself to the
pernicious preaching to the working class of ideas that obscure the
ever-widening gulf between the interests of labour and capital and tone
down the acuteness of the class struggle; it fosters petty-bourgeois
utopias in the sphere of co-operation.  

5.
The Narodniks are greatly hindered in conducting republican-democratic
propaganda among large masses of the peasantry by their vacillation in the
struggle for democratic slogans, their narrow group character and their
petty-bourgeois prejudices. The interests of this propaganda itself
therefore demand, in the first place, strong criticism of the Narodniks by
the Social-Democrats.  

This Conference does not by any means reject the joint action with the
Narodnik parties especially provided for by the London Congress, but
suggests that the tasks of the Social-Democrats are: 

a) to expose the vacillations and tendency to abandon consistent
democracy that are manifesting themselves in the Narodnik parties; 

b) to combat the petty-bourgeois socialism of the Narodniks, which
tends to obscure the gulf between capital and labour; 
 

c) to support the republican-democratic trends among the peasant masses
and constantly point out to them that only the consistently democratic
socialist proletariat can serve as a reliable leader of the masses of the
poorer peasants in their struggle against monarchy and landed
proprietorship; 

d) to devote greater attention to the propagation of Social-Democratic
ideas among the groups of workers—although these are not numerous—who
have not yet rid them selves of the obsolete theories of Narodism.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
See present edition, Vol. 17, p. 480.—Ed.  

[2]
See present edition, Vol. 17, pp. 465–68 and Vol. 18, pp.
456–58. —Fd.  —Lenin

[3]
The Editorial Board of the Central Organ, which was instructed to
publish the resolutions of the Conference, added a reference to the
September events that fully confirmed the correctness of these resolutions.
—Lenin
 



[4]
The Joint Conference of the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P. and
Party Officials (for purposes of secrecy it was known as “the
summer” or “August” Conference), was held from September 23 to October 1
(October 6–14), 1913 in the village of Poronin (near Cracow) where Lenin
spent the summer months. The Conference was attended by twenty-two
delegates (17 with a vote and 5 with voice but no vote). Sixteen delegates
represented local Party organisations: St. Petersburg—Inessa Armand,
A. Y. Badayev and A. V. Shotman; Moscow and the Central Industrial
Area—F. A. Balashov, Y. T. Novozhilov, R. V. Malinovsky and A. I. Lobov
(the two last-named were found to be provocateurs);
Ekaterinoslav—G. I. Petrovsky; Kharkov—M. K. Muranov;
Kostroma—N. R. Shagov; Kiev—Y. F. Rozmirovich (“Galina”);
Urals—S. I. Deryabina (“Sima”, “Elena”). Lenin, Krupskaya,
Troyanovsky and others

   

represented the Central Committee Bureau Abroad, the Central Organ of the
Party Sotsial-Demokrat and the magazine
Prosveshcheniye. The Bolshevik deputies to the Fourth Duma also
represented the Party organisations in the constituencies and towns that
elected them to the Duma. Representatives of the Left wing of the Polish
Social-Democratic Party, J. S. Hanecki, G. Kamenski (“Domski”) and others
attended; these delegates had a voice but no vote.  

The Conference discussed the following questions: =

(1) reports from the localities, report on the work of the Polish
Social-Democrats, report on the work of the Central Committee; =

(2) the national question; =

(3) the work of Social-Democrats in the Duma; =

(4) the situation in the Social-Democratic Duma group; =

(5) the question of organisation and the Party congress; =

(6) the strike movement; =

(7) work in legal associations; =

(8) the Narodniks; =

(9) the Party press; =

(10) the forthcoming International Socialist Congress in Vienna. The first
two days were devoted to a private conference of the Duma deputies on
questions of practical work in the Duma.  

Lenin guided the work of the Conference; he opened the meeting with an
introductory speech and delivered reports on the work of the Central
Committee, the national question and the International Socialist Congress
in Vienna; Lenin also spoke on almost all the points of the agenda, made
proposals and compiled or edited the draft resolutions.  

Reports from the localities told of the growth of the working-class
movement. The Conference decided in favour of united All-Russian Party work
to guide the actions of the working class on a country-wide scale.  

Lenin’s report on the Central Committee activity summarised what had
been done since the Prague Conference in 1912. In his report on the Vienna
International Socialist Congress Lenin proposed sending as many delegates
as possible from both legal and illegal organisations, and suggested the
holding of a Party congress at the same time as the International
Congress. The Conference ended with Lenin’s closing speech.  

The minutes of the Conference at Poronin have not been found. The
resolutions were published as a separate pamphlet under the title
Notification and Resolutions of the Summer, 1913, Joint Conference of
the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P. and Party Officials, issued
abroad by the Central Committee. For reasons of secrecy some of the
resolutions were not printed in full; omitted were point 6 of the
resolution on the strike movement and points 1–5 of the resolution on the
Party press. The full texts of the resolutions were published illegally in
a mimeographed edition.





[5]
It was intended to hold the Party congress at the same time as the
International Socialist Congress, which would have made it easier to keep
secret the preparations for calling it. Intensive preparations for the
congress were made during the spring and summer of 1914, but owing to the
outbreak of war the congress was not held.





[6]
The newspaper referred to was Nash Put (Our Path)
published in Moscow from August 25 to September 12 (September 7–25),
1913. The paper was launched on Lenin’s proposal and under his guidance;
Lenin sent his articles simultaneously to Pravda and to Nash
Put. Among the contributors to Nash Put were Maxim Gorky, the
Bolshevik deputies to the Fourth Duma, Demyan Bedny, M. S. Olminsky and
I. I. Skvortsov-Stepanov. The newspaper was popular among the workers and
received immense help from them; 395 groups of workers supported the paper
by monetary collections. Its daily circulation was from 17,000 to 20,000
copies.  

The newspaper was persistently persecuted by the police and finally
suppressed; only 16 issues appeared. Moscow workers responded to the
suppression of Nash Put with mass strikes in pro test against the
persecution of the working-class press. They did not, however, succeed in
re-starting the paper.





[7]
The Central Organ of the R.S.D.L.P., the newspaper
Sotsial-Demokrat, began appearing illegaly in February 1908. The
first issue was printed in Russia but owing to the arrest of the editors
and destruction of the printing-press the paper was moved out of the
country—first to Paris and then to Geneva. Altogether 58 issues appeared.


In accordance with a decision of the Central Committee of the
R.S.D.L.P. the Editorial Board was composed of representatives of the
Bolsheviks, Mensheviks and Polish Social-Democrats. The newspaper printed
Lenin’s articles giving guidance to the Party. On the Editorial Board Lenin
conducted a struggle for a consistently Bolshevik line. Some of the editors
(Kamenev and Zinoviev) adopted a line of conciliation towards the
liquidators and attempt ed to prevent Lenin’s political line from being
implemented. The Mensheviks Martov and Dan sabotaged the work of the
Central Organ Editorial Board and at the same time openly defended
liquidationism in the newspaper Golos Sotsial-Demokrata (Voice
of a Social-Democrat). Lenin’s implacable struggle against the
liquidators led to Martov and Dan’s resigning from the Editorial Board in
June 1911. From December 1911 Sotsial-Demokrat was edited by
Lenin.  

In 1912 and 1913 the paper appeared with big intervals between issues,
only 6 issues appearing in those years. After the outbreak of the First
World War Sotsial-Demokrat was published more regularly, the last
issue appearing in Geneva on January 15 (31), 1917.





[8]
The subsection referred to was that of a resolution on “The
Social-Democratic Group in the Duma” adopted by the Fifth (All Russian)
Conference of the R.S.D.L.P. in 1908. Lenin’s draft for this subsection was
adopted by the Conference with some amendments that spoiled the original
formulation (the conditions under which voting was permissible for items of
expenditure on cultural requirements were less definite in the resolution
than in Lenin’s draft). This part of the resolution on “Social-Democratic

   

Activities in the Duma” was confirmed in a new, improved version by the
Poronin (Summer) Conference.





[9]
The congresses referred to are the Fifth (London) Congress of the
R.S.D.L.P. in 1907 and the International Social Congress at Stuttgart in
the same year; the resolutions were directed against the opportunist
principle of trade union “neutrality”.





[10]
The resolution refers here to the decision adopted by the liquidators’
August Conference in 1912 to the effect that “cultural-national autonomy”
was compatible with the Programme of the R.S.D.L.P.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## There's a Trudovik For You!









Lenin: There's a Trudovik For You!







V. I.  

      Lenin
There’s a Trudovik For You!




Published:
Pravda Truda No. 18, October 1, 1913.

      Signed: V. Ilyin.

      Published according to the Pravda Truda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 432-435.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Zavety[2] is an out-and-out Narodnik,
Left-Narodnik, publication with Mr. Chernov himself on the
staff. It is a bulky and serious magazine. And if the celebrated
“family labour principle” that all
      Trudoviks,[1]

all Narodniks, including all the Socialist-Revolutionaries, have constantly
on their lips is to be found anywhere it is in this magazine.  

Some people even assert that the “family labour principle” is a
socialist principle, and that its theoreticians are socialists.  

Let us see how Mr. S. Zak, a Left Narodnik who has made a special study
of the question of industrial capitalism, discusses the “family
labour principle” in industry.  

Mr. S. Zak distinguishes three types of industry:
(1) “family labour” industry;
(2) “transitional” industry which stands midway between “family labour”
and capitalist industry, and
(3) capitalist industry. Enterprises employing over 50 workers he
classifies as capitalist; those employing from 11 to 50 workers come under
the heading “transitional industry” and those employing no more than
10 he classifies as “family labour” industry.  

Why does he classify the last-named enterprises as “family labour”?
The reason, if you please, is that “since these undertakings do not employ
on the average even one clerk and one technician per undertaking, it is
absurd to say that they are capitalist undertakings”.  

This theory is worthy of a semi-literate clerk, but not of an author
who wants to be regarded as a socialist! Until Mr. Zak and the other
Narodniks have invented “their own”,

    

new, truly Russian political economy, we shall stick to the old view that
capitalism means production of commodities, in which
labour-power is also transformed into a commodity.  

This is elementary, and to be ignorant of it is disgraceful. The
Narodniks say that they subscribe to Marx’s theories, and that they are
opposed to bourgeois political economy, but what they offer the public is
nothing more than the views of the most banal philistine, who has learnt
nothing and who repeats scraps of bourgeois phrases, such as: if the owner
has an “office”, he is a capitalist. But if my plant is a small one, how
can I be a capitalist? I am a working man!  

The defence of such views in the press is a rejection of the science of
political economy, it is the defence of ignorance.  

Capitalists may be small or big, foolish or clever, but this is not a
criterion of capitalism. Capitalism means producing commodities
and hiring wage-labour.  

In the opinion of our Narodnik another criterion of “family labour”
industry is—do the members of the owner’s family take part in the work?
Anybody who is familiar with the rudiments of political economy knows that
family labour is typical of petty-bourgeois
industry. Exalting. the petty bourgeoisie with the title of “family
labour” industry shows a complete failure to understand what socialism is.


Here are Mr. Zak’s own figures. For every group of 100 factories, we
find on the average the following numbers of members of owners’ families
employed:
(1) 28 in the factories employing up to 3 workers;
(2) 34 in the factories employing 4 to 5 workers;
(3) 22 in the factories employing 6 to 10 workers.  

Our “neo-Narodnik” is splendid, is he not? He himself quotes figures
which show that wage-labour predominates, and yet he calls it
“family labour” industry!  

Mr. Zak skips over the returns of various industrial censuses, waxes
enthusiastic over the “numerous” “working” masters he finds, and
asserts that this proves the “unsoundness of the orthodox theory”—as
the Narodniks ironically call Marx’s doctrine. We shall quote the complete
figures of the German census returns, to which Mr. Zak primarily refers. We
shall take industry in the broad sense of the term, including commerce and
transport.  
    

    




Enterprises
Number
%
Number or quantity (millions)


Workers
%
H. P.
%
kilowatts
%




One-man workshops           
1,452,000
44.4
1.4
10.1
—
—
—
—


Small (2 to 5 workers)      
1,524,000
46.7
3.8
26.2
0.7
7.4
0.1
7.1


Medium (6 to 50 workers)    
259,000
8.0
3.5
24.3
1.5
17.3
0.2
15.7


Large (51 workers and over) 
31,000
0.9
5.7
39.4
6.6
75.3
1.2
77.2


   Total . . . .      
3,266,000
100
14.4
100
8.8
100
1.5
100




Look closely at this picture of capitalism in industry. One-man,
petty-bourgeois workshops are very “numerous”:
one and a half million. Their share of industry?
One-tenth of the workers and none of the machinery,
either steam or electrically driven!  

What about the big capitalists? They account for one-hundredth
of the factories, but they employ nearly two-fifths (39 per cent) of the
total number of workers and have over three-fourths (75–77
per cent) of the total machinery.  

Every intelligent worker will see at once that these figures fully
confirm his everyday experience: the existence of a vast number of
miserable petty bourgeois crushed by capital, and the most complete
predominance of a handful of large capitalist enterprises.  

To proceed. The statistics, so hopelessly garbled by this “Left”
Narodnik, reveal a very rapid growth of capitalism and the elimination of
small production. We shall compare the returns of three German censuses,
that of 1882, 1895 and 1907 (the last). So as not to weary the reader with
figures, we shall take only the most important of them; we shall compare
the one-man workshops with the capitalist plants, taking medium and large
together.  
    

    




Year
One-man workshops
Medium and large capitalist plants


% of total number of plants 
% of total number of workers 
% of total number of plants 
% of total number of workers 




1882 . . . .  
62
26
4
41


1895 . . . .  
54
17
7
53


1907 . . . .  
42
10
9
63




Twenty–five years ago the one–man workshop owners constituted the
majority of the masters (three–fifths). Now they constitute the minority
(two–fifths). Formerly, they employed one–fourth of the total number of
workers; they now employ only one–tenth.  

On the other hand, the share of the capitalist plants shows a rapid
increase. Twenty-five years ago they employed only a minority of the
workers (two-fifths), but they now employ the majority, nearly
two-thirds of the total number of workers (63 per cent). And we have
already seen that the concentration of steam, to say nothing of
electrically driven machinery, in the hands of a small number of
capitalists is far greater than the concentration of workers.


Thus, the industrial censuses of the free and rapidly developing
countries are the best proof of the correctness of Marx’s
theory. Capitalism rules everywhere. Everywhere it is squeezing out small
production. Everywhere the masses of peasants and small artisans and
handicraftsmen are being ruined. Big capital forces down and crushes the
small master in a thousand ways that are still poorly reflected in
statistics. There is no salvation for the small master. His only way of
escape is to join the struggle of the proletariat.  

From first to last the theory of the “family labour principle” and
“family labour industry” is a repetition of the old bourgeois prejudices,
prejudices that are being shattered all the time by the experience of every
country.  

In trying to prove to the workers that the capitalist or small master
who employs from five to ten wage-workers is a “working master”, the Left
Narodniks only reveal their own bourgeois nature.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
See Note 95.—Ed.  
 



[2]
Zavety (Testament)—a legal Socialist-Revolutionary
literary and political monthly published in St. Petersburg from April 1912
to July 1914.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Bewildered Non-Party People









Lenin: Bewildered Non-Party People







V. I.  

      Lenin
Bewildered Non-Party People




Published:
Za PravduNo. 3, October 4, 1913.

      Signed: Kar—ov.

      Published according to the Za Pravdu text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 436-438.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

One of the most widespread and unhealthy symptoms of our public life is
the contempt (if not open hostility) that is displayed towards adherence to
a party.  

It is characteristic of political free lances, political adventurers
and political Manilovs to repudiate party affiliations and to talk
pompously about party “bigotry”, “dogmatism”, intolerance, and so on,
and so forth. As a matter of fact, the use of such expressions merely
reflects the ridiculous and paltry conceit or self-justification of
intellectuals who are shut off from the masses and feel compelled to cover
up their feebleness. Serious politics can only be promoted by the
masses; non-party masses that do not follow the lead of a strong
party are, however, disunited, ignorant masses, with out staying power,
prone to become a plaything in the hands of adroit politicians, who always
emerge “opportunely” from the ranks of the ruling classes to take
advantage of “favourable” circumstances.  

Russia is one of the most petty-bourgeois countries in the world and is
least accustomed to free political activities. This, and this alone,
explains the contempt that is so widespread in this country for adherence
to a party. One of the tasks of class-conscious workers in Russia (and one
of the great historical services they must render) is to wage a systematic
and persevering struggle against this attitude.  

The following is one of the latest examples of the smug
non-partisanship that reigns among the near-Party intellectuals.


The workers have organised the collection of funds for working-class
newspapers on an extensive scale. It is not difficult to understand that
when the masses have consciously

    

decided for themselves which newspaper to assist and which
trend to support, such collections teach them
ideologically sound and principled politics.  

The liquidators, who so often descend to non-party politics, have
launched their notorious campaign for the collections to be shared
equally. In this they were prompted solely by the desire to cover up
their own weakness, and in their haste they did not have time to think and
realise that the principle underlying such a campaign is precisely the
principle of non-partisanship.  

They were immediately exposed by the real state of affairs. Russian
petty-bourgeois society made the liquidators’ slogan its own:
share and share alike with everybody, with the liquidators and with the
Narodniks!  

When their political gamble is exposed, these non-party people who have
renounced the Marxist past for the sake of visions of something as
“broad” as it is unprincipled, begin to twist and turn. G. R., in No. 24
of the liquidators’ newspaper, assures us that the liquidators are not at
all in favour of uniting with the Narodniks, and alleges that such union
has been “systematically advocated” by the Marxists.  

A cruder distortion of the truth could scarcely be imagined. If
G. R. and Co. were not non-party, if they did not treat the
history of Marxism like philistines, they would know that it was
only due to the Marxists (supporters of Pravda) that the
question of the attitude the workers should adopt to the various parties
was settled quite officially more than six years
 ago.[1]

The Marxists alone gave a precise definition of the class basis of
all the important parties in Russia; the liquidators have never
been able to do this. The Marxists alone of all the parties in Russia,
six years ago, defined the exact nature of the various “trends”
and the attitude that should be adopted towards them in place of a chaotic,
unprincipled attitude (“as circumstances demand”) towards individual
parties.  

Since then, events have brilliantly confirmed the correctness of this
definition in the most unquestionable manner.  

The definition states clearly and precisely that the Narodniks are
petty-bourgeois democrats with whom “joint

    

action” is possible only against reaction and against liberalism.  

Now, G. R. and Co., in asserting that they are opposed to uniting with
the Narodniks, want to wriggle out of it by saying: “We are in favour of
the collections being shared equally between the two newspapers
when ‘mass collections’ are made, but we are opposed to this when
collections are made ‘among groups of politically conscious supporters’!”
(See Novaya Rabochaya Gazeta No. 24.)  

In the first place, it has already been proved by actual experience
that a non-party plan emerges from your advocacy of share and share
alike. This is a fact. This very issue, No. 24, contains a resolution
adopted by one workers’ group which says: equally with the Narodniks,
too. As is always the case with them, our non-partisans or
independents, find themselves in the wrong box!  

In the second place, can a group of politically conscious supporters be
called such if it is unable to enlighten the masses? No, gentlemen,
non-partisans, it cannot! Politically conscious supporters will say to the
masses—let everybody contribute, let everybody unite, but try,
in doing so, to distinguish the trends of the different
newspapers!  

To contribute and say “share and share alike” means being non-party,
indifferent and not politically conscious. To contribute and say, “for
such and such a trend”, means being politically conscious, and taking
part consciously in a common action.  

G. R. distorts this political ABC. The result is that G. R. and Co.,
the liquidators, while asserting that they are opposed to uniting with the
Narodniks, are actually continuing their policy of uniting with
them on a non-party basis; they are continuing a
non-party policy extremely harmful to the workers, one which
cannot be tolerated.  

Worker democrats have more than once offered determined resistance to
the advocacy of non-partisanship and must do so again in the future, for it
dulls the political consciousness of the workers and makes it easier for
all sorts of frauds to be perpetrated upon them.  

 

Notes
 

[1]
See present edition, Vol. 12, pp. 136–38.—Ed.  
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Liberals and the Land Problem in Britain









Lenin: The Liberals and the Land Problem in Britain







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Liberals and the Land Problem in Britain




Published:
Za Pravdu No. 8, October 12, 1913.

      Signed: V. I..

      Published according to the Za Pravdu text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 439-442.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

On Saturday, October 11 (September 28, O.S.), the British Liberal
Minister, Lloyd George, opened his “Land Campaign “in two “brilliant”
speeches delivered in the town of Bedford. Just as our Kit Kitych Guchkov
promised “to settle accounts” with the Russian privileged and
all-powerful landowners, so the British Liberal Minister promised to start
a campaign on the land question, to expose the land lords and appeal to the
people on the issue of a “radical” (Lloyd George is extremely radical!)
land reform.  

The Liberal press in Britain tried to give their leader’s campaign as
impressive an appearance as possible. Publicity, publicity at all costs! If
the speech is too long, let us publish a brief “summary” of it, let us
call it a land “charter”, let us embellish it in such a way as to conceal
the diplomatic subterfuges of the parliamentary huckster behind a long list
of reforms—a minimum wage, 100,000 cottages for the workers, and the
“compulsory alienation of the land at its net [!!] value to the
landlords”.  

In order to show the reader how the Minister of the British
Liberal bourgeoisie carries on agitation among the people, we shall quote
several passages from Lloyd George’s Bedford speeches.  

“There is no question more vital, ... than the question ...  of the
land!” exclaimed the speaker. “It enters into every thing—the food the
people eat, the water they drink, the houses they dwell in, the industries
upon which their livelihood depends.” And to whom does the land belong in
Britain? To a handful of rich people! One-third of all the land belongs to
members of the House of Lords. “Landlordism is

    

the greatest of all monopolies in this land.” The power of the landlords
is boundless. They may evict their tenants, and devastate the land worse
than an enemy would. “Now, I am not attacking the landlords either
individually or as a class,” the Minister took pains to declare, “but can
such a state of affairs be allowed to continue?”  

During the last few decades the agricultural population has declined
from over two million to one and a half million, while the number of
gamekeepers has increased from 9,000 to 23,000. There is no other country
in the world where there is so much uncultivated land and where the farmers
suffer so much from game bred by the rich for their amusement.  

The wealth of Britain is increasing at an astonishing rate. But what
about the farm labourers? Nine-tenths of them earn less than twenty
shillings and sixpence (about 10 rubles) per week, a sum which in
workhouses is considered to be barely sufficient to prevent an inmate from
starving. Sixty per cent of the farm labourers earn less than eighteen
shillings (about 9 rubles) per week.  

The Conservatives propose that the land be purchased in small
holdings. “But him who talks about purchase,” thundered the British
Rodichev,[1] “I shall ask: at what price?”
(Laughter.)  

Will not the high price crush the small buyer? Will he not be crushed
by high rates? There is a Small Holdings Act which is supposed to provide
land for workers. Here is an example. The total rates and taxes on a plot
of land are assessed at £30 (nearly 270 rubles). This land is bought
and resold to poor people in small holdings. The price they pay turns out
to be £60!  

The depopulation of rural England threatens to make our country
defenceless—without a strong peasantry there can be no strong army. Now,
can either a Russian or a British Liberal get along without playing on
crude nationalist and chauvinist sentiments?  

“The landlords did not create the land.” exclaimed Lloyd George,
“the country must choose between the power of the landlords and the
welfare of the workers. We must act firmly and determinedly against
monopoly—and property in land is the greatest monopoly. The tenant farmer
must

    

obtain guarantees that he will not be evicted, or deprived of the fruits of
his energy and skill.” (A voice: “What is the remedy?”)  “We must act,
enough of timid attempts at half-measures. We must deal with it thoroughly,
we must do as businessmen do. It is no use tinkering and mending, we must
put the land monopoly under better control.  

“We must secure a minimum wage for the labourer, shorten the working
day, give him a decent, comfortable cottage and a plot of land so that he
can grow a certain amount of produce for his family. We must secure for him
a ladder of progress in order that the ‘enterprising’ labourer may
rise from the small allotment, the kitchen garden, to the small
holding. And the most enterprising might look forward to taking their
position as one of the substantial farmers in the community. You are
tempted with the charms of emigration to America and Australia. But we want
the British worker to find sustenance for himself, a free life and comfort
for himself and for his children right here, in England, in our own
country.”  

Thunderous applause.... And one can almost hear the isolated voices of
those in the audience who were not fooled (like the one who shouted: “What
is the remedy?”) saying: “He sings well; but will he do anything?”  

He sings well, this British Liberal Minister, this favourite of the
petty-bourgeois crowd, a past master in the art of breaking strikes by
brazen deception of the workers, the best servant of British capital, which
enslaves both the British workers and the 300 million population of
India. What power, however, induced this hardened politician, this lackey
of the money-bags, to make such “radical” speeches?  

The power of the labour movement.  

In Britain there is no conscripted army. The people cannot be
restrained by violence—they can be restrained only by deception. The
labour movement is growing irresistibly. The people’s attention must be
diverted, the masses must be “engaged” with high-sounding schemes for
reform, a pretence must be made of waging war on the Conservatives, sops
must be promised to prevent the masses from losing faith in the Liberals,
to ensure that they follow the industrial and financial capitalists like
sheep following shepherds.  
 

And the promises of reform ... does not the English proverb say that
promises are like pie-crusts, made to be broken? Lloyd George makes
promises and the Liberal Cabinet as a whole will cut them to a fifth before
setting about their realisation. The Conservatives, in their turn, will
make a further cut, the result being a tenth.  

The reformism of the British bourgeoisie is the clearest indication of
the growth of a deep-going revolutionary movement among the British working
class. No eloquent orator, no Liberal charlatan can stop this movement.


 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Rodichev, F. M.—a landowner from Tver Gubernia, one of the
organisers and most active members of the Cadet Party.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## A Weak Defence of a Weak Case









Lenin: A Weak Defence of a Weak Case







V. I.  

      Lenin
A Weak Defence of a Weak Case




Published:
Za Pravdu No. 12, October 17, 1913.

      Signed: V. Ilyin.

      Published according to the Za Pravdu text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 443-445.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

A certain G. Golosov is mortally offended over the fact
that I, in Prosveshcheniye, referred to Chkheidze as a “near
Party
  Social-Democrat”.[1]


G. Golosov is in a towering rage; he hurls invectives right and left
and burdens his lines with exclamation marks and marks of
interrogation. But the greater the anger he displays the more evident it
becomes that his angry outcries are merely a screen to cover up his lack of
proof.  

I did refer to Chkheidze as a near-Party Social-Democrat. It should not
be difficult for Golosov to realise that he could refute me if he proved
that Chkheidze is a Party Social-Democrat.  

I mentioned the fact that at the most critical moment in the history of
the Social-Democratic group (and in the history of the regeneration of the
Party) Chkheidze “avoided the issue”. When the liquidator and
anti-liquidator press came into being (1911 and beginning of 1912)
Chkheidze was neither on one side nor on the other.  

Does my angry opponent disprove this precisely indicated fact?  

He does not. Angry G. Golosov does not disprove this fact, nor can he
do so. Poor Golosov; he is wrathful, but he is weak! He timidly evades the
fact that proves that Chkheidze’s behaviour (notwithstanding his oratorical
talent and parliamentary experience) was the behaviour of a
near-Party man.  

If irate G. Golosov were able to think, he would realise that a man
proves his party allegiance by taking a most

    

energetic, direct, and open part in the affairs of his party (and not only
of its group in the Duma). The rise of a liquidator and anti-liquidator
press marked an extremely important moment in the modern history of the
Marxist organisation. Hence, I proved up to the hilt that Chkheidze is a
near-Party man.  

In a fit of hysterical rage G. Golosov exclaims: “The Party is
supposed to be where V. Ilyin and G. Zinoviev are.”  

Thus, good Golosov adds to his troubles by raising the extremely
interesting and important question as to where the Party is. If
G. Golosov cannot think, the workers can, and they have all thought and are
thinking about this question.  

The Party is where the majority of the class-conscious worker
Marxists who take an active part in political life are to be found.  

G. Golosov’s anger rises to the pitch of hysteria simply because he
realises he is unable to disprove this plain truth.  

The elections to the Fourth Duma, the history of the inception and
growth of Pravda, the election to the Executive Committee of the
Metalworkers’ Union, the insurance campaign and the resolutions passed by
the workers in sup port of the six worker deputies—all proved
that the Party is on the side of the six, that it supports their
line. Their slogans have been adopted and tested by the
mass actions of workers in all branches of the working-class
movement.  

Irate Golosov is angry simply because he is unable to disprove the
precise, obvious and indisputable fact that the Marxists beat the
liquidators in the elections, in the trade unions, in the effort to
establish daily newspapers and in the insurance campaign.  

Those against whom all the facts speak have no alternative but to “get
angry” and go into hysterics.  

The Party is where the majority of the workers have rallied around the
Party’s decisions which provide complete, systematic and accurate answers
to the most important problems. The Party is where the majority of
class-conscious workers are united by the singleness of these decisions and
by a single will to implement them conscientiously.  

In defending the “right” of Chkheidze (and of the seven) to flout
these decisions and the will of the working class,

    

G. Golosov, like all the liquidators, is trying to break up the Marxist
organisation in the interests of non-partisanship.  

There can be no doubt that the workers will continue to back the
position of their six deputies as against the near Party
position of the seven.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
See p. 413 of this volume.—Ed.  
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Declaration









Lenin: Declaration







V. I.  

      Lenin
Declaration[1]




Published:
Za Pravda No. 13, October 18, 1913.

      Published according to the Za Pravdu text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 446-448.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Dear Comrades, 

Our joint activities in the State Duma during the past year revealed a
number of disagreements and points of friction between our group and
yours—the other seven Social-Democratic deputies. Matters have reached
the stage of open polemics in the press; and the last decisions you adopted
just before the adjournment of the State Duma in June 1913, when some of
the deputies had already left, revealed to the full that the situation had
become intolerable and had reached an impasse. These decisions which you
adopted by a vote of seven against six, are: refusal to allow the
Bolsheviks (i.e., the six deputies) to have one of the two seats on the
Budget Committee, and the election of one delegate (instead of two) to a
certain important body.  

After repeatedly, by seven votes against six, depriving the six
workers’ deputies of the right to nominate one of the two speakers put up
in the Duma, the aforesaid decisions were the last drop that filled the cup
to overflowing.  

You are aware that we have been, and still are, acting entirely in
keeping with the spirit of consistent Marxism, and ideologically adhere to
all its general decisions.  

You are aware, comrades, that absolutely objective facts prove that it
is no exaggeration to say that our activities have been in complete harmony
with the political consciousness and will of the overwhelming majority of
the Marxist advanced workers in Russia. This was proved by the case of
Pravda, the first workers’ newspaper which was brought into being
by the revival of the working-class movement in April and May 1912, and
which rallied to its side the majority of the workers. It was proved by the
circulation of Pravda, which reached 40,000. It was proved by the
collection

    

of funds for Pravda by workers’ groups, the progress of which that
newspaper always openly reported. It was proved by the Fourth Duma
elections in the worker curia, which resulted in the Bolsheviks winning all
the seats in the curia, and which revealed an indisputable and undisputed
enormous growth of Marxist and anti-liquidator convictions among the
class-conscious workers of Russia as compared with the elections in the
worker curia to the Second and Third Dumas. Lastly, it was proved by the
election of the Executive Committee of the Metalworkers’ Union in
St. Petersburg and by the case of the first workers’ newspaper in Moscow
this year. It goes without saying that we regard it as our absolute duty to
act in strictest harmony with the will of the majority of the workers of
Russia who are united by Marxism.  

You seven deputies, however, act independently of this will and
contrary to it. You boldly adopt decisions that run counter to the will of
the majority of the class-conscious workers. We shall mention, for example,
your acceptance on vague terms, of Jagiello, who is not a Social-Democrat,
and to this day has not been recognised by a single Social-Democrat in
Poland; and your adoption—contrary to the will of the majority of the
workers—of nationalist slogans, such as so-called cultural-national
autonomy, and so forth. We do not know exactly your attitude towards the
liquidator trend, hut we think that you incline towards liquidationism
rather than fully support it. Be that as it may, it nevertheless remains an
indisputable fact that you do not feel bound by the opinions and demands of
the majority of the class-conscious workers of Russia, with whom we go hand
in hand.  

Needless to say, under these circumstances, every socialist in every
country in the world, every class-conscious worker, will regard as
monstrous your efforts to suppress us by means of one vote, to deprive us
of one of the two seats on Duma committees, or other bodies, to deprive us
of spokesmen in the Duma, etc., and to foist upon us tactics and a policy
that have been condemned by the majority of the class-conscious workers of
Russia.  

We affirm, and cannot but affirm at the present time, that our
disagreements are irreconcilable in other spheres of activity besides that
of the Duma. We are compelled to

    

regard your efforts to suppress us and to deprive us of one of the two
seats as being undoubtedly aimed at a split and, as such, precluding all
possibility of co-operation between us. Nevertheless, respecting as we do
the strong desire of the workers that the unity of the Social-Democratic
deputies be preserved at least in the Duma and in face of the outside
world, and bearing in mind our year’s experience, which has proved that it
is possible to achieve such unity in Duma activities by
means of an agreement, we call upon you to declare precisely and
unambiguously, once and for all, that the suppression, in any form, of the
six deputies from the worker curia by seven votes is impermissible. The
unity of the Social-Democratic group in the Fourth Duma can be really
maintained only on the condition that the equality of the seven and six is
fully and definitely recognised, and that the principle of agreement
between them on all questions concerning Duma activities is adhered to.


 
Notes
 
 



[1]
The text of the “Declaration” was worked out by Lenin
together with the Bolshevik deputies to the Duma at the Poronin (Summer)
Conference.  

At the first meeting of the Social-Democratic Duma group on October 16
(29), 1913, at the beginning of the second session o the Fourth Duma, the
Bolshevik deputies submitted to the Menshevik deputies an ultimatum in
which they demanded equal rights for the “six” and the “seven”. The
Bolshevik deputies left the meeting when no satisfactory answer was
forthcoming. On October 18 (31), the “Declaration” was published in
Za Pravdu over the signatures of the Bolshevik deputies
accompanied by an appeal to workers to discuss the demand made by the
“six” of the “seven” and give support to the worker-deputies in
re-establishing the unity of the Social-Democratic Duma group.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Duma “Seven”









Lenin: The Duma 'Seven'







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Duma “Seven”




Published:
Za Pravdu No. 19, October 25, 1913.

      Signed: V. F..

      Published according to the Za Pravdu text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 449-450.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The long-winded statements and arguments of the seven
deputies to the State Duma in defence of liquidationism create a very
strange impression.  

All the time the seven discuss solely Duma activities,
Social-Democratic activities in the Duma!  

Outside of the Taurida Palace nothing of an organised
character exists for the seven! “We, the seven of us, decided; we and
Jagiello voted; we appointed speakers; we adopted a declaration”—this is
all one hears from the seven. “We members of the Duma”, “we in the
Duma”—except for this, the seven know and understand nothing.  

The seven have already become so thoroughly infected with
liquidationist views that they have ceased to understand the ABC of
Marxism.  

According to Marxist standards, deputies to the Duma should
not carry out their own will, but the will of the Marxist
organisation, not their own decisions, but those of the Marxist
body as a whole, not their own, but its tactics. It is a shame and
a disgrace that this ABC of Marxism should have to be explained to Duma
deputies! What a pass their inclinations towards the liquidators must have
brought them to if they dare to act as non-Party people, as subverters of
the proletarian political organisation!  

The seven pro-liquidators dare not even ask “where is the
Marxist organisation?”  

And yet, this is the crux of the whole question.  

All appeals for unity are sheer hypocrisy if those who make them evade
the question of the single will, the single decisions and
single tactics of the majority of the advanced and
class-conscious workers of Russia organised on a Marxist basis.  
 

Za Pravdu long ago indicated the criteria by which the Marxist
will of the majority of the workers, opposition to which means splits,
disorganisation and disruption can (and must) be judged.  

These criteria are:
(1) the elections to the Fourth Duma in the worker curia;
(2) the case of the workers’ newspapers;
(3) the trade unions. In Europe they add to these what is the most
important—the number of openly registered members of political
parties. Everybody will understand that data of the latter kind cannot be
obtained in Russia; they are partly compensated for by common
decisions, which every honest worker regards as binding.  

The liquidators and the seven do not say a word about this,
not a word about the characteristics of the Marxist organisation, about its
decisions and its tactics! The liquidators and the seven want “unity”,
that is, they want the six workers’ deputies to submit to the seven
non-Party deputies; that is, they want to flout the will of the
Marxist body as a whole.  

The liquidators and the seven want the Social-Democratic Duma group to
act on its own according to its own sweet will, in isolation from and
opposed to this body as a whole. And this disgraceful, disruptive
demand they call a demand for unity.  

The appeals for unity made by the seven remind one of a well-known
quip: the seven want to “unite” with the six in the same way as a man
“unites” with a piece of bread. He swallows it.  

The seven non-Party men want to swallow the six Marxists; and they
demand that this should be called “unity”.  

The destruction of the Marxist organisation by the seven deputies who
have alienated themselves from the majority of the workers, by the
seven pro-liquidator deputies, by the seven who have forgotten
that in the Duma they are only the vehicles of the will of the
majority of the workers—this is what the liquidators and the seven
deputies are aiming at!  

The working class protests against this astounding, disruptive
behaviour of the arrogant enemies of working-class organisation, and
emphatically demands subordination in Duma activities as in all
else.  

 

Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Liberal Bourgeoisie and the Liquidators









Lenin: The Liberal Bourgeoisie and the Liquidators







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Liberal Bourgeoisie and the Liquidators




Published:
Za Pravdu No. 20, October 26, 1913.

      Published according to the Za Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 451-453.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The Cadet Party, the leading party of the liberal bourgeoisie in
Russia, has a number of men at its headquarters who have received a
European education. In our day a man cannot be regarded as educated if he
is not generally familiar with Marxism and the West-European working-class
movement.  

Since they have a large number of bourgeois intellectuals in their
ranks, the Russian Cadets are, of course, familiar with Marxism; among them
there are even some who were Marxists, or near-Marxists in their youth, but
who grew “wiser” as they grew older and became liberal philistines.  

All this explains the difference between the attitude of the old,
European liberals, and that of the new, Russian liberals towards
Social-Democracy. The former tried to prevent the emergence of
Social-Democracy and denied its right to existence; the latter have been
obliged to resign themselves to the fact: “We have no doubt,”
says the leading article in Rech (No. 287), “that
Social-Democracy is destined to become the open political party of the
proletariat in Russia.” That is why the fight our liberals arc waging
against Social-Democracy has assumed the form of a struggle in
favour of opportunism in the ranks of Social-Democracy.  

Impotent to prevent the rise and growth of Social-Democracy, our
liberal bourgeois are doing their best to make it grow in the liberal
way. Hence, the prolonged and systematic efforts of our Cadets to
foster opportunism (and liquidationism in particular) in the ranks of the
Social-Democrats; the liberals rightly regard this as the
only way of retaining

    

their influence over the proletariat and of making the working class
dependent upon the liberal bourgeoisie.  

The liberals’ appraisal of the fight waged by the six workers’ deputies
against the seven pro-liquidator deputies is therefore very instructive. As
onlookers, the liberals are compelled candidly to admit the main fact: the
seven are the “parliamentary elements of Social-Democracy”, they are a
“party of parliamentary activity”, they have in their ranks “the entire
intelligentsia of the Duma Social-Democrats”. Their line is that of the
“evolution of Social-Democracy into an open parliamentary party”, a line
connected with a special “trend in tactics”. “Novaya Rabochaya
Gazeta is the organ of the Social-Democrat parliamentarians.”  

Za Pravdu, on the contrary, is the “organ of the
irreconcilables”, says Rech, who are not a party of parliamentary
activity but are the “antithesis of such a party”.  

The party of “intellectual deputies” versus “workers’
deputies”, such is Rech’s verdict. Rech says
superciliously that it is impossible to tell whom the majority of the
workers support, but it refutes itself in the very next breath by the
following illuminating passage: 


   “The longer the transition to this normal existence”
   (i.e., open, legal existence) “is delayed,” it says, “the more reason
   will there be to anticipate that the parliamentary majority of the
   Social-Democratic intellectuals will be compelled to yield to the
   non-parliamentary workers’ majority and to its present mood. We saw
   the deplorable consequences of such a divergence of trends at the end of
   1905. And whatever one’s opinion may be of the future upshot of the present
   impasse, it is hardly likely that anyone will be found to justify the
   blunders committed by the inexperienced leaders of the spontaneous mass
   temper in those winter months.” This is what Rech writes.  


We have stressed what interests us now particularly in this admission.


The non-parliamentary workers’ majority versus the “parliamentary
majority of the Social-Democratic intellectuals”,—even the liberals
perceive this as the issue in the controversy between the six and the
seven.  

The seven and Novaya Rabochaya Gazeta represent the majority
of the self-styled Social-Democratic intelligentsia as opposed to
the “non-parliamentary workers’ majority”, as opposed to the
Party.  
 

The old party has disappeared; we don’t need the old party; we will do
without the party, we will make shift with one newspaper and activities in
the Duma, and advocate the formation of an open party in the future—such,
virtually, is the position of the seven and the position of all
liquidators.  

One can understand, therefore, why the liberals speak so kindly of the
seven and of the liquidators, why they praise them for understanding
parliamentary conditions, and refer to their tactics as “intricate,
thoughtful and not oversimplified”. The seven and the liquidators carry
liberal slogans into the ranks of the working class—why should
not the liberals praise them? The liberals could not wish for anything
better than the erection of a bulwark of intellectuals, parliamentarians
and legalists against the old party, against the
“non-parliamentary workers’ majority”.  

Let this bulwark call itself Social-Democratic; its name is not
important, what is important is its liberal-labour policy—that is the way
the enlightened bourgeoisie argues, and from its point of view it argues
quite correctly.  

The liberals have realised (and have blurted out) what all
class-conscious, advanced workers realised long ago—that the Novaya
Rabochaya Gazeta group and the seven that follow its lead, are this
bulwark of liberal intellectuals who have split off from the
Social-Democratic Party, repudiate the Party, denounce its “underground”
activities and pursue a systematic policy of concessions to bourgeois
reformism, bourgeois nationalism, etc.  

The unity of the “non-parliamentary workers’ majority”, which is the
genuine Party majority and is really independent of the liberal
bourgeoisie, is inconceivable unless this bulwark of intellectual
liquidators of the workers’ party is vigorously combated.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Capitalism and Workers' Immigration









Lenin: Capitalism and Workers' Immigration







V. I.  

      Lenin
Capitalism and Workers’ Immigration




Published:
Za Pravdu No. 22, October 29, 1913.

      Signed: V. I..

      Published according to the Za Pravdu text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 454-457.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
Unknown
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Capitalism has given rise to a special form of migration of
nations. The rapidly developing industrial countries, introducing machinery
on a large scale and ousting the backward countries from the world market,
raise wages at home above the average rate and thus attract workers from
the backward countries.  

Hundreds of thousands of workers thus wander hundreds and thousands of
versts. Advanced capitalism drags them forcibly into its orbit, tears them
out of the backwoods in which they live, makes them participants in the
world-historical movement and brings them face to face with the powerful,
united, international class of factory owners.  

There can be no doubt that dire poverty alone compels people to abandon
their native land, and that the capitalists exploit the immigrant workers
in the most shameless manner. But only reactionaries can shut their eyes to
the progressive significance of this modern migration of
nations. Emancipation from the yoke of capital is impossible without the
further development of capitalism, and without the class struggle that is
based on it. And it is into this struggle that capitalism is drawing the
masses of the working people of the whole world, breaking down the
musty, fusty habits of local life, breaking down national barriers and
prejudices, uniting workers from all countries in huge factories and mines
in America, Germany, and so forth.  

America heads the list of countries which import workers. The following
are the immigration figures for America: 
    

    




Ten years 1821–30 . . . . . . .  
99,000


” ” 1831–40 . . . . . . .      
496,000


” ” 1841–50 . . . . . . .      
1,597,000


” ” 1851–60 . . . . . . .      
2,453,000


” ” 1861–70 . . . . . . .      
2,064,000


” ” 1871–80 . . . . . . .      
2,262,000


” ” 1881–90 . . . . . . .      
4,722,000


” ” 1891–1900 . . . . . . .    
3,703,000


Nine ” 1901–09 . . . . . . .    
7,210,000




The growth of immigration is enormous and continues to increase. During
the five years 1905–09 the average number of immigrants entering America
(the United States alone is referred to) was over a million a
year.  

It is interesting to note the change in the place of origin of those
emigrating to America, Up to 1880 the so-called old immigration
prevailed, that is, immigration from the old civilised countries, such as
Great Britain, Germany and partly from Sweden. Even up to 1890, Great
Britain and Germany provided more than half the total immigrants.  

From 1880 onwards, there was an incredibly rapid in crease in what is
called the new immigration from Eastern and Southern Europe, from
Austria, Italy and Russia. The number of people emigrating from these three
countries to the United States was as follows: 





Ten years 1871–80 . . . . . . .  
201,000


” ” 1881–90 . . . . . . .      
927,000


” ” 1891–1900 . . . . . . .    
1,847,000


Nine ” 1901–09 . . . . . . .    
5,127,000




Thus, the most backward countries in the old world, those that more
than any other retain survivals of feudalism in every branch of social
life, are, as it were, undergoing compulsory training in
civilisation. American capitalism is tearing millions of workers of
backward Eastern Europe (including Russia, which in 1891–1900 provided
594,000 immigrants and in 1900–09, 1,410,000) out of their semi-feudal
conditions and is putting them in the ranks of the advanced, international
army of the proletariat.  

Hourwich, the author of an extremely illuminating book, Immigration
and Labour, which appeared in English last year, makes some
interesting observations. The number of

    

people emigrating to America grew particularly after the 4905 Revolution
(1905—1,000,000; 1906—1,200,000; 1907—1,400,000; 1908 and
1909—1,900,000 respectively). Workers who had participated in various
strikes in Russia introduced into America the bolder and more aggressive
spirit of the mass strike.  

Russia is lagging farther and farther behind, losing some of her best
workers to foreign countries; America is advancing more and more rapidly,
taking the most vigorous and able-bodied sections of the working population
of the whole
world.[1]


Germany, which is more or less keeping pace with the United States, is
changing from a country which released workers into one that attracts them
from foreign countries. The number of immigrants from Germany to America in
the ten years 1881–90 was 1,453,000; but in the nine years 1901–09 it
dropped to 310,000. The number of foreign workers in Germany, however, was
695,000 in 1910–11 and 729,000 in 1911–12. Dividing these immigrants
according to occupation and country of origin we get the following: 





 
Foreign workers employed in
    Germany in 1911–12 (thousands)


Agriculture
Industry
Total




From Russia . . . . . . . . . .
274
34
308


” Austria . . . . . . . . . . 
101
162
263


” other countries  . . . . . .
22
135
157


    Total . . . . . . . . . . . .
397
331
728




The more backward the country the larger is the number of “unskilled”
agricultural labourers it supplies. The advanced nations seize, as it were,
the best paid occupations for themselves and leave the, semi-barbarian
countries the worst paid occupations. Europe in general (“other
countries”) provided Germany with 157,000 workers, of whom more than
eight-tenths (135,000 out of 157,000) were industrial
workers. Backward Austria provided only six-tenths
    

(162,000 out of 263,0O0) of the industrial workers. The most backward
country of all, Russia, provided only one-tenth of the industrial
workers (34,000 out of 308,000).  

Thus, Russia is punished everywhere and in everything for her
backwardness. But compared with the rest of the population, it is the
workers of Russia who are more than any others bursting out of this state
of backwardness and barbarism, more than any others combating these
“delightful” features of their native land, and more closely than any
others uniting with the workers of all countries into a single
international force for emancipation.  

The bourgeoisie incites the workers of one nation against those of
another in the endeavour to keep them disunited. Class-conscious workers,
realising that the break-down of all the national barriers by capitalism is
inevitable and progressive, are trying to help to enlighten and organise
their fellow-workers from the backward countries.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
Other countries on the American Continent besides the United States are
also rapidly advancing. The number of immigrants entering the United States
last year was about 250,000, Brazil about 170,000 and Canada over 200,000;
total 620,000 for the year.  —Lenin
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Material on the Conflict Within the Social-Democratic Duma Group









Lenin: Material on the Conflict Within the Social-Democratic Duma Group







V. I.  

      Lenin
Material on the Conflict Within the Social-Democratic Duma Group[5]




Published:
Za Pravdu No. 22, October 29, 1913.

      Published according to the Za Pravdu text collated with the symposium Marxism and Liquidationism, Part II, St. Petersburg, 1914.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 458-474.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

A conflict has broken out between the six Social-Democratic
deputies from the worker curia in the State Duma—Badayev, Malinovsky,
Muranov, Petrovsky, Samoilov and Shagov, on the one side, and the other
seven members of the Social-Democratic group in the State Duma, on the
other. Both the six and the seven have appealed to the workers to discuss
the question and to express their opinions.  

The discussion is already under way among the St. Petersburg workers,
and to enable it to proceed successfully, we publish the following summary
of material and considerations, which will interest all workers who have
the fate of their Marxist organisation at heart.  
WHOSE WILL?

The main question that confronts the workers in connection with the
split in the Social-Democratic group in the Duma is the relation between
the Duma group and the Marxist body as a whole. Whose will should determine
the decisions, tactics and conduct of the Social-Democratic group in the
Duma?  

The experience of all Social-Democratic parliamentary groups throughout
the world provides a clear and absolutely

    

indisputable answer to this question. Social-Democrat parliamentary
deputies are the vehicles of the will of the class-conscious and organised
proletariat of the country in question. The decisions adopted by the
advanced proletariat, and which it carries out in all its economic and
political struggle, are binding for Social-Democrat
representatives in parliament. Parliamentary deputies who disagree with the
will of the class-conscious, organised and advanced proletariat, resign,
i.e., surrender their title of deputy.  

These general and fundamental principles, to which all Marxists all
over the globe subscribe, must first of all be clearly understood and
thoroughly assimilated so that no unscrupulous persons may confuse and
obscure the point at issue.  

Anyone who attempts to defend the conception that Social-Democrat
parliamentary deputies should be independent of the will of the majority of
the organised and class-conscious workers at once exposes himself as an
enemy of the Marxist organisation and a disruptor of all unity, of all
united action on the part of worker Social-Democrats.  

The question now is, how can we Russian workers deter mine what are the
will and decisions of the majority of the class-conscious and united worker
Social-Democrats of Russia?  
WHAT IS THE WILL OF THE MAJORITY OF THE CLASS CONSCIOUS WORKERS OF
RUSSIA?

In all countries in the world the following criteria determine the will
of the politically organised proletariat.  

First, the workers’ newspapers. The support which the proletariat
renders the different workers’ newspapers reveals its political will and
indicates the trend it stands for.  

Second, parliamentary elections. Election laws in different countries
vary, but it is often possible to determine without error which
deputies the working class elects. The trend to which the
deputies elected by the workers belong indicates the will of the
proletariat.  
 

Third, various workers’ associations and societies, especially the
trade unions, which wage a struggle against capital, give an indication of
the will of the proletariat.  

Fourth, in Western Europe, the most precise index of the will of the
proletariat is the decisions of the socialist par ties, which conduct their
activities openly, and whose membership is known.  

It is common knowledge that there is no open Social-Democratic Party in
Russia. In this country even the Constitutional-Democratic Party is
presumed to be banned. In Russia, those who attack or renounce the
“underground”, or justify renouncing it, are therefore called
liquidators, i.e., renegades, disruptors of the workers’ organisation.


Let us now examine facts concerning the will of the advanced
workers of Russia.  
WHAT DID THE ELECTIONS TO THE SECOND, THIRD AND FOURTH DUMAS REVEAL
CONCERNING THE WILL OF THE PROLETARIAT?

For the reactionary purpose of separating the workers from the
peasants, the Russian election law provides for the establishment of worker
curias, i.e., the separate election of workers’ deputies. But this enables
us all the more easily to ascertain the will of the workers, who return to
the Duma men who agree with their views and trend.  

That is why all the candidates elected by the worker
curias at the elections to the Second, Third and Fourth Dumas were
Social-Democrats. All informed people (except the politically
unscrupulous) were therefore compelled to draw the conclusion that it was
the will of the workers of Russia to march solidly in step with the
Social-Democrats.  

But which trend inside the Social-Democratic movement
did the workers support?  

A clear-cut reply to this question is provided by the re turns which
show to which trends the candidates elected by the worker curias
belonged. In the Second Duma there were 23 deputies elected by the worker
curia; of these 11(i.e., 47 per cent) were Bolsheviks. It is common
knowledge that

    

at that very time, the spring of 1907, a certified majority in the workers’
party supported the Bolsheviks.  

To the Third Duma, after the election reform, the worker curia elected
only eight deputies. Of these, four (i.e., 50 per cent) were Bolsheviks. To
the Fourth Duma the worker curia elected nine deputies, of whom six (i.e.,
67 per cent) were Bolsheviks.  

Thus, over a period of six years, from 1907 to 1912, when the
intelligentsia deserted Social-Democracy, the workers in
increasing numbers came over to the side of the Bolsheviks.  

Over two-thirds of the workers of Russia support the views and
line of the six deputies from the worker curia in the Fourth
Duma—Badayev, Malinovsky, Muranov, Petrovsky, Samoilov and Shagov. These
deputies are backed by the overwhelming majority of the
class-conscious workers who take an active part in politics.  

The intellectuals deserted the Marxist organisation; they tried to
liquidate it. The workers deserted the liquidators. Only unscrupulous
people can deny the truth of this.  
WHO ARE THE DEPUTIES?

On the very day that the declaration of the six
       deputies[1]

appeared in the newspapers, the liquidators’ newspaper (issue No. 60)
hastened to the defence of the seven deputies and argued that the latter
had received no fewer workers’ votes than the six.  

At that time our paper (issue No. 13) published figures which
completely shattered the liquidators’ position and knocked the bottom out
of the “argument” they advanced.  

These figures showed the number of workers in the gubernias which
returned Social-Democratic deputies to the Duma; they also gave a perfectly
clear idea of which section of the Social-Democratic group in the Duma
received the highest number of workers’ votes, and even how much higher.


Here are the figures: 
    

    




Gubernia
Name of deputy  
Thousands


Number of workers according to factory
    inspectors’ reports
Mining industry 
Totals




Moscow . . . .                
Malinovsky . . .      
348
3
351


Vladimir . . . .              
Samoilov . . . .      
202
3
205


St. Petersburg                
Badayev . . . .       
170
27
197


Ekaterinoslav . .             
Petrovsky . . .       
33
85
118


Kostroma . . .               
Shagov . . . . .      
91
—
91


Kharkov . . . .               
Muranov . . . .       
45
1
46


 
   Totals . . . 
889
119
1,008


Warsaw . . . .                
Jagiello . . . .      
78
—
78


Don Region . . .              
Tulyakov . . .        
18
41
59


Ufa . . . . . . .             
Khaustov . . .        
6
31
37


Taurida . . . .               
Buryanov . . .        
10
10
20


Irkutsk . . . .               
Mankov . . . . .      
2
11
13


Tiflis . . . . .              
Chkheidze . . .       
5
—
5


Kars and Batum Region . . . . 
Chkhenkeli . . .      
1
1
2


 
   Totals . . . 
120
94
214




Since deputy Jagiello is not really a member of the group of seven
deputies, for he does not belong to the Social-Democratic Party and has no
voice in the relations between the six and the seven deputies, and
furthermore, since he was elected to the Duma contrary to the wishes of the
majority of the worker electors of the city of Warsaw, the number of
workers in the Warsaw Gubernia cannot be counted as having voted in favour
of the seven deputies.  

The upshot is that out of 1,144,000, the seven deputies can claim only
136,000, or 11.8 per cent, or about one-tenth, whereas the six
deputies can claim 1,008,000, or 88.2 per cent, or about
nine-tenths.  

The liquidators’ emphatic statement that the workers’ vote was equal is
utterly refuted.  

What do they say in answer to that?  

Their answer is worth repeating in full, and it can be explained only
by the hopelessness of their case.  
 

“Leaving aside the question as to whether these figures are
correct or significant, we assert...” says Mr. F., in No. 61 of
Novaya Rabochaya Gazeta.  

Gentlemen, you raised the question of the number of workers’ votes. The
figures are presented to you, but you leave them aside.  

Barely had he finished saying this, when another statement appeared in
the next issue (No. 62), at which one can only wonder.  

“Our newspaper yesterday expressed its opinion on the arithmetical
side of this assertion.”  

Leaving aside means “expressing an opinion”. Who are the
simpletons that the liquidators count on fooling?  

In quoting these figures, which the liquidators have not been able to
refute, we have not said a word about the particularly important place in
our electoral system occupied by the gubernias which elected the six
workers’ deputies. Discouraged by the facts, the liquidators are
now talking about the special privileges provided for the six deputies by
the law of June 3, about our being supposed to stand in awe of Stolypin’s
curias, about our regarding only the six deputies as Social-Democrats, etc.


Assertions of this kind have a very definite “if unflattering”
name.... We will not soil our lips!...  

The numbers of workers in the various gubernias remain unchanged. They
can and must be compared.  

The German Social-Democrats count their election gains in spite of the
fact that women there are deprived of the franchise.  

All this is so clear and simple that one can only wonder whom the
liquidators expect to mislead with their “arguments”.  
WHAT IS THE WILL OF THE WORKERS AS SHOWN BY WORKERS’ NEWSPAPERS IN
RUSSIA?

It is common knowledge that workers’ newspapers began to appear in
Russia after the 1908–10 period of despondency and collapse, i.e., in
1911; and they became firmly established in 1912.  

Take the year 1912. The first to appear and become firmly established
was the weekly
Zvezda,[6] which later began to appear twice a week and paved
the way for the daily

    

Pravda. Pravda appeared thanks to the extraordinarily
strong support of the workers in April 1912. This newspaper rallied
around itself the majority of the class-conscious workers. Its line was the
line of the majority of the united and class-conscious
proletarians.  

By 1913 there were two all-Russian newspapers of the same
trend. A tremendous wave of working-class support brought into being
Nash Put, a Moscow newspaper of the same trend.  

The other trend, the liquidators, started a daily newspaper,
Luch, only in the autumn of 1912, after publishing very
feeble weeklies.  

Thus, the facts prove beyond doubt that the majority of the
workers rallied around Pravda very much earlier. The liquidator
newspaper was launched later, and it opposed the will of the
majority, tried to effect a split, i.e., it demonstrated the
refusal of the minority to submit to the majority.  

Every worker will understand that workers’ unity of action is
thwarted if a second newspaper is published in the same
city with the object of undermining the first. Not a single
Social-Democratic Party anywhere in Europe would tolerate anything of the
sort.  
WHAT IS THE WILL OF THE WORKERS AS SHOWN BY COLLECTIONS FOR WORKERS’
NEWSPAPERS?

Bourgeois newspapers are maintained by large sums of capital. Workers’
newspapers are maintained by funds collected by the workers themselves.


In making contribution to a publication or a newspaper of any
particular trend the workers very clearly express their will.  

The funds that the workers have contributed to the workers’ press in
Russia are therefore a most important index of the workers’ will. Only
absolute ignoramuses or unscrupulous people (like the Cadets and the
liquidators) can attempt to brush this aside.  

The following figures show how many collections were made by
workers’ groups; they have been published more than once, and are
open to verification by anyone who can read.  
    

    




 
Number of collections made by workers’ groups


For Pravda
For the Moscow newspaper
For both
For Luch




1912 . . . . . . . . . . . . .
620
5
625
89


1913 to April 1 . . . . . . .
309
129
438
139


1913, from April 1 to October          
1,252
261
1,513
328


Totals for the two years . .  
2,181
395
2,576
556




These figures cover a long period of time. They cover the
whole of 1912 and nine months of 1913. They cover the whole of
=

     Russia.[2]


What do they show? They undoubtedly show that sup porters of Za
Pravdu, supporters of the six workers’ deputies, opponents of
liquidationism clearly predominate among the class-conscious
workers.  

All those who refuse to recognise the decisions of this overwhelming
majority are schismatics, disruptors, violators of the will of the workers.

WHAT IS THE WILL OF THE WORKERS AS SHOWN BY THE ST. PETERSBURG TRADE
UNIONS?

It is common knowledge that the metalworkers are the most developed and
most advanced section of the working class not only in St. Petersburg, but
throughout Russia, and not only Russia, but throughout the world.  

Nobody can deny—and on the day the metalworkers assembled the
liquidators themselves admitted it—that the metalworkers are the
vanguard of the entire Russian proletariat.  

What did the metalworkers’ meeting in St. Petersburg prove?  

The occasion was the election of the Executive Committee. There were
two lists of candidates.  

One list, published in the liquidators’ newspaper and backed by the
latter, contained the names of a number of well-known liquidators.

 

The other list, published in Pravda, was
anti-liquidationist.  

The liquidators fraudulently gave out their list as the decision of the
union, but their fraud did not help them.  

The metalworkers’ meeting was attended by about 3,000
people. Of these, only some 150 cast their votes for the
liquidators’ list of candidates.  

Obviously, this quite clearly revealed the will of the class-conscious
and advanced workers. The workers will not allow any mention of
liquidationism.  

Of all the trade unions in St. Petersburg, the Printers’ Union alone
still supports the
     liquidators,[3]

thereby isolating itself from the rest of the St. Petersburg
proletariat. But even there, it must be observed, not everything is
“favourable” for the liquidators. Are there many admirers of the
liquidators to be found among the shop assistants, woodworkers, gold- and
silversmiths, tailors, bakers, builders, tavern employees, and so forth?
How many are there, and where are they? Are many of these admirers to be
found in the cultural and educational institutions? There is little
evidence of them! And yet the liquidators, in denouncing the
“underground” and the “strike craze”, in pleading for legality in the
shelter of Stolypin reforms, assert that every thing legal supports them!
Whom are the working-class intelligentsia supporting? In our last issue
106 working-class students expressed their greetings to the six
and denounced the liquidators!  

In following the lead of the liquidators the seven deputies are
flouting the will of the majority of the workers. This has been
proved by the Duma elections, by the collections for the newspapers, by the
meeting of the metalworkers, by all the activities in the legal movement,
and by the present insurance campaign (the support rendered the insurance
weekly in response to the appeal of the six workers’ deputies).  

The seven deputies who are flouting the will of the majority
of the workers must bear in mind the inevitable consequences if they insist
on pursuing their own will in opposition to the majority
of the workers.  
    

IDEOLOGICAL UNITY

The liquidator newspaper writes: 


   “Social-Democracy constitutes a definite ideologically
   united body and those who do not subscribe to its ideas do not belong to
   it.”  


That is the truth, but not the whole truth, for Social-Democracy is not
only an ideologically but also an organisationally united
body. This can be forgotten only by liquidators, i.e., by those who refuse
to recognise precisely the organised body, who ignore its will, flout its
decisions, etc.  

Our liquidators, those who wrote for Luch and are now writing
for Novaya Rabochaya Gazeta, exposed themselves most vividly to
the masses of the workers by opposing and strongly combating the Russian
Marxist organisation.  

The liquidators have been strongly condemned in a number of decisions
adopted by this, the only existing political organisation of the workers of
Russia. They have been condemned for their intolerable, disruptive and
schismatic attitude towards this organisation. These decisions were passed
in 1908, in 1910 and in 1912. Russian workers who take an interest in the
affairs of their class are familiar with them. But the liquidators not only
did not consider it necessary to abide by these decisions, they have
unceremoniously flouted them by all their actions and their propaganda.


That explains why the liquidationist newspaper, in discussing the
question of organisation, concealed from its readers the fact that
Social-Democracy represents not only an ideologically but also an
organisationally united body. Operating in complete isolation from the
organisation, flouting its decisions, making its very existence the subject
of derision, the liquidators, naturally, prefer not to remind the workers
of this.  

But although the liquidator writer conceals this circumstance from his
readers, he has nevertheless had to admit that those who do not subscribe
to the ideas of the Social-Democratic organisation cannot possibly be
regarded as belonging to it. But the liquidators are the very people who
come under this category. Their ideas are not Social-Democratic but
liberal-labour ideas. The ideas of opportunists and legalists, the ideas of
those who trim down

    

consistent Marxist slogans and advocate the destruction of the old
organisation and the formation of an open party under the June Third
regime, can nowhere ever be regarded as Social-Democratic by anybody.  

Both in their organisational activities and in their propaganda of
non-Marxist ideas, the liquidators have gone beyond the bounds of
Social-Democracy.  

Social-Democracy is a definite organisationally united body and those
who refuse to submit to the discipline of this organisation, who ignore it
and flout its decisions, do not belong to it. Such is the basic rule.  

But the liquidator who let the cat out of the bag is also right. He is
right when he says that those who do not subscribe to Social-Democratic
ideas do not belong to Social-Democracy. Precisely,
Mr. Liquidator. Only you fail to see that these words apply primarily and
most aptly to yourself and your liquidator ideas.  
THE LIQUIDATORS AND THE BOURGEOISIE

If anybody has any doubts about this let him watch the attitude of the
bourgeois politicians and the bourgeois press towards liquidationism, its
ideas and the struggle it is waging against the Marxist working-class
organisation. Anybody who does this will very soon become convinced that
the bourgeoisie greets every pronouncement by the liquidators against
the Marxists with paeans of praise and admiration. It welcomed the
liquidators’ pronouncements against the old organisation; gleefully it took
up their campaign against the workers on strike and their denunciation of
the “strike craze”.  

But while admiring and praising the liquidators, the bourgeois press
could not close its eyes to a very sad circumstance. It was obliged to
admit that liquidationism, which is so pleasing to the bourgeois liberals
(birds of a feather flock together!), is only an intellectualist trend and
meets with no success among the masses of the workers. The liberals deplore
this very much, but every class-conscious worker should rejoice at it!


See how Rech, the leading organ of the bourgeois liberals,
appraised what happened in the Social-Democratic group in the Duma.  
 

It stated plainly that the seven are the “parliamentary elements of
Social-Democracy”, that they belong to the “party of parliamentary
activity”, that “the position of the intellectualist deputies is more
thoughtful”. To put it briefly, the position of the liquidators and of
Novaya Rabochaya Gazeta suits the liberal gentlemen more than that
of the six workers’ deputies.  

“All of them were elected directly by the workers”, say the liberals
in respect of the workers’ deputies; they constitute a group of
“irreconcilables”, and their slogans are much more “intelligible” to
the masses of the workers.  

Now it is precisely this “irreconcilability” of the workers’ deputies
and their direct contact with the masses that the liberal gentlemen do not
like. And they tearfully declare that “there is reason to anticipate that
the parliamentary majority of the Social-Democratic intellectuals will be
compelled to yield to the non-parliamentary workers’ majority”.  

In this controversy the liberal gentlemen desire from the bottom of
their hearts to see the victory of the “moderates”, the liquidators, the
advocates of “parliamentary” tactics; and they would like to see the
irreconcilable workers’ deputies with their “straightforward” slogans
tied hand and foot!  

But even the liberals have an inkling that the working class and its
devotion to the uncurtailed slogans will prevent the realisation of the
liquidator and liberal dream of a victory of the opportunists in the ranks
of Social-Democracy.  
DECISION OF THE UNITED ISTS

The seven deputies, who oppose the will of the majority of the
proletariat, furtively evade the fact that the six are acting in harmony
with that will.  

The following is an already published decision of the Marxists: 

“This Conference is of the opinion that united action on the
part of the Social-Democratic group in the Duma is possible and
essential.  

“This Conference affirms, however, that the conduct of the seven
deputies gravely jeopardises the unity of the group.  

“Taking advantage of their accidental majority of one,

    

the seven deputies encroach on the elementary rights of the six workers’
deputies who represent the overwhelming majority of the workers of Russia.


“The seven deputies, guided by narrow factional interests, deprive the
six deputies of the opportunity to speak in the Duma on very important
questions affecting the lives of the workers. In several cases, when the
Social-Democratic group put up two or more speakers, the six deputies were
not given an opportunity in spite of repeated demands to put up even one of
theirs.  

“Similarly, in appointing representatives to various Duma committees
(for example, the Budget Committee) the seven deputies refuse to allow the
six to have one of the two places.  

“When the group elects representatives to bodies that are of
importance to the working-class movement, the seven deputies, by a majority
of one, deprive the six of all representation. The staff that serves the
group is always elected in a biased manner (for example, the demand for a
second secretary was rejected).  

“This Conference is of the opinion that such conduct on the part of
the seven deputies inevitably gives rise to friction in the group, which
hinders united action and threatens to split the group.  

“This Conference protests most emphatically against this conduct on
the part of the seven deputies.  

“The six deputies represent the overwhelming majority of the workers
of Russia and act in complete harmony with the political line of the
organised vanguard of the working class. This Conference is therefore of
the opinion that united action on the part of the Social-Democratic group
in the Duma is possible only if the two sections of the group
enjoy equal rights, and if the seven deputies abandon their
steam-roller tactics.  

“Notwithstanding irreconcilable disagreements in spheres of activity
outside as well as inside the Duma, this Conference demands that the
group should maintain unity on the basis of the aforesaid equality of
rights of its two sections.  

“This Conference invites class-conscious workers to express their
opinion on this important question and to exert all efforts to
help preserve the unity of the group on the only

    

possible basis, that of equal rights for the six workers’
     deputies.”[4]


This decision clearly and precisely expressed through the medium of
workers’ representatives the will of the majority that we discussed in
detail above.  

Only non-Party Social-Democrats can act contrary to this
will. Only liquidators can advise the seven to act as they
think fit, as schismatics and disruptors of the workers’ organisation.

OUR WORK WITHIN THE DUMA GROUP

The six deputies submitted to the judgement of the workers the question
of their being suppressed in the Duma group by the accidental majority
within the group.  

They quoted astonishing facts about the group. What have the seven
deputies said in reply?  

Instead of making a clear and straightforward statement refuting the
cases of their being restricted in the Duma activities, enumerated by the
six, the seven deputies quoted a number of cases when there was no
restriction or suppression.  

No doubt there were cases in the activities of the group when the
rights of the six deputies were respected; if this were not so it would
have been nothing short of an insult to the proletariat, and such a
situation in the Duma group would be intolerable even for a single day.


That the unity of the group is possible and that agreement is essential
is proved by the experience of the year the group has been in existence.


But this experience also shows that within the group the six deputies
were tied band and foot by the seven who inclined towards liquidationism
and ignored the majority of the workers.  

The facts which are quoted by the six deputies, and which clearly
depict the state of affairs in the group, have not been refuted.  

The seven deputies:
1) attempted to change the Programme of the Social-Democratic Party. In the
Duma, for example,

    

they advocated the cultural-national autonomy rejected by all Marxists in
1903.  

2) Accepted deputy Jagiello into the group with the right to vote on
Duma affairs and wanted to grant him a vote on Party affairs although he
belongs to another organisation and does not belong to the
Social-Democrats.  

3) Refused to allow the six deputies to have their own secretary in
spite of their repeated demands for one.  

4) Restricted the six deputies in every way as regards speaking in the
Duma.  

5) Refused to allow the six deputies representation on a certain
important body.  

6) Restricted the right of the six deputies to be represented on Duma
committees, including the Budget Committee.  

To all these charges the seven deputies have but one reply—for
the benefit of the cause.  

Obviously, the suppression and restriction of the activities of the six
deputies, who represent the overwhelming majority of the workers of Russia,
cannot be shown to benefit the workers’ cause and the cause of
Social-Democracy.  

The following facts and figures on Social-Democrat representation on
Duma committees, show convincingly how the six deputies were suppressed in
the Duma group.  

Of the 26 committees on which the Social-Democrats are represented:


the six deputies are represented on seven; the other seven
deputies are represented on thirteen—nearly twice as
many.  

Of the 20 committees on which there is one Social-Democratic
representative: 

the six deputies are represented on seven; the other seven are
represented on thirteen—nearly twice as many.  

Of the committees on which there are two Social-Democratic
representatives: 

the six deputies are represented on three; the other seven are
represented on six—twice as many.  

On each of three of these committees the seven had two representatives.


Not one of the six deputies sits on more than two committees. Of the
seven, Chkhenkeli sits on six committees; Skobelev sits on
six, and Mankov sits on four.  
    

WHAT DO THE SIX DEMAND?

The six demanded the right to have their own secretary, one of the
two seats on the Budget Committee, and the election of two
representatives instead of one to a certain important body.  

The seven have admitted that they have not conceded these
demands to this day, and have even rejected them.  

Every worker will agree that these demands are quite fair.  

The seven will forfeit all confidence if they refuse to yield to
these fair demands.  

The seven are in duty bound to grant equal rights, complete
equality to the six workers’ deputies who act in conformity with
the will of the majority.  

Only in this way can the seven—who act contrary to the will
of the majority—take a step towards unity, at least in Duma activities.


The workers must compel the seven to respect the will of the
majority!  
UNITY INSIDE AND OUTSIDE THE DUMA

There is only one way of ensuring unity outside the Duma, and that is,
by maintaining the unity of the workers’ cells, by bringing into these
cells all those who sincerely and honestly desire to work for the benefit
of the working class under the leadership of its political
organisation. Entry is open to all. All those who desire to work in harmony
with the organisation can and should join. Only in this way can we ensure
unity in the working-class movement; unity from below, unity in
practical activities, in the struggle, under mutual control.  

Our newspaper issued this slogan long ago, and has at ways championed
it. There is no evidence, however, that the liquidators are following the
same road, which is always open to them if they really want
Social-Democratic activity and unity.  

But what about unity in Duma activities?  

Everywhere unity in parliamentary activities is always achieved in one
way only: by the parliamentary representatives

    

submitting to the majority of the organised workers. But the seven deputies
who are inclining towards liquidationism refuse to respect the will of this
majority. They refuse to respect the clear-cut decisions of the organised
workers. They prefer to use their accidental majority of one vote to
suppress the six deputies who express the will of the overwhelming majority
of the workers and are operating in complete ideological harmony with the
Marxist organisation.  

The only proper thing for those who refuse to respect the Marxist body
as a whole to do is to say so openly.  

But they prefer to stick tight to their position of alleged
non-responsibility. Not only do they refuse to respect the decisions of the
organised workers, but they want to use their majority in the Duma
to violate the decisions that express the will of the proletariat outside
the Duma.  

Unity in the Duma will be possible only if the seven deputies abandon
this line of conduct.  

The six deputies demand no more than that.  

Our comrades say: unity of action will be possible in the Duma if the
seven deputies, who do not feel bound by the decisions of the Marxists,
abandon their tactics of suppressing us, who desire to keep in step with
these ideological decisions.  

On this basis unity is possible.  

But only on this basis. The seven deputies’ refusal to accede to these
demands indicates that they are deliberately and openly heading for a
split. The overwhelming majority of the organised workers, who, as the
above-quoted figures show, support the six, offer to work with the
seven deputies on the basis of agreement. That the latter reject this
offer, shows that they have completely and definitely broken away
from the Marxist workers’ organisation. It shows that the seven vacillating
deputies have entirely gone over to schismatic liquidationism.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
See pp. 446–48 of this volume—Ed.  

[2]
In the symposium Marxism and Liquidationism there is a
footnote to this passage: “By May 1914 Pravda had in round
figures 6,000 workers’ groups. The liquidators had about
1,500.”—Ed.  

[3]
In the symposium Marxism and Liquidationism there is a foot
note to this passage: “Evidently even this union is now beginning to shift
away from the liquidators.”—Ed.  

[4]
See pp. 425–26 of this volume.—Ed.  
 



[5]
In sending this “Material” to the newspaper Za
Pravdu, Lenin pro posed that the Sunday issue of the paper contain a
separate leaflet dealing exclusively with the campaign to support the
Bolshevik “six”.  When Lenin heard that the issue containing the article
had been confiscated he proposed that the editors reprint it in the
following issues. The article was not, however, published again in the
paper. It was reprinted in 1914 in the symposium Marxism and
Liquidationism under the heading “Material on the History of the
Formation of the Russian Social-Democratic Workers’ Group in the Duma”,
and added to it was a section entitled “Workers’ Comment on the Formation
of the Russian Social-Democratic Workers’ Group in the State Duma”.





[6]
Zvezda (The Star)—a Bolshevik legal newspaper, the
immediate predecessor of Pravda; it was published in
St. Petersburg from December 16 (29), 1910 to April 22 (May 5), 1912 (it
was at first a

   

weekly but from January 1912 it appeared twice a week and from March three
times a week). On February 26 (March 10), 1912, Nevskaya Zvezda
(The Neva Star) No. 1 appeared simultaneously with Zvezda
and when the latter was suppressed became its successor. The last,
twenty-seventh issue of Nevskaya Zvezda appeared on October 5
(18), 1912.  

Up to the autumn of 1911 the pro-Party Mensheviks (Plekhanov’s group)
contributed to Zvezda. Lenin guided the work of the paper (from
abroad) ideologically, about fifty of his articles being published in
Zvezda and Nevskaya Zvezda.  

Zvezda contained an extensive section “Correspondence from
Workers” and maintained regular contact with workers. The circulation of
some issues reached 50,000–60,000 copies.  

The newspaper was constantly subjected to government persecution; of 96
issues (Zvezda and Nevskaya Zvezda) 39 were confiscated
and fines were imposed on ten others. Zvezda prepared the way for
4he publication of the Bolshevik daily Pravda; Pravda
No. 1 appeared on the day Zvezda was suppressed by the government.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## A Cadet Property-Owner Argues “According to Marx”









Lenin: A Cadet Property-Owner Argues 'According to Marx'







V. I.  

      Lenin
A Cadet Property-Owner Argues “According to Marx”




Published:
Za Pravdu No. 23, October 30, 1913.

      Signed: V. Ilyin.

      Published according to the Za Pravdu text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 475-476.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Mr. Velikhov, property-owner, member of the State Duma and the Cadet
Party, editor and publisher of Gorodskoye
Dyelo,[1] published in his magazine an article in defence of the
Kiev congress of urban representatives of “the intellectualist
bureaucracy”.  

This malicious phrase, borrowed from the reactionary press, denotes the
democratic intelligentsia, who, be it known, have given offence to the poor
property-owners by analysing the “property-owners’ institutions” and
demanding political clarity. “The intellectualist bureaucracy,” complains
Mr. Velikhov, tried “primarily to impose a general-political role on the
congress.”  

Mr. Velikhov calls this trend at the congress “political” and
contrasts it to another trend, “municipal”.  

The views of the latter he outlines as follows: 


   “The revolution, said the urban representatives, has
   passed and is not likely to be repeated in the near future. It is probable
   that it was not completely successful because the revolutionary-minded
   classes [which classes?  Say what you mean, Mr. Velikhov!] acted at that
   time without having acquired sufficient knowledge and experience and were
   not trained to take over state power. The broad road of meetings, slogans,
   tub-thumping speeches and resolutions of protest no longer satisfies
   anyone, and has apparently outlived itself. Ahead of us there is tremendous
   cultural work of a practical nature ” 


That is how a property-owner speaks. He shows the point of view of the
serf-owner both in his morals and in his urge to forget that at the
decisive moment the bourgeoisie went over to the side of the feudalists. He
repeats in a peculiar way some “would-be Marxist” phrases that he has
heard somewhere, probably among the liquidators: 
 


   “In Russia,” he writes, “where the working-class
   proletariat is still small in numbers and weak, where, even according to
   Marx’s Capital, government should pass from the landed aristocracy
   to the urban bourgeoisie at the next stage of historical development, to
   attack the bourgeoisie, to disdain them, to hinder their attempts to
   struggle against the present political system and regime means putting the
   brake on natural progress.” (Gorodskoye Dyelo, 1913, No. 20,
   pp. 1341–1342.)  


Quite, quite “according to Marx”!  

My dear progressive and even Constitutional-Democratic property-owner!
“The attempts of the bourgeoisie to struggle against the present political
system” have never been hindered by the Marxists. You will never
be able to show a single case of “struggle” in which the “weak
proletariat” did not participate more energetically. The Marxists
and the workers have not disdained a single case of bourgeois
“struggle” against the feudal landowners.  

But do you not recall, you who quote Marx, those historical examples
that have been increasingly frequent since 1848, of the bourgeoisie
betraying the struggle against the feudal landowners and going
over to their side?  

Russian history, too, teems with such examples, especially in 1904 and
still more so in the autumn of 1905, still more so in the winter of that
year and then in the spring of 1906, and so on and so forth.  

Can you not understand, Mr. Property-Owner who quotes Marx, that the
interests of the struggle against the feudal landowners demand
that those bourgeois who talk about struggle and, by their
actions, betray it should be exposed, attacked and discredited?  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Gorodskoye Dyelo (Urban Affairs)—a Cadet
fortnightly devoted to questions of municipal economy and administration;
it was published in St. Petersburg from 1909 to 1918.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Working-Class Masses and the Working-Class Intelligentsia









Lenin: The Working-Class Masses and the Working-Class Intelligentsia







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Working-Class Masses and the Working-Class Intelligentsia




Written: Written at the beginning of November 1913 

Published:

      First published in 1938 in the journal Proletarskaya Revolutsia No. 9.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 477-479.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The liquidators’ journal Nasha Zarya No. 9 carried
an article under this heading by G. Rakitin in which the author is forced
to admit that which the liquidators’ newspaper brushes aside in impotent
wrath. Rakitin is superior to the various F. D.’s because he at least tries
to think some things over and get an understanding of the issue
instead of treating the reader to boring invective.  


   “The victory”—that is how Rakitin beams his
   article—“the victory won by the supporters of Pravda at the
   general meeting of the St. Petersburg Metalworkers’ Union, and several
   other facts that bear witness to the growing influence of Bolshevism in the
   working-class milieu (especially in St. Petersburg) provide food for
   thought; how has it come about that strongholds of the Menshevik trend, and
   specifically of the so-called ‘liquidationism’, have begun to escape from
   the influence of the trend that laid the foundation of open working-class
   organisations in Russia, and that has alone worked actively in them during
   the past few years?”  


Notice has to be taken of this passage to show the reader a rare case
of “a bright interval” where the liquidators are compelled to admit the
truth. In the articles by F.D.& Co., Novaya Rabochaya Gazeta
merely frets and fumes when shown the exact. figures on the elections to
the Second, Third and Fourth Dumas, or on the collections made by workers’
groups, etc., figures which prove the dominance of the
Pravda trend among politically conscious (those participating in
political life) workers.  

G. Rakitin admits the fact. He also admits the victory at the
metalworkers’ meeting and “other facts” (although he modestly
refrains from saying what those facts are—a method that is purely
literary-intellectual and is calculated

    

to hide from the workers exact figures that would make
independent verification possible). Rakitin, in general, admits
“the growing influence of Bolshevism in the working-class milieu,
especially in St. Petersburg”; he admits that “strongholds” of
liquidationism “have begun to escape from the influence” of that
“trend”.  

Rakitin strives to explain this fact, a sad one for the
liquidators, in a way most comforting to them.  

What is his explanation?  

“The working-class masses” are going through a “Bolshevik stage of
the movement” admits C. Rakitin (p. 59). But “the working-class
intelligentsia”, he declares (p. 57) “are in the majority of cases
supporters of the so-called ‘liquidator’ trend”. Hence, of course, the
conclusion that “comforts” the liquidators—“the Bolshevik stage of the
movement” is a “temporary infatuation of the masses and the rising
generation of workers with Bolshevik slogans”, an influence “rather of
instinct and intuition than consciousness and calculation”; the addiction
of the working masses to “the primitive peasant world outlook”, the
“overestimation of the significance of spontaneous outbursts”; the
failure to understand the “flexible class tactics” (of the liquidators)
and its replacement by “the simplified tactics of Bolshevism”, etc., etc.


In short, the Nasha Zarya contributor provides a magnificent
explanation—Pravda’s majority is immature, undeveloped, spontaneous,
feeble and the liquidator minority is intellectualist, flexible,
politically conscious, etc. In exactly the same way all reactionary writers
always explain that the masses have democratic convictions because they are
foolish, undeveloped and so on, while the nobility and the bourgeoisie are
developed and intelligent!  

But please show us, my dear Rakitin, where your proofs are. You
admitted yourself that facts bear witness to the victory of the
Pravda supporters, to the masses “going through a Bolshevik stage
of the movement”! Where are the facts proving that the
overwhelming majority of the working-class intelligentsia support the
liquidators? Where are facts such as the elections to the State Duma, or
the number of collections by workers’ groups, or the victory of some list
of candidates in the trade unions?  
 

Rakitin does not adduce a single fact, not even a single
argument!  

We therefore permit ourselves to disagree with Rakitin. It is
gratifying to him, of course, to regard the Bolshevik
working-class masses as undeveloped and stupid (“instinct and not
consciousness”) and the liquidator minority as developed and
intelligent. But to write history, to provide an explanation of the
stages of the working-class movement basing oneself on what is
gratifying to the person of the historian and not on facts—that, if
Rakitin will excuse me, is simply amusing puerility. I cannot say, of
course, whether it is “instinct and intuition” that compel the liquidator
Rakitin to consider the liquidator minority particularly intelligent,
clever and advanced, but is it proper for a writer to be guided by
“instinct and intuition” and not by “consciousness and
calculation”?  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Split in the Russian Social-Democratic Duma Group









Lenin: The Split in the Russian Social-Democratic Duma Group







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Split in the Russian Social-Democratic Duma Group[2]




Written: Written at the beginning of November 1913 

Published:

      First published in Russian on January 21, 1934 in the newspaper Pravda No. 21.

      Published on December 24, 1913 in the newspaper Leipziger Volkszeitung No. 298.

      Translated from the German.

      Published according to the Pravda text, collated with the Leipziger Volkszeitung.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 480-484.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Dear Comrades, 

In issue No. 266 of your newspaper, you published an article by your
“Russian correspondent” on the split in the Russian Social-Democratic
Duma group. Unfortunately, that article is far from objective and in a
certain respect may mislead the German reader. We hope, Comrades, that you
will respond to our request to publish this brief denial so that German
workers and the fraternal German party will be correctly informed on these
elementary facts.  

1)
Your Russian correspondent begins by saying that Social-Democracy in Russia
“suffers from fragmentation into many organisations, groups and
trends”. This in itself is absolutely untrue. Every Russian
Social-Democrat and, in general, everyone interested in the historical
struggle in Russia, knows that at present in the Russian working-class
movement there are only two trends, two leading
newspapers in St. Petersburg and two political lines—the Marxists and the
liquidators. The former, i.e., the Marxists, publish in St. Petersburg the
daily newspaper Za Pravda (very recently the government destroyed
their second newspaper in Moscow Nash Put). The latter publish
Novaya Rabochaya Gazeta in St. Petersburg. There are no
other “trends” of any kind in the Russian working-class movement;
even among Russian students abroad and among émigrés all
other intermediate, so-called “trends” are disappearing. Every Russian
Social-Democrat today has to choose between the Marxists and the
liquidators.  

2)
Your “Russian correspondent” defines the difference between the Russian
Marxists and the liquidators as being

    

the same as that between radicals and revisionists in Germany, as being the
same as the difference “between a Bebel or a Ledebour on the one hand and
a Frank or a David on the other”. But that is not quite true. The Russian
liquidator, it goes without saying, supports the revisionist platform. He
has adopted the worst features of West-European opportunism. Nevertheless,
there is a substantial difference between the liquidators and the
revisionists. A Frank or a David would never assert that the existence of
the present German Social-Democratic Party and its organisation is
“harmful”. Our liquidators, however, are struggling against the very
existence of the Party, they are actually destroying (“liquidating”) its
underground organisation, they struggle even against its decisions during
(political) strikes, and as a reward for this activity enjoy the applause
and whole-hearted support of the entire Russian bourgeoisie.  

3)
Your correspondent writes that “a political disagreement in the Duma
group” between the six Marxists and the seven deputies with liquidator
tendencies emerged only on one occasion. But that is not so. Disagreements
occurred at every step, as has been incontrovertibly proved by the
St. Petersburg working-class press. Things went so far that the seven, by a
majority of one, voted to renounce the Programme of our Party. In the very
first political declaration proclaimed from the Duma rostrum, the seven
deputies renounced before the whole of Russia the Programme adopt ed at the
Second Party Congress in 1903. To the joy of those nationalist elements
(the Bund) that adhere to the liquidators, they declared that Russian
Social-Democrats defend what is known as “cultural-national
autonomy”. The Party, however, rejects this demand, which in Russia is
supported by almost all bourgeois nationalists. When the Programme of the
Party was being elaborated this demand was rejected by all Russian
Social-Democrats. Quite recently Plekhanov described this demand as the
“adaptation of socialism to nationalism”. The six Marxist
deputies made a sharp protest against this betrayal of the Programme. The
seven deputies, however, stuck to their decision, which was directed
against the Party.  

4)
Your correspondent says it can only be proved “in directly” that the six
Marxist deputies represent the majority

    

of the working class. This is absolutely untrue. We shall quote a
few exact figures to show how many workers are represented by the
six and how many by the seven.  





Gubernia
Name of Marxist deputy
Number of workers according to factory inspectorate




St. Petersburg 
Badayev        
197,000


Moscow         
Malinovsky     
351,000


Vladimir       
Samoilov       
205,000


Ekaterinoslav  
Petrovsky      
118,000


Kostroma       
Shagov         
91,000


Kharkov        
Muranov        
46,000


   
   Total 
1,008,000








Gubernia
Other deputies 
Number of workers according to factory inspectorate




Warsaw      
Jagiello       
78,000


Don Region  
Tulyakov       
59,000


Ufa         
Khaustov       
37,000


Taurida     
Buryanov       
20,000


Irkutsk     
Mankov         
13,000


Tiflis      
Chkheidze      
5,000


Kars Region 
Chkhenkeli     
2,000


   
   Total 
214,000




The entire worker curia is represented by Marxist
deputies. The six Marxist deputies represent a number of workers that is
five times greater, by a conservative estimate, titan that
represented by the seven who favour liquidationism.  

Is this an “indirect” proof?  

Here are some more figures on the number of workers’ groups
supporting the legal press of the Marxists and of tile liquidators by the
collection of funds.  
    

    




 
Pravda 
Moscow newspaper
Total for Marxist press
Liquida- tors’ newspaper




1912 . . . . . . . . . .                  
620
5
625
89


1913 to April 1 . . . .                   
309
129
438
139


1913, from April to Oc- tober . . . . . . 
1,252
261
1,513
328


Totals for the two years 
2,181
395
2,576
556




These figures were published in the St. Petersburg newspaper Za
Pravdu
       No. 22,[1]

and no one has disputed them. Your correspondent should have known
them. Contributions from groups are always acknowledged in both newspapers,
and the figures are regarded by our enemies in the bourgeois camp as
evidence of the alignment of forces of the two trends.  

Here, too, the figures show that the Marxists are supported by five
tunes as many workers’ groups as the liquidators.  

Can this be called “indirect” proof?  

Unlike the legal Social-Democratic parties in Western Europe, we cannot
at the present time publish the exact strength of our
membership. Nevertheless, we also have direct proof of whom the workers
support.  

In the Second Duma, among the twenty-three deputies from the worker
curia (all Social-Democrats) eleven (i.e., 47 per cent) were Bolsheviks. In
the Third Duma, four out of eight, i.e., 50 per cent were Bolsheviks. In
the Fourth Damn, six out of nine, i.e., 67 per cent. Perhaps these data on
the elections to three Dumas in five years (1907–12) are
also “indirect proofs”?  

Now that a statement of the six against the seven has been published in
the press, all trade unions that have expressed an opinion are on the side
of the six deputies against the seven. Every day the Marxist newspaper in
St. Petersburg publishes numerous resolutions of many workers, elected
representatives, trade unions, and workers’ cultural and educational
organisations that support the six deputies.  
 

The six workers’ deputies, who represent the whole working class of Russia, have
formed their own Social-Democratic workers’ group in the Duma, which in all
respects submits to the will of worker Social-Democrats. The seven deputies act
as an “independent” group. The six workers’ deputies have proposed
to the seven an agreement for work in the Duma. Up to now the seven have
bluntly rejected the proposal. An agreement, however, is inevitable.


Such is the true state of affairs.


Editorial Board of the Central Organ of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour
Party—“Sotsial-Demokrat”


 
Notes
 

[1]
See pp. 461 and 465 of this volume.—Ed.  
 



[2]
This article was written in answer to a slanderous version of the split
in the Russian Social-Democratic Duma group that was published unsigned in
the German Social-Democratic Leipziger Volkszeitung on November 15
(N.S.), 1913.  

Lenin tried to acquaint the International Social-Democratic movement,
and especially the German Social-Democrats, with the true state of affairs
in the working-class movement in Russia, but the opportunist leadership of
the German Social-Democratic Party did not print articles by Bolsheviks in
Vorw\"arts, its central organ. Leipziger Volkszeitung
alone published the article after a long delay, which it explained as due
to lack of space and “other reasons”.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Left Narodniks on the Controversies Among the Marxists









Lenin: The Left Narodniks on the Controversies Among the Marxists







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Left Narodniks on the Controversies Among the Marxists




Published:
Za Pravdu No. 34, November 13, 1913.

      Published according to the Za Pravdu text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 485-486.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Issue No. 3 of Volnaya
Mysl[1] contains an article bearing
the pretentious title: “Unity, Duality or Trinity.”



“We openly declare,” says this article, “that the claim of the
Bolshevik faction that it alone embraces the entire working-c1ass movement is
as unreasonable and absurd as the efforts of the two Social-Democratic factions
to embody the entire socialist movement in Russia. The future belongs only to
the unification of all the socialist trends in a single party.


“And we, who issued this slogan in the beginning of 1900, shall remain true
to it to the end.”



This is a perfect example of the amusingly irate statements that are made about
“unity"! Not a word about the principles which underlie the
historical struggle that has raged between Marxists and Narodniks for several
decades. Nor do we hear a word about the history of the movement of 1905–07,
when the open activities of the masses of the population of all classes
revealed in practice the fundamental difference between the
Social-Democratic proletariat and the “working” (i.e.,
petty-bourgeois) peasantry.


The existence in Russia of a radical and serious newspaper that formulates the
question in this way, shows vividly how necessary it still is to wage a
long and persistent struggle for the most elementary definition of
principles.


That the Bolsheviks enjoy the backing of the majority of the class-conscious
workers is a fact which their enemies, the liquidators, are compelled to admit,
albeit angrily and through their clenched teeth.


This cannot he refuted by sentiment. The workers will
not be intimidated if the words: “unreasonable and absurd”
are bawled at them—they will only smile.

 

From the standpoint of ideas, the entire history of Marxism in Russia
is the history of the struggle against petty-bourgeois theories, beginning
with “legal Marxism” and Economism. This was no chance struggle, nor is
its direct continuation at the present time accidental. It is in the
struggle against petty-bourgeois liquidationism and Left Narodism that the
workers’ party in Russia is taking shape and maturing as a genuine
proletarian class party in this difficult period of the June Third regime.


“We Left Narodniks have never tried to profit by other people’s
misfortunes,” writes Volnaya Mysl, but in the same breath asserts
that the split is the cause of “the complete inner weakness of our
Social-Democratic movement”!  

To write a thing like that, gentlemen, means nothing if not
“profiting”—not, however, say we, by other people’s “misfortunes”,
but by “other people’s ideological struggle”; for it is the
ideological conflict between liberal and proletarian policy that lies at
the root of the controversies among the Marxists. The workers, unperturbed
by angry words or by sentiment, have already learned to detect the basic
principles of the struggle.  

“There is less disagreement in the united parties in the
European working-class movement than among us,” writes Volnaya
Mysl. This is a very common, but very fallacious argument. Nowhere in
Europe is there any sign of an attempt to replace the proletarian, Marxist
organisation by ...  talk about a “broad” party formed with
Purishkevich’s blessing ... etc.  

From controversies of this sort the workers will learn to
build a workers’ party in deeds and not merely in words.


 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Volnaya Mysl (Free Thought)—one of the names under
which the Left-Narodnik (S. R.) legal newspaper Zhivaya Mysl
(Living Thought) was published; the paper appeared in
St. Petersburg from August 1913 to July 1914 and frequently changed its
name.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Agrarian Question and the Present Situation in Russia









Lenin: The Agrarian Question and the Present Situation in Russia







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Question and the Present Situation in Russia
(NOTES OF A PUBLICIST)




Published:
Za Pravdu No. 36, November 15, 1913.

      Signed: V. Ilyin.

      Published according to the Za Pravdu text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 487-491.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Two interesting articles on this subject appeared in re
cent magazines. One was in the liquidators’ Nasha Zarya (No. 6,
1913, N. Rozhkov) and the other in Russkaya Mysl, the organ of the
Right Cadets (No. 8, 1913, Y. Y. Polferov). There can be no doubt that the
two authors wrote their articles knowing nothing about each other, and that
they proceeded from entirely different premises.  

Nevertheless, the resemblance between the two articles is
astonishing. They both clearly demonstrate—and this gives them a special
value—the kinship of the principles under lying the ideas of the
liberal-labour politicians and those of the counter-revolutionary liberal
bourgeoisie.  

N. Rozhkov uses exactly the same material as Mr. Polferov, except that
the latter’s is more copious. Capitalism has been developing in Russian
agriculture since the 1905 Revolution. The prices of grain and land are
rising; imports of agricultural machinery and of fertilisers, as well as
the home manufacture of both, are increasing. Small credit institutions are
growing, and so is the number of peasants who are setting up their
independent farmsteads. Wages are rising (44.2 per cent from 1890 to 1910,
says N. Rozhkov who forgets the rise in the cost of living in the same
period!). Commercial stock-breeding, vegetable oil production and grass
cultivation are on the increase, and progress is being made in agricultural
education.  

Needless to say, all this is very interesting. From the point of view
of Marxism there has never been the slightest doubt that the development of
capitalism cannot he halted,

 

Had the authors merely adduced new data to explain this they would
certainly have deserved our thanks.  

But how should these data he appraised; and what conclusions should be
drawn from them?—that is the crux of the matter. Here, N. Rozhkov jumps
to conclusions with an eagerness that is positively touching. “Feudal serf
economy has been transformed into bourgeois capitalist economy ...
the transition to bourgeois conditions in agriculture is an accomplished
fact, about which there cannot be the slightest doubt.... The agrarian
problem in its previous form is now a thing of the past in Russia.... No
attempt must be made to galvanise the corpse—the agrarian problem in its
old form.”  

As the reader sees, the conclusions are perfectly clear and just as
perfectly—liquidationist. The editors of the liquidator magazine (as has
long been the custom in commercialised journals with no principles)
appended a small reservation to the article, stating: “There is
much in this that we do not agree with ... we do not think it is possible
to assert so emphatically, as N. Rozhkov does, that Russia will
proceed precisely along the path mapped out by the law of November 9–June
14....”  

The liquidators are “not so emphatic” as N. Rozhkov! What a profound,
principled attitude to the question!  

In this article N. Rozhkov has proved once again that he has
learned by heart a number of Marxist propositions, but has not
understood them. That is why they “popped out” so easily.  

The development of capitalism in Russian agriculture was also under way
in 1861–1904. All the symptoms of this development that Rozhkov and
Polferov now point out were in existence at that time. The development of
capitalism did not avert the bourgeois-democratic crisis in 1905,
but paved the way for it and intensified it. Why? Because the old,
semi-feudal, natural, economy had been eroded, while the conditions for
the new, bourgeois economy had not yet been created. Hence, the
unusual intensity of the 1905 crisis.  

The ground for such crises has disappeared, says
Rozhkov. This, of course, could possibly be true if we were to speak
abstractly, of capitalism in general, and not of Russia,
not
    

of 1913. Marxists, it goes without saying, recognise the existence of a
bourgeois-democratic agrarian problem only under special conditions
(not always, and not everywhere).  

But Rozhkov has not the slightest inkling of what propositions he has
to prove in order to confirm the concrete conclusion he draws.


The peasants are discontented with their conditions? “But the peasants
are discontented everywhere,” writes Rozhkov.  

To compare and identify the discontent of the West-European peasants
whose village life and legal status are based on a fully developed
bourgeois system, and who have their “parties of law and order”, with the
famines in Russia, with the complete degradation of
village life caused by the social-estate system with the complete
domination of feudalism in the sphere of the law, etc., is puerile and
absurd. Rozhkov cannot see the wood for the trees.  

Capitalism is growing, corvée (labour service) is
declining, he writes. “The vast majority of landowners,” writes the
liberal Polferov “... are developing more and more the contract and
métayage system, which has arisen exclusively out of the peasants’
need of money and land.”  

The liberal writing in Russkaya Mysl is less of a naive
optimist than the ex-Marxist writing in the liquidator Nasha
Zarya!  

N. Rozhkov did not even attempt to deal with the data showing the
degree to which métayage, labour service, corvée,
bondage are prevalent in the rural districts today. With amazing
unconcern, lie ignored the fact that these forms are still
widespread. But this fact leads to the conclusion that the
bourgeois-democratic crisis has become still more acute.  

Don’t galvanise the corpse, writes the liquidator, echoing the liberal,
who uses other words to indicate that the demands of 1905 are a
“corpse”.  

To this we have replied: Markov and Purishkevich are not corpses. The
economic system which engendered them, and is engendering their class to
this day, is not a corpse. To fight that class is the living task of living
workers who have a live understanding of their class aims.  
 

The renunciation of this task proves that the liquidators are a
decomposing corpse, for although they do not all speak “so
emphatically” as Rozhkov, they all forget, or obscure, the
struggle against agrarian (and particularly landowner) Purishkevichism and
against political Purishkevichism.  

The domination of the Purishkeviches in our life is the reverse side of
the same medal that in our rural districts is called labour service,
bondage, corvée, serfdom, the absence of the most
elementary general conditions for the bourgeois system of economy. If the
millionaire-proprietors at the top (Guchkov and Co.) are grumbling, then
the conditions of the millions of small proprietors (the peasants) at the
bottom must be absolutely intolerable.  

When they set out to deal with the roots of Purishkevichism the workers
are by no means neglecting their “own” tasks in order to “galvanise”
something that is alien to them. No. In this way the democratic
aims of their struggle, of their class, become clearer to
them and they teach democracy and the elements of socialism to the
broad masses. For only “royal-Prussian socialism” (as Marx called it in
his statement against
Schweitzer)[1] can leave in the shade the feudal domination of
Purishkevichism in general, and of landowner Purishkevichism in particular.


Without noticing it, Rozhkov has descended to the position of Polferov,
who says: “The simple allotment of additional land” would not “save”
the situation without intensification! As if intensification would not
proceed a hundred times faster if Purishkevichism were abolished!
As if the question were merely one of the peasants, whether they should or
should not he “allotted additional land”, and not a question of the
entire nation, of the entire development of capitalism, a
development which is being distorted and retarded by Purishkevichism!  

Rozhkov has blurted out the real nature of liquidationism, and
revealed the connection that exists between the all-embracing
slogan “freedom of association” (see how thus slogan is dealt with in the
liberal speech delivered by Tulyakov and in the Marxist
speech delivered by Badayev in the State Duma on October 23,
1013)—revealed the connection between this slogan and
satisfaction with the present state of the agrarian problem.  
 

This connection is an objective fact and Nasha Zarya’s “small
reservations” will not obliterate it.  

Stop thinking about the entire nation, about Purishkevichism in every
sphere of life, about the famines that afflict the peasantry, about
corvée, labour service and serfdom; fight “for legality”,
for “freedom of association” as one of a series of reforms—such are the
ideas that the bourgeoisie fosters in the minds of the
workers. Rozhkov and the liquidators are merely trailing unwittingly in the
wake of the bourgeoisie.  

We, however, think that the proletarians, the foremost representatives
of the entire mass of the working people, cannot achieve even their own
emancipation except by waging an all-round struggle against Purishkevichism
for the sake and in the interests of the struggle against the bourgeoisie;
and these are the ideas that distinguish the Marxist from the
liberal-labour politician.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Royal-Prussian socialism is the name Marx and Engels gave to
the policy of conciliation with Bismarck’s government, a policy pursued by
Lassalle and by his successor Schweitzer, editor of the Lassallean
newspaper Sozialdemokrat.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Two Methods of Controversy and Struggle









Lenin: Two Methods of Controversy and Struggle







V. I.  

      Lenin
Two Methods of Controversy and Struggle




Published:
Za Pravdu No. 36, November 15, 1513.

      Published according to the Za Pravdu text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 492-494.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Some controversies and conflicts of opinion in the press
help the reader to obtain a better understanding of political problems, to
appreciate their importance more profoundly, and to solve them more
confidently.  

Other controversies, however, degenerate into recrimination, intrigues
and squabbling.  

The advanced workers, who are aware of the responsibility they
bear for the progress of the work of educating and organising the
proletariat, must keep careful watch to prevent the inevitable
controversies, the inevitable conflict of opinions, from
degenerating into recrimination, intrigues, squabbling and
slander.  

This is a question of the workers’ cause, the workers’ organisation, it
is the most serious and important question of combating the slightest
attempts at disruption. It can not be treated lightly. Those who have not
learned to cut at the very roots of disruption are useless as organisers;
and without an organisation the working class is nothing. No movement,
including the working-class movement, is possible without debates,
controversy and conflict of opinions; and no organisation is
possible if resolute measures are not taken to prevent controversies
from degenerating into recrimination and squabbling.  

We invite class-conscious workers to examine from this angle the
conflict between the six and the seven Social Democrat Duma deputies.  

The six considered it their duty to respect the will and decisions of
the Marxist conference. The Duma representatives of the proletariat are
duty bound to obey the will of

    

the majority of the class-conscious, organised, Marxist workers outside the
Duma.  

This is a general principle, the general basis of all our views on the
tasks of the working-class movement.  

If this view is wrong it must be refuted and rejected. If it is
correct, if it is the ABC without which no policy can be pursued, without
which no organisation is possible, then this view must be accepted and
firmly adhered to in spite of all the howling, outcries, attacks and
slander.  

Worker comrades! Debate this question. Arrange debates, talks and
discussions to obtain absolute clarity on this question, but have no
dealings with those who resort to recrimination instead of argument.  

What did the liquidators say in reply to the first and fundamental
argument of the six deputies?  

Their only reply was abuse! They abused the conference; they abused the
“underground” a hundred times over, and that is all.  

Is that a reply? Is it not simply an attempt to disrupt, to wreck the
organisation?  

Things have gone so far that F. D. in No. 70, writes literally the
following: “Where are the responsible bodies that promoted their
candidatures and gave them their instructions?”  

Worker comrades, think over what this question means! You will find
that it is one worthy of ... those who carry out interrogations!... Will
you not realise, F. D. and other liquidators, that we cannot argue
with you when you put questions of that sort.  

Examine the substance of the matter. Is the decision of the conference
correct; does it correctly express the interests and views of the majority
of the workers? Pravda answers this question by quoting a series
of exact figures (see Za Pravdu, Tuesday, October 29,
1913).[1]

These figures show that the Pravda trend enjoys the support of the
absolute and indisputable majority of class-conscious workers,
i.e., of those who take an active part in politics.  

These figures compared the elections to the Second, Third and Fourth
Dumas in the worker curia—-and they

    

referred to the number of workers represented by the six and the seven, and
to the number of workers’ groups which openly assisted in collecting funds
for the respective news papers, etc.  

What did the liquidators say in reply to this argument on the substance
of the question of the majority?  

Abuse was their only reply. The liquidators do not, refute a single
figure, not a single one. They do not even make an attempt to correct them,
or quote others in place of them!  

The thing is as clear as daylight. Those who evade precise data on the
question of the majority run counter to the will of the majority;
they are disruptors.  

The seven Duma deputies are inclining towards liquidationism, for they
sanction abuse of the “underground” and take a hand in flouting the will
of the majority. This shows that the seven are non-Party. And no
man in his senses will allow seven non-Party men to suppress Party
decisions and the supporters of Party decisions by one vote.  

No amount of liquidator abuse will refute this plain and simple fact.


The six deputies performed their duty, and the more the liquidators
shout and rave the sooner will all workers and Marxists understand that the
six are right, and that the establishment of equality and concoid with the
non-Party Social-Democratic deputies in the State Duma is inevitable.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
See pp. 458 74 of this volume—Ed.

 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Would-Be “Uniters”









Lenin: Would-Be 'Uniters'







V. I.  

      Lenin
Would-Be “Uniters”




Published:
La Pravdu No. 36, November 15, 1913.

      Published according to the Za Pravdu text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 495-498.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The Berlin group of Polish Social-Democrats (Rosa
Luxemburg, Tyszka and Co.), which the Polish worker Social-Democrats
emphatically repudiate, is irrepressible. It persists in calling itself the
“Executive Committee” of the Polish Social-Democratic Party, although
there is not a person in the world who can say what this miserable
Executive without a party
“administers”.[1] 

The worker Social-Democrats of Warsaw and Lodz declared long ago that
they had dissociated themselves from the aforesaid Berlin group. The State
Duma elections in Warsaw and the insurance campaign in that city revealed
to all that there is only one Social-Democratic organisation in Poland,
namely, the one that has categorically declared it does not recognise the
disruptors and slanderers on the Executive Committee. Of the feats
performed by this Executive it is sufficient to mention one: these people
came out with the unsupported statement that the main bulwark of
the Polish worker Social-Democrats, the Warsaw organisation, was “in the
clutches of the secret police”. A year elapsed, but this Executive
produced no evidence whatever in support of their atrocious charge. This,
of course, was enough in itself to discourage any honest for son, active in
the working-class movement, from having any dealings whatever with the
people in the Tyszka group. As the reader sees, the fighting methods of
these people differ very little from those employed by our Martov, Dan and
Co....  

And it is this group of persons, condemned by all the parties
working in Poland, that has now decided to act as the saviour of the
Russian working-class movement.

    

Rosa Luxemburg has sent to the International Socialist
Bureau[2] a proposal that it should discuss the question of restoring
unity in Russia. One of the motives that she advances for this is that the
“Lenin group”, if you please, is causing disruption in the
Polish Social-Democratic Party.  

This statement gives the Berlin group away at once. It is common
knowledge that the Bolsheviks are shoulder to shoulder with the Polish
worker Social-Democrats who have repudiated this group of intriguers. That
fact keeps our notorious Executive awake at nights, and explains its
“unity” campaign, which was opened with attacks on the Russian Marxists
and has the object of supporting the Russian liquidators.  

Rosa Luxemburg would never have done this if things were “going
well”. Even her group refused to meet the liquidators at the “August”
reconciliation.  

But having lost all significance in the Polish and in the Russian
working-class movement owing to its lack of principles and to its
intrigues, this tiny group of political bankrupts is now clutching at the
liquidators’ coat-tails. It turns out, of course, that the “Lenin group”
is guilty of all mortal sins, and therefore—therefore it is necessary, at
all costs, to amalgamate with it. The old, old story!...  

What is essentially the Russian Marxists’ attitude to wards the
proposal that the International Socialist Bureau should investigate the
disagreements among the Russians?  

As far as we know, they will be very pleased if the West-European
comrades can be persuaded to investigate the substance of our
controversies. We have heard that the Russian Marxists have, for their
part, sent to the International Socialist Bureau a proposal that it should
also investigate the split in the Polish Social-Democratic Party and the
disgraceful conduct of the Tyszka group towards the genuine workers’
organisations in Poland. The Marxists will be very pleased if the
International Bureau also examines the disagreements between the six and
the seven Duma deputies. This will bring before our foreign comrades the
question of whether the parliamentary group should be subordinate to the
workers’ party, or, on the contrary,

    

whether the workers’ party should be subordinate to the parliamentary
group.  

The Marxists will be still more pleased if Rosa Luxemburg’s proposal
that the question of Russian unity be placed on the agenda of the
International Congress to be held in Vienna in 1914 is accepted.  

The new International has twice discussed such questions at its
congresses. The first occasion was in Amsterdam, in 1904, when the question
of unity in France was discussed. The Congress examined the
substance of the controversy between the Guesdists (Marxists) and
Jaurèsists (revisionists) and condemned the line of the
Jaurèsists, condemned their tactics of joining bourgeois Cabinets,
of compromising with the bourgeoisie, etc. And on the basis of this
decision on the substance of the issue it proposed that the
conflicting groups should unite.  

The other occasion was in Copenhagen in 1910, when the Czech-Austrian
split was discussed. The Congress again discussed the substance of
the controversy, expressed its opposition to the “Bundist-nationalist”
principles of the Czech separatists, and declared that the trade unions in
a given country should not be organised on a national basis; and
it was on the basis of this settlement of the sub stance of the
controversy that the Congress recommended the two sides to
unite. (Incidentally, the Czech Bundists refused to obey the decision of
the International.)  

If the Russian question is brought up at the Vienna Congress there can
be no doubt that the Congress will express an opinion on the importance of
the “underground” in a country like present-day Russia, on the question
as to whether, under present conditions, Marxists should be guided by the
prospects of “evolution” or by the prospects of “uncurtailed”
slogans, etc. At all events, it will not be without interest to hear the
opinion of the International on all these questions....  

Unfortunately, however, this is still a long way off. Meanwhile, we
merely have the irate but impotent pronouncement of the Rosa Luxemburg and
Tyszka group in Berlin. We advise Mr. F. D. to make good use of this
pronouncement against the Marxists and in defence of the
liquidators. Although the liquidators’ newspapers reported the disgraceful

    

exploits of this Berlin group in its struggle against the Polish workers,
Mr. F. D. will not, of course, be able to resist the temptation to drink
also from this ... fresh spring.  

But the Russian workers will say: We ourselves will establish
unity in our Russian workers’ organisations. As for feeble intrigues, we
shall simply laugh at them.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
The differences of opinion between the Executive Committee of the
Social-Democratic Party of Poland and Lithuania and the Warsaw
organisation, the strongest and most consistently revolutionary Polish
Social-Democratic organisation, arose in 1908 at the Sixth Congress of that
party. The line of behaviour of the Executive

   

Committee headed by Rosa Luxemburg, L. Tyszka and others was sharply
criticised at the Congress; the Board was criticised for its unprincipled
position in the R.S.D.L.P., for not allowing criticism from the local
organisations, etc. The Congress passed a vote of no confidence in the
Executive.  

The Executive, in 1912, announced the dissolution of the War saw
Committee on the grounds of its “schismatic” activities, accused it
falsely of connections with the secret police, and established a new Warsaw
Committee from among its own supporters. From this moment the
Social-Democratic Party of Poland and Lithuania was split into two.  

Lenin kept track of the struggle within the Polish Social-Democratic
Party. He published a number of articles in both the Russian and Polish
Party press on the split in the Polish Social-Democratic Party and spoke in
the International Socialist Bureau against the attacks of the Executive on
the Warsaw organisation.  

The “schismatics” agreed with the tactical line of the Bolsheviks on
a number of points and tried to establish organisational ties with the
Bolsheviks despite their differences on the national question (the
“schismatics” adopted the semi-Menshevik position of Rosa Luxemburg and
her followers). The “schismatics” took part in the Poronin Conference

During the First World War the two divisions of the Polish Social-Democrats
formed a single party with an internationalist platform. In December 1918
the Social-Democratic Party of Poland and Lithuania together with the Left
elements of the Polish Socialist Party established the Communist Workers’
Party of Poland.





[2]
The International Socialist Bureau was the executive body of
the Second International established by a decision, of the Paris Congress
in 1900.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## A Letter to S. G. Shahumyan









Lenin: A Letter to S. G. Shahumyan







V. I.  

      Lenin
A Letter to S. G. Shahumyan




Written: Written November 23 (December 6), 1913 

Published:

      First published March 2 (15), 1918, in the newspaper Bakinsky Rabochy (Baku Worker) No. 48.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 499-502.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

December 6, 1913 

Dear Friend, 

Your letter of November 15 gave me great pleasure. You must realise how
highly one in my position appreciates the opinions of comrades in Russia,
especially thoughtful people, who are thinking hard studying the subject. I
was therefore particularly pleased to get your early reply. One feels less
isolated when one receives letters like this. But poetry enough—let’s get
down to business.  

1.
You are in favour of an official language in Russia. It, is
“necessary; it has been and will be of great progressive importance”. I
disagree emphatically. I wrote about this long ago in
   Pravda,[1]

and so far have not been refuted. Your argument does not convince me in the
least. Quite the reverse. The Russian language has undoubtedly
been of progressive importance for the numerous small and backward
nations. But surely you must realise that it would have been of
much greater progressive importance had there been no compulsion. Is not an
“official language” a stick that drives people away from the
Russian language? Why will you not understand the psychology that
is so important in the national question and which, if the slightest
coercion is applied, besmirches, soils, nullifies the undoubtedly
progressive importance of centralisation, large states and a uniform
language? But the economy is still more important than psychology:
in Russia we already have a capitalist economy, which
makes the Russian language essential. But you have no faith in the
power of the economy and want to prop it up with the crutches of the rotten
police regime.

    

Don’t you see that in this way you are crippling the economy and
hindering its development? Will not the collapse of the wretched police
regime multiply tenfold (even a thousand fold) the number of voluntary
associations for protecting and spreading the Russian language? No, I
absolutely disagree with you, and accuse you of
k\"oniglich-preussischer
  Sozialismus![2]


2.
You are opposed to autonomy. You are in favour only of
regional self-government. I disagree entirely. Recall Engels’s explanation
that centralisation does not in the least preclude local
“liberties”.[5] Why should Poland have autonomy and not the Caucasus,
the South, or the Urals? Does not the central parliament determine the
limits of autonomy? We are certainly in favour of democratic
centralism. We are opposed to federation. We support the Jacobins
as against the Girondists. But to be afraid of autonomy in Russia of all
places—that is simply ridiculous! It is reactionary. Give me an example,
imagine a case in which autonomy can be harmful. You cannot. But
in Russia (and in Prussia), this narrow interpretation—only local
self-government—plays into the hands of the rotten police regime.  

3.
“The right to self-determination does not imply only the right to
secede. It also implies the right to federal association, the right to
autonomy,” you write. I disagree entirely. It does not imply the
right to federation. Federation means the association of equals,
an association that demands common agreement. How can one
side have a right to demand that the other side should
agree with it? That is absurd. We are opposed to federation in
principle, it loosens economic ties, and is unsuitable for a single
state. You want to secede? All right, go to the devil, if you can break
economic bonds, or rather, if the oppression and friction of
“coexistence” disrupt and ruin economic bonds. You don’t want to
secede? In that case, excuse me, but don’t decide for me; don’t
think that you have a “right” to federation.  

“Right to autonomy?” Wrong again. We are in favour of autonomy
for all parts; we are in favour of the right to

    

secession (and not in favour of everyone’s seceding!).
Autonomy is our plan for organising a democratic state. Secession
is not what we plan at all. We do not advocate secession. In general, we
are opposed to secession. But we stand for the right to secede
owing to reactionary, Great-Russian nationalism, which has so besmirched
the idea of national coexistence that sometimes closer ties will
be established after free secession!  

The right to self-determination is an exception to our general
premise of centralisation. This exception is absolutely essential in view
of reactionary Great-Russian nationalism; and any rejection of this
exception is opportunism (as in the case of Rosa Luxemburg); it means
foolishly playing into the hands of reactionary Great-Russian
nationalism. But exceptions must not be too broadly
interpreted. In this case there is not, and must not be
anything more than the right to secede.  

I am writing about this in
      Prosveshcheniye.[3]

Please do not fail to write to me in greater detail when I have finished
these articles (they will appear in three issues). I will send something
more. I was mainly responsible for getting the resolution passed. I
delivered a series of lectures on the national question in the
summer,[6] and have made some little study of it. That is why I intend
to “stick tight”, although, of course, ich lasse mich
    belehren[4]

from comrades who have studied the question more deeply and for a longer
period.  

4.
So you are opposed to “altering” the Programme; opposed to a “national
programme”, are you? Here, too, I disagree. You are afraid of
words. You must not let words frighten you. Everybody
changes it (the Programme) any way, surreptitiously, in an
underhand manner, and for the worse. We, however, define, make more
precise, develop and consolidate our position in keeping with the spirit of
the Programme, with the consistently democratic spirit, with the
Marxist (anti-Austrian) spirit. This had to be done. Let the
opportunist (Bundist, liquidator, Narodnik) scum

    

have their say, let them give their equally precise and
complete answers to all the problems raised, and solved,
in our resolution. Let them try. No, we have not “given way” to the
opportunists, we have beaten them on all points.  

A popular pamphlet on the national question is very much
needed. Write. Looking forward to reply, I send you my very heartiest
greetings. Regards to all friends.  

Yours, V. I. 

 
Notes
 

[1]
See pp. 354–57 of this volume.—Ed.  

[2]
Royal Prussian socialism.—Ed.  

[3]
See present edition, Vol. 20, “Critical Remarks on the National
Question”.—Ed.  

[4]
I am willing to take advice.—Ed.  
 



[5]
Lenin here refers to a passage in Engels’s “Critique of the Draft
Social-Democratic Programme of 1891”. (Engels, “Zur Kritik des
sozial-demokratischen Programmentwurfes 1891”, Die Neue Zeit,
1901-02, 20 Jhrg. 1. Band, Stuttgart, 1902.)





[6]
The lectures here referred to are those Lenin delivered in 1913 in
Switzerland.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## “Cultural-National” Autonomy









Lenin: 'Cultural-National' Autonomy







V. I.  

      Lenin
“Cultural-National” Autonomy




Published:
Za Pravdu No. 46, November 28, 1913.

      Published according to the Za Pravdu text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 503-507.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
Charles Farrell
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2000).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The essence of the plan, or programme, of what is called
“cultural-national” autonomy (or: “the establishment of institutions
that will guarantee freedom of national development”) is separate
schools for each nationality.  

The more often all avowed and tacit nationalists (including the
Bundists) attempt to obscure this fact the more we must insist on it.  

Every nation, irrespective of place of domicile of its individual
members (irrespective of territory, hence the term “extra-territorial”
autonomy) is a united officially recognised association conducting
national-cultural affairs. The most important of these affairs is
education. The determination of the composition of the nations by allowing
every citizen to register freely, irrespective of place of domicile, as
belonging to any national association, ensures absolute precision and
absolute consistency in segregating the schools according to nationality.


Is such a division, be it asked, permissible from the point of view of
democracy in general, and from the point of view of the interests of the
proletarian class struggle in particular?  

A clear grasp of the essence of the “cultural-national autonomy”
programme is sufficient to enable one to reply without hesitation—it is
absolutely impermissible.  

As long as different nations live in a single state they are bound to
one another by millions and thousands of millions of economic, legal and
social bonds. How can education be extricated from these bonds? Can it be
“taken out of the jurisdiction” of the state, to quote the Bund formula,

    

classical in its striking absurdity? If the various nations living in a
single state are bound by economic ties, then any attempt to divide them
permanently in “cultural” and particularly educational matters would be
absurd and reactionary. On the contrary, efforts should be made to
unite the nations in educational matters, so that the schools
should be a preparation for what is actually done in real life. At the
present time we see that the different nations are unequal in the rights
they possess and in their level of development. Under these circumstances,
segregating the schools accord lug to nationality would actually
and inevitably worsen the conditions of the more backward
nations. In the Southern, former slave States of America, Negro children
are still segregated in separate schools, whereas in the North, white and
Negro children attend the same schools. In Russia a plan was recently
proposed for the “nationalisation of Jewish schools”, i.e., the
segregation of Jewish children from the children of other nationalities in
separate schools. It is needless to add that this plan originated in the
most reactionary, Purishkevich circles.  

One cannot be a democrat and at the same time advocate the principle of
segregating the schools according to nationality. Note: we are arguing at
present from the general democratic (i.e., bourgeois-democratic) point of
view.  

From the point of view of the proletarian class struggle we must oppose
segregating the schools according to nationality far more emphatically. Who
does not know that the capitalists of all the nations in a given state are
most closely and intimately united in joint-stock companies, cartels and
trusts, in manufacturers’ associations, etc., which are directed
against the workers irrespective of their nationality? Who does
not know that in any capitalist undertaking—from huge works,
mines and factories and commercial enterprises down to capitalist
farms—we always, without exception, see a larger variety of
nationalities among the workers than in remote, peaceful and sleepy
villages?  

The urban workers, who are best acquainted with developed capitalism
and perceive more profoundly the psychology of the class struggle—their
whole life teaches them or they perhaps imbibe it with their mothers’
milk—such workers instinctively and inevitably realise that segregating

    

the schools according to nationality is not only a harm jut
scheme, but a downright fraudulent swindle on the part of the
capitalists. The workers can be split up, divided and
weakened by the advocacy of such an idea, and still more by the
segregation, of the ordinary peoples’ schools according to nationality;
while the capitalists, whose children are well provided with rich private
schools and specially engaged tutors, cannot in any way be
threatened by any division or weakening through “cultural-national
autonomy”.  

As a matter of fact, “cultural-national autonomy”, i.e., the
absolutely pure and consistent segregating of education according to
nationality, was invented not by the capitalists (for the time
being they resort to cruder methods to divide the workers) but by the
opportunist, philistine intelligentsia of Austria. There is not a
trace of this brilliantly philistine and brilliantly nationalist idea
in any of the democratic West-European countries with mixed
populations. This idea of the despairing petty bourgeois could arise only
in Eastern Europe, in backward, feudal, clerical, bureaucratic Austria,
where all public and political life is hampered by wretched, petty
squabbling (worse still:
cursing and brawling) over the question of languages. Since cat and dog
can’t agree, let us at least segregate all the nations once and for all
absolutely clearly and consistently in “national curias” for educational
purposes!—such is the psychology that engendered this foolish idea of
“cultural-national autonomy”. The proletariat, which is conscious of and
cherishes its internationalism, will never accept this nonsense of refined
nationalism.  

It is no accident that in Russia this idea of “cultural-national
autonomy” was accepted only by all the Jewish bourgeois parties,
then (in 1907) by the conference of the petty-bourgeois
Left-Narodnik parties of different nationalities, and lastly by the
petty-bourgeois, opportunist elements of the near-Marxist groups,
i.e., the Bundists and the liquidators (the latter were even too timid to
do so straightforwardly and definitely). It is no accident that in the
State Duma only the semi-liquidator Chkhenkeli, who is infected
with nationalism, and the petty-bourgeois Kerensky, spoke in favour of
“cultural-national autonomy”.  
 

In general, it is quite funny to read the liquidator and Bundist
references to Austria on this question. First of all, why should the most
backward of the multinational countries be taken as the model? Why
not take the most advanced? This is very much in the style of the bad
Russian liberals, the Cadets, who for models of a constitution turn mainly
to such backward countries as Prussia and Austria, and not to advanced
countries like France, Switzerland and America!  

Secondly, after taking the Austrian model, the Russian nationalist
philistines, i.e., the Bundists, liquidators, Left Narodniks, and so forth,
have themselves changed it for the worse. In this country it is
the Bundists (plus all the Jewish bourgeois parties, in whose wake
the Bundists follow without always realising it) that mainly and primarily
use this plan for “cultural-national autonomy” in their propaganda and
agitation; and yet in Austria, the country where this idea of
“cultural-national autonomy” originated, Otto Bauer, the father of the
idea, devoted a special chapter of his book top roving that
“cultural-national autonomy” cannot be applied to the Jews!


This proves more conclusively than lengthy speeches how inconsistent
Otto Bauer is and how little he believes in his own idea, for he excludes
the only extra-territorial (not having its own territory) nation
from his plan for extra-territorial national autonomy.  

This shows how Bundists borrow old-fashioned plans from
Europe, multiply the mistakes of Europe tenfold and “develop” them to the
point of absurdity.  

The fact is—and this is the third point—that at their congress in
Br\"unn (in 1899) the Austrian Social-Democrats rejected the
programme of “cultural-national autonomy” that was proposed to them. They
merely adopted a compromise in the form of a proposal for a union of the
nationally delimited regions of the country. This compromise did
not provide either for extra-territoriality or for segregating
education according to nationality. In accordance with this compromise, in
the most advanced (capitalistically) populated centres, towns, factory and
mining districts, large country estates, etc., there are no
separate schools for each nationality!  
 

The Russian working class has been combating this reactionary,
pernicious, petty-bourgeois nationalist idea of “cultural-national
autonomy”, and will continue to do so.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Coteries Abroad and Russian Liquidators









Lenin: Coteries Abroad and Russian Liquidators







V. I.  

      Lenin
Coteries Abroad and Russian Liquidators




Published:
Za Pravdu No. 46, November 28, 1913.

      Published according to the Za Pravdu text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 508-510.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Issue No. 86 of Novaya Rabochaya Gazeta contains a
scurrilous article against Social-Democrats that deserves attention in
spite of its abusive character and in spite of the
insinuations of which everybody is sick and tired.  

This article is entitled “The German Social-Democratic Press on the
Split”. It deserves attention because it very clearly explains to Russian
workers something they have not known up to now, and which they ought
to know.  

They ought to know what intrigues the coteries of Russian
Social-Democrats abroad are hatching against the Social-Democratic
organisation in Russia, for ignorance of these intrigues constantly and
inevitably condemns many Russian Social-Democrats to making comic and
tragi-comic mistakes.  

The liquidators’ article, commences with italics: “Not a
single voice has so far been heard in the ranks of the German
Social-Democrats” in favour of a split (by “split”, the liquidators mean
the building of a Marxist organisation in opposition to
the liquidators).  

Note the italics in the first sentence of the article: “Not a
single voice”!  

The worn-out trick of the bourgeois hack-writer—not everybody reads a
newspaper through to the end, but everybody sees the first
striking words of an article....  

Read the liquidators’ article further. It quotes the opinion of a
Frankfurt newspaper, which is, of course, in favour of the
liquidators, but it says nothing about the fact that this newspaper is an
opportunist one!  

My dear liquidators! Do you think the Russian workers are fools who do
not know that there are opportunists among the German Social-Democrats, and
that the Socialist
    

(alleged) Monthly, the chief organ of the German
opportunists, constantly supports Nasha Zarya?  

We read further. The opinion of a Dresden newspaper. It condemns the
split in general. Neither the newspaper’s sympathies in Russian affairs,
nor its position on German affairs is indicated. The liquidators do not
want to enlighten the Russian workers, but to fool them by leaving a number
of things unsaid.  

We read further. The Leipzig organ of the Social-Democrats



   “a fortnight ago published a report from Russia
   describing the situation in tones rather favourable to the schismatics”.
   



This is literally what is published in the liquidator newspaper; and,
of course, not a word in italics.  

And, of course, not a word, not a syllable, not a sound on the
substance of that “unpleasant” report! Oh, we are past masters in
the art of petty trickery and miserable intrigue!  

On the one hand, we have italics: “Not a single voice”; and
on the other hand, the only report from Russia turns out to be
written “in tones rather favourable” to the opponents of the liquidators.


We read further:




   “The issue [of the Leipzig Social-Democratic newspaper]
   of November 15 contains a long editorial [liquidators’ italics!]
   article”....  


from which only the passages that favour the liquidators are
quoted.  

Russian workers! It is high time you learned to expose the liquidators’
lies.  

The liquidators print the word “editorial” in italics. This is a
lie. The article is signed with the initials
J. K.,[1] i.e., it is not an editorial article, but
an article by an individual contributor!  

The liquidators are deceiving the Russian workers in the most brazen
and insolent manner.  

This is not all. The liquidators concealed the fact that in
this very same report the seven are called “shameless
splitters” for admitting Jagiello to the Duma group, in opposition to
the will of the Polish Social-Democrats!  
 

And this is still not all. The liquidators concealed a fact
which is obvious to every politically-informed person. The article signed
J. K. was written by one of Tyszka’s supporters. All the evidence
goes to prove this. Tyszka’s supporters are the group of Rosa Luxemburg,
Tyszka & Co. in Berlin, those who circulated a most abominable rumour
about the presence of provocateurs in the Warsaw Social-Democratic
organisation. Even Luch (true, this was after Jagiello
had been smuggled into the Duma group!) admitted that this was
abominable. Even Novaya Rabochaya Gazeta has admitted more than
once that “Tyszka & Co.” do not represent the polish
Social-Democratic workers of Warsaw in fighting against the workers’
insurance centre, to which the Bund, the Lefts and the Polish
Social-Democrats (of Warsaw, and not Tyszka & Co., of course) are
affiliated.  

And now, in order to fool the Russian workers, the liquidators clutch
at the coat-tails of the Tyszka crowd. A drowning man clutches at a straw
(even at a filthy and rotten one).  

The article of the Tyszka supporter, J. K., like all the pronouncements
of that group, throbs with but one desire:
to hatch an intrigue around the split, to make “a little political
capital” out of it. Pretending that coteries “divorced” from the
working-class movement in Russia are viable political organisations,
hatching intrigues around this, uttering sentimental phrases instead
of studying events in Russia—such is the nature of “Tyszka-ism”,
and it is ,what nine-tenths of the separate and “independent” coteries
abroad are engaged in.  

They seem now to be reviving in the hope of being able to “play on”
the split between the six and the seven....  

Vain hope! Russian worker Social-Democrats have matured sufficiently to
be able themselves to decide the fate of their organisation by a
majority vote, and contemptuously to brush aside the intrigues of the
coteries abroad. Members of these coteries very often write in the German
Social-Democratic press expressing the point of view of these coteries; but
it is not at all difficult to recognise this crowd “by their ears”.  

 

Notes
 
 



[1]
J. K. (J. Karski)—pseudonym of J. J. Marchlewski.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Cadet Maklakov and the Social-Democrat Petrovsky









Lenin: The Cadet Maklakov and the Social-Democrat Petrovsky







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Cadet Maklakov and the Social-Democrat Petrovsky




Published:
Za Pravdu No. 47, November 29, 1913.

      Signed: M..

      Published according to the Za Pravdu text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 511-512.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

It is some considerable time now since the Social-Democrat
Petrovsky spoke in the State Duma on the question of the rules and was
deprived of the right to speak by the Chairman for “unparliamentary
language” addressed to the Minister, and so forth. As a “topic of the
day” in the narrow sense of the term this matter is perhaps out of
date. But the fact of the matter is that the speeches delivered by
Petrovsky and the Cadet Maklakov deserve more attention than ordinary
“news of the day”.  

The Cadet Maklakov spoke in the State Duma on the question of the new
rules. This gentleman was the author of the rules and the spokesman for the
Rules Committee. On a number of questions the Cadet Maklakov spoke
against the Cadet group in the Duma, and with the aid of the
Octobrists and the Rights secured the adoption of most reactionary
rules directed against the opposition.  

This is not new. It has long been common knowledge that V. Maklakov is
a favourite of the Octobrists and that he is an Octobrist at heart. But the
extremely important fact of our public life that is revealed by
this long-known circumstance deserves the closest attention.  

Here we have one of the most prominent Cadets himself suppressing
the freedom of the Duma with the aid of the Rights and Octobrists on a
question on which the Duma is relatively less impotent than on
other questions. The Social-Democrat Petrovsky was a thousand times right
in speaking sharply against such an old hand at shady politics.  
 

But what is the main point here? Was V. Maklakov’s conduct crooked
because Mr. V. A. Maklakov is himself crooked? Of course, not, and
that is not the point, anyway.  

Just as the
Beilis case[1] was interesting and important because it very vividly
revealed what is behind our home politics, its behind-the-scenes
“machinery”, etc., so this minor (relatively) case of V. Maklakov’s
speech against die Cadets and against the freedom of the Duma
reveals for the hundredth and hundred-and-first time what is really behind
the policy of the party of our Russian liberal bourgeoisie.  

The struggle between the Cadets and the Octobrists is a struggle
between competitors—that is why it is so sharp and
unscrupulous. It was possible for V. Maklakov, favourite of the
Octobrists and suppressor of the freedom of the Duma, to become a “leading
light” among the Cadets because, and only because, the
Cadets have the same class basis as the Octobrists. They are two
different wings, or representatives of different trends, of the liberal
bourgeoisie, who are more afraid of democracy than they are of the
Purishkeviches.  

This is material. This is important. This is the quintessence of
politics. This is the reason our bourgeoisie is astoundingly impotent
politically, its economic power not withstanding.  

The Social-Democrat Petrovsky performed his duty as a democrat in
opposing V. Maklakov, the suppressor of the freedom of the Duma. There will
be no freedom in Russia until the democratic masses learn to despise the
Maklakovs as well as the parties that produce gentlemen of this type.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
The Beilis case—the trial of the Jew Beilis, organised for
provocative purposes by the tsarist government in 1913 in Kiev. Beilis was
falsely accused of the ritual murder of a Christian boy, Yushchinsky (the
murder was actually committed by the Black Hundreds). The tsarist
government staged this trial to stir up anti-Semitism and make use of
anti-Jewish pogroms to divert the attention of the masses from the
revolutionary movement that was growing through out the country. The trial
aroused public indignation; in a number of towns workers’ demonstrations of
protest were held. Beilis was acquitted.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Zabern









Lenin: Zabern







V. I.  

      Lenin
Zabern




Published:
Za Pravdu No. 47, November 29, 1913.

      Signed: V. I..

      Published according to the Za Pravdu text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 513-515.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Sometimes “incidents” occur in politics when the nature
of a certain order of things is revealed, as it were, suddenly, and with
extraordinary power and clarity in connection with some relatively minor
happening.  

Zabern is a small town in Alsace. Over forty years ago Alsace was
severed from France by the victorious Prussians (with only one party in
Germany, the Social-Democratic Party, emphatically protesting). For over
forty years the French population of Alsace has been forcibly
“Germanised” and “driven” by every possible form of pressure into the
royal Prussian, drill-sergeant, bureaucratic discipline that is called
“German culture”. But the Alsatians have been retorting to all this with
their hymn of protest: “You have taken our Alsace and our Lorraine, you
may Germanise our field, but, never, never, never will you capture our
hearts.”  

One day a Prussian aristocrat, a young officer named Forstner brought
things to a climax. He grossly insulted the Alsatian people (he used the
word Wackes, a coarse term of abuse). The German Purishkeviches
had used this sort of language in barracks a million times without causing
any trouble, but the million and first time—the fat was in the fire!


The pent-up anger of decades against tyranny, nagging and insult,
against decades of forced Prussianisation, burst out on the surface. It was
not a revolt of French culture against German culture. The
Dreyfus case[1] showed that there is as much crude militarism capable
of every kind of savagery, barbarism, violence and crime in France as in
any other country. No, this was not a revolt of French

    

culture against German culture, but the revolt of the democracy fostered by
a number of French revolutions against absolutism.  

The unrest of the population, their resentment against the Prussian
officers, the jeers hurled at these officers by the proud, freedom-loving
French crowd, the rage of the Prussian militarists, the arbitrary arrests
and assaults on people in the street—all this gave rise in Zabern (and
later throughout Alsace) to “anarchy”, as the bourgeois news papers call
it. The landowning, “Octobrist”, clerical, German Reichstag, by an
overwhelming majority, passed a resolution against the Imperial
German Government.  

“Anarchy” is a silly catchword. It presupposes that there has been
and still is in Germany an “established” civil, legal system which, on
the instigation of the devil, has been violated. The catchword “anarchy”
is impregnated through and through with the spirit of official, university
German “scholarship” (with apologies to real scholarship), the
scholarship that cringes before the landowners and the militarists, and
sings the praises of the exceptional “rule of law” in Germany.


The Zabern incident showed that Marx was right when, nearly forty years
ago, he described the German political system as a “military despotism,
embellished with parliamentary
forms”.[2] Marx’s appraisal of the real nature of the German
“constitution” was a hundred thousand times more profound than
those of hundreds of bourgeois professors, priests and publicists who sang
the praises of the “legal state”. They all bowed and scraped in face of
the successes and triumphs of the German rulers of the day. In appraising
the class nature of politics, Marx was not guided by the “zigzag” of
events, but by the entire experience of international
democracy and of the international working-class movement.  

It was not “anarchy” that “burst out” in Zabern; it was the
true nature of the German regime, the sabre rule of the Prussian
semi-feudal landowners that was aggravated and came to the surface. If the
German bourgeoisie had possessed a sense of honour, if it had possessed
brains and a conscience, if it had believed what it said, if its deeds were
not in contradiction to its words, in short, if it were not a
bourgeoisie

    

confronting millions of socialist proletarians, the Zabern “incident”
would have been “incidental” to the bourgeoisie’s becoming republican. As
it is, the whole affair will be confined to platonic protests by bourgeois
politicians—in parliament.  

But things will not stop there outside parliament. The mood of the
petty-bourgeois masses in Germany has been and is undergoing a
change. Conditions have changed, the economic situation has changed,
all the props of the “peaceful” rule of the aristocratic
Prussian sabre have been under mined. Whether the bourgeoisie
likes it or not, events are sweeping it towards a profound
political crisis.  

The time when the “German Michael” slumbered peace fully under the
guardianship of the Prussian Purishkeviches, while the course of Germany’s
capitalist development was exceptionally favourable, has gone. The general,
fundamental collapse is irresistibly maturing and approaching....  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
The Dreyfus case—the trial in 1894 of Dreyfus, a Jewish
General Staff officer who was falsely accused of espionage and high
treason; the trial was staged for provocative purposes by French
reactionary militarists. A Court Martial sentenced Dreyfus to imprisonment
for life. The strong public movement for a review of the case led to a
sharp conflict between republican and monarchist forces in France. Dreyfus
was acquitted in 1906.  

Lenin described the Dreyfus case as “one of the many thousands of
fraudulent tricks of the reactionary military caste”.





[2]
See K. Marx and F. Engels, “Critique of the Gotha Programme”,
Selected Works, Vol. II, Moscow, 1958, p. 33.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Question of Bureau Decisions









Lenin: The Question of Bureau Decisions







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Question of Bureau Decisions[1]




Written: Written December 2 (15), 1913 

Published:

      First published in the fourth Russian edition of the Collected Works.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 516-518.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Today, Monday, December 2 (15), yesterday’s decision of the
Bureau on Russian affairs became known—so far from a brief
telegram. Plekhanov has announced his resignation in writing, i.e.,
resigned of his own accord.  

The Organising Committee (OC), the liquidators’ leading institution,
has been affiliated, i.e., has obtained the right to representation in the
Bureau.  

(Apropos of this it must be mentioned that according to the Rules, not
only the most opportunist parties, but even semi-party workers’
organisations may affiliate. The most opportunist groups of the British are
affiliated; there fore, the affiliation of the OC could not be prevented.)


What is the result? Plekhanov has been squeezed out by the liquidators!
If the liquidators try to rejoice over this, they must be
answered—hypocritical supporters of unity. The liquidators have
managed to replace Plekhanov. That is the actual result. Let all
workers in general, and worker Mensheviks in particular, judge whether the
liquidators are sincerely striving for unity, whether sincere supporters of
unity would have substituted themselves for Plekhanov. Surely there cannot
be anybody so naive as to believe that the replacement of Plekhanov by a
liquidator is a step towards unity and not away from it.


At all events I can offer the editors an article on the subject if the
liquidators have started any foolish jubilation. It can also be added
(later) that having become affiliated, the OC members (the liquidators)
have committed themselves to becoming an entity, i.e., a
party. Probably an open party, eh gentlemen? Time will show.  
 

At last “unification has been entrusted to the executive”—says the
telegram. That means that the Executive Committee of the Bureau
(Vandervelde&plusBertrand +Anseele+the Secretary Huysmans) has been
instructed to take measures or to take steps towards re-establishing unity.


Apparently (or probably) that has been done without any reproach to
us. In that case it is quite acceptable to us. It must be said that the
Executive Committee of the Bureau always and unconditionally must
work for unity, and that two years ago, Huysmans, the Secretary of the
Bureau, asked Lenin in writing what measures should be adopted as a step
towards unity. Entrusting this to the Executive, therefore, is, I repeat,
quite acceptable to us, and any possible misinterpretations by the
liquidators will be simply untrue.  

Nothing is said in the telegram about the seven and the six. It is
known from a letter, however, that at the be ginning of the Bureau session
a liquidator was named during the roll-call. Our representative then said
that the six had not elected him, to which Huysmans replied with an
explanation of the rules, according to which representation (from socialist
parliamentary groups) is granted only to the majority irrespective
of party membership. It is probable that they left it at that—one
liquidator from the seven or the eight. If such are the rules (which we
shall verify—so far we have had to accept the official
explanation of the rules of the Bureau by the Secretary of the Bureau at an
official session), then it was a good thing we did not waste our efforts
and did not “put in an appearance”, did not go there and make demands. It
has no practical significance. It is not convenient to speak about it in
the press. If the liquidators start rejoicing—we shall again answer them:
=

hypocritical supporters of unity, who contravene the will of the majority
of politically conscious workers.  

And so the result is as mentioned elsewhere.  

We also see from the letter of our representative that the liquidators
have been agitating Kautsky (who represent ed the Germans) to have a
commission appointed on the question of unity. Kautsky censured
Rosa Luxemburg for her attack on Lenin and was of the opinion that nothing

    

could be done from abroad; it was necessary for the Russian workers to
demand unity.  

We shall await a confirmation of these statements. We are certainly in
favour of unity in accordance with the will of the
majority of politically conscious workers in Russia.  

Such is the state of affairs according to information at present
available.


 
Notes
 
 



[1]
This letter was addressed by Lenin to the editors of Za Pravdu
when he received the first report of the decisions of the December session
(1913) of the International Socialist Bureau on the unification of the
R.S.D.L.P.  

The question was raised by Rosa Luxemburg (member of the Bureau from
the Social-Democratic Party of Poland and Lithuania) in support of the
Russian liquidators, who had been defeated in their struggle against the
Bolsheviks. At the session on December 14 (N.S.), 1913, the resolution
proposed by Kautsky was adopted; in this resolution the Executive Committee
of the Bureau was instructed, allegedly for the purpose of re-establishing
the unity of the R.S.D.L.P., to organise an exchange of opinion “between
all factions of the working-class movement in Russia”.  

At the conference held in July 1914 in Brussels in accordance with the
decision of the Bureau, the leaders of the Second International, on the
pretext of “reconciling” the Bolsheviks and liquidators, demanded that
the Bolsheviks cease their criticism of the liquidators; the Bolsheviks
refused; and continued their struggle against the liquidators.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Working-Class Unity









Lenin: Working-Class Unity







V. I.  

      Lenin
Working-Class Unity




Published:
Za Pravdu No. 50, December 3, 1913.

      Published according to the Za Pravdu text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 519-521.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Lately, the polemics that Novaya Rabochaya Gazeta
has been conducting against the six worker deputies in the Duma have been
steadily losing any business-like and ideological character and assuming
more and more the character of a “squabble”. It is all the more
necessary, there fore, to turn these polemics back into
the channels of a serious examination of controversial questions. Every
class-conscious worker will probably agree with us about this.  

We have before us the “big names” that the liquidators always juggle
with. Tsereteli and Gegechkori condemn the six; the “leading body” of the
August Conference (1912) does the same. For the thousand and first time
they call the six splitters, and proclaim “unity”.  

We, for our part, undeterred by raving and shouting, will, for the
thousand and first time, calmly call upon the workers to reflect upon the
question and study it.  

The working class needs unity. But unity can be effected only by a
united organisation whose decisions are conscientiously carried out by all
class-conscious workers. Discussing the problem, expressing and hearing
different opinions, ascertaining the views of the majority of the
organised Marxists, expressing these views in the form of decisions adopted
by delegates and carrying them out conscientiously—this is what
reasonable people all over the world call unity. Such a unity is
infinitely precious, and infinitely important to the working
class. Disunited, the workers are nothing. United, they are everything.


Are there, we ask, data available that will enable every
class-conscious worker who desires to study the controversy for himself to
judge whether unity has been maintained
    

among worker Social-Democrats during the past few years?  

Efforts must be made to collect such data, to verify them and to
publish them as material for the purpose of enlightening, uniting and
organising the workers.  

The newspaper Pravda has been in existence since April 1912,
and its trend has always (and not one of its opponents has ever denied
this) strictly conformed to the decisions which on three occasions
in this period (once in 1912 and twice in 1913) were passed by the leading
Marxist body. How many workers have accepted these decisions (on all
questions of working-class life; altogether there were about forty
decisions) and have carried them out?  

The reply to this question—obviously a very important and interesting
one—can be only approximate, but it is based on absolutely precise and
objective and not biased data. In 1912 and 1913 there were
basically two workers’ newspapers, which advocated
different views to the masses of the workers. Both of them
published reports of the workers’ groups which collected funds for the
respective newspapers. Needless to say, the workers’ groups which collected
funds for a given newspaper thereby expressed by deeds (and not
merely by words) their sympathies for the policy pursued by that paper, and
their determination to back the decisions that it supports.  

The publication of these data in the two rival newspapers is the best
guarantee against mistakes, which interested workers can themselves
correct. Here are the data, which have been published many times
before, have never been refuted by anyone, and have never been
superseded by other data. In the course of nearly two years, from
January 1912 to October 1913, 556 workers’ group collections were made for
Luch, 2,181 for Pravda, and 395 for the Moscow workers’
newspaper.  

One may boldly assert that nobody but a person blinded by prejudice
would hesitate to admit that the majority (and the overwhelming majority at
that) supported Pravda. Slowly but surely the Pravda
people are building up real unity among the workers, uniting them
by uniform decisions, which they conscientiously carry out. This is the
first time in Russia that a Marxist daily newspaper, which
scrupulously

    

defends uniform and precise decisions, has been able for so long to
unite more and more systematically and closely workers’
groups scattered all over the country.  

This is unity in deeds and not merely in words! Of course, this is not
everything but it is actual deeds and not merely words, not a mere
advertising.  

But Tsereteli, Gegechkori and the “August leading body”, like all the
other liquidators, stubbornly ignore the facts!  

They shout about “unity”, but say nothing about the fact that it is
the liquidators—obviously in the minority among the class-conscious
workers—who are violating unity, are flouting the will of the
majority!  

No outcries, no clamour and no abuse can refute this plain and simple
fact; and all references made by the “August leading, and so forth”, to
all sorts of “bodies” and groups, only raise a smile. Just think,
gentlemen! What are your “bodies and groups” worth if no
workers, or only an obvious minority, support them? Such “bodies
and groups” are breakaway bodies if they fail to call upon all
the workers to obey the will of the majority.  

The experience of the revival of the working-class movement during the
past two years increasingly confirms the correctness of the views
of Pravda. The experience of uniting the workers of
Russia on definite decisions formulated by the Marxists is more and more
clearly revealing the successes, growth and strength of our
organisation. It goes without saying that we shall proceed along this path
more boldly and quickly, undaunted by abuse, by outcries, or by any thing
else.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## A Stubborn Defence of a Bad Case









Lenin: A Stubborn Defence of a Bad Case







V. I.  

      Lenin
A Stubborn Defence of a Bad Case




Published:
Proletarskaya Pravda No. 1, December 7, 1913.

      Published according to the Proletarskaya Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 522-524.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Those gentlemen, the liquidators, are stubbornly defending
the Octobrist clause that “slipped” into their Bill on liberties. This is
Clause 5, which by a legal twist limits freedom of association by stating
that the workers shall not be liable to criminal prosecution for their
actions “if, in general, they are not actions of a nature that renders
them criminally-liable”.  

The reactionary nature of this clause is obvious. It is obvious that
genuine Social-Democrats would say the very opposite of this
pettifoggery, i.e., they would say that acts committed in the course of a
strike, for the purpose of assisting oppressed fellow workers, should not
be liable to punishment, or at least, that the penalty should be reduced.


It is obvious that the liquidators will have to delete this reactionary
clause from their Bill; the workers will compel them to do so.  

But instead of straightforwardly admitting their mistake the
liquidators (guided by
Burenin-Gamma[1]) twist and turn and resort to petty lying. Mr. Gorsky
assures us in Novaya Likvidatorskaya
Gazeta[2] that the conferences held abroad (three or four years
ago)[3] “with the closest co-operation of N. Lenin” adopted similar
clauses in a Bill on strikes.  

All this is a downright falsehood.  

At these conferences abroad the work was divided as
follows. Subcommittees drafted the bills, while the general committee
discussed certain fundamental questions. Lenin

    

was not even a member of the Strike Subcommittee (he was a member of the
Eight-Hour-Day Subcommittee); and on the general committee, Lenin
opposed every point that conceded or recognised criminal
liability!  

Mr. Gorsky wants to throw the blame for a Bill drafted by a certain
Mr. F. D. (an ex-member of the Strike Subcommittee!) on Lenin. That trick
won’t work, gentlemen.  

In defending this bad case Mr. Burenin-Gamma advanced another bad
argument. He wrote: 


   “They [the Social-Democrats] should keep their class
   struggle within certain limits, not out of respect for ‘bourgeois law’, but
   out of respect for the legal and moral consciousness of the broad masses of
   the people.”  


Now this is an argument that is indeed worthy of a philistine!  

Out of considerations of expediency we wage our class struggle
within certain limits, Mr. Liquidator, and avoid everything which may
(under certain circumstances) disrupt our ranks or facilitate the enemy’s
onslaught upon us at a time when this is to his advantage, etc. Failing to
understand these real reasons, the liquidator falls into the opportunist
morass. What are the broad masses of the people? Those masses are the
undeveloped proletarians and petty-bourgeois who are full of
prejudices—philistine, nationalist, reactionary, clerical and so on, and
so forth.  

How can we, for example, “respect” the “legal and moral
consciousness” of anti-Semitism, which, as everybody knows, has very often
proved to be a dominant feature of the consciousness of the “broad masses
of the people” even of Vienna (a city that is more cultured than many
Russian cities).  

The “legal and moral consciousness” of the broad masses of
philistines will condemn, let us say, a blow struck at a blackleg,
when it was struck in the heat of defending a strike called for an increase
of a starvation wage. We shall not advocate violence in such cases
because it is inexpedient from the point of view of our
struggle. But we shall not “respect” this philistine “consciousness”;
on the contrary,

    

we shall steadily combat it by all the means of persuasion, propaganda and
agitation at our command.  

Mr. Burenin-Gamma’s appeal for “respect” for the legal and moral
consciousness of the broad masses of the people is the appeal of a
philistine for respect for philistine prejudices.  

It is further proof (in addition to a thousand others) of the
philistinism of the liquidators.  
 

Notes
 
 



[1]
Burenin, V. P.—staff employee of the reactionary newspaper
Novoye Vremya (New Times); engaged in libelling and
besmearing all progressive social and political trends. Lenin uses the name
as a synonym for those who conduct polemics by dishonest methods.
Gamma—pseudonym of L. Martov.





[2]
Novaya Likvidatorskaya Gazeta (New Liquidators’
Gazette)—Lenin’s ironical appelation for the Menshevik Novaya
Rabochaya Gazeta (New Workers’ Newspaper).





[3]
This refers to a committee to assist the Social-Democratic group in the
Third Duma in preparing bills for the Duma; it was set up in Paris in 1909,
both Bolsheviks and Mensheviks participating. The committee had
subcommittees to elaborate bills on the eight-hour day, on the right to
strike and on trade unions. The bill on strikes was drawn up by the
Menshevik Dan; it included a point recognising the criminality of
participation in strikes. When the bill was discussed by the committee
Lenin spoke vehemently against this point.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Cadets and “The Right of Nations to Self-Determination”









Lenin: The Cadets and 'The Right of Nations to Self-Determination'







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Cadets and “The Right of Nations to Self-Determination”




Published:
Proletarskaya Pravda No. 4, December 11, 1913.

      Signed: I..

      Published according to the Proletarskaya Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 525-527.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Last summer, Rech, the chief liberal newspaper in
Russia, published an article by Mr. Mikhail Mogilyansky on the All-Ukraine
Student Congress in Lvov. Rabochaya Pravda at the time pointed out
that Mr. Mogilyansky in a manner most reprehensible (for a democrat, or for
a man who poses as a democrat) showered abuse on the Ukrainian
separatism advocated by
     Mr. Dontsov,[1]

and others. We stated at once that the issue was not whether one agreed or
disagreed with Mr. Dontsov, whom many Ukrainian Marxists opposed, we said
it was impermissible to hurl such epithets at “separatism” as
“delirium” and adventurism. We said that this was a chauvinist approach,
and that in criticising any particular plan for secession, a Great-Russian
democrat must agitate for freedom to secede, for the
right to secede.  

As the reader will see, this is a question of principle, of programme,
and concerns the duties of democrats in general.  

But now, six months later, Mr. Mikhail Mogilyansky again brings this
point up in Rech (No. 331) but does not reply to us; he replies to
Mr. Dontsov, who sharply attacked Rech in the Lvov newspaper
Shlyakhi[2] and incidentally pointed out that
“Rech’s chauvinistic thrust was properly branded only in the
Russian Social-Democratic press”.  

In replying to Mr. Dontsov, Mr. Mogilyansky states three times
that “criticism of Mr. Dontsov’s recipes does not imply repudiation of
the right of nations to self-determination”.  

This statement by a contributor to the liberal Rech is
extremely important and we invite our readers to pay particular

    

attention to it. The more rarely the liberal gentlemen establish and
analyse the fundamental and material truths of democracy instead of
indulging in common political-oppositional scandal-mongering, the more
persistently must we call for a serious appraisal of every case in which
they do so.  

Does our Constitutional-“Democratic” Party recognise the right of
nations to self-determination or not? This is the interesting question that
Mr. Mogilyansky inadvertently raises.  

He thrice repeats his reservation, but he does not give a
straightforward answer to this question! He knows perfectly well that
neither the programme of the Constitutional-Democratic Party, nor its daily
political sermons (propaganda and agitation) provide a straightforward,
precise and clear answer to this question.  


   “It must be said,” writes Mr. Mogilyansky, “that even
   the ‘right of nations to self-determination’ is not a fetish that must
   never be criticised: the unhealthy conditions of life of a nation may
   engender unhealthy tendencies in national self-determination; and to expose
   the latter does not mean repudiating the right of nations to
   self-determination.”  


This is a beautiful example of a liberal evasion which the Semkovskys
repeat in different strains in the columns of the liquidators’ newspaper!
Oh, no, Mr. Mogilyansky, no democratic right is a “fetish”, and never
must the class content, for example, of any of them be
forgotten. All general democratic demands are bourgeois-democratic demands;
but only anarchists and opportunists can deduce from this that it is not
the business of the proletariat to back these demands in the most
consistent manner possible.  

The right to self-determination is one thing, of course, and
the expediency of self-determination, the secession of a given
nation under given circumstances, is another. This is elementary. But does
Mr. Mogilyansky, do Russian liberals, does the Constitutional-Democratic
Party admit that it is the duty of a democrat to preach to the
masses—particularly the Great-Russian masses—the great significance and
urgency of this right?  

No, no, and no again. That is what Mr. Mogilyansky evades and
conceals. That is one of the roots of the nationalism
    

and chauvinism of the Cadets—not only of Struve, Izgoyev and the
other outspoken Cadets, but also of the diplomats of the Cadet Party like
Milyukov, and the philistines of that party like.... But their names are
not important!  

The class-conscious workers of Russia will not forget that in addition
to national reactionaries we have in this country national liberals, and
that the rudiments of national democracy are springing up (recall
Mr. Peshekhonov’s appeal in Russkoye Bogatstvo No. 8, 1906, for
“caution” concerning the nationalist prejudices of the Great Russian
muzhik).  

Advocacy of the right to self-determination is very important in the
fight against the abscess of nationalism in all its forms.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
See pp. 266–67 of this volume.—Ed.  
 



[2]
Shlyakhi (Paths)—nationalist organ of the Ukrainian
Students’ Union; it was published in Lvov from April 1913 to March 1914.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## A Good Resolution and a Bad Speech









Lenin: A Good Resolution and a Bad Speech







V. I.  

      Lenin
A Good Resolution and a Bad Speech




Published:
Proletarskaya Pravda No. 6, December 13, 1913.

      Published according to the Proletarskaya Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 528-530.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

All class-conscious workers in Russia undoubtedly showed
interest in the resolution on Russian affairs passed by the International
Bureau and paid attention to it. It is known that the pivot of this
resolution was the decision to organise or arrange a “general exchange
of opinion” among “all sections of the working-class movement” of
Russia, including those which accept the Social-Democratic programme, as
well as those whose programmes “are in agreement” (or “in
harmony”—im Einklange) with it.  

The latter definition is extremely broad, for it embraces not only the
supporters of Jagiello, but also every group that wishes to declare that
its programme “harmonises” or “is in agreement with” the
Social-Democratic programme. This broad definition, however, will not do
any harm for, of course, it is desirable that the widest Possible circle
should participate in this “exchange of opinion” so as not to
exclude any of those with whom even individual groups of Social-Democrats
might desire to unite. We must not forget that two plans were
proposed at the meeting of the International Socialist Bureau:
(1) Kautsky’s plan to “arrange a general exchange of opinion” and no
more. An exchange of opinion before impartial colleagues, the
Executive Committee of the International Socialist Bureau, will
ascertain the state of affairs and the depth of the disagreements;
=

(2) The plan pro posed by Rosa Luxemburg, but withdrawn after Kautsky’s
objections. This plan proposed a “unification conference”
(Einigungskonferenz) “to restore the united party”.  

This second plan was not so good, of course, for, the first essential
is to gather precise data, apart from the fact that Rosa Luxemburg was
merely trying to smuggle in “restoration” of the notorious “Tyszka
group”.  
 

The plan accepted was Kautsky’s; it was more cautious and approached
the question of unity more systematically, through a preliminary
“exchange of opinion and the study of precise data. It is quite natural
therefore that Kautsky’s resolution should have been adopted unanimously.


But a distinction must be drawn between Kautsky’s resolution, which was
adopted by the Bureau, and the speech he made, in the course of
which he said some monstrous things on one point. We have already
commented briefly on this matter, but the appearance of the report of
Kautsky’s speech in Vorw\"arts (the chief organ of the German
party)[1] compels us to deal with this important question in greater
detail.  

Objecting to Rosa Luxemburg, Kautsky said that “the old party had
disappeared although old names had been retained which, however, in the
course of time (im Laufe der Jahre—during the past few years)
had acquired a new content. Old comrades could not simply be excluded
merely because their party (ihre Partei) did not bear the old
name”.  

When Rosa Luxemburg objected to this and said that “Kautsky’s
statement that the Russian party was dead [sei tot] was a
thoughtless expression”, Kautsky limited himself to “protesting that he
did not say that Russian Social-Democracy was dead. He merely said that the
old forms were broken, and that a new form would have to be created”.


This is the translation of the official record of the passages relevant
to our question.  

It is obvious that Kautsky did not say and could not have said that
Social-Democracy was dead. But he did say that the party
had disappeared, and this he did not withdraw, in spite of the
protest that was made!  

This is incredible, but it is a fact.  

The confusion Kautsky betrayed here is stupendous. To the exclusion of
which “old comrades” did he refer? Potresov and Co.? By
“their party” did he mean liquidator amorphousness?  

Or did Kautsky have in mind the “P.S.P. Left wing” which was excluded
by Rosa Luxemburg’s formula? If so, then his expression “old comrades” is
unintelligible, for never since the Social-Democratic Party has
been in existence,

    

i.e., since 1898, have the members of the P.S.P. and Social-Democrats been
fellow party members.  

As far as we are concerned the two interpretations are the same, for it
would be ridiculous indeed to exclude the liquidators from an “exchange of
opinion” on the question of unity (for the whole question centres round
them), just as it would be ridiculous to exclude the P.S.P. Left wing
(speaking abstractly, the liquidators—anything can be expected of
them—are quite capable of making an ultimatum of their defence of their
break-away alliance with the non Social-Democratic P.S.P.). At all
events it must be ascertained exactly not only what the liquidators want of
the party, but also what their allies want.  

The undoubted fact remains that at the Bureau, Kautsky went to the
length of saying that the Russian party had disappeared.  

How could he have descended to such a monstrous statement? To
understand this the Russian workers must know who informs the
German Social-Democratic press about Russian affairs? When the Germans
write they usually avoid the question of our disagreements. When Russians
write for German Social-Democratic publications we either see all the
émigré coteries allied with the liquidators in a campaign of
scurrilous abuse against the “Leninists” (as was the case in
Vorw\"arts in the spring of 1912), or the writings of the Tyszkas
and Trotskys, or a member of some other émigré coterie,
deliberately obscuring the issue. For years there has not been a
single document, collection of resolutions, analysis of ideas, or a single
attempt to collect the facts!  

We regret that the German leaders (who show ability in collecting and
analysing facts when they study theory) are not ashamed to listen to and
repeat the fairy-tales of their liquidator informants.  

The Bureau’s resolution will be carried out, but Kautsky’s
speech will remain a sad curiosity.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Vorw\"arts (Forward)—the central organ of the
German Social-Democratic Party; from 1876 onwards it was edited by Wilhelm
Liebknecht and others. Engels conducted a struggle in the paper’s columns
against all manifestations of opportunism. From the middle nineties, after
the death of Engels, Vorw\"arts regularly published articles by
the opportunists dominant in the German Social-Democratic Party and in the
Second International. During the First World War Vorw\"arts
adopted a social-chauvinist position.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Nationality of Pupils in Russian Schools









Lenin: The Nationality of Pupils in Russian Schools







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Nationality of Pupils in Russian Schools




Published:
Proletarskaya Pravda No. 7, December 14, 1913.

      Published according to the Proletarskaya Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 531-533.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
Unknown
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (1901).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

To obtain a more precise idea of the plan for “cultural
national autonomy”, which boils down to segregating the schools according
to nationality, it is useful to take the concrete data which show the
nationality of the pupils attending Russian schools. For the St. Petersburg
educational area such data are provided by the returns of the school census
taken on January 18, 1911.  

The following are the data on the distribution of pupils attending
elementary schools under the Ministry of Public Education according to the
native languages of the pupils. The data cover the whole of the
St. Petersburg educational area, but in brackets we give the
figures for the city of St. Petersburg. Under the term “Russian
language” the officials constantly lump together Great-Russian,
Byelorussian and Ukrainian (“Little Russian”, according to official
terminology). Total pupils—265,660 (48,076).  

Russian—232,618 (44,223);
Polish—1,737 (780);
Czech—3 (2);
Lithuanian—84 (35);
Lettish—1,371 (113);
Zhmud—1 (0);
French—14 (13);
Italian—4 (4);
Rumanian—2 (2);
German—2,408 (845);
Swedish—228 (217);
Norwegian—31 (0);
Danish—1 (1);
Dutch—1 (0);
English—8 (7);
Armenian—3 (3);
Gipsy—4 (0);
Jewish—1,196 (396);
Georgian—2 (1);
Ossetian—1 (0);
Finnish—10,750 (874);
Karelian—3,998 (2);
Chud—247 (0);
Estonian—4,723 (536);
Lapp—9 (0);
Zyryan—6,008 (0);
Samoyed—5 (0);
Tatar—63 (13);
Persian—1 (1);
Chinese—1 (1);
not ascertained—138 (7).  

These are comparatively accurate figures. They show that the national
composition of the population is extremely mixed, although they apply to
one of the basically Great-

    

Russian districts of Russia. The extremely mixed national composition of
the population of the large city of St. Petersburg is at once evident. This
is no accident, but results from a law of capitalism that operates
in all countries and in all parts of the world. Large cities, factory,
metallurgical, railway and commercial and industrial centres generally, are
certain, more than any other, to have very mixed populations, and it is
precisely these centres that grow faster than all others and constantly
attract larger and larger numbers of the inhabitants of the backward rural
areas.  

Now try to apply to these real-life data the lifeless utopia of the
nationalist philistines called “cultural-national autonomy” or (in the
language of the Bundists) “taking out of the jurisdiction of the state”
questions of national culture, i.e., primarily educational affairs.  

Educational affairs “shall be taken out of the jurisdiction of the
state” and transferred to 23 (in St. Petersburg) “national associations”
each developing “its own” “national culture”!  

It would be ridiculous to waste words to prove the absurdity and
reactionary nature of a “national programme” of this sort.  

It is as clear as daylight that the advocacy of such a plan means,
in fact, pursuing or supporting the ideas of bourgeois
nationalism, chauvinism and clericalism. The interests of democracy in
general, and the interests of the working class in particular, demand the
very opposite. We must strive to secure the mixing of the children
of all nationalities in uniform schools in each locality;
the workers of all nationalities must jointly pursue the
proletarian educational policy which Samoilov, the deputy of the Vladimir
workers, so ably formulated on behalf of the Russian Social-Democratic
workers’ group in the State
Duma.[1] We must most emphatically oppose segregating the schools
according to nationality, no matter what form it may take.  

It is not our business to segregate the nations in matters of education
in any way; on the contrary, we must strive to create the fundamental
democratic conditions for the peaceful coexistence of the nations on the
basis of equal rights. We must not champion “national culture”, but
expose the clerical and bourgeois character of this slogan in

    

the name of the international culture of the world working-class movement.


But we may be asked whether it is possible to safeguard the interests
of the one Georgian child among the 48,076 schoolchildren in
St. Petersburg on the basis of equal rights. And we should reply that it is
impossible to establish a special Georgian school in St. Petersburg on the
basis of Georgian “national culture”, and that to advocate such a plan
means sowing pernicious ideas among the masses of the people.


But we shall not be defending anything harmful, or be striving after
anything that is impossible, if we demand for this child free government
premises for, lectures on the Georgian language, Georgian history, etc.,
the provision of Georgian books from the Central Library for this child, a
state contribution towards the fees of the Georgian teacher, and so
forth. Under real democracy, when bureaucracy and
“Peredonovism”[2] are completely eliminated from the schools, the
people can quite easily achieve this. But this real democracy can he
achieved only when the workers of all nationalities are
united.  

To preach the establishment of special national schools for every
“national culture” is reactionary. But under real democracy it is quite
possible to ensure instruction in the native language, in native history,
and so forth, without splitting up the schools according to
nationality. And complete local self-government will make it impossible for
anything to be forced upon the people, as for example, upon the
713 Karelian children in Kem Uyezd (where there are only 514 Russian
children) or upon the 681 Zyryan children in Pechora Uyezd (153 Russian),
or upon the 267 Lettish children in Novgorod Uyezd (over 7,000 Russian),
and so on and so forth.  

Advocacy of impracticable cultural-national autonomy is an absurdity,
which now already is only disuniting the workers ideologically. To advocate
the amalgamation of the workers of all nationalities means facilitating the
success of proletarian class solidarity, which will guarantee equal rights
for, and maximum peaceful coexistence of, all nationalities.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Samoilov made his statement at a session of the State Duma on
November 26 (December 9), 1913, during the discussion on a bill to increase
the salaries of teachers of religion in agrarian schools.





[2]
For Lenin’s characterisation of Peredonov see the article “The
Question of Ministry of Education Policy”.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Strikes in Russia









Lenin: Strikes in Russia







V. I.  

      Lenin
Strikes in Russia[1]




Written: Written in 1913 

Published:

      Published in December 1913 in the pocket calendar Sputnik Rabochego for 1914 Priboi Publishers, St. Petersburg.

      Signed: V. I..

      Published according to the calendar text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 534-538.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

In the majority of West-European countries, strike
statistics were placed on a proper footing comparatively recently—some
ten or twenty years ago. In Russia there are strike statistics dating from
1895 only. The chief defect in our official statistics, apart from
understatement concerning the number of participants, is that they cover
only workers in enterprises subordinated to the Factory
Inspectorate. Railwaymen, metallurgical workers, tramway workers, workers
in trades subject to excise, etc., miners, building and rural workers are
not included in the statistics.  

Here are summarised data for the entire period covered by Russian
strike statistics.  





Year
Number of strikes
Number of strikers


Total
Percentage of all enterprises
Total
Percentage of all workers




1895 
68
0.4
31,195
2.0


1896 
118
0.6
29,527
1.9


1897 
145
0.7
59,870
4.0


1898 
215
1.1
43,150
2.9


1899 
189
1.0
57,498
3.8


1900 
125
0.7
29,389
1.7


1901 
164
1.0
32,218
1.9


1902 
123
0.7
36,671
2.2


1903 
550
3.2
86,832
5.1


1904 
68
0.4
24,904
1.5


1905 
13,995
93.2
2,863,173
163.8


1906 
6,114
42.2
1,108,406
65.8


1907 
3,573
23.8
740,074
41.9


1908 
892
5.9
176,101
9.7


1909 
340
2.3
64,166
3.5


1910 
222
1.4
46,623
2.4


1911 
466
2.8
105,110
5.1


1912 
1,918
?
683,361
?



 

The extent to which these figures are understated may be judged, for
example, from the fact that such a cautious writer as Mr. Prokopovich cites
another figure for 1912—683,000 strikers, but “according to
another estimate, 1,248,000 in factories, and in addition a further 215,000
in enterprises not under the Factory Inspectorate”, i.e.,
1,468,000 or almost a million and a half.  

The number of economic strikes (from 1905) is as follows: 





Year
Number of strikes
Number of workers
Year
Number of strikes
Number of workers




1905  
4,388
1,051,209
1909
290
55,803


1906  
2,545
457,721
1910
214
42,846


1907    
973
200,004
1911
442
96,730


1908    
428
83,407
1912
702
172,052




Thus the history of strikes in Russia may be divided into four
clear-cut periods (if we omit the eighties with their famous Morozov
strikes[2], noted even by the reactionary publicist Katkov as the
emergence of the “labour question” in Russia): 





 
 
Average number of strikers per annum




1st period (1895–1904), 
pre-revolutionary . .                           
43,000


2nd period (1903–07),   
revolutionary . . .                             
1,570,000


3rd period (1908–10),   
counter-revolutionary                           
96,000


4th period (1911–12),   
present, beginning of revival . . . . . . 
394,000




In general, the average number of strikers a year in Russia over the
eighteen years was 345,400. In Germany the average for fourteen years
(1899-1912) was 229,500, and for Britain the average for twenty years
(1893-1912) was 344,200. To give a clear picture of the connection between
strikes in Russia and the country’s political history, we cite the figures
for 1905-07 in three-month periods (quarters): 
    

    




Years . . . . . .
1905
1906


Quarters . . . . .
I
II
III
IV
I
II
III
IV


Number of strikers (thousands) per quarter
Beginning of revolu- tion {BOX}


Revo- lution {BOX}

First Duma {BOX}




Total . . . . . .
810
481
294
1,277
269
479
296
63


Economic . . . .
411
190
143
275
73
222
125
37


Political . . . .
399
291
151
1,002
196
257
171
26








Year . . . . . . . . . . . .
1907


Quarters . . . . . . . . . .
I
II
III
IV


Number of strikers (thousands) per quarter

Second Duma {BOX}




Total . . . . . . . . . . . .
146
323
77
193


Economic  . . . . . . . . . .
52
52
66
30


 Political . . . . . . . . . .
94
271
11
163




The extent to which workers from various parts of Russia participated
in strikes may be seen from the following figures: 





Factory district
Number of factory workers (thousands)
    in 1905
Number of strikers
(thousands)


Total for 10 years (1895–1904)
Number in 1905




St. Petersburg . .
299
137
1,033


Moscow . . . . . . .
567
123
540


Warsaw . . . . . .
252
69
887


3 Southern regions
543
102
403


  Totals . . . . .
1,661
431
2,863




This table shows the relative backwardness of Moscow,, and still more
of the South, and the outstanding priority of St. Petersburg and its area
(including Riga), and also of Poland.  

The strikers in the main branches of industry were distributed as
follows: 
    

    




Groups of industries
Total number of factory workers
    (thousands) in 1904
Number of strikers
    (thousands)


Total for 10 years (1895–1904)
Number in 1905




Metalworking . . .
252
117
811


Textile . . . . . . .
708
237
1,296


Printing, woodwork- ing, leather, chem- icals
  . . . . . . .
277
38
471


Ceramics, food . . .
454
39
285


  Totals
1,691
431
2,863




This shows that the metalworkers are in the lead and the textile
workers are backward, the remaining workers being still more backward.


The strikes are grouped in accordance with their causes in the
following way (for 14 years, 1895-1908): political, 59.9 per cent of the
strikers; on wage issues, 24.3 per cent; on the issue of the working day,
10.9 per cent; labour conditions, 4.8 per cent.  

In respect of the results of the strikes we get the following division
(if the number of strikers whose strikes ended in a compromise be divided
equally between “won” and “lost”): 





 
Number participating in economic strikes
    (thousands)


Total for 10 year (1895 –1904)
%
1905
%
1906
%
1907
%
1911
%
1912
%




Won 
159
37.5
705
48.9
233
50.9
59
29.5
49
51
55
42


Lost 
265
62.5
734
51.1
225
49.1
141
70.5
47
49
77
58


  Totals 
424
100
1,439
100
458
100
200
100
96
100
132
100




The figures for 1911 and 1912 are incomplete and are not fully
comparable with the preceding figures.  

In conclusion we give brief data on the distribution of strikes
according to the size of the enterprise and according to the location of
the enterprise: 
    

    




Number of strikers per 100 in each
      category:


Category of enterprise
Total for 10 years— 1895–1904
In 1905




20 workers or less . . . . 
2.7
47


21 to 50 workers . . .     
7.5
89.4


51 to 100 ” . . .         
9.4
108.9


101 to 500 ” . . .        
21.5
160.2


501 to 1,000 ” . . .      
49.9
163.8


Over 1,000 ” . . .        
89.7
231.9


Percentage of strikes 


 
in towns
outside towns


1895–1904 . . 
75.1
24.9


1905 . . . . . 
85
15




The dominance of the workers of big industrial establishments in the
strike movement and the relative backwardness of rural factories are quite
clear from these figures.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Lenin wrote this article for the pocket calendar Sputnik
Rabochego (Worker’s Handbook) for 1914, issued by
the Priboi Party Publishing House in December 1913. It contained essential
information on labour legislation in Russia, the Russian and international
working-class movement, political parties, associations and unions, the
press, etc. The Worker’s Handbook was sequestered but the issue
was sold in one day before the police could confiscate it. When Lenin
received a copy of the Handbook he wrote in a letter to Inessa
Armand that 5,000 copies had already been sold. A second, amended edition
was published in February 1914 with deletions and amendments made for
purposes of censorship and with a list of books for self-education
added. Altogether 20,000 copies of the Handbook were sold.





[2]
For details of the strike at the Morozov mills see “Explanation of the
Law on Fines Imposed on Factory Workers”, V. I. Lenin, Collected
Works, Vol. 2, pp. 29–72.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The National Programme of the R.S.D.L.P.






Lenin: The National Programme of the R.S.D.L.P.







V. I.  

      Lenin
The National Programme of the R.S.D.L.P.




Published:
Sotsial-Demokrat No. 32, December 15 (28), 1913.

      Published according to the Sotsial-Demokrat text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 539-545.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2002).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The Conference of the Central Committee has adopted a
resolution on the national
      question,[1]

which has been printed in the “Notification”, and has placed the question
of a national programme on the agenda of the Congress.  

Why and how the national question has, at the present time, been
brought to the fore—in the entire policy of the counter-revolution, in
the class-consciousness of the bourgeoisie and in the proletarian
Social-Democratic Party of Russia—is shown in detail in the resolution
itself. There is hardly any need to dwell on this in view of the clarity of
the situation. This situation and the fundamentals of a national programme
for Social-Democracy have recently been dealt with in Marxist theoretical
literature (the most prominent place being taken by Stalin’s
article [2]). We there fore consider that it will be to the point if,
in this article, we confine ourselves to the presentation of the problem
from a purely Party standpoint and to explanations that cannot be made in
the legal press, crushed as it is by the Stolypin-Maklakov oppression.


Social-Democracy in Russia is taking shape by drawing exclusively on
the experience of older countries, i.e., of Europe, and on the theoretical
expression of that experience, Marxism. The specific feature of our country
and the specific features of the historical period of the establishment of
Social-Democracy in our country are: first, in our country, as distinct
from Europe, Social-Democracy began to take shape before the
bourgeois revolution and continued taking shape during that
revolution. Secondly, in our country

    

the inevitable struggle to separate proletarian from general bourgeois and
petty-bourgeois democracy—a struggle that is fundamentally the same as
that experienced by every country—is being conducted under the conditions
of a complete theoretical victory of Marxism in the West and in our
country. The form taken by this struggle, therefore, is not so much that of
a struggle for Marxism as a struggle for or against petty-bourgeois
theories that are hidden behind “almost Marxist” phrases.  

That is how the matter stands, beginning with Economism (1895–1901)
and “legal Marxism” (1895–1901, 1902). Only those who shrink from
historical truth can forget the close, intimate connection and relationship
between these trends and Menshevism (1903–07) and liquidationism
(1908–13).  

In the national question the old Iskra, which in 1901–03
worked on and completed a programme for the R.S.D.L.P. as well as laying
the first and fundamental basis of Marxism in the theory and practice of
the Russian working-class movement, had to struggle, in the same way as on
other questions, against petty-bourgeois opportunism. This opportunism was
expressed, first and foremost, in the nationalist tendencies and waverings
of the Bund. The old Iskra conducted a stubborn struggle against
Bund nationalism, and to forget this is tantamount to becoming a Forgetful
John again, and cutting oneself off from the historical and ideological
roots of the whole Social-Democratic workers’ movement in Russia.  

On the other hand, when the Programme of the R.S.D.L.P. was finally
adopted at the Second Congress in August 1903, there was a struggle,
unrecorded in the Minutes of the Congress because it took place in the
Programme Commission, which was visited by almost the entire
Congress—a struggle against the clumsy attempts of several Polish
Social-Democrats to cast doubts on “the right, of nations to
self-determination”, i.e., attempts to deviate towards opportunism and
nationalism from a quite different angle.  

And today, ten years later, the struggle goes on along those same two
basic lines, which shows equally that there is a profound
connection between this struggle and all the objective conditions affecting
the national question in Russia.  
 

At the Br\"unn Congress in Austria (1899) the programme of
“cultural-national autonomy” (defended by Kristan, Ellenbogen and others
and expressed in the draft of the Southern Slavs) was
rejected. Territorial national autonomy was adopted, and
Social-Democratic propaganda for the obligatory union of all national
regions was only a compromise with the idea of “cultural-national
autonomy”. The chief theoreticians of this unfortunate idea themselves lay
particular emphasis on its inapplicability to Jewry.  

In Russia—as usual—people have been found who have made it their
business to enlarge on a little opportunist error and develop it into a
system of opportunist policy. In the same way as Bernstein in Germany
brought into being the Right Constitutional-Democrats in Russia—Struve,
Bulgakov, Tugan & Co.—so Otto Bauer’s “forgetfulness of
internationalism” (as the supercautious Kautsky calls it!) gave
rise in Russia to the complete acceptance of “cultural
national autonomy” by all the Jewish bourgeois parties and a
large number of petty-bourgeois trends (the Bund and a conference
of Socialist-Revolutionary national parties in 1907). Backward Russia
serves, one might say, as an example of how the microbes of West-European
opportunism pro duce whole epidemics on our savage soil.  

In Russia people are fond of saying that Bernstein is “tolerated” in
Europe, but they forget to add that nowhere in the world, with the
exception of “holy” Mother Russia, has Bernsteinism engendered
Struvism,[3] or has “Bauerism” led to the justification, by
Social-Democrats, of the re fined nationalism of the Jewish bourgeoisie.


“Cultural-national autonomy” implies precisely the most refined and,
therefore, the most harmful nationalism, it implies the corruption of the
workers by means of the slogan of national culture and the propaganda of
the profoundly harmful and even anti-democratic segregating of schools
according to nationality. In short, this programme undoubtedly contradicts
the internationalism of the proletariat and is in accordance only with the
ideals of the nationalist petty bourgeoisie.  

But there is one case in which the Marxists are duty bound, if
they do not want to betray democracy and the proletariat, to defend one
special demand in the national question;

    

that is, the right of nations to self-determination (§ 9 of
the R.S.D.L.P. Programme), i.e., the right to political secession. The
Conference resolution explains and motivates this demand in such detail
that there is no place left for misunderstanding.  

We shall, therefore, give only a brief description of those amazingly
ignorant and opportunist objections that have been raised against this
section of the Programme. In connection with this let us mention that
in the course of the ten years’ existence of the Programme not
one single unit of the R.S.D.L.P., not one single national
organisation, not one single regional conference, not one local committee
and not one delegate to a congress or conference, has attempted to raise
the question of changing or annulling § 9!  

It is necessary to bear this in mind. It shows us at once whether there
is a grain of seriousness or Party spirit in the objections raised to this
point.  

Take Mr. Semkovsky of the liquidators’ newspaper. With the casual air
of a man who has liquidated a party, he announces: “For certain reasons we
do not share Rosa Luxemburg’s proposal to remove § 9 from the
Programme altogether” (Novaya Rabochaya Gazeta No. 71).  

So the reasons are a secret! But then, how can secrecy be avoided in
face of such ignorance of the history of our Programme? Or when that same
Mr. Semkovsky, incomparably casual (what do the Party and the Programme
matter!) makes an exception for Finland?  


   “What are we to do ... if the Polish proletariat wants
   to carry on a joint struggle together with the whole proletariat of Russia
   within the framework of one state, and the reactionary classes of Polish
   society, on the contrary, want to separate Poland from Russia and, through
   a referendum, obtain a majority of votes in favour of separation; are we,
   Russian Social-Democrats, to vote in a central parliament together with our
   Polish comrades against secession, or, in order not to infringe on
   the ‘right to self-determination’, vote in favour of secession?”
   


What, indeed, are we to do when such na\"ive and so hopelessly confused
questions are raised?  

The right to self-determination, my dear Mr. Liquidator,
certainly does not imply the solution of the problem by a central
parliament, but by a parliament, a diet, or a referendum of the
seceding minority. When Norway seceded

    

from Sweden (1905) it was decided by Norway alone (a country half
the size of Sweden).  

Even a child could see that Mr. Semkovsky is hopelessly mixed up.  

“The right to self-determination” implies a democratic system of
a type in which there is not only democracy in general, but
specifically one in which there could not be an undemocratic
solution of the question of secession. Democracy, speaking generally, is
compatible with militant and tyrannical nationalism. The proletariat
demands a democracy that rules out the forcible retention of any
one of the nations within the bounds of the state. “In order not to
infringe on the right to self-determination”, therefore, we are duty bound
not “to vote for secession”, as the wily Mr. Semkovsky assumes,
but to vote for the right of the seceding region to decide the question
itself.  

It would seem that even with Mr. Semkovsky’s mental abilities it is not
difficult to deduce that “the right to divorce” does not require
that one should vote for divorce! But such is the fate of those
who criticise § 9—they forget the ABC of logic.  

At the time of Norway’s secession from Sweden, the Swedish proletariat,
if they did not want to follow the nationalist petty bourgeoisie, were
duty bound to vote and agitate against the annexation of Norway by
force, as the Swedish priesthood and landed proprietors desired. This is
obvious and not too difficult to understand. Swedish nationalist democrats
could refrain from a type of agitation that the principle of the
right to self-determination demands of the proletariat of
ruling, oppressor nations.  

“What are we to do if the reactionaries are in the majority?” asks
Mr. Semkovsky. This is a question worthy of a third-form schoolboy. What is
to be done about the Russian constitution if democratic voting
gives the reactionaries a majority? Mr. Semkovsky asks idle, empty
questions that have nothing to do with the matter in hand—they are the
kind of questions that, as it is said, seven fools can ask more of than
seventy wise men can answer.  

When a democratic vote gives the reactionaries a majority, one of two
things may, and usually does occur: either the decision of the
reactionaries is implemented and its

    

harmful consequences send the masses more or less speedily over to the side
of democracy and against the reactionaries; or the conflict between
democracy and reaction is decided by a civil or other war, which is also
quite possible (and no doubt even the Semkovskys have heard of this) under
a democracy.  

The recognition of the right to self-determination is, Mr. Semkovsky
assures us, “playing into the hands of the most thorough-paced bourgeois
nationalism”. This is childish nonsense since the recognition of the
right does not exclude either propaganda and agitation
against separation or the exposure of bourgeois nationalism. But
it is absolutely indisputable that the denial of the right to
secede is “playing into the hands” of the most thorough-paced
reactionary Great-Russian nationalism!  

This is the essence of Rosa Luxemburg’s amusing error for which she was
ridiculed a long time ago by German and Russian (August 1903)
Social-Democrats; in their fear of playing into the hands of the bourgeois
nationalism of oppressed nations, people play into the hands not merely of
the bourgeois but of the reactionary nationalism of the oppressor
nation.  

If Mr. Semkovsky had not been so virginally innocent in matters
concerning Party history and the Party Programme he would have understood
that it was his duty to refute Plekhanov, who, eleven years ago,
in defending the draft programme (which became the Programme in 1903) of
the R.S.D.L.P. in
Zarya,[4] made a special point (page 38) of the
recognition of the right to self-determination and wrote the following
about it: 


   “This demand, which is not obligatory for bourgeois
   democrats, even in theory, is obligatory for us as Social-Democrats. If we
   were to forget about it or were afraid to put it forward for fear of
   impinging on the national prejudices of our compatriots of Great-Russian
   origin, the battle-cry of world Social-Democracy, ‘Workers of all
   countries, unite!’ would be a shameful lie upon our lips.”  


As long ago as the Zarya days, Plekhanov put forward the basic
argument which was developed in detail in the conference resolution, an
argument to which the Semkovskys have not attempted to draw attention for
eleven years. In Russia there are 43 per cent Great Russians, but
Great-Russian

    

nationalism rules over the other 57 per cent of the population and
oppresses all nations. The National-Liberals (Struve & Co., the
Progressists, etc.) have already joined forces with our
national-reactionaries and the “first swallows” of national
democracy have appeared (remember Mr. Peshekhonov’s appeal in August 1906
to be cautious in our attitude to the nationalist prejudices of the
muzhik).  

In Russia only the liquidators consider the bourgeois-democratic
revolution to be over, and the concomitant of such a revolution
all over the world always has been and still is national movements. In
Russia in particular there are oppressed nations in many of the border
regions, which in neighbouring states enjoy greater liberty. Tsarism is
more reactionary than the neighbouring states, constitutes the
greatest barrier to free economic development, and does its utmost
to foster Great-Russian nationalism. For a Marxist, of course, all
other conditions being equal, big states are always preferable to
small ones. But it would be ridiculous and reactionary even to suppose that
conditions under the tsarist monarchy might be equal to those in any
European country or any but a minority of Asian countries.  

The denial of the right of nations to self-determination in present-day
Russia is, therefore, undoubted opportunism and a refusal to fight against
the reactionary Great-Russian nationalism that is still all-powerful.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
See pp. 427–29 of this volume.—Ed.  
 



[2]
The work referred to is Stalin’s Marxism and the National
Question.





[3]
Struvism—a variety of the bourgeois distortion of Marxism.


Struve, P. B.—Russian bourgeois liberal, exponent of legal
Marxism in the nineties. He later became one of the leaders of the Cadet
Party and after the October Revolution, as a white émigré,
was an inveterate enemy of the Soviet Union.





[4]
Lenin here refers to Plekhanov’s article “Draft Programme of the
Russian Social-Democratic Party” published in Zarya No. 4, in
August 1902.  

Zarya (Dawn)—a Marxist scientific and political
journal published in Stuttgart in 1901–02 by the editors of
Iskra. Four numbers

   

appeared in three issues. The Lenin writings published in Zarya
were: “Casual Notes” (Vol. 4), “The Persecutors of the Zemstvo and the
Hannibals of Liberalism” (Vol. 5), the first four chapters of “The
Agrarian Question and the ‘Critics of Marx’\thinspace” (published under
the title “The ‘Critics’ on the Agrarian Question” [ibid.]), “Review of
Home Affairs” (ibid.) and “The Agrarian Programme of Russian
Social-Democracy” (Vol. 6).










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Kautsky's Unpardonable Error







Lenin: Kautsky's Unpardonable Error







V. I.  

      Lenin
Kautsky’s Unpardonable Error




Published:
Proletarskaya Pravda No. 8, December 15, 1913.

      Published according to the Proletarskaya Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 546-547.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

In Proletarskaya Pravda No. 6, we commented on the
speech Comrade Kautsky
      delivered[1]

during the discussion of Russian affairs in the International Socialist
Bureau, and on the amazing—to the Russian reader—complete and
deplorable ignorance of Russian affairs that he then displayed.  

In his speech Kautsky said that in Russia “the old Party is dead”. In
a second speech, replying to the objections that had been raised to this,
Kautsky said: “I did not say that Russian Social-Democracy is dead; I
merely assert that the old forms are broken and that new forms must be
created.” This is how VorwÃ¤rts, the central organ of the German
party, whose delegate Kautsky was, reports the matter. VorwÃ¤rts
is published in the city where Kautsky lives, and, of course, if he had
found that he had been incorrectly reported he would have hastened to
correct the report, as he has done on more than one occasion on questions
far less important than the “question of the existence” of an entire
Party, and of one affiliated to the International at that.  

And now, No. 101 of Novaya Likvidatorskaya Gazeta publishes
its own report of the meeting of the International Bureau, in
which Kautsky’s second speech is so reported as to make it appear that
Kautsky definitely denied that he had stated that the “Party is
dead”.  

We would have been the first to rejoice had Kautsky really spoken a
second time in order emphatically to with draw the view which he had
expressed, and which was based on his most deplorable ignorance of Russian
Party life. But alas! We have no grounds whatever for giving more credence
to the report in Novaya Likvidatorskaya Gazeta than to the report
in the central organ of the German party.  
 

The liquidators’ newspaper is trying to hush up the matter. But it is
quite clear. In his statement about the old Party being “dead” Kautsky
not only betrayed ignorance of the facts about the Russian working-class
movement, but also revealed what sort of influence the liquidator
whisperers abroad exercise upon our foreign comrades.  

After uttering his monstrous phrase and meeting with objections,
Kautsky tried to correct himself. As reported in Vorwärts,
the central organ of the German Social-Democratic Party, he appears to have
corrected himself badly, and as reported by the liquidator correspondent he
appears to have corrected himself better, but not very much better, for
what does he mean by the “form” of Social-Democracy, if not the Party?


The point, however, is not how Kautsky corrected him self, but
the unpardonable mistake he committed as a result of liquidator
efforts abroad. Class-conscious workers in Russia could, of course, easily
expose these whisperers abroad if only they wanted to, and it is high time
they did want to!  They must organise the work of informing our foreign
comrades about their movement in such a way as to tear this business out of
the hands of irresponsible émigré coteries. They must
counteract the efforts being made by whisperers to use the
ignorance (natural) of foreign parties for their own liquidator ends. That
is why we called upon the worker comrades to respond as vigorously as
possible to the International Bureau’s appeal to clarify the disagreements
between the Marxists and the liquidators. Let the foreign comrades at last
hear the voices of the workers themselves and not those of the liquidator
whisperers. This is important, this is essential if we value the idea of
international unity.  

We make this appeal for a genuine clarification of disagreements, for
keeping our foreign comrades informed by means of resolutions, decisions
and voting by the workers them selves in order to counteract the
liquidators’ attempts to conceal or garble the facts of what took place at
the meeting of the Bureau.  

 

Notes
 

[1]
See pp. 528–30 of this volume.—Ed.  
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Once More on the Segregation of the Schools According to Nationality







Lenin: Once More on the Segregation of the Schools According to Nationality







V. I.  

      Lenin
Once More on the Segregation of the Schools According to Nationality




Published:
Proletarskaya Pravda No. 9, December 17, 1913.

      Published according to the Proletarskaya Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 548-550.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Marxists resolutely oppose nationalism in all its forms,
from the crude reactionary nationalism of our ruling circles and of the
Right Octobrist parties, down to the more or less refined and disguised
nationalism of the bourgeois and petty-bourgeois parties.  

Reactionary, or Black-Hundred, nationalism strives to safeguard the
privileges of one nation, condemning all other nations to an inferior
status, with fewer rights, or even with no rights at all. Not a single
Marxist, and not even a single democrat, can treat this nationalism with
anything else but the utmost hostility.  

In words, bourgeois and bourgeois-democratic nationalists recognise the
equality of nations, but in deeds they (often covertly, behind the backs of
the people) stand for certain privileges for one of the nations, and always
try to secure greater advantages for “their own” nation (i.e., for the
bourgeoisie of their own nation); they strive to separate and segregate
nations, to foster national exclusiveness, etc. By talking most of all
about “national culture” and emphasising what separates one nation from
the other, bourgeois nationalists divide the workers of the
various nations and fool them with “nationalist slogans”.  

The class-conscious workers combat all national oppression and
all national privileges, but they do not confine themselves to
that. They combat all, even the most refined, nationalism, and advocate not
only the unity, but also the amalgamation of the workers of
all nationalities in the struggle against reaction and against
bourgeois nationalism in all its forms. Our task is not to segregate
nations, but

    

to unite the workers of all nations. Our banner does not carry the slogan
“national culture” but international culture, which unites all
the nations in a higher, socialist unity, and the way to which is already
being paved by the international amalgamation of capital.  

The influence of petty-bourgeois, philistine nationalism has infected
certain “would-be socialists”, who advocate what is called
“cultural-educational autonomy”, i.e., the transfer of educational
affairs (and matters of national culture in general) from the state to the
individual nations. Naturally, Marxists combat this propaganda for the
segregation of nations, they combat this refined nationalism, they
combat the segregating of the schools according to
nationality. When our Bundists, and later, the liquidators, wanted to
support “cultural-national autonomy” in direct opposition to our
Programme, they were condemned not only by the Bolsheviks, but also by the
pro-Party Mensheviks (Plekhanov).  

Now Mr. An, in Novaya Rabochaya Gazeta (No. 103) is trying to
defend a bad case by subterfuge, and by showering abuse upon us. We calmly
ignore the abuse; it is merely a sign of the liquidators’ feebleness.  

To have schools connected in the native languages—this, Mr. An
assures us, is what is meant by segregating the schools according to the
nationalities of the pupils; the Pravda people, he says, want to
deprive the non-Russians of their national schools!  

We can afford to laugh at this trick of Mr. An’s, for everybody knows
that Pravda stands for the fullest equality of languages, and even
for the abolition of an official language! Mr. An’s impotent rage is
causing him to lose his head. This is dangerous, dear Mr. An!  

The right of a nation to use its native language is explicitly and
definitely recognised in § 8 of the Marxist
programme.[2] 

If Mr. An is right in stating that having schools conducted in the
native languages means segregating the schools according to nationality,
why did the Bundists in 1906, and the liquidators in 1912, “supplement”
(or rather, distort) the Programme adopted in 1903—at the very
Congress which rejected “cultural-national autonomy”—which
fully
    

recognises the right of a nation to use its native language?  

Your subterfuge will fail, Mr. An, and you will not succeed in covering
up with your noise, clamour and abuse the fact that the liquidators have
violated this Programme, and that they have “adapted socialism to
nationalism”, as Comrade Plekhanov expressed it.  

We do not want to have the Programme violated. We do not want socialism
to be adapted to nationalism. We stand for complete democracy, for the
complete freedom and equality of languages, but give no support whatever to
the proposal to “transfer educational affairs to the nations” or to
“segregate schools according to nationality”.  


   “The question at issue is that of segregating the
   schools according to nations,” writes Mr. An, “hence, these nations must
   exist in each locality, hindering each other’s development; and
   consequently, they must be segregated in the sphere of public
   education as well.”  


The words we have emphasised clearly reveal how liquidationism is
dragging Mr. An away from socialism towards nationalism. The
segregation of nations within the limits of a single state is
harmful, and we Marxists strive to bring the nations together and to
amalgamate them. Our object is not to “segregate” nations, but to
secure for them, through full democracy, an equality and coexistence as
peaceful (relatively) as in
     Switzerland.[1]


 
Notes
 

[1]

Mr. An boldly asserts that “there is no intermixing of nations even in
the cantons of Switzerland”. Will he not blush if we mention four
cantons: Berne, Fribourg, Graub\"unden and Valais?  —Lenin
 



[2]
This refers to §8 of the Programme of the R.S.D.L.P. adopted at
the Second Congress of the Party.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Mr. Gorsky and a Certain Latin Proverb









Lenin: Mr. Gorsky and a Certain Latin Proverb







V. I.  

      Lenin
Mr. Gorsky and a Certain Latin Proverb




Published:
Proletarskaya Pravda No. 10, December 18, 1913.

      Published according to the Proletarskaya Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      page 551.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Mr. Gorsky, in the liquidator newspaper, is continuing to defend the
obvious mistake of the seven deputies who adopted the deplorable clause on
“criminally-liable actions”. Mr. Gorsky, your wriggling is all in vain!
It is no use saying that you are not familiar with F. D.’s draft; you can
easily obtain it through the editorial office of your newspaper. Don’t let
F. D. play the part of the witness who is “not to be found”. That would
be ridiculous.  

In vain does Mr. Gorsky assert that Lenin, Zinoviev and Kamenev have
“by their silence” accepted responsibility for the draft made by
F. D. and his friends. Each of the three writers mentioned would need a
staff of ten secretaries and a special newspaper to refute all the nonsense
that is uttered in the wide world.  

In vain does Mr. Gorsky hide behind the backs of the worst
(possible) socialists, who would lessen the penalties for
“criminally-liable actions” if they are not abolished altogether. There
is a good Latin proverb which says: “It is natural for all men to err; but
only a fool persists in his error.  

Remember this proverb, Mr. Gorsky and Mr. F. D., and advise the seven
deputies to delete the Octobrist clause on “criminally-liable actions”
from their bill!  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Marx-Engels Correspondence









Lenin: The Marx-Engels Correspondence







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Marx-Engels Correspondence[1]




Written: Written at the end of 1913 

Published:

      First published November 28, 1920 in Pravda No. 268.

      Signed: N. Lenin.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1977,

      Moscow,

      Volume 19,

      pages 552-558.

      Translated: The Late George Hanna

      Transcription:
Zodiac
HTML Markup:
B. Baggins and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (1996).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

      
• README



 

The long-promised edition of the correspondence of the
famous founders of scientific socialism has at last been published. Engels
bequeathed the work of publishing it to Bebel and Bernstein, and Bebel
managed to complete his part of the editorial work shortly before his
death.  

The Marx-Engels correspondence, published a few weeks ago by Dietz,
Stuttgart, consists of four big volumes. They contain in all 1,386 letters
by Marx and Engels covering an extensive period, from 1844 to 1883.  

The editorial work, i.e., the writing of prefaces to the correspondence
of various periods, was done by Eduard Bernstein. As might have been
expected, this work is unsatisfactory both from the technical and the
ideological stand point. After his notorious “evolution” to extreme
opportunist views, Bernstein should never have undertaken to edit letters
which are impregnated through and through with the revolutionary
spirit. Bernstein’s prefaces are in part meaningless and in part simply
false—as, for instance, when, instead of a precise, clear and frank
characterisation of the opportunist errors of Lassalle and Schweitzer which
Marx and Engels exposed, one meets with eclectic phrases and thrusts, such
as that “Marx and Engels were not always right in opposing Lassalle”
(Vol. III, p. xviii), or that in their tactics they were “much nearer” to
Schweitzer than to Liebknecht (Vol. IV, p. x). These attacks have no
purpose except to serve as a screen and embellishment for
opportunism. Unfortunately, the eclectic attitude to Marx’s ideological
struggle against many of his opponents is becoming increasingly widespread
among present-day German Social-Democrats.  

 

From the technical standpoint, the index is unsatisfactory—only one for
all four volumes (Kautsky and Stirling are omitted, for instance); the notes to
individual letters are too scanty and are lost in the editor’s prefaces
instead of being placed in proximity to the letters they refer to, as they were
by Sorge, and so forth.


The price of the publication is unduly high—about 20 rubles for the four
volumes. There can be no doubt that the complete correspondence could and should
have been published in a less luxurious edition at a more reasonable price, and
that, in addition, a selection of passages most important from the standpoint
of principle could and should have been published for wide distribution among
workers.


All these defects of the edition will, of course, hamper a study of the
correspondence. This is a pity, because its scientific and political value is
tremendous. Not only do Marx and Engels stand out before the reader in clear
relief in all their greatness, but the extremely rich theoretical content of
Marxism is graphically revealed, because in their letters Marx and Engels return
again and again to the most diverse aspects of their doctrine, emphasising and
explaining—at times discussing and debating—what is newest (in
relation to earlier views), most important and most difficult.


There unfolds before the reader a strikingly vivid picture of the history of the
working-class movement all over the world—at its most important junctures
and in its most essential points. Even more valuable is the history of the
politics of the working class. On the most diverse occasions, in
various countries of the Old World and the New, and at different historical
moments, Marx and Engels discuss the most important principles of the
presentation of the political tasks of the working class. And
the period covered by the correspondence was a period in which the working class
separated from bourgeois democracy, a period in which an independent
working-class movement arose, a period in which the fundamental principles of
proletarian tactics and policy were defined. The more we have occasion in our
day to observe how the working-class movement in various countries suffers from
opportunism in consequence of the stag nation and decay of the bourgeoisie, in
consequence of the attention of the labour leaders being engrossed in the
trivialities

    

of the day, and so on—the more valuable becomes the wealth of material
contained in the correspondence, displaying as it does a most profound
comprehension of the basic aims of the proletariat in bringing
about change, and providing an unusually flexible definition of the tasks
of the tactics of the moment from the standpoint of these revolutionary
aims, without making the slightest concession to opportunism or
revolutionary phrase-mongering.  

If one were to attempt to define in a single word the focus, so to
speak, of the whole correspondence, the central point at which the whole
body of ideas expressed and discussed converges—that word would be
dialectics. The application of materialist dialectics to the
reshaping of all political economy from its foundations up, its application
to history, natural science, philosophy and to the policy and tactics of
the working class—that was what interested Marx and Engels most of all,
that was where they contributed what was most essential and new, and that
was what constituted the masterly advance they made in the history of
revolutionary thought.  

We intend in the following account, after giving a general review of
the correspondence, to outline the most interesting remarks and arguments
of Marx and Engels, without pretending to give an exhaustive account of the
contents of the letters.  
I. GENERAL REVIEW

The correspondence opens with letters written in 1844 by the
24-year-old Engels to Marx. The situation in Germany at that time is
brought out in striking relief. The first letter is dated the end of
September 1844 and was sent from Barmen, where Engels’s family lived, and
where he was born. Engels was not quite 24 years old at the time. He was
bored with family life and was anxious to break away. His father was a
despot, a pious manufacturer, who was outraged at his son’s continual
running about to political meetings, and at his communist
convictions. Engels wrote that had it not been for his mother, of whom he
was

    

deeply fond, he would not have spent at home even the remaining few days
before he was due to leave. “You would never believe,” he complained to
Marx “what petty reasons, what superstitious fears were put forward by the
family against my
departure.”[2] 

While he was still in Barmen—where he was delayed a little longer by
a love affair—Engels gave way to his father and worked for about two
weeks in the factory office (his father was a manufacturer). “Huckstering
is too horrible,” he writes to Marx. “Barmen is too horrible, the way
they waste their time is too horrible, and above all things it is too
horrible to remain, not merely a bourgeois, but a manufacturer, a bourgeois
who actively opposes the proletariat.” He consoled himself, Engels goes on
to say, by working on his book on the condition of the working class (this
book appeared, we know, in 1845 and is one of the best works of world
socialist literature). “And perhaps one can while being a Communist remain
in one’s outward status a bourgeois and a huckstering beast as long as one
does not write, but to carry on a wide communist propaganda and at the same
time engage in huckstering and industry will not work. Enough. At Easter I
quit here. Add to this the drowsy life of a thoroughly Christian-Prussian
family—I cannot stand it any longer; I might in the, end become a German
philistine and introduce philistinism into

communism.[3] Thus wrote the young Engels. After the Revolution of 1848
the exigencies of life obliged him to return to his father’s office and to
become a “huckstering beast” for many long years. But be was able to
stand firm and to create for himself, not Christian-Prussia,, surroundings,
but entirely different, comradely surroundings, and to become for the rest
of his life a relentless foe of the “introduction of philistinism into
communism”.  

Social life in the German provinces in 1844 resembled Russian social
life at the beginning of the twentieth century, before the Revolution of
1905. There was a general urge for political life, a general seething
indignation in opposition to the government; the clergy fulminated against
the youth for their atheism; children in bourgeois families quarrelled with
their parents over their “aristocratic treatment of servants or workers”.

 

The general spirit of opposition found expression in the fact that
everybody declared himself to be a Communist. “The Police Commissary in
Barmen is a Communist,” Engels writes to Marx. He was in Cologne,
D\"usseldorf, Elberfeld—wherever he turned he stumbled upon Communists!
“One ardent Communist, a cartoonist ... named Seel, is going to Paris in
two months. I shall give him your address; you will all like him for his
enthusiastic temperament and his love of music, and he could very well be
useful as a
cartoonist.”[4] 

“Miracles are happening here in Elberfeld. Yesterday [this was written
on February 22, 1845], we held our third communist meeting in the largest
hall and the best restaurant of the city. The first meeting was attended by
40 people, the second by 130 and the third by at least 200. The whole of
Elberfeld and Barmen, from the moneyed aristocracy to the small
shopkeepers, was represented, all except the proletariat.”  

This is literally what Engels wrote. Everybody in Germany at that time
was a Communist—except the proletariat. Communism was a form of
expression of the opposition sentiments of all, and chiefly of the
bourgeoisie. “The most stupid, the most lazy and most philistine people,
who take no interest in anything in the world, are almost becoming
enthusiastic over
communism.”[5] The chief preachers of communism at that time were
people of the type of our Narodniks, “Socialist-Revolutionaries”,
“Popular
Socialists”,[6] and so forth, that is to say, well-meaning bourgeois,
some to a greater, others to a lesser degree, furious with the government.


And under such conditions, amidst countless pseudo-socialist trends and
factions, Engels was able to find his way to proletarian
socialism, without fearing to break off relations with a mass of
well-intentioned people, who were ardent revolutionaries but bad
Communists.  

In 1846 Engels was in Paris. Paris was then seething with politics and
the discussion of various socialist theories. Engels eagerly studied
socialism, made the acquaintance of Cabet, Louis Blanc and other prominent
socialists, and ran from editorial office to editorial office and from
circle to circle.  
 

His attention was chiefly focussed on the most important and most
widespread socialist doctrine of the time—Proudhonism. And even
before the publication of Proudhon’s Philosophy of
Poverty (October 1846; Marx’s famous reply, The Poverty of
Philosophy, appeared in 1847), Engels, with ruthless sarcasm and
remarkable profundity, criticised Proudhon’s basic ideas, which were then
being particularly advocated by the German Socialist Gr\"un. His excellent
knowledge of English (which Marx mastered much later) and of English
literature enabled Engels at once (letter of September 16, 1846) to point
to the example of the bankruptcy of the notorious Proudhonist “labour
bazaars” [7] in England. Proudhon disgraces socialism, Engels
exclaims indignantly—it follows from Proudhon that the workers must
buy out capital.  

The 26-year-old Engels simply annihilates “true socialism”. We meet
this expression in his letter of October 23, 1846, long before the
Communist Manifesto, and Gr\"un is mentioned as its chief
exponent. An “anti-proletarian, petty-bourgeois, philistine” doctrine,
“sheer phrase-mongering”, all kinds of “humanitarian” aspirations,
“superstitious fear of ‘crude’ communism” (L\"offel-Kommunismus,
literally: “spoon communism” or “belly communism”), “peaceful plans to
bestow happiness” upon mankind—these are some of Engels’s epithets,
which apply to all species of pre-Marxist socialism.  

“The Proudhon plan of association,” writes Engels, “was discussed
for three evenings. At first I had nearly the whole clique with Gr\"un at
their head against me.... The chief point was to prove the necessity for
revolution by force.” (October 23, 1846). In the end he got furious, he
writes, and drove his opponents so hard that they were obliged to make an
open attack on communism. He demanded a vote on whether they were
Communists or not. This caused great indignation among the Gr\"unites, who
began to argue that they had come together to discuss “the good of man
kind “and that they must know what communism really was. Engels
gave them an extremely simple definition so as to permit no opportunity for
evasions. “I therefore defined,” Engels writes, “the objects of the
Communists in this way:
(1) to achieve the interests of the proletariat in opposition

    

to those of the bourgeoisie;
(2) to do this through the abolition of private property and its
replacement by community of goods;
(3) to recognise no means of carrying out these objects other than a
democratic revolution by
force.”[8] (Written a year and a half before the 1848 Revolution.)


The discussion ended with the meeting’s adopting Engels’s definition by
thirteen votes against the votes of two Gr\"unites. These meetings were
attended by some twenty journeymen carpenters. Thus the foundations of the
Social-Democratic Workers’ Party of Germany were laid in Paris sixty-seven
years ago.  

A year later, in his letter of November 23, 1847, Engels informed Marx
that he had prepared a draft of the Communist Manifesto,
incidentally declaring himself opposed to the catechism form originally
proposed. “I begin: What is Communism?” writes Engels. “And then
straight to the proletariat—history of its origin, difference from former
workmen, development of the contradiction between proletariat and
bourgeoisie, crises, results.... In conclusion the Party policy of the
Communists.”  

This historical letter of Engels’s on the first draft of a work which
has travelled all over the world and which to this (lay is true in all its
fundamentals and as actual and topical as though it were written yesterday,
clearly proves that Marx and Engels are justly named side by side as the
founders of modern socialism.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
The article “The Marx-Engels Correspondence” here published was the
beginning of an extensive article that Lenin planned at the time of the
publication of the German four-volume edition of the Marx-Engels
Correspondence in September 1913. Lenin made a deep study of th?
correspondence; the Institute of Marxism-Leninism has in its possession a
thick notebook (76 pages) in which Lenin summarised the letters and copied
extracts from them.  

Lenin intended to publish “The Marx-Engels Correspondence” in the
magazine Prosveshcheniye in 1914, and an announcement to that
effect was printed in Proletarskaya Pravda No. 7 on December 14,
1913; the article, however, remained unfinished and was first published in
Pravda on November 28, 1920, on the occasion of the hundredth
anniversary of Engels’s birth. On this occasion Lenin added a subtitle
“Engels as One of the Founders of Communism” and provided a footnote to
the title: “The beginning of an unfinished article written in 1913 or
early 1914”.





[2]
Marx-Engels Gesamtausgabe, dritte Abteilung, Band I, Marx-Engels Verlag
GmbH, Berlin, 1929, S. 1 u. 20-21.





[3]
Marx-Engels, Selected Correspondence, Moscow, 1955,
pp. 29–31.





[4]
Marx-Engels Gesamtausgabe, dritte Abteilung, Band I, Marx-Engels Verlag
GmbH, Berlin, 1929, S. 3.





[5]
Marx-Engels Gesamtausgabe, dritte Abteilung , Band 1, Marx-Engels
Verlag GmbH, Berlin, 1929, S. 14.





[6]
Popular Socialists—a legal petty-bourgeois party formed in
1906 by the separation of part of the Right wing of the
Socialist-Revolutionaries, The demands put forward by the party did not go
beyond a constitutional monarchy.





[7]
Engels an das Kommunistische Korrespondenz-Komitee in Br\"ussel; Paris,
1846, September 16. [Marx-Engels Gesamtausgabe, dritte Abteilung, Band I,
Marx-Engels Verlag GmbH, Berlin, 1929, S. 34.]





[8]
See K. Marx and F. Engels, Selected Correspondence, Moscow,
1955, pp. 35–36.











Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 





