# Volume  4

==========

## Table of contents







Lenin Collected Works: Volume 4







Lenin
      Collected Works: Volume 4


 
 
Lenin Collected Works: 

    Volume 4
1898--1901


Preface




1898


On the Question of Our Factory Statistics
    
(Professor Karyshev's New Statistical Exploits

105k


Book Review: A. Bogdanov. A Short Course of Economic Science
    
Moscow, 1897. Publ. A. Murinova's Bookshop. 290 pp. Price 2
  rubles

30k


A Note on the Question of the Market Theory
(Apropos of the Polemic of
  Messrs. Tugan-Baranovsky and Bulgakov)

32k


1899


Book Review: Parvus. The World Market and the Agricultural Crisis
    

Economic Essays. Translated from the German by
L. Y., St. Petersburg, 1898. Publ. O. N. Popova
(Educational Library, Series 2, No. 2). 142 pp. Price 40
kopeks.
      
7k


Book Review: R. Gvozdev. Kulak Usury, Its Social and Economic Significance
    
St. Petersburg, 1899. Publ. N. Garin
      
12k


Book Review: Commercial and Industrial Russia
    
Handbook for Merchants and Factory Owners.
Compiled under the Editorship of
A. A. Blau, Head of the Statistical Division of the Department
of Commerce and Manufactures. St. Petersburg, 1899. Price
10 rubles

10k


Once More on the Theory of Realisation

67k


Book Review: Karl Kautsky. Die Agrarfrage
    
Eine Uebersicht fiber die Tendenzen der modernen
Landwirtschaft und die
Agrarpolitik u.s.w. Stuttgart, Diets, 1899
      
18k


Book Review: J. A. Hobson. The Evolution of Modern Capitalism
    
Translated from the English. St. Petersburg,
1898. Publ. O. N. Papova. Price I rb. 50 kop.
      
10k


Capitalism in Agriculture
    
(Kautsky's Book and Mr. Bulgakov's Article)

    
First Article

  | Second Article

176k


Reply to Mr. P. Nezhdanov

19k


A Protest by Russian Social-Democrats

54k


Book Review: S. N. Prokopovich. The Working-Class Movement in the West

26k


Book Review: Karl Kautsky. Bernstein und das sozialdemokratische Programm. Eine Antikritik

33k


Articles for “Rabochaya Gazeta”
    
Letter to the Editorial Group
    
Our Programme
    
Our Immediate Task
    
An Urgent Question

60k


A Draft of Our Party Programme

78k


A Retrograde Trend in Russian Social-Democracy

94k


Apropos of the Profession de Foi

32k


Factory Courts

36k


On Strikes

30k


1900


Draft of a Declaration of the Editorial Board of Iskra and Zarya

39k


How the “Spark” Was Nearly Extinguished

53k


Draft Agreement

6k


Declaration of the Editorial Board of Iskra

18k


Preface to the Pamphlet, May Days in Kharkov

20k


The Urgent Tasks of Our Movement

18k


The War in China

17k


The Split in the Union of Russian Social-Democrats Abroad

7k


Note of December 29, 1900

10k


1901


Casual Notes
    

I. Beat--But Not to Death!
    

II. Why Accelerate the Vicissitude of the Times?
    

III. Objective Statistics

100k

The Drafting of 183 Students Into the Army

19k


The Workers' Party and the Peasantry

27k


 


Volume 4 Transcription/Mark-up:
   

    Brian Baggins, David Walters, & Robert Cymbala, 2000.
    
    • R. Cymbala, 2003.

        • 
    (Converted to "tx2html", Oct. 2004.)
  







 
Previous

 | 
 Next 

 
Lenin
      Collected Works 
 | 
 Lenin
      Internet Archive 

 




 


 
 
 







==========

## Preface







LCW: 4: Preface by Progress Publishers







Lenin  
      Collected Works: Volume 4: Preface by Progress Publishers


 

Lenin Collected Works: 
Volume 4

Preface by Progress
      Publishers



    Volume Four of the Collected Works contains Lenin's
    writings for the period February 1898-February 1901. These writings
    are devoted to the struggle for the victory of revolutionary Marxism
    in the working-class movement and to the exposure of the
    anti-revolutionary views of the Narodniks, “legal Marxists,"
    and “economists."
  

    "A Note on the Question of the Market Theory (Apropos of the
    Polemic of Messrs. Tugan-Baranovsky and Bulgakov)," “Once More
    on the Theory of Realisation," and “Capitalism in Agriculture
    (Kautsky's Book and Mr. Bulgakov's Article)" were directed against
    the “legal Marxists," who sought to subordinate and adapt the
    working-class movement to the interests of the bourgeoisie.
  

    This volume contains Lenin's first writings against
    “economism”: “A Protest by Russian
    Social-Democrats," articles for the third issue of Rabochaya
    Gazeta, “A Retrograde Trend in Russian Social-Democracy,"
    and “Apropos of the Profession de foi," in which he
    laid bare the opportunism of the economists” and showed
    “economism” to be a variety of international opportunism
    ("Bernsteinism on Russian soil"). Against the anti-Marxist
    positions adopted by the “economists," Lenin contraposed the
    plan of the unity of socialism with the working-class movement.
  

    Several of the articles in this volume are models of the journalism
    of social and political exposure to which Lenin attached great
    significance in the struggle against the lawlessness of the tsarist
    officials, the struggle to awaken the consciousness of the broad
    masses of the people. These articles are: “Beat—but Not
    to Death!", "'Why Accelerate the Vicissitude of the Times?" and
    “Objective Statistics," published under the general heading of
    “Casual Notes”; “The Drafting of 183 Students into
    the Army," the preface to

    

    the pamphlet on the famous Kharkov May Day celebration, 1900,
    May Days in Kharkov, and the article, “Factory
    Courts," written in connection with the granting of police functions
    to the Factory Inspectorate.
  

    The volume also contains writings relating to the organisation of the
    all-Russian illegal Marxist newspaper Iskra:

    "Draft of a Declaration of the Editorial Board of
    Iskra and Zarya," “How the 'Spark' Was
    Nearly Extinguished," and “Declaration of the Editorial Board
    of Iskra."
  

    These documents, as well as the articles, “Our Programme,"
    “A Draft Programme of Our Party," “The Urgent Tasks of
    Our Movement," and “The Workers' Party and the Peasantry,"
    define the tasks confronting the Marxist organisations and the
    working-class movement of Russia at the moment when Lenin set about
    the actual formation of a party to fight under the unitary banner of
    revolutionary Marxism against opportunism, amateurishness in work,
    ideological disunity, and vacillation.
  

    The present volume also contains the “Draft Agreement”
    with the Plekhanovist Emancipation of Labour group on the
    publication of the newspaper Iskra and the magazine
    Zarya, which appears for the first time in a collected
    edition of Lenin's writings. Iskra was launched on the
    basis of the “Draft Agreement."
  







 
Previous

 | 
 Next 

 
Lenin
      Collected Works 
 | 
 Lenin
      Internet Archive 

 




 









==========

## On the Question of Our Factory Statistics









Lenin: On the Question of Our Factory Statistics







V. I.  

      Lenin
On the Question of Our Factory Statistics
(Professor Karyshev’s New Statistical Exploits)[21]




Written: Written in August 1898 

Published:

      Published in 1898 in the collection Economic Studies and Essays, by Vladimir Ilyin.

      Published according to the text in the collection.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 4,

      pages 13-45.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



 

      The Russian reading public displays a lively interest in the question of
      our factory statistics and in the chief conclusions to be drawn from
      them. This interest is quite understandable, for the question is connected
      with the more extensive one of the “destiny of capitalism in
      Russia.” Unfortunately, however, the state of our factory statistics does
      not correspond to the general interest in their data. This branch of
      economic statistics in Russia is in a truly sad state, and still sadder,
      perhaps, is the fact that the people who write about statistics often
      display an astounding lack of understanding of the nature of the figures
      they are analysing, their authenticity and their suitability for drawing
      certain conclusions. Such precisely is the estimate that must be made of
      Mr. Karyshev’s latest work, first published in Izvestia Moskovskovo
      Selskokhozyaistvennovo Instituta (4th year, Book 1) and then as a
      separate booklet with the high-sounding title Material on the Russian
      National Economy. I. Our Factory Industry in the Middle Nineties
      (Moscow, 1898). Mr. Karyshev tries, in this essay, to draw conclusions
      from the latest publication of the Department of Commerce and Manufactures
      on our factory

      industry.[1]

      We shall make a detailed
      analysis of Mr. Karyshev’s conclusions and, especially, of his methods. We
      think that an analysis of this sort will have significance, not only in
      deter mining the way in which the material is treated by Professor

    

      So-and-So (for this a review of a few lines would suffice), but also in
      determining the degree of reliability of our factory statistics, for which
      deductions they are suitable and for which they are unsuitable, what the
      most important requirements of our factory statistics are and the tasks of
      those who study them.
    

      As its name implies, the source used by Mr. Karyshev contains a list of
      factories in the Empire for the year 1894-95. The publication of a full
      list of all factories (i.e., of relatively large industrial
      establishments, with varying conceptions of what is to be considered
      large) is not new to our literature. Since 1881 Messrs. Orlov and Budagov
      have compiled a Directory of Factories and Works the last (third)
      edition of which was issued in 1894. Much earlier, in 1869, a list of
      factories was printed in the notes accompanying the statistical tables on
      industry in the first issue of the Ministry of Finance Yearbook.
      The reports which factory owners are by law obliged to submit annually to
      the Ministry provided the material for all these publications. The new
      publication of the Department of Commerce and Manufactures differs from
      former publications of this type in its somewhat more extensive
      information, but at the same time it has tremendous shortcomings from
      which the earlier ones did not suffer and which greatly complicate its
      utilisation as material on factory statistics. In the introduction to the
      List there is a reference to the unsatisfactory condition of
      these statistics in the past which thereby defines the purpose of the
      publication—to serve precisely as material for statistics and not
      merely as a reference book. But the List, as a statistical
      publication, amazes one by the complete absence of any sort of summarised
      totals. It is to be hoped that a publication of this sort, the first of
      its kind, will also be the last statistical publication without
      summaries. The huge mass of raw material in the form of piles of figures
      is useless ballast in a reference book. The introduction to the
      List sharply criticises the reports previously submitted to the
      Ministry by factory owners on the grounds that they “consisted of
      confusing in formation, always one and the same, which was repeated from
      year to year and did not allow even the quantity of goods produced to be
      accurately determined, whereas production figures as complete and reliable
      as possible are an urgent

    

      necessity” (p. 1). We shall certainly not say a word in defence of
      the absolutely outmoded system of our former factory statistics that were
      purely

      pre-Reform,[2]

      both as to organisation and as to quality. But,
      unfortunately, there is scarcely any noticeable improvement in
      their present condition. The gigantic List just published still
      does not give us the right to speak of any serious changes in the old
      system admitted by all to be useless. The reports “did not allow
      even the quantity of goods produced to be accurately
      determined.”... Indeed, in the latest List there is no
      information whatsoever on the quantity of goods, although Mr. Orlov’s
      Directory, for example, gave this information for a very large
      number of factories, and in some branches of industry for almost all
      factories, so that in the summarised table there is information on the
      quantity of the product (for the leather, distilling, brick, cereals,
      flour milling, wax, lard, flax-scutching, and brewery industries). And it
      was from the old reports that the Directory material was
      compiled. The List does not give any information on machinery
      employed, although the Directory gave this information for some
      branches of industry. The introduction describes the changes that have
      occurred in our factory statistics in this way: formerly, factory owners
      supplied information through the police according to “a brief and
      insufficiently clear programme” and no one checked the
      information. “Material was obtained from which no more or less
      precise conclusions could be drawn” (p. 1). Now a new and much more
      detailed programme has been compiled and the gathering and checking of
      factory statistical information have been entrusted to the factory
      inspectors. At first glance one might think that we now have the right to
      expect really acceptable data, since a correct programme and provision for
      checking the data are two very important conditions for successful
      statistics. In actual fact,how ever, these two features are still in their
      former primitively chaotic state. The detailed programme with an
      explanation is not published in the introduction to the List,
      although statistical methodology requires the publication of the programme
      according to which the data were gathered. We

    

      shall see from the following analysis of the List material that the
      basic questions of programme for factory statistics still remain
      entirely unclarified. With regard to checking the data, here is a statement
      by a person engaged in the practical side of this
      process—Mr. Mikulin, Senior Factory Inspector of Kherson

      Gubernia,[3]

      who has published a book containing an analysis of statistical data gathered
      according to the new system in Kherson Gubernia.
    

      “It proved impossible to make a factual check of all the figures in
      the reports submitted by owners of industrial establishments and they
      were, therefore, returned for correction only in those cases when
      comparison with the data of similar establishments or with information
      obtained during an inspection of the establishments showed obvious
      inconsistencies in the answers. In any case, responsibility for the
      correctness of the figures for each establishment con lamed in the lists
      rests with those who submitted them” (Factory and Artisan Industry
      in Kherson Gubernia, Odessa, 1897, preface. Our italics). And so,
      responsibility for the accuracy of the figures, as before, still rests
      with the factory owners. Representatives of the Factory Inspectorate were
      not only unable to check all the figures, but, as we shall see below, were
      even unable to ensure that they were uniform and could be compared.
    

      Later, we shall give full details of the shortcomings of the List
      and the material it uses. Its chief shortcoming, as we have noted, is the
      complete absence of summaries (private persons who compiled the
      Directory drew up summaries and expanded them with each
      edition). Mr. Karyshev, availing himself of the collaboration of two other
      people, conceived the happy idea of filling this gap, at least in part,
      and of compiling summaries on our factory industry according to the
      List. This was a very useful undertaking, and every one would
      have been grateful for its achievement, if ... if Mr. Karyshev, firstly,
      had published even a few of

    

      the obtained results in their entirety and if, secondly, he had not
      displayed, in his treatment of the material, a lack of criticism bordering
      on high-handedness. Mr. Karyshev was in a hurry to draw conclusions before
      he had studied the material attentively and before his statistical
      processing was anything like

      “thorough,”[4]

      so that naturally he made
      a whole series of the most curious errors.
    

      Let us begin with the first, basic question in industrial statistics: what
      establishments should come under the heading of “factories”?
      Mr. Karyshev does not even pose this question; he seems to assume that a
      “factory” is some thing quite definite. As far as the
      List is concerned, he asserts, with a boldness worthy of better
      employment, that in contrast to former publications this one registers not
      only large establishments but all factories. This
      assertion, which the author repeats twice (pp. 23 and 34), is
      altogether untrue. Actually the reverse is the case; the
      List merely registers larger establishments as compared
      with former publications on factory statistics. We shall now explain how
      It is that Mr. Karyshev could “fail to notice” such a
      “trifle”; but first let us resort to historical
      reference. Prior to the middle eighties our factory statistics did not
      include any definitions or rules that limited the concept of
      factory to the larger industrial establishments. Every type of industrial
      (and artisan) establishment found its way into “factory”
      statistics; this, it goes without saying, led to terrific chaos in the
      data, since the full registration of all such establishments, by the
      employment of existing forces and means (i.e., with out a correct
      industrial census), is absolutely out of the question. In some gubernias
      or in some branches of industry hundreds and thousands of the tiniest
      establishments were included, while in others only the larger
      “factories” were listed. It was, therefore, natural that the
      people who first tried to make a scientific analysis of the data contained
      in our factory statistics (in the sixties) turned all their attention to
      this question and directed all their efforts to separating the

    

      branches for which there were more or less reliable data from those for
      which the data were absolutely unreliable, to separating establishments
      large enough to enable the obtainment of satisfactory data from those too
      small to yield satisfactory data.

      Bushen,[5]

      Bok,[6]

      and

      Timiryazev[7]

      provided such valuable criteria on all these
      questions that, had they been carefully observed and developed by the
      compilers of our factory statistics, we should now have, in all
      probability, some very acceptable data. But in actual fact all these
      criteria remained, as usual, a voice crying in the wilderness, and our
      factory statistics have remained in their former chaotic state. From 1889
      the Department of Commerce and Manufactures began its publication of the
      Collection of Data on Factory Industry in Russia (for 1885 and
      the following years). A slight step forward was made in this publication:
      the small establishments, i.e.,. those with an output valued at less than
      1,000 rubles, were excluded. It goes without saying that this standard was
      too low and too indefinite; it is ridiculous even to think of the
      lull registration of all industrial establishments with
      an output valued at more than that amount as long as the information is
      collected by the police. As before, some gubernias and some branches of
      industry included a mass of small establishments with outputs ranging in
      value from 2,000 to 5,000 rubles, while other gubernias and other branches
      of industry omitted them. We shall see in stances of this further
      on. Finally, our latest factory statistical system has introduced a
      completely different formula for defining the concept “factory.” It
      has been recognised that “all industrial establishments” (of
      those “under the jurisdiction” of the Factory
      Inspectorate) are subject to registration “if they employ no
      fewer than 15 workers, as are also those employing fewer than 15 workers,
      if they have a steam-boiler, a steam-engine, or other mechanical
motive power and
    

      machines or factory

installations.”[8]

      We must examine this
      definition in detail (the points we have stressed are particularly
      unclear), but let us first say that this concept of “factory”
      is something quite new in our factory statistics; until now no attempt has
      been made to limit the concept “factory” to establishments
      with a definite number of workers, with a steam-engine, etc. In general,
      the strict limitation of the concept “factory” is undoubtedly
      necessary, but the definition we have cited suffers, unfortunately, from
      its extreme lack of precision, from its unclarity and diffusion. It
      provides the following definitions of establishments subject to
      registration as “factories” in the statistics: 1) The
      establishment must come within the jurisdiction of the Factory
      Inspectorate. This, apparently, excludes establishments belonging to the
      state, etc., metallurgical plants and others. In the List,
      however, there are many state and government factories (see Alphabetical
      List, pp. 1-2), and we do not know whether they were registered in all
      gubernias or whether the data pertaining to them were subject to checking
      by the Factory Inspectorate, etc. It must be said, in general, that as
      long as our factory statistics are not freed from the web of various
      “departments” to which the different industrial establishments
      belong, they cannot be satisfactory; the areas of departmental
      jurisdiction frequently overlap and are subject to changes; even the
      implementation of similar programmes by different departments will never
      be identical. The rational organisation of statistics demands that
      complete information on all industrial establishments be concentrated in
      one purely statistical institution to ensure careful observation of
      identical methods of gathering and analysing data. So long as this is not
      done, the greatest caution must be exercised in dealing with factory
      statistics that now include and now exclude (at different times and in
      different gubernias) establishments belonging to “another
      department.” Metallurgical plants, for instance, have long been excluded
      from our factory statistics; but Orlov, nevertheless, included in

    

      the last edition of his Directory quite a number of metallurgical
      plants (almost all rail production, the Izhevsk and Votkinsk factories in
      Vyatka Gubernia, and others) that are not included in the List,
      although the latter records metallurgical plants in other gubernias that
      were previously not included in “factory” statistics (e.g.,
      the Siemens copper-smelting plant in Elisavetpol Gubernia, p. 330). In
      Section VIII of the introduction to the List, iron-working,
      iron-smelting, iron- and copper-founding and other establishments are
      mentioned (p. iii), but no indication at all is given of the way in which
      metallurgical plants are separated from those “subordinated”
      to the Department of Commerce and Manufactures. 2) Only
      industrial establishments are subject to registration. This
      definition is not as clear as it seems to be at first glance; the
      separation of artisan and agricultural establishments requires detailed
      and clearly defined rules applicable to each branch of industry. Below we
      shall see confusion in abundance arising out of the absence of these
      rules. 3) The number of workers in an establishment must be no less than
      15. It is not clear whether only workers actually employed in the
      establishment are counted or whether those working outside are included;
      it has not been explained how the former are to be distinguished from the
      latter (this is also a difficult question), whether auxiliary workers
      should be counted, etc. In the above-mentioned book Mr. Mikulin quotes
      instances of the confusion arising out of this unclarity. The
      List enumerates many establishments that employ only
      outside workers. It stands to reason that an attempt to list all
      establishments of this type (i.e., all shops giving out work, all people
      in the so-called handicraft industries who give out work, etc.) can only
      raise a smile under the present system of gathering information, while
      fragmentary data for some gubernias and some branches of industry are of
      no significance and merely add to the confusion. 4) All establishments
      possessing a steam-boiler or a steam-engine are called “factories.”

      This definition is the most accurate and most happily chosen, because the
      employment of steam is really typical for the development of large-scale
      machine industry. 5) Establishments possessing “other”
      (non-steam) “mechanical motive power” are regarded as
      factories. This definition is very inaccurate and exceedingly broad; by
      this definition, establishments

    

      employing water, horse, and wind power,
      even treadmills, may be called factories. Since the registration of all
      such establishments is not even feasible, there must be confusion,
      examples of which we shall soon see. 6) Under the heading
      “factories” are included establishments having “factory
      installations.” This most indefinite and hazy definition negates the
      significance of all definitions given previously and makes the data
      chaotic and impossible to compare. This definition will inevitably be
      understood differently in different gubernias, and what sort of definition
      is it in reality? A factory is an establishment having factory
      installations.... Such is the last word of our newest system of factory
      statistics. No wonder these statistics are so unsatisfactory. We shall
      give examples from all sections of the List in order to
      show that in some gubernias and in some branches of industry the tiniest
      establishments are registered, which introduces confusion into factory
      statistics, since there can be no question of recording all such
      establishments. Let us take Section I: “cotton processing.” On
      pp. 10-11 we come across five “factories” in the villages of
      Vladimir Gubernia which, for payment, dye yarn and linen belonging to
      others (sic!). In place of the value of the output the sum paid
      for dyeing is given as from 10 rubles (?) to 600 rubles, with the number
      of workers from zero (whether this means that there is no information on
      the number of workers or that there are no hired workers, is not
      known) to three. There is no mechanical motive power. These are peasant
      dye-houses, i.e., the most primitive artisan establishments that have been
      registered by chance in one gubernia and, it goes without saying, omitted
      in others. In Section II (wool processing), in the same Vladimir Gubernia,
      we find hand “factories” that card wool belonging to others
      for the payment of 12-48 rubles a year and em ploy 0 or I worker. There
      is a band silk factory (Section III, No. 2517) in a village; it employs
      three workers and has an out put valued at 660 rubles. Then more village
      dye-houses in the same Vladimir Gubernia, employing 0-3 workers for hand
      work and receiving 150-550 rubles for the treatment of Linen (Section IV,
      treatment of flax, p. 141). There is a bast-mat “factory” in
      Perm Gubernia, on a hand-work level, employing six workers (Section V),
      with an output valued at 921 rubles (No. 3936). It goes without saying
      that there

    

      are more than a few such establishments in other gubernias (Kostroma, for
      instance), but they were not counted as factories. There is a
      printing-works (Section VI) with one worker and an output value of 300
      rubles (No. 4167): in other gubernias only the big printing-works were
      included, and in still others, none at all. There is a
      “sawmill” with three workers sawing barrel staves for the
      payment of 100 rubles (Section VII, No. 6274), and a metal-working hand
      establishment employing three workers with an output valued at 575 rubles
      (No. 8962). In Section IX (processing of mineral products) there are very
      many of the tiniest establishments, brickworks especially, with, for
      example, only one worker and an output valued at 48-50 rubles, and so
      on. In Section X (processing of livestock products) there are petty
      candle, sheep - skin processing, leather and other establishments
      employing hand labour, 0-1-2 workers, with an output valued at a few
      hundred rubles (pp. 489, 507, et al.). More than anywhere else there are
      numerous establishments of a purely artisan type in Section XI (processing
      of foodstuffs), in the oil-pressing and, especially, the flour-milling
      branches. In the latter industry the strict division of
      “factories” from petty establishments is most essential; but
      so far this has not been done and utter chaos reigns in all our factory
      statistical publications. An attempt to introduce order into the
      statistics on the factory- type flour-milling establishments was made by
      the first congress of gubernia statistical committee secretaries (in May

      1870),[9]

      but it was in vain, and up to the present day the compilers of our
      factory statistics do not seem to be concerned about the utter
      uselessness of the figures they print. The List, for example,
      included among the factories windmills employing one worker and realising
      from 0 to 52 rubies, etc. (pp. 587, 589, et passim); water-mills
      with one wheel, employing one worker and earning 34-80 rubles,
      etc. (p. 589, et passim); and so on. It goes without saying that
      such “statistics” are simply ridiculous, because another and
      even several other volumes could be filled with such mills without giving

    

      a complete list. Even in the section dealing with the chemical industry
      (XII) there are tiny establishments.such as village pitch works employing
      from one to three workers, with an output valued at 15-300 rubles (p. 995,
      et al.). Such methods can go so far as to produce “statistics”
      similar to those published in the sixties in the well-known Military
      Statistical Abstract that for European Russia listed 3,086 pitch and
      tar “factories,” of which 1,450 were in Archangel Gubernia
      (employing 4,202 workers, with a total output valued at 156,274 rubles,
      i.e.,
      an average of fewer than three workers and a little more than 100 rubles
      per “factory”). Archangel Gubernia seems to have been deliberately
      left out of this section of the List altogether, as though the
      peasants there do not distil pitch and make tar! We must point out that
      all the instances cited concern registered establishments that do not come
      under the definitions given in the circular of June 7,1895. Their
      registration, therefore, is purely fortuitous; they were included
      in some gubernias (perhaps, even, in some

      uyezds[10]

),

      but in the majority
      they were omitted. Such establishments were omitted in former statistics
      (from 1885 onwards) as having an output valued at less than 1,000 rubles.
    

      Mr. Karyshev did not properly understand this basic problem of factory
      statistics; yet he did not hesitate to make “deductions” from
      the figures he obtained by his calculations. The first of these deductions
      is that the number of factories in Russia is decreasing (p. 4, et
      al.). Mr. Karyshev arrived at this conclusion in a very simple way: he
      took the number of factories for 1885 from the data of the Department of
      Commerce and Manufactures (17,014) and deducted from it the number of
      factories in European Russia given in the List (14,578). This
      gives a reduction of 14.3%—the professor even calculates the
      percentage and is not bothered by the fact that the 1885 data did not
      include the excise-paying factories; he confines himself to the remark
      that the addition of excise-paying establishments would give a greater
      “reduction” in the number of factories. And the author
      undertakes to discover in which part of Russia this “process of
      diminution in the number of establishments” (p. 5) is evolving
      “most rapidly.” In actual fact there is no process of
diminution, the number of
    

      factories in Russia is increasing and not decreasing, and the
      figment of Mr. Karyshev’s imagination came from the learned professor’s
      having compared data that are not at all

      comparable.[11]

      The incomparability is by no means due to the absence of data on
      excise-paying factories for 1885. Mr. Karyshev could have taken figures
      that included such factories (from Orlov’s cited Directory that
      was compiled from the same Department of Commerce and Manufactures
      lists), and in this way could have fixed the number of
      “factories” in European Russia at 27,986 for 1879,
      27,235 for 1884, 21,124 for 1890, and the
      “reduction” by 1894-95 (14,578) would have been incomparably
      greater. The only trouble is that all these figures are quite unsuitable
      for comparison, because, first, there is no uniform conception of
      “factory” in old and present-day factory statistical
      publications, and, secondly, very small establishments are included in
      the number of “factories” fortuitously and indiscriminately
      (for certain gubernias, for certain years), and, with the means at the
      disposal of our statistics, it would be ridiculous even to assume that
      they could be registered in full. Had Mr. Karyshev taken the trouble to
      study the definition of “factory” in the List, he
      would have seen that in order to compare the number of factories in that
      publication with the number of factories in others it would be
      necessary to take only establishments employing 15 or more
workers, because it is only this type of establishment
      that the List registered in toto and without any
      limitations for all gubernias and all branches of industry. Since such
      establishments are among the relatively large ones, their registration
      in previous publications was also more satisfactory. Having thus assured
      the uniformity of data to be compared, let us compute the number of
      factories in European Russia employing

      sixteen[12]

      or

    

      more workers, taking them from the Directory for 1879 and from
      the List for 1894-95. We get the following instructive figures:
    

Number of Factories in European Russia




Source
Year
Total
Employing
    16 or more
    workers
Employing
    fewer than
    16 workers



Directory, 1st edition
1879


27,986[13]

4,551
23,435



Directory, 3rd edition
1890
21,124
6,013
15,111



List … …
1894-95
14,578
6,659
    (without
    print-
    shops
    6,372)
  
7,919




      Therefore, the comparison of those figures which alone can be considered
      relatively uniform, comparable, and complete shows that the number of
      factories in Russia Is increasing, and at a fairly rapid rate: in
      fifteen or sixteen years (from 1879 to 1894-95) it has increased from
      4,500 to 6,400, i.e., by 40 per cent (in 1879 and 1890 print-shops were
      not included in the number of factories). As far as the number of
      establishments employing fewer than 16 workers is concerned, it would be
      absurd to compare them for these years, since different
      definitions of “factory” and different methods of excluding
      small establishments were employed in all these publications. In 1879
      no small establishments were excluded; on account of
      this, the very smallest establishments in branches closely connected
      with agriculture and peasant industries (flour milling, oil pressing,
      brickmaking, leather, potteries, and others) were included, but they were
      omitted in later publications. By 1890 some small establishments (those
      with an output valued at less than 1,000 rubles) were omitted; this left
      fewer small “factories.” And lastly, in 1894-95, the mass of
      establishments employing fewer than 15 workers was omitted, which resulted
      in the immediate reduction in the number of small “factories”
      to about a half of the 1890 figure. The number of factories for 1879 and
      1890 can be made comparable in another way—by selecting the
      establishments

    

      with an output valued at no less than 2,000 rubles. This is possible
      because the totals from the Directory, as quoted above, refer to
      all registered establishments, whereas the Directory entered in
      its name index of factories only those with an output valued at
      no less than 2,000 rubles. The number of establishments of this type may
      be considered approximately comparable (although there can never be a
      complete list of these establishments as long as our statistics are in
      their present state), with the exception, however, of the flour- milling
      industry. Registration in this branch is of a completely fortuitous
      character in different gubernias and for different years both in the
      Directory and in the Collection of the Department of
      Commerce and Manufactures. In some gubernias only steam-mills are counted
      as “factories,” in others big water-mills are added, in the third
      case hundreds of wind mills, and in the fourth even horse-mills and
      treadmills are included, etc. Limitation on the basis of the value of
      output does not clear up the chaos in statistics on factory-type mills,
      because, instead of that value the quantity of flour milled is taken, and
      this, even in very small mills, frequently amounts to more than 2,000
      poods a year. The number of mills included in factory statistics,
      therefore, makes unbelievable leaps from year to year on account of the
      lack of uniformity in registration methods. The Collection, for
      example, listed 5,073, 5,605 and 5,201 mills in European Russia for the
      years 1889, 1890, and 1891 respectively. In Voronezh Gubernia the number
      of mills, 87 in 1889, suddenly increased to 285 in 1890 and 483 in 1892 as
      a result of the accidental inclusion of windmills. In the Don region the
      number of mills increased from 59 in 1887 to 545 in 1888 and 976 in 1890,
      then dropping to 685 in 1892 (at times windmills were included, while at
      others they were not), etc., etc. The employment of such data is clearly
      impermissible. We, therefore, take only steam-mills and add to them
      establishments in other branches of industry with an output value of no
      less than 2,000 rubles, and the number of factories we get for European
      Russia in 1879 is about 11,500 and in 1890 about

      15,500.[14]

      From this,
      again, it follows that there is an increase
    

      in the number of factories and not the decrease invented by
      Mr. Karyshev. Mr. Karyshev’s theory of the “process of diminution in
      the number of establishments” in the factory industry of Russia is a
      pure fable, based on a worse than in sufficient acquaintance with the
      material he undertook to analyse. Mr. Karyshev, as long ago as 1889
      (Yuridichesky Vestnik, No. 9), spoke of the number of factories
      in Russia, comparing absolutely unsuitable figures taken from the loyal
      reports of the governors and published in the Returns for Russia for
      1884-86 (St. Petersburg, 1887, Table XXXIX) with the strange figures
      of the Military Statistical Abstract (Issue IV. St. Petersburg,
      1871), which included among the “factories” thousands of tiny
      artisan and handicraft establishments, thousands of tobacco plantations
      (sic! see pp. 345 and 414 of the Military Statistical
      Abstract on tobacco “factories” in Bessarabia Gubernia),
      thousands of rural flour- mills and oil-presses, etc., etc. Small wonder
      that in this way the Military Statistical Abstract recorded over
      70,000 “factories” in European Russia in 1866. The wonder is
      that a man was found who was so inattentive and uncritical with regard to
      every printed figure as to take it as a basis for his

      calculations.[15]


      Here a slight diversion is necessary. From his theory of the diminution of
      the number of factories Mr. Karyshev deduces the existence of a process of
      the concentration of industry. It goes without saying that, in rejecting
      his theory, we do not by any means reject the conclusion, since it is only
      Mr. Karyshev’s way of arriving at it that is wrong. To demonstrate this
      process,we must isolate the biggest establishments. Let us take, for
      example, establishments employing 100 or more workers. Comparing the
      number of such establishments, the number of workers they employ, and the
      total value of their output with data on all establishments,we get this
      table:
    
    

    




    See

    footnote[16]


    1879
  

    1890
  

    1894-95
  



Number of

Value of output (thous. rubles)

Number of

Value of output (thous. rubles)

Number of

Value of output (thous. rubles)


Factories
Workers

Factories
Workers

Factories
Workers






 
    All "factories"
     
  
27,986
763,152
1,148,134
21,124
875,764
1,500,871
14,578
885,555
1,345,346


Establishments with 100 or more workers
1,238
509,643
629,926
1,431
623,146
858,588
1,468
655,670
955,233


Percentage of total
–
66.8
54.8
–
71.1
57.2
–
74
70.8



 

      It can be seen from this table that the number of very large
      establishments is increasing, as well as the number of workers employed
      and the value of the output, which constitute an ever greater proportion
      of the total number of workers and the total value of the output of
      officially registered “factories.” The objection may be raised that
      if a concentration of industry is taking place, it means that big
      establishments are squeezing out the smaller, whose number and,
      consequently, the total number of establishments, is decreasing. But,
      firstly, this last deduction is not made in respect of
      “factories” but refers to all industrial
      establishments, and of these we have no right to speak because we
      have no statistics on industrial establishments that are in the least
      reliable and complete. Secondly, and from a purely theoretical standpoint,
      it cannot be said a priori that the number of industrial
      establishments in a developing capitalist society must inevitably and
      always diminish, since, simultaneous with the process of the concentration
      of industry, there is the process of the population’s withdrawal from
      farming, the process of growth in the number of small industrial
      establishments in the backward parts of the country as a result of the
      break-up of the semi-natural peasant economy,

      etc.[17]


      Let us return to Mr. Karyshev. He pays almost the greatest attention of
      all to those data that are the least reliable (i.e., the data on the
      number of “factories”). He divides up the gubernias into groups
      according to the number of “factories,” he designs a cartogram on
      which these groups are plotted, he compiles a special table of gubernias
      having the greatest number of “factories” in each branch of
      industry (pp. 16-17); he presents a mass of calculations in
      which the number of factories in each gubernia is shown as a percentage of
      the total (pp. 12-15). In doing this Mr. Karyshev overlooked a mere
      bagatelle: he forgot to ask himself whether the numbers of factories
      in different gubernias are comparable. This is a question that must
      be answered in the negative and, consequently, the greater part of
      Mr. Karyshev’s calculations,

    

      comparisons, and arguments must be relegated to the sphere of innocent
      statistical exercises. If the professor had acquaint ed himself with the
      definition of “factory” given in the circular of June 7, 1895,
      he would easily have concluded that such a vague definition
      cannot be applied uniformly in different gubernias, and a more
      attentive study of the List itself could have led him to the same
      conclusion. Let us cite some examples. Mr. Karyshev selects Voronezh,
      Vyatka, and Vladimir gubernias (p. 12) for the number of establishments in
      Section XI (processing of food products; this group contains the greatest
      number of factories). But the abundance of “factories” in
      these gubernias is to be explained primarily by the purely
      fortuitous registration, specifically in these gubernias, of small
      establishments such as were not included in other gubernias. In Voronezh
      Gubernia, for instance, there are many “factories” simply
      because small flour-mills were included (of 124 mills only 27 are
      steam-mills; many of them are water-mills with 1-2-3 wheels; such mills
      were not included in other gubernias, and, indeed, they could not be
      listed in full), as well as small oil-presses (mostly horse-driven), which
      were not included in other gubernias. In Vyatka Gubernia only 3 out of 116
      mills are steam-driven, in Vladimir Gubernia a dozen windmills and 168
      oil-presses were included, of which the majority were wind- or
      horse-driven or were worked by hand. The fact that there were fewer
      establishments in other gubernias, does not, of course, mean that these
      gubernias were devoid of windmills, small water-mills, etc. They were
      simply not included. In a large number of gubernias steam- mills were
      included almost exclusively (Bessarabia, Ekaterinoslav, Taurida, Kherson,
      et al.), and the flour-milling industry accounted for 2,308
      “factories” out of 6,233 in European Russia, according to
      Section XI. It was absurd to speak of the distribution of factories by
      gubernias without investigating the dissimilarity of the
      data. Let us take Section IX, the processing of minerals. In Vladimir
      Gubernia, for example, there are 96 brickworks and in the Don region, 31,
      i.e., less than a third of the number. The Directory (for 1890)
      showed the opposite: 16 in Vladimir and 61 in the Don region. It now turns
      out that, according to the List, out of the 96 brickworks in
      Vladimir Gubernia only 5 employ 16 or more workers, while the analogous
      figures for the Don region

    

      are 26 out of 31. The obvious explanation of this is that in the
      Don region small brickworks were not so generously classified as
      “factories” as in Vladimir Gubernia, and that is all (the
      small brickworks in Vladimir Gubernia are all run on hand
      labour). Mr. Karyshev does not see any of this (p. 14). In respect of
      Section X (processing of livestock products) Mr. Karyshev says that the
      number of establishments is small in almost all gubernias but that
      “an outstanding exception is Nizhni-Novgorod Gubernia with its 252
      factories” (p. 14). This is primarily due to the fact that very many
      small hand establishments (sometimes horse- or wind-driven) were included
      in this gubernia and not in the others. Thus, for Mogilev Gubernia the
      List includes only two factories in this section; each of them
      employs more than 15 workers. Dozens of small factories processing
      livestock products could have been listed in Mogilev Gubernia, in the same
      way as they were included in the Directory for 1890, which showed
      99 factories processing livestock products. The question then arises: What
      sense is there in Mr. Karyshev’s calculations of the distribution by
      percentages of “factories” so differently understood?
    

      In order to show more clearly the different conceptions of the term
      “factory” in different gubernias, we shall take two neighbouring
      gubernias: Vladimir and Kostroma. According to the List, there are 993
      “factories” in the former and 165 in the latter. In all branches of
      industry (sections) in the former there are tiny establishments that swamp the
      large ones by their great number (only 324 establishments employ 16 or more
      workers). In the latter there are very few small establishments (112 factories
      out of 165 employ 16 or more workers), although everybody realises that more
      than a few windmills, oil-presses, small starch, brick, and pitch works, etc.,
      etc., could be counted in this

      gubernia.[18]

 

      Mr. Karyshev’s light-minded attitude towards the authenticity of the
      figures he uses reaches its peak when he compares the number of
      “factories” per gubernia for 1894-95 (according to
      the List) with that for 1885 (according to the
      Collection). There is a serious dissertation on the increased
      number of factories in Vyatka Gubernia, on the “considerably
      decreased” number in Perm Gubernia, and on the substantially
      increased number in Vladimir Gubernia, and so on (pp. 6-7). “In this
      we may see,” concludes our author profoundly, “that the
      above-mentioned process of diminution in the number of factories affects
      places with a more developed and older industry less than those where
      industry is younger” (p. 7). Such a deduction sounds very
      “scientific”; the greater the pity that it is merely
      nonsensical. The figures used by Mr. Karyshev are quite fortuitous. For
      example, according to the Collection, for 1885-90 the number of
      “factories” in Perm Gubernia was 1, 001, 895, 951, 846, 917,
      and 1,002 respectively, following which, in 1891, the figure suddenly
      dropped to 585. One of the reasons for these leaps was the inclusion of
      469 mills as “factories” in 1890 and 229 in 1891. If the
      List gives only 362 factories for that gubernia, it must be borne in
      mind that it now includes only 66 mills as “factories.” If the number of
      “factories” has increased in Vladimir Gubernia, the List’s
      registration of small establishments in that gubernia must be remembered. In
      Vyatka Gubernia, the Collection recorded 1-2-2-30-28-25 mills from
      1887 to 1892 and the List, 116. In short, the comparison undertaken by
      Mr. Karyshev demonstrates over and over again that he is quite incapable of
      analysing figures from different sources.
    

      In giving the numbers of factories in different sections (groups of industrial
      branches) and in computing their ratio to the total number, Mr. Karyshev once
      again fails to notice that there is no uniformity in the number of small
      establishments included in the various sections (there are, for example, fewer
      in the textile and metallurgical industries than elsewhere, about one-third of
      the total number for European Russia, whereas in the industries processing
      livestock and food products they constitute about two-thirds of the total
      number). It stands to reason that in this way he is comparing non-comparable
      magnitudes, with the result that his percent ages (p. 8) are devoid of all
      meaning. In short, on the entire

    

      question of the number of “factories” and their distribution
      Mr. Karyshev has displayed a complete lack of understanding of the nature
      of the data he has employed and their degree of reliability.
    

      As we go over from the number of factories to the number of workers, we
      must say, in the first place, that the figures for the total number of
      workers recorded in our factory statistics are much more reliable than
      those given for the factories. Of course, there is no little confusion
      here, too, and no lack of omissions and reductions of the actual
      number. But in this respect we do not find such great divergence in the
      type of data used, and the excessive variations in the number of small
      establishments, which are at times included in the number of factories and
      at others not, have very little effect on the total number of workers, for
      the simple reason that. even a very large percentage of the smallest
      establishments gives a very small percentage of the total number of
      workers. We have seen above that for the year 1894-95, 74 per cent of the
      workers were concentrated in 1,468 factories (10 per cent of the total
      number). The number of small factories (employing fewer than 16 workers)
      was 7,919 out of 14,578, i.e., more than a half, and the number of workers
      in them was (even allowing an average of 8 workers per establishment)
      something like 7 per cent of the total. This gives rise to the following
      phenomenon: while there is a tremendous difference in the number of
      factories in 1890 (in the Directory) and in 1894-95, the
      difference in the number of workers is insignificant: in 1890 the figure
      was 875,764 workers for fifty gubernias of European Russia, and in 1894-95
      it was 885,555 (counting only workers employed inside the
      establishments). If we deduct from the first figure the number of workers
      employed in the rail manufacturing (24,445) and salt-refining (3,704)
      industries, not included in the List, and from the second figure
      the number of workers in print-shops (16,521), not included in the
      Directory, we get 847,615 workers for 1890 and 869,034 workers
      for 1894-95, i.e., 2.5 per cent more. It goes without saying that this
      percentage cannot express the actual increase, since many small
      establishments were not included in 1894-95, but, in general, the
      closeness of these figures shows the relative suitability of the over-all
      data on the total number of workers and their

    

      relative reliability. Mr. Karyshev, from whom we have taken the total
      number of workers, does not make an accurate analysis of precisely which
      branches of industry were included in 1894-95 as compared with former
      publications, nor does he point out that the List omits many
      establishments that were formerly included in the number of factories. For
      his comparison with former statistics he takes the same absurd data of the
      Military Statistical Abstract and repeats the same nonsense about
      the alleged reduction in the number of workers relative to the population
      which has already been refuted by Mr. Tugan-Baranovsky (see above). Since
      the data on the number of workers are more authentic, they are deserving
      of a more thorough analysis than the data on the number of factories, but
      Mr. Karyshev has done just the opposite. He does not even group factories
      together according to the number of workers employed, which is what he
      should have done in the first place, in view of the fact that the
      List regards the number of workers as an important distinguishing
      feature of the factory. It can be seen from the data cited above that the
      concentration of workers is very great.
    

      Instead of grouping factories according to the number of workers employed
      in them, Mr. Karyshev undertook a much simpler calculation, aimed at
      determining the average number of workers per factory. Since the data on
      the number of factories are, as we have seen, particularly unreliable,
      fortuitous, and dissimilar, the calculations are full of
      errors. Mr. Karyshev compares the average number of workers per factory in
      1886 with the figure for 1894-95 and from this deduces that “the
      average type of factory is growing larger” (pp. 23 and 32-33), not
      realising that in 1894-95 only the larger establishments were listed, so
      that the comparison is incorrect. There is a very strange comparison of
      the number of workers per factory in the different gubernias (p. 26);
      Mr. Karyshev obtains the result, for instance, that “Kostroma
      Gubernia turns out to have a bigger average type of industry than all
      other gubernias”—242 workers per factory as compared with, for
      example, 125 in Vladimir Gubernia. It does not enter the learned
      professor’s head that this is due merely to different methods of
      registration, as we have explained above. Having allowed the difference
      between the number of large and small establishments in different
      gubernias to pass

    

      unnoticed, Mr. Karyshev invented a very simple way of evading the
      difficulties encountered in this question. Precisely put, he multiplied
      the average number of workers per factory for the whole of European
      Russia (and then for Poland and the Caucasus) by the number of
      factories in each gubernia and indicated the groups he thus obtained on a
      special cartogram (No. 3). This, indeed, is really so simple! Why group
      factories according to the number of workers they employ, why examine the
      relative number of large and small establishments in different gubernias,
      when we can so easily artificially level out the
      “average” size of the factories in various gubernias according
      to one standard? Why try to find out whether there are many or few small
      and petty establishments included in the number of factories in Vladimir
      or Kostroma Gubernia, when we can “simply” take the average
      number of workers per factory throughout European Russia and
      multiply it by the number of factories in each gubernia?  What
      matters it if such a method equates hundreds of fortuitously registered
      windmills and oil-presses with big factories? The reader, of course, will
      not notice it, and who knows—he may even believe the
      “statistics” invented by Professor Karyshev!
    

      In addition to workers employed in the establishment, the List
      has a special category of workers “outside the establishment.” This
      includes not only those working at home to the orders of the factory
      (Karyshev, p. 20), but also auxiliary workers, and so on. The number of
      these workers given in the List (66,460 in the Empire) must not
      be regarded as “an indication of how far advanced in Russia is the
      development of the so-called outside department of the factory”
      (Karyshev, p. 20), since there can be no question of anything like a
      complete registration of such workers under the present system of factory
      statistics. Mr. Karyshev says very thoughtlessly: “66,500 for the
      whole of Russia with her millions of handicraftsmen and artisans is but a
      few” (ibid.).Before writing this he had to forget that, if
      not the greater part, at least a very large part of these “millions
      of handicraftsmen,” as is confirmed by all sources, work for jobbers,
      i.e., are the selfsame “outside workers.” One has only to glance at
      those pages of the List devoted to districts known for their
      handicraft industries to be convinced of the thoroughly fortuitous and
      fragmentary nature of the registration of

    

      “outside workers.” Section II (wool processing) of the List,
      for example, for Nizhni-Novgorod Gubernia counts only 28 outside workers
      in the town of Arzamas and in the suburban Viyezdnaya Sloboda (p. 89),
      whereas we know from the Transactions of the Commission of Inquiry
      into Handicraft Industry in Russia (Issues V and Vi) that many
      hundreds (up to a thousand) “handicraftsmen” work there for
      masters. The List does not record any outside workers at all in
      Semyonov Uyezd, whereas we know from the

      Zemstvo[22]

      statistics
      that over 3,000 “handicraftsmen” work there for masters in the
      felt boot and insole branches. The List records only one
      “factory” employing 17 outside workers in the accordion
      industry of Tula Gubernia (p. 395), whereas the cited Transactions of
      the Commission, etc., as early as 1882, listed between 2,000 and
      3,000 handicraftsmen working for accordion factory owners (Issue IX). It
      is, therefore, obvious that to regard the figure of 66,500 outside workers
      as being in any way authentic and to discuss their distribution by
      gubernias and branches of industry, as Mr. Karyshev does, and even to
      compile a cartogram, is simply ridiculous. The real significance of these
      figures lies not at all in the determination of the extent to which
      capitalist work is done in the home (which is determinable only from a
      complete industrial census that includes all shops and other
      establishments, as well as individuals giving out work to be done at
      home), but in the separation of the workers in the establishments,
      i.e. ,factory workers in the strict sense from outside workers. Hitherto
      these two types of workers have often been confounded; frequent instances
      of such confusion are to be found even in the Directory for
      1890. The List is now making the first attempt to put an end to
      this state of affairs.

    

      The List’s figures relating to the annual output of the factories have
      been analysed by Mr. Karyshev most satisfactorily of all, mainly because that
      author at last introduced the grouping of factories by the magnitude of their
      output and not by the usual “averages.” It is true that the author still
      cannot rid himself of these “averages” (the magnitude of output per
      factory) and even compares the averages for 1894-95 with those for 1885, a
      method that, as we have repeatedly said, is absolutely incorrect. We would note
      that the total figures for the annual output of factories are much more

    

      authentic than the total figures for the number of factories, for the
      reason, already mentioned, of the minor role of the small establishments
      According to the List, there are, for example, only 245 factories
      in European Russia with an out put valued at more than one million rubles,
      i.e., only 1.9 per cent, but they account for 45.6 per cent of the total
      annual output of all factories in European Russia (Karyshev, p. 38), while
      factories with an output valued at less than 5,000 rubles constitute 30.8
      per cent of the total number, but account for only 0.6 per cent of the
      total output, i.e., a most insignificant fraction. We must here note that
      in these calculations Mr. Karyshev ignores the difference between the
      value of the total output (=value of the product) and payment for the
      processing of raw material. This very important distinction is made for
      the first time in our factory statistics by the

      List.[19]

      It goes
      without saying that these two magnitudes are absolutely incomparable with
      each other and that they should have been separated. Mr. Karyshev does not
      do this, and it is to be supposed that the low percentage of annual output
      of the small establishments is partly due to the inclusion of
      establishments that showed only the cost of processing the product and not
      its value. Below we shall give an example of the error into which
      Mr. Karyshev falls through ignoring this circumstance. The fact that the
      List differentiates between payment for processing and the value
      of the product and that it does not include the sum of the excise in the
      price of production makes it impossible to compare these figures with
      those of previous publications. According to the List, the output
      of all the factories of European Russia amounts to 1,345 million rubles,
      while according to the Directory for 1890 it amounted to 1,501
      million. But if we subtract the sum of the excise from the second figure
      (250 million rubles in the distilling industry alone), then the first
      figure will be considerably greater.
    
 

      In the Directory (2nd and 3rd editions) factories were
      distributed in groups according to the amount of annual out put (without
      any indication of the share of each group in the total output), but this
      distribution cannot be compared with the data in the List because
      of the differences in registration methods mentioned above and in the
      determining of the magnitude of annual output.

    

      We have yet another fallacious argument of Mr. Karyshev to examine. Here,
      too, in quoting data on the total annual output of factories in each
      gubernia, he could not refrain from making comparisons with the data for
      the years 1885 to 1891, i.e., with the data of the Collection.
      Those data contain no information on productions subject to excise, and
      for
      that reason Mr. Karyshev looks only for gubernias in which the total
      output for 1894-95 is less than in previous years. Such gubernias are
      to be found to the number of eight (pp. 39-40), and apropos of this
      Mr. Karyshev argues about “the retrograde movement in industry” in
      the “less industrial” gubernias and says that this “may serve
      as an indication of the difficult position of the small establishments in their
      competition with big establishments,” and so on. All these arguments. would
      probably be very profound if—if they were not all completely
      fallacious. And here, too, Mr. Karyshev did not notice that he was comparing
      absolutely non- comparable and dissimilar data. Let us demonstrate this
      incomparability by data on each of the gubernias indicated by Mr.

      Karyshev.[20]

      In
      Perm Gubernia the total output in 1890 was 20.3 million rubles
      (Directory), while in 1894-95 it was 13.1 million rubles; this includes
      the flour-milling industry,
      12.7 million (at 469 mills!) in 1890, and 4.9 million (at 66 mills) in
      1894-95. The seeming “reduction,” therefore, is simply a matter of the
      fortuitous registration of different numbers of mills. The number of
      steam-mills, for example, increased from 4 in 1890 and 1891 to 6 in
      1894-95. The “reduction” of

    

      output in Simbirsk Gubernia is to be explained in the same way (1890: 230
      mills with an output of 4.8 million rubles; 1894-95: 27 mills with an
      output of 1.7 million rubles. Steam- mills, 10 and 13 respectively). In
      Vyatka Gubernia the total output was 8.4 million rubles in 1890 and 6.7
      million in 1894- 95, a reduction of 1.7 million rubles. Here, in 1890, two
      metallurgical works, the Votkinsk and the Izhevsk, were included, with a
      combined output valued at precisely 1.7 million rubles; in 1894-95 they
      were not included because they were “subordinated” to the
      Department of Mines and Metallurgy. Astrakhan Gubernia: 2.5 million rubles
      in 1890 and 2.1 mil lion in 1894-95. But in 1890 the salt-refining
      industry (346,000 rubles) was included, while in 1894-95 it was not,
      because it belongs to the “mining” industries. Pskov Gubernia:
      2.7 million rubles in 1890 and 2.3 million in 1894-95; but 45
      flax-scutching establishments with a total output of 1.2 million rubles
      were counted in 1890, and in 1894-95 only four flax-spinning
      establishments with an output valued at 248,000 rubles. It stands to
      reason that the flax-scutching establishments in Pskov Gubernia have not
      disappeared but were simply not included in the list (perhaps because the
      majority of them are hand-worked and employ less than 15 workers). In
      Bessarabia Gubernia the output of the flour-mills was registered in
      different ways, although a similar number of mills was recorded both in
      1890 and in 1894-95 (97 in each case); in 1890 the quantity of flour
      milled was computed—4.3 million poods valued at 4.3 million rubles,
      while in 1894-95 the majority of the mills recorded only payment for
      milling, so that their total output (1.8 million rubles) cannot be
      compared with the figure for 1890. The following instances will illustrate
      the difference. Levenson’s two mills recorded an output of 335,000 rubles
      in 1890 (Directory, p. 424), and in 1894-95 recorded only 69,000
      rubles payment for milling (List, No. 14231-2). Schwartzberg’s
      mill, on the contrary, showed the value of the product in 1890 as 125,000
      rubles (Directory, p. 425), and in 1894-95 as 175,000 rubles
      (List, No. 14214);out of the total sum for the
      flour-milling industry in 1894-95, 1,400,000 rubles are accounted for by
      the value of the product and 0.4 million rubles as payment for milling.The
      same is true of Vitebsk Gubernia: in 1890—241 mills with a total
      output figure of 3.6 million rubles, and in 1894-95—82

    

      mills with a total output figure of 120,000 rubles, the majority of the
      mills showing only payment for milling (the number of steam-mills in 1890
      was 37, in 1891, 51, and in 1894-95, 64), so that more than a
      half of this sum of 120,000 rubles does not represent the value of
      the product but payment for milling. And, finally, in the last gubernia,
      Archangel, the “retrograde movement in industry” discovered by
      Mr. Karyshev is explained simply by a strange error in his calculations:
      in actual fact the total value of the output of the Archangel factories,
      according to the List, is not the 1.3 million rubles twice quoted by
      Mr. Karyshev (pp. 40 and 39, as compared with 3.2 million rubles in 1885-91),
      but 6.9 million rubles, of which 6.5 million rubles was accounted for
      by 18 sawmills (List, p. 247).
    

      Summarising what has been said above, we come to the conclusion that
      Mr. Karyshev’s approach to the material he was analysing was astonishingly
      inattentive and devoid of criticism, so that he committed a whole series
      of the crudest errors. With regard to the calculations based on the
      List figures that he made together with his colleagues, it must
      be said that they lose much in statistical value from the fact that
      Mr. Karyshev did not publish full totals, i.e., total numbers of
      factories, workers, value of output for all gubernias and all branches of
      industry (although he apparently made these calculations, which, had he
      published them in full, would, on the one hand, have made verification
      possible and, on the other, have proved of great benefit to those who use
      the List). The purely statistical analysis of the material,
      therefore, proved extremely fragmentary, incomplete,and unsystematic, and
      Mr. Karyshev’s deductions, made in too great a hurry, serve, for the most
      part, as an example of how not to work with figures.
    

      Returning to the question raised above on the present state of our factory
      statistics, we must say, first of all, that if “complete and reliable
      production figures” are an “urgent necessity” (as the
      introduction to the List says, with which one cannot but agree), then,
      to obtain them, a correctly organised industrial census is essential, one that
      will register each and every industrial establishment, enterprise, and kind of
      work, and that will be taken regularly at definite intervals of time. If the
      data on occupations in the first

    

      census[23]

      of the population, taken on January 28, 1897, prove
      satisfactory and if they are analysed in detail, they will greatly
      facilitate the taking of an industrial census. As long as there are no
      such censuses it can only be a question of registering some of the big
      industrial establishments, It must be conceded that the present system of
      collecting and processing statistical information on such big
      establishments (“factories and workers” in the prevailing
      terminology) is unsatisfactory in the highest degree. Its first
      shortcoming is the division of factory statistics among various
      “departments” and the absence of a special, purely statistical
      institution that centralises the collecting, checking, and classifying of
      all information on all types of factories. When you analyse the data of
      our present-day factory statistics you find yourself on territory that is
      intersected in all directions by the boundaries of various
      “departments” (which employ special ways and means of
      registration, and so on). It sometimes happens that these boundaries pass
      through a certain factory, so that one section of a factory (the iron
      foundry, for example) comes under the Department of Mines and Metallurgy,
      while another section (the manufacture of ironware, for example) comes
      under the Department of Commerce and Manufactures, It can be understood
      how this makes the use of the data difficult and into what errors those
      investigators risk falling (and fall) who do not pay sufficient attention
      to this complicated question. With regard to the checking of the
      information, it must be said in particular that the Factory Inspectorate
      will, naturally, never be in a position to check the extent to which all
      information supplied by all factory owners corresponds to reality. Under a
      system of the present-day type (i.e., under which the information is not
      gathered by means of a census conducted by a special staff of agents but
      by means of questionnaires circulated among factory owners), the chief
      attention should be paid to ensuring that the central statistical
      institution have direct contact with all factory owners,
      systematically control the uniformity of the returns, and see to
      their completeness and to the dispatch of questionnaires to all
      industrial centres of any importance—that it thus prevent the
      fortuitous inclusion of dissimilar data, or different applications and
      interpretations of the programme. The second basic shortcoming of
      present-day statistics

    

      lies in the fact that the programme for the gathering of information has
      not been elaborated. If this programme is prepared in offices and is not
      submitted to the criticism of specialists and (what is particularly
      important) to an all- round discussion in the press, the information
      never can be in any way complete and uniform. We have seen, for
      example, how unsatisfactorily even the basic programmatic question—
      what is a “factory”?—is being solved. Since there is no industrial census, and the system employed is that of gathering information
      from the industrialists themselves (through the police, the Factory
      Inspectorate, etc.), the concept “factory” should most
      certainly be defined with complete accuracy and limited to big
      establishments of such size as to warrant our expectation that they will
      be registered everywhere and in their entirety without omissions.
      It appears that the fundamental elements of the definition of a
      “factory establishment” as at present accepted have been quite
      well chosen: 1) the number of workers employed in the
      establishment to be no fewer than 15 (the question of separating
      auxiliary workers from factory workers in the true sense of the word, of
      determining the average number of workers for the year, etc., to be
      elaborated); and 2) the presence of a steam-engine (even when the number
      of workers is smaller). Although extreme caution should be exercised in
      extending this definition, it is an unfortunate fact that to these
      distinguishing characteristics have been added other, quite indeterminate
      ones. If, for instance, the bigger establishments employing water power
      must not be omitted, it should be shown with absolute accuracy what
      establishments of this type are subject to registration (using motive
      power of not less than so many units, or employing not less than a certain
      number of workers, and so on). If it is considered essential to include
      smaller establishments in some branches, these branches must be listed
      very precisely and other definite features of the concept “factory
      establishments” must be given. Those branches in which
      “factory” establishments merge with “handicraft”
      or “agricultural” establishments (felt, brick, leather, flour
      milling, oil pressing, and many others) should be given special
      attention. We believe that the two characteristics we have given of the
      concept “factory “should in no case be extended, because even
      such relatively big

    

      establishments can scarcely be registered without omissions under the
      existing system of gathering information. A reform of the system may be
      expressed either in partial and insignificant changes or in the
      introduction of full industrial censuses. As far as the extent of the
      information is concerned, i.e., the number of questions asked the
      industrialists, here, too, a radical distinction has to be ’made between
      an industrial census and statistics of the present-day type. It is only
      possible and necessary to strive for complete information in the first
      case (questions on the history of the establishment, its relations to
      neighbouring establishments and the neighbourhood population, the
      commercial side of affairs, raw and auxiliary materials, quantity and type
      of the product, wages, the length of the working day, shifts, night- work
      and overtime, and so on and so forth). In the second case great caution
      must be exercised: it is better to obtain relatively little reliable,
      complete, and uniform information than a lot of fragmentary, doubtful
      information that cannot be used for comparisons. The only addition
      undoubtedly necessary is that of questions on machinery in use and on the
      amount of output.
    

      In saying that our factory statistics are unsatisfactory in the highest
      degree, we do not by any means wish to imply that their data are not
      deserving of attention and analysis. Quite the contrary. We have examined
      in detail the short comings of the existing system in order to stress the
      necessity for a particularly thorough analysis of the data. The chief and
      basic purpose of this analysis should be the separation of the wheat from
      the chaff, the separation of the relatively useful material from the
      useless. As we have seen, the chief mistake made by Mr. Karyshev (and many
      others) consists precisely in the failure to make such a separation. The
      figures on “factories” are the least reliable, and under no
      circumstances can they be used without a thorough preliminary analysis
      (the separate listing of the bigger establishments, etc.). The number of
      workers and the output values are much more reliable in the grand totals
      (it is, however, still necessary to make a strict analysis of which
      productions were included and in which way, how the output value was
      computed, etc.). If the more detailed totals are taken, it is possible
      that the data will prove unsuited for comparison and their use conducive

    

      to error. The fables of the reduction of the number of factories in Russia
      and of the number of factory workers (relative to the
      population)—fables that have been so zealously disseminated by the

      Narodniks[24]—can

      only be explained as due to the ignoring
      of all these circumstances.

    

      As far as the analysis of the material itself is concerned, it must
      undoubtedly be based on information on each separate factory, i.e.,
      card-index information. The cards must, first and foremost, be grouped by
      territorial units. The gubernia is too big a unit. The question of the
      distribution of industry is so important that the classification must be
      for individual cities, suburbs, villages, and groups of villages that form
      industrial centres or districts. Further, grouping by branches of industry
      is essential. In this respect our latest factory statistical system has,
      in our opinion, introduced an undesirable change, causing a radical
      rupture with the old subdivision into branches of industry that has
      predominated right from the sixties (and earlier). The List made
      a new grouping of industries in twelve sections: if the data are taken by
      sections only, we get an excessively broad framework embracing branches of
      production of the most diverse character and throwing them together (felt
      cloth and rough felt, saw mills and furniture manufacture, notepaper and
      printing, iron-founding and jewellery, bricks and porcelain, leather and
      wax, oil-pressing and sugar-refining, beer-brewing and tobacco, etc.). If
      these sections are subdivided in detail into separate branches we get
      groups that are far too detailed (see Mikulin, op. cit.), over three
      hundred of them! The old system that had ten sections and about a
      hundred branches of production (91 in the Directory for 1890)
      seems to us to have been much happier. Furthermore, it is essential to
      group. the factories according to the number of workers, the type of
      motive power, as well as according to the amount of output.
      Such a grouping is particularly necessary from the purely theoretical
      standpoint for the study of the condition and development of industry and
      for the separation of relatively useful from useless data in the material
      at hand. The absence of such a grouping (necessary within the territorial
      groups and the groups of branches of production) is the most significant
      shortcoming of our present publications on factory statistics, which allow
      only “average figures” to be determined,

    

      quite often absolutely false and leading to serious errors. Lastly,
      grouping under all these headings should not be limited to a determination
      of the number of establishments in each group (or sub-group) but must be
      accompanied by a calculation of the number of workers and aggregate output
      in each group, in establishments employing both machine and hand labour,
      etc. In other words, combined tables are necessary as well as
      group tables.
    

      It would be a mistake to think that such an analysis involves an
      inordinate amount of labour.The Zemstvo statistical bureaus with their
      modest budgets and small staffs carry out much more complicated work for
      each uyezd; they analyse 20,000, 30,000 and 40,000 separate cards (and the
      number of relatively big, “factory” establishments throughout
      the whole of Russia would probably not be more than 15,000- 16,000);
      moreover, the volume of information on each card is incomparably greater:
      there are several hundred columns in the Zemstvo statistical abstracts,
      whereas in the List there are less than twenty. Notwithstanding
      this, the best Zemstvo statistical abstracts not only provide group tables
      under various headings, but also combined tables, i.e., those showing a
      combination of various features.
    

      Such an analysis of the data would, firstly, provide the requisite
      material for economic science. Secondly, it would fully decide the
      question of separating relatively useful from useless data. Such an
      analysis would immediately disclose the fortuitous character of data on
      some branches of industry, some gubernias, some points of the programme,
      etc. An opportunity would be provided to extract relatively full,
      reliable, and uniform material. Valuable indications would be obtained of
      the way in which these qualities can be assured in the future.
    

 

Notes
 

[1]

      Ministry of Finance. Department of Commerce and Manufactures. The Factory
      Industry of Russia. List of Factories and Works, St. Petersburg,
      1897, pp. 63-j–vi-j-1047.
    —Lenin

[2]

      The Reform of 1861 which abolished serfdom in Russia.—Ed.
    

[3]

Gubernia, uyezd, volost—Russian administrative-territorial
      units. The largest of these was the gubernia, which had its subdivisions in
      uyezds, which in turn were subdivided into volosts. This system of districting
      continued under the Soviet power until the introduction of the new system of
      administrative-territorial division of the country in
      1929-30.—Ed.
    

[4]

      Contrary to the opinion
      of the reviewer in Russkiye

Vedomosti[25]

      (1898,
      No. 144), who, apparently, was as little capable of a critical attitude to
      Mr. Karyshev’s conclusions as was Mr. Karyshev of a critical attitude to
      the List’s figures.
    —Lenin

[5]

Ministry of Finance Yearbook. First Issue. St. Petersburg, 1869.
    —Lenin

[6]

Statistical Chronicle of the Russian Empire. Series II, Issue
      6. St. Petersburg, 1872. Material for the factory statistics of European
      Russia, elaborated under the editorship of I. Bok.
    —Lenin

[7]

Statistical Atlas of Main Branches of Factory Industry of European
      Russia, with List of Factories and Works. Three issues. St. Petersburg,
      1869, 1870, and 1873.
    —Lenin

[8]

      Circular of June 7,1895, in Kobelyatsky (handbook for Members of the
Factory Inspectorate etc., 4th edition. St. Petersburg, 1897, p. 35. Our
      italics). This circular is not reprinted in the introduction to the
      List, and Mr. Karyshev, in analysing the List material, did
      not go to the trouble of discovering what the List meant by
      “factories”!!
    —Lenin

[9]

      According to the draft rules drawn up by the congress on the gathering
      of industrial data, all mills equipped with less than 10 pairs of
      millstones, but not roller mills, were excluded from the list of
      factories. Statistical Chronicle, Series II, Issue 6,
      Introduction, p. xiii.
    —Lenin

[10]

      See footnote on p. 15.–Ed.
    —Lenin

[11]

      In 1889 Mr. Karyshev took data for 1885 (Yuridichesky

Vestnik,[26]

      No. 9) drawn from the most loyal
      reports of the governors, data that included the very smallest
      flour-mills, oil-presses, brickyards, potteries, leather, sheepskin, and
      other handicraft establishments, and fixed the number of
      “factories” in European Russia at 62,8011 We are
      amazed that he did not calculate the percentage of “reduction”
      in the number of factories today in relation to this figure.
    —Lenin

[12]

      We are taking 16 and not 15 workers, partly
      because the computation of factories with 16 and more workers has already been
      made
      in the Directory for 1890 (3rd edition, p. x), and partly because the
      explanations of the Ministry of Finance sometimes adopt this standard (see
      Kobelyatsky, loc. cit., p. 14).
    —Lenin

[13]

      Some gaps in the information have been filled in
      approximately:
      see Directory, p. 695.
    —Lenin

[14]

      It is impossible to
      obtain the required figure from the data in the List, first,
      because it omits a mass of establishments with an output valued at 2,000
      rubles and more owing to their employing fewer than 15 workers. Secondly,
      because the List counted the total value of the output without
      excise (in which it differed from former statistics). Thirdly, because the
      List, in some cases, registered, not the total value of the
      output, but payment for the processing of raw material.
    —Lenin

[15]

      Dealing with the
      question of the number of factory workers, Mr.  Tugan-Baranovsky has shown
      the utter uselessness of the Military Statistical Abstract data
      (see his book, The Factory, etc., St. Petersburg, 1898, p. 336,
      et seq., and Mir

Bozhy,[27]

      1898, No. 4), and Messrs.  N.—on
      and Karyshev have responded with silence to his direct challenge. They
      really cannot do anything else but remain silent.
    —Lenin

[16]

      The same sources. Some data for 1879, as already mentioned, have been
      added approximately. The general data of the Directory and the
      List are incomparable with each other, but here we compare
      only percentages of the total number of workers and of the total
      value of output, and these data in their totals are much more reliable (as
      we shall show later) than the data on the total number of factories. The
      estimate of large establishments is taken from Capitalism in
      Russia, which the present writer is preparing for

      print.[28]

    —Lenin

[17]

      The handicraft census for 1894-95 in Perm Gubernia
      showed, for example, that with every decade of the
      post-Reform period more and more small industrial establishments are being
      opened in the villages. See Survey of Perm Territory. A
Sketch of the State of Handicraft Industry in Perm Gubernia.
      Perm, 1896.
    —Lenin

[18]

      We have here another instance of the arbitrary determination of the
      number of “factories” in our “newest” system of
      factory statistics. The List for 1894-95 records 471 factories
      for Kherson Gubernia (Mr. Karyshev, op. cit., p. 5), but for 1896
      Mr. Mikulin suddenly lists as many as 1,249 “factory
      establishments” (op. cit., p. Xiii), among them 773
      with mechanical motive power and 109 without, employing more than 15
      workers. With this unclarity in the definition of “factory”
      such leaps are inevitable.
    —Lenin

[19]

      The only thing is that, unfortunately, we have no guarantee that the
      List made this distinction strictly and consistently, i. e., that the
      value of the product is shown only for those
      factories that actually sell their product, and payment for processing raw
      material only for those that process material belonging to others. It is
      possible, for example, that in the flour-milling industry (where the
      above-mentioned distinction is most frequently met with) the mill owners
      should have shown either of the figures indiscriminately. This is a problem
      that requires special analysis.
    —Lenin

[20]

      In this case we do not take the data of the Collection but
      those of the Directory for t890, deducting industries subject
      to excise. With the exception of these industries, the
      Directory data do not differ from those of the
      Collection, since they are based on the same reports of the
      Department of Commerce and Manufactures. In order to expose Mr. Karyshev’s
      error we need detailed data for individual factories and not only for
      individual industries.
    —Lenin
 



[21]

      The article, “On the Question of Our Factory Statistics
      (Professor Karyshev’s New Statistical Exploits),” was
      written in August 1898 and published in the collection Economic
      Studies and Essays that appeared early in October 1898. Lenin made
      extensive use of the material and the conclusions of this article for his
      The Development of Capitalism in Russia (Chapter V,
      “The First Stages of Capitalism in Industry”; Chapter VI,
      “Capitalist Manufacture and Capitalist Domestic Industry”; and
      Chapter VII, “The Development of Large-Scale Machine Industry,”
      Section II, “Our Factory Statistics”).
    



[25]

Russkiye Vedomosti (Russian Recorder)— a newspaper
      published in Moscow from 1863 onwards; it expressed the views of the
      moderate liberal intelligentsia. Among its contributors in the ISSOs and
      1890s were the democratic writers V. G. Korolenko,
      M. Y. Saltykov-Shchedrin, and G. I. Uspensky. It also published items
      written by
      liberal Narodniks. In 1905 it became the organ of the Right wing of the
      Constitutional-Democratic (Cadet) Party. Lenin said that Russkiye
      Vedomosti was a peculiar combination of “Right-wing Cadetism
      and a strain of Narodism” (see present edition, Vol. 19,
      “Frank Speeches of a Liberal”). In 1918 the publication was closed
      down together with other counter-revolutionary newspapers.
    



[26]

Yuridichesky Vesinik (The Legal Messenger)— a monthly
      magazine, bourgeois-liberal in trend, published in Moscow from 1867 to
      1892.
    



[27]

Mir Boshy (The Wide World; literally, God’s
      World)— a monthly literary and popular-scientific magazine,
      liberal in trend; it was published in St. Petersburg from 1892 to 1906. In
      1898 the magazine carried Lenin’s review of A. Bogdanov’s A Short
      Course of Economic Science (see p. 46 of this volume). From
      1906 to 1918 the magazine appeared under the title Sovremenny Mir
      (Contemporary World).




[28]

      The reference is to Lenin’s The Development of Capitalism in
      Russia (see present edition, Vol. 3).
    



[22]

Zemstvo— the name given to the local government bodies
      introduced in the central gubernias of tsarist Russia In 1864.
    

      The powers of the Zemstvos were limited to purely local economic problems
      (hospital and road building, statistics, insurance, etc.). Their
      activities were controlled by the provincial governors and by the Ministry
      of Internal Affairs, which could overrule any decisions disapproved by the
      government.
    



[23]

      The results of the first general census of the population of the Russian
      Empire, taken on January 28 (February 9), 1897, were published as a series
      between 1897 and 1905; in the second edition of his The Development
      of Capitalism in Russia Lenin made use of them,
      correcting the data on the population of a number of places.
    



[24]

Narodism— a petty-bourgeois trend in the Russian revolution
      ary movement; it began to manifest itself in the sixties and seventies of
      the nineteenth century and comprised mainly progressive intellectuals
      from the lower estates. With the objective of rousing the peasantry to
      struggle against absolutism, the revolutionary youth “went among
      the people,” to the village, gaining there, however, no support. The
      Narodniks held to the view that capitalism in Russia was a fortuitous
      phenomenon with no prospect of development, and that for this reason
      there would be no growth and development of a Russian proletariat. The
      Narodniks considered the peasantry to be the main revolutionary force and
      regarded the village commune as the embryo of socialism. The Narodniks
      proceeded from an erroneous view of the role of the class struggle in
      historical development, maintaining that history is made by heroes, by
      outstanding personalities, who are followed passively by the popular
      masses.
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 4

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Book Review: A. Bogdanov. A Short Course of Economic Science









Lenin: Book Review: A. Bogdanov. A Short Course of Economic Science







V. I.  

      Lenin
Book Review: A. Bogdanov. A Short Course of Economic Science




Written: Written in February 1898 

Published:

      Published in April 1898 in the magazine Mir Bozhy, No. 4.

      Published according to the text in th magazine.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 4,

      pages 46-54.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.
Other Formats:  
Text



 

A. Bogdanov.
A Short Course of Economic Science.
      

Moscow, 1897. Publ. A. Murinova’s Bookshop. 290 pp. Price 2 rubles.
      


      Mr. Bogdanov’s book is a remarkable manifestation in our economic
      literature; not only is it “no superfluous” guide among a
      number of others (as the author “hopes” in his preface), it is
      by far the best of them. In this note, therefore, we intend to call the
      reader’s attention to the outstanding merits of the book and to indicate a
      few minor points which could, in our opinion, be improved upon in future
      editions; in view of the lively interest displayed by our reading public
      in economic questions, it is to be expected that further editions of this
      useful book will soon be forth coming.
    

      The chief merit of Mr. Bogdanov’s Course is the strict adherence
      to a definite line from the first page to the last, in a book that treats
      of many and very extensive problems. From the outset the author gives a
      clear-cut and precise definition of political economy as “the
      science that studies the social relations of production and distribution
      in their development” (3), and he never deviates from this point of
      view, one that is often but poorly understood by learned professors of
      political economy who lapse from “the social relations of
      production” to production in general and fill their ponderous
      courses with a pile of empty banalities and examples that have nothing to
      do with social science. Alien to the author is the scholasticism that
      often impels compilers of textbooks to indulge in
      “definitions” and in an analysis of every aspect of each
      definition; the clarity of

    

      his exposition, actually gains, rather than loses, by this, and the reader
      gets a clear conception, for example, of such a category as
      capital, both in the social and in the historical sense. In his
      Course, Mr. Bogdanov bases the sequence of his exposition on the
      view that political economy is the science of the historically developing
      systems of social production. He begins his Course with a brief
      exposition of “general concepts” (pp. 1-19) of the
      science and ends with a brief “history of economic views”
      (pp. 235-90), outlining the subject of the science in Section C:
      “The Process of Economic Development”; he does not give his
      outline dogmatically (as is the case with the majority of textbooks), but
      by means of a characteristic of the periods of economic development in
      their proper sequence: the periods of primitive clan communism, slavery,
      feudalism and guilds, and, finally, capitalism. This is precisely what an
      exposition of political economy should be. The objection may be raised
      that under these circumstances the author is inevitably compelled to break
      up one and the same theoretical division (e. g., money) between different
      periods and thereby repeat himself. But this purely formal short coming is
      more than compensated by the fundamental mer its of the historical
      exposition. And is it really a short coming? The repetitions are quite
      insignificant and are of benefit to the beginner because he is better able
      to grasp the more important postulates. The treatment of the various
      functions of money in the various periods of economic development, for
      example, shows the student clearly that the theoretical analysis of these
      functions is not based on abstract speculation but on a precise study of
      what actually happened in the course of the historical development of
      mankind. It provides a more complete conception of the particular,
      historically determined, systems of social economy. The whole task of a
      handbook of political economy is, of course, to give the student of that
      science the fundamental concepts of the different systems of social
      economy and of the basic features of each system; the whole task is one of
      placing in the hands of the student who has mastered the elementary
      handbook a reliable guide to the further study of the subject, so that,
      having understood that the most important problems of contemporary social

    

      life are intimately bound up with problems of economic science, he may
      acquire an interest in this study. In ninety nine cases out of a hundred
      this is precisely what is lacking in handbooks of political economy. Their
      shortcoming is due not so much to the fact that they are usually limited
      to one system of social economy (i.e., the capitalist system) as to their
      inability to focus the reader’s attention on the basic features of that
      system; they are unable to give a clear definition of its historical
      significance and to show the process (and the conditions) of its
      emergence, on the one hand, and the tendencies of its further development,
      on the other; they are unable to represent the different aspects and
      different manifestations of contemporary economic life as component parts
      of a definite system of social economy, as manifestations of the basic
      features of that system; they are unable to give the reader reliable
      guidance, because they do not usually adhere to one particular line with
      complete consistency; and, lastly, they are unable to interest the
      student, because they have an extremely narrow and incoherent conception
      of the significance of economic questions and present economic, political,
      moral, and other “factors” in “poetic disorder.” Only
      the materialist conception of history can bring light into this
      chaos and open up the possibility for a broad, coherent, and intelligent
      view of a specific system of social economy as the foundation of a
      specific system of man’s entire social life.
    

      The outstanding merit of Mr. Bogdanov’s Course is that the author
      adheres consistently to historical materialism. In outlining a definite
      period of economic development in his “exposition” he usually
      gives a sketch of the political institutions, the family relations, and
      the main currents of social thought in connection with the basic
      features of the economic system under discussion. The author explains how
      the particular economic system gave rise to a certain division of society
      into classes and shows how these classes manifested themselves in
      the political, family, and intellectual life of that historical period,
      and how the interests of these classes were reflected in certain schools
      of economic thought, for example, how the interests of developing
      capitalism were expressed by the school of free competition and how, at a
      later period, the interests of the same

    

      class were expressed by the school of vulgar economists (284), the apologist
      school. The author rightly points out the connection between the position of
      definite classes and the historical school (284), as well as the school of

      Katheder-reformers[7]

      (the “realistic” or “historico-ethical” school),
      which, with its empty and false conception of the “non-class”
      origin and significance of juridico-political institutions (288), etc.,
      must be characterised as the school of “compromise” (287). The
      author connects the theories of Sismondi and Proudhon with the development
      of capitalism and with good reason relegates them to the category of
      petty-bourgeois economists; he shows the roots of their ideas in the
      interests of a specific class in capitalist society, the class that
      occupies the “middle, transitional place” (279), and
      recognises without circumlocution the reactionary import of such ideas
      (280-81). Thanks to the consistency of his views and his ability to
      examine the different aspects of economic life in their relation to the
      fundamental features of the economic system under discussion, the author
      has given a correct assessment of such phenomena as the participation of
      the workers in the profits of an enterprise (one of the “forms of
      wages” that “can very rarely prove profitable for the
      employer” [pp. 132-331) or the production associations which,
      “being organised within capitalist relations,” “in reality
      serve only to increase the petty-bourgeoisie” (187).
    

      We know that it is precisely these features of Mr. Bogdanov’s
      Course that will give rise to more than a few reproaches. It
      stands to reason that representatives and supporters of the
      “ethico-sociological” school in

      Russia[8]

      will be
      dissatisfied. Among the dissatisfied there will also be those who assume
      that “the question of the economic conception of history is purely

      academic,”[1]

      and many others.... But apart from this, one might say
      partisan, dissatisfaction, the objection will be raised that the posing of
      questions so extensively has led to the extraordinarily condensed
      exposition of the Short Course which, in the brief

    

      space of 290 pages, deals with all periods of economic development, from
      the clan community and savagery to capitalist cartels and trusts, as well
      as the political and family life of the world of antiquity and the Middle
      Ages, and with the history of economic views. Mr. A. Bogdanov’s exposition
      really is condensed to the highest degree, as he him self states in his
      preface, wherein he says plainly that his book is a “conspectus.”
      There is no doubt that some of the author’s terse notes, dealing mostly
      with facts of a historical character, but sometimes with more detailed
      problems of theoretical economics, will not be understood by the beginner
      who wishes to learn something of political economy. We, however, do not
      think that the author should be blamed for this. We would even say,
      without fear of being accused of paradoxes, that such notes should be
      regarded as a merit and not a shortcoming of the book under review. For,
      indeed, were the author to think of giving a detailed exposition,
      explanation and basis for every such note, his book would have attained
      immeasurable dimensions quite out of keeping with the purposes of a short
      guide. And it would be impossible to outline, in any course, no matter how
      extensive, all the data of modern science on all periods of economic
      development and on the history of economic views from Aristotle to
      Wagner. Had he discraded all such notes, his book would positively have
      been worsened by the reduction of the scope and significance of political
      economy. In their present form these terse notes will, we think, be of
      great benefit both to teachers and students who use the book. Concerning
      the former this is more than true. The latter will see from the sum total
      of these notes that political economy cannot be studied carelessly,
      mir nichts dir

nichts,[2]

      without any previous knowledge, and
      without making the acquaintance of very many and very important problems
      in history, statistics, etc. Students will see that they cannot become
      acquainted with problems of social economy in its development and its
      influence on social life from one or even from several textbooks or
      courses that are often distinguished by their “facility of
      exposition”

    

      as well as by their amazing emptiness, their meaning less
      phrase-mongering; that the most vitally important questions of history and
      present-day reality are indissolubly bound up with economic questions and
      that the roots of the latter are to be found in the social relations of
      production. Such, indeed, is the chief purpose of any guidebook—to
      give the basic concepts of the subject under discussion and to show in
      what direction it is to be studied in greater detail and why such a study
      is important.
    

      Let us now turn to the second part of our remarks and point out those places in
      Mr. Bogdanov’s book that, in our opinion, stand in need of correction or
      expansion. We hope the respected author will not demur at the trivial and even
      hole-picking nature of these remarks: in a conspectus individual phrases and
      even individual words have incomparably greater significance than in an
      extensive and detailed exposition.
    

      Mr. Bogdanov, in general, uses only the terminology of the school of
      economics to which he adheres. But when he speaks of the form of value he
      replaces that term by the expression “formula of exchange”
      (p. 39, et seq.). This seems to us to be an unfortunate expression; the
      term “form of value” is really inconvenient in a brief
      handbook, and it would probably be better to say instead: form of exchange
      or stage of development of exchange, since, otherwise, we get such
      expressions as “predominance of the second formula of
      exchange” (43) (?). In speaking of capital, the author was mistaken
      in omitting the general formula of capital which would have helped the
      student to master the fact that trading and industrial capital are of the
      same kind.
    

      In describing capitalism, the author omitted the question of the growth of
      the commercial-industrial population at the expense of the agricultural
      population and that of the concentration of the population in the big
      cities; this gap is felt all the more because the author, in speaking of
      the Middle Ages, dealt in detail with the relations between countryside
      and town (63-66), while in respect of the modern town he said only a
      couple of words about the countryside being subordinated to it (174).
    

      In discussing the history of industry, the author determinedly placed the
      “domestic system of capitalist

    

      production”[3]

      “mid-way between artisan production and manufacture” (p. 156,
      Thesis 6). This simplification does not seem to us, in the
      present case, to be very convenient. The author of Capital
      described capitalist domestic industry in the section on machine industry
      and attributed it directly to the transforming effect which the latter
      exerts on old forms of labour. Actually those forms of domestic labour
      that prevail, both in Europe and in Russia, in the dressmaking industry,
      for example, cannot by any means be placed “mid way between artisan
      production and manufacture.” They come later than manufacture in
      the historical development of capitalism and it would have been worth
      while, we think, to say a few words about this.
    

      In the chapter on the machine period of

      capitalism,[4]

      a noticeable gap is the absence of a paragraph on the reserve army and
      capitalist over-population, engendered by machine industry, on its
      significance in the cyclical development of industry, and on its chief
      forms. The very scanty mention the author makes of these phenomena on
      pages 205 and 270 are clearly insufficient.
    

      The author’s statement that “during the past fifty years”
      “profit has been increasing more rapidly than rent” (179) is
      too bold an assertion. Not only Ricardo (against whom Mr. Bogdanov
      mentions the point), but Marx as well affirms the general tendency of rent
      to increase with particular rapidity under all and any circumstances (rent
      may even increase when the price of grain is decreasing). That reduction
      in grain prices (and in rent under certain circumstances), brought about
      recently by the competition of the virgin fields of America, Australia,
      etc., became acute only in the seventies, and Engels’ note to the section
      on rent (Das Kapital, III, 2,

      259-60[9]),

      devoted to the present-day agrarian crisis, is formulated with
      much greater caution. Engels here postulates the “law” of the
      growth of rent in civilised

    

      countries, which explains the “amazing vitality of the class of big
      landlords,” and further says only that this vitality “is gradually being
      exhausted” (allmählig sich erschöpft).
    

      The paragraphs devoted to farming are also marked by excessive
      brevity. The paragraph on (capitalist) rent shows only in the barest
      outline that it is conditioned by capitalist farming (“In the period
      of capitalism land remains private property and takes on the role of



      capital," 127—and that is all!). In order to avoid all sorts of
      misunderstandings, a few words, in greater detail, should have been said
      about the emergence of the rural bourgeoisie, the condition of the farm
      labourers, and the difference in their condition and that of the factory
      workers (a lower standard of living and requirements, remnants of their
      attachment to the land or of various

      Gesindeordnungen,[5]

      etc.). It
      is also a pity that the author did not touch on the genesis of capitalist
      rent. After the mention he made of the

      coloni[10]

and dependent peasants and, further, of the rent paid by our
peasants, he should have given a brief characteristic of the course taken
by the development of rent from labour rent (Arbeitsrente) to
rent in kind (Produktenrente), then to money rent
(Geldrente), and finally to capitalist rent (cf. Das
  Kapital, III, 2, Kap.

47[11])

    

      In treating of the supplanting of subsidiary industries by capitalism and
      the resultant loss of stability experienced by peasant economy, the author
      expresses himself as follows: “In general the peasant economy
      becomes poorer— the sum total of values produced decreases”
      (148). This is most inexact. The process of the ruination of the peasantry
      by capitalism consists in its dispossession by the rural bourgeoisie,
      which derives from that same peasantry. Mr. Bogdanov could hardly, for
      example, describe the decline of peasant farming in Germany without
      mentioning the

      Vollbauer.[6]

      In the place mentioned the author speaks of the peasantry in general, and
      follows this up immediately with an example from Russian reality; well, to
      speak of the

    

      Russian peasantry “in general” is a more than risky
      business. On the same page the author says: “The peasant either
      engages in farming alone or he goes to the manufactory,” that is, we add
      on our own part, he becomes either a rural bourgeois or a proletarian
      (with a tiny piece of land). Mention should have been made of this
      two-sided process.

    

      Lastly, we must mention the absence of examples from Russian life as a
      general drawback of the book. On very many questions (for instance, on the
      organisation of production in the Middle Ages, the development of machine
      industry and railways, the growth of the urban population, crises and
      syndicates, the difference between manufactories and factories, etc.) such
      examples taken from our economic literature would have been of great
      importance, since the absence of examples with which he is familiar makes
      it much more difficult for the beginner to master the subject. It seems to
      us that the filling of these gaps would not greatly increase the size of
      the book and would not increase the difficulty of distributing it widely,
      which is very desirable in all respects.
    

 

Notes
 

[1]

      This is the opinion of the Russkaya

Mysl”[12]

      reviewer (1897;
      November, bibliographical section, p. 517). And to think that there are
      such comedians in the world!
    —Lenin

[2]

      As Kautsky aptly remarked in the preface to his well-known book,
      Marx’s Oekonomische Lehren. (Marx’s Economic
      Teachings—Ed.)
    —Lenin

[3]

      Pp. 93, 95, 147, 156. It seems to us that this term is a successful
      substitution for the expression “domestic system of large-scale
      production” that was introduced into our literature by Korsak.
    —Lenin

[4]

      The strict division of capitalism into a period of
      manufacture and a period of machine industry is one of the most valuable
      features of Mr. Bogdanov’s Course.
    —Lenin

[5]

      Legal injunctions fixing tile relations between landowners
      and serfs.—Ed.
    

[6]

      A peasant who is in possession of a full (undivided) plot of
      land.—Ed.
    
 



[7]

Katheder-reformers or Katheder-Socialists—
      representatives of a trend in bourgeois political economy in the 1870s and
      1880s who, under the guise of socialism, advocated bourgeois-liberal
      reformism from university chairs (Katheder in German). The fear
      aroused among the exploiting classes by the spread of Marxism and the
      growth of the working-class movement, as well as the efforts of bourgeois
      ideologists to find fresh means of keeping the working people in
      subjugation, brought Katheder-Socialism into being.
    

      The Katheder-Socialists, among whom were Adolf Wagner, Gustav Schmoller,
      Lorenz Brentano, and Werner Sombart, asserted that the bourgeois state is
      above classes; that it can reconcile mutually hostile classes, and that it
      can gradually introduce “socialism,” without affecting the interests
      of the capitalists, while giving every possible consideration to the
      demands of the working people. They suggested the legalisation of
      police-regulated wage-labour and the revival of the medieval guilds. Marx
      and Engels exposed Katheder-Socialism, showing how essentially
      reactionary it was. Lenin called the Katheder-Socialists the bed bugs of
      “police-bourgeois university science” who hated Marx’s
      revolutionary

   

teachings. In Russia the views of the Katheder-Socialists
      were disseminated by the “legal Marxists.”
    



[8]

      Lenin refers to the liberal Narodniks headed by N. M. Mikhailovsky; he
      criticised the views of the “school” in his What the
      “Friends of the People” Are and How They Fight the
      Social-Democrats (see present edition, Vol. 1).
    



[12]

Russkaya Mysl (Russian Thought)—a monthly literary and
      political magazine published in Moscow from 1880 to 1918; until 1905 it
      was liberal Narodnik in its views; the editor from 1880 to 1885 was
      V. M. Lavrov. During the struggle between the Marxists and the liberal
      Narodniks in the nineties the magazine occasionally carried articles by
      Marxists. In this period Russkaya Mysl published the democratic
      writers D. N. Mamin-Sibiryak, G. I. Uspensky, V. G. Korolenko,
      A. M. Gorky, A. P. Chekhov, and others. After the Revolution of 1905 it
      became the organ of the counter-revolutionary liberals and was edited by
      P. B. Struve. It was an advocate of nationalism, reaction, and
      clericalism, and it defended landlordism. Lenin termed the journal
      “Black-Hundred Thought” (see present edition, Vol. 13,
      “Police-Patriotic Demonstration to Order”).
    



[9]

      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. III, Moscow, 1959, pp. 709-10.
    



[10]

Coloni— tenant farmers renting small parcels of land from
      big landowners in the Roman Empire. The coloni paid in cash or
      kind for the right to use the land. The coloni later became bound
      serfs by virtue of their indebtedness to the landowners.
    



[11]

      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. III, Moscow, 1959,
      pp. 763-93.
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 4

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## A Note on the Question of the Market Theory









Lenin: A Note on the Question of the Market Theory







V. I.  

      Lenin
A Note on the Question of the Market Theory
(Apropos of the Polemic of Messrs. Tugan-Baranovsky and Bulgakov)




Written: Written at the end of 1898 

Published:

      Published in January 1899 in the magazine Nauchnoye Obozreniye,[4] No. 1.

      Signed: Vladimir Ilyin.

      Published according to the text in the magazine.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 4,

      pages 55-64.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



 

      The question of markets in capitalist society, it will be remembered,
      occupied a highly important place in the theory of the Narodnik economists
      headed by Messrs. V. V. and N.—on. It is, therefore, perfectly
      natural that economists who adopt a negative attitude towards the
      Narodnik theories should deem it essential to call attention to this
      problem and to explain, first and foremost, the basic,
      abstract-theoretical points of the “market theory.”  An attempt to
      offer such an explanation was undertaken by Mr. Tugan Baranovsky in 1894
      in his book, Industrial Crises in Modern England, Chapter 1, Part
      2, “The Market Theory”; last year, Mr. Bulgakov devoted his
      book, Markets under Capitalist Production (Moscow, 1897), to the
      same problem. The two authors are in agreement in their basic views; the
      central feature of both is an exposition of the noteworthy analysis,
      “the circulation and reproduction of the aggregate social capital,”
      an analysis made by Marx in the third section of Volume II of
      Capital. The two authors agree that the theories propounded by
      Messrs. V. V. and N.—on on the market (especially the internal
      market) in capitalist society are completely erroneous and are due either
      to an ignoring or a misunderstanding of Marx’s analysis. Both authors
      recognise the fact that developing capitalist production creates its own
      market mainly for means of production and not for articles of
      consumption; that the realisation of the product in general and of
      surplus-value in particular is fully explicable without the introduction
      of a foreign market; that the necessity of a foreign market for a
      capitalist country is not due to

    

      the conditions of realisation (as Messrs. V. V. and N.—on assumed),
      but to historical conditions, and so on. It would seem that
      Messrs. Bulgakov and Tugan-Baranovsky, being in such complete accord,
      would have nothing to argue about and that they could direct their joint
      efforts to a further and more detailed criticism of Narodnik
      economics. But in actual fact a polemic arose between these two writers
      (Bulgakov, op. cit., pages 246-57, et passim; Tugan-Baranovsky in
      Mir Bozhy, 1898, No. 6, “Capitalism and the Market,”
      apropos of S. Bulgakov’s book). In our opinion both Mr. Bulgakov and
      Mr. Tugan-Baranovsky have gone a bit too far in their polemic and have
      given their remarks too personal a character. Let, us try and discover
      whether there is any real difference between them and, if there is, which
      of them has the greater right on his side.

    

      To begin with, Mr. Tugan-Baranovsky charges Mr. Bulgakov with possessing
      “little originality” and with liking too much jurare in verba

magistri[1]

(Mir Bozhy, 123). “The solution I set forth as regards
      the question of the role of the foreign market for a capitalist country,”
      says Mr. Tugan Baranovsky, “adopted in toto by
      Mr. Bulgakov, is not taken from Marx at all.” We believe this statement to
      be untrue, for it was precisely from Marx that
      Mr. Tugan-Baranovsky took his solution to the question; Mr. Bulgakov no
      doubt also took it from the same source, so that the argument should not
      be about “originality” but about the understanding of a
      certain postulate of Marx, about the need to expound Marx in one way or in
      another. Mr. Tugan-Baranovsky says that Marx “does not touch at all
      on the question of the foreign market in the second volume”
      (op. cit.). This is not true. In that same (third) section of the
      second volume, wherein he analyses the realisation of the product, Marx
      very definitely explains the relationship of foreign trade and,
      consequently, of the foreign market, to this question. He says the
      following:
    

      “Capitalist production does not exist at all without foreign commerce. But
      when one assumes normal annual reproduction on a given scale one also assumes
      that foreign commerce only replaces home products
      [Artikel—

    

      goods][2]
by articles of other use- or bodily form, without affecting
      value-relations, hence without affecting either the value-relations in
      which the two categories ’means of production’ and ’articles of
      consumption’ mutually exchange, or the relations between constant capital,
      variable capital, and surplus-values into which the value of the product
      of each of these categories may be divided. The involvement of foreign
      commerce in analysing the annually reproduced value of products can
      therefore only confuse without contributing any new element of the
      problem, or of its solution. For this reason it must be entirely
      discarded” (Das Kapital, II’,

      469. [5]

      Our
      italics). Mr. Tugan-Baranovsky’s “solution of the question,” namely,
      "... in any country importing goods from abroad there may be a
      surplus of capital; a foreign market is absolutely essential to such a
      country” (Industrial Crises, p. 429. Quoted in Mir
      Bozhy, op. cit., 121)—is merely a paraphrase of Marx’s
      postulate. Marx says that in analysing realisation foreign trade must not
      be taken into consideration, since it only replaces one article by
      another. In analysing the question of realisation (Chapter 1 of the second
      part of Industrial Crises), Mr. Tugan-Baranovsky says, that a
      country importing goods must export them, that is, must have a foreign
      market. One may ask, can it be said after this that Mr. Tugan-Baranovsky’s
      “solution of the question” is “not taken from Marx at all”?
      Mr. Tugan-Baranovsky says further that “Volumes II and III of
      Capital constitute a far from finished rough draft” and
      that “for this reason we do not find in Volume III conclusions drawn
      from the splendid analysis given in Volume II” (op. cit., 123). This
      statement too is inaccurate. In addition to individual analyses of social
      reproduction (Das Kapital, III, 1,

      289),[6]

      there is an explanation
      of how and to what extent the realisation of constant capital is
      “independent” of individual consumption and “we find in
      Volume  Ill” a special chapter (the 49th,
      “Concerning the
      Analysis of the Process of Production”) devoted to conclusions drawn from
      the splendid analysis given in Volume II, a chapter in which the results
      of the analysis

    

      are applied to the solution of the exceedingly important question of the
      forms of social revenue in capitalist society. Lastly, we must point out
      the equal inaccuracy of Mr. Tugan-Baranovsky’s assertion that “Marx,
      in Volume Ill of Capital speaks in a quite different manner on
      the given question,” and that in Volume Ill we “can even find
      statements that are decisively refuted by that analysis” (op. cit.,
      123). On page 122 of his article Mr. Tugan-Baranovsky quotes two such
      passages from Marx that allegedly contradict the basic doctrine. Let us
      examine them closely. In Volume III Marx says: “The conditions of
      direct exploitation, and those of realising it, are not identical. They
      diverge not only in place and time, but also logically. The first are only
      limited by the productive power of society, the latter by the proportional
      relation of the various branches of production and the consumer power of
      society.... The more productiveness develops, the more it finds itself at
      variance with the narrow basis on which the conditions of consumption
      rest” (Ill, 1, 226. Russian translation,

p. 189).[7]
      Mr. Tugan-Baranovsky interprets these words as follows: “The mere
      proportional distribution of national production does not guarantee the
      possibility of marketing the products. The products may not find a market
      even if the distribution of production is proportional—this is
      apparently the meaning of the above-quoted words of Marx.” No, not this is
      the meaning of those words. There are no grounds for seeing in them some
      sort of a correction to the theory of realisation expounded in
      Volume II. Marx is here merely substantiating that contradiction of
      capitalism which he indicated in other places in Capital, that
      is, the contradiction between the tendency toward the unlimited
      expansion of production and the inevitability of limited
      consumption (as a consequence of the proletarian condition of the mass of
      the people). Mr. Tugan-Baranovsky will, of course, not dispute the fact
      that this contradiction is inherent in capitalism; and since Marx
      points to this in the passage quoted, we have no right to look for some
      other meaning in his words. “The consumer power of society” and the
      “proportional relation of the various branches of
      production”—these are not conditions that are isolated, independent
      of, and unconnected with, each other. On the contrary, a definite
      condition of consumption

    

      is one of the elements of proportionality. In actual fact, the analysis of
      realisation showed that the formation of a home market for capitalism owes
      less to articles of consumption than to means of production. From this it
      follows that Department I of social production (the production of means of
      production) can and must develop more rapidly than Department II (the
      production of articles of consumption). Obviously, it does not follow from
      this that the production of means of production can develop in
      complete independence of the production of articles of consumption
      and outside of all connection with it. In respect of this, Marx
      says: “As we have seen [Book II, Part III], continuous circulation
      takes place between constant capital and constant capital.... It is at
      first independent of individual consumption because it never enters the
      latter. But this consumption definitely (definitiv) limits it
      nevertheless, since constant capital is never produced for its own sake
      but solely because more of it is needed in spheres of production whose
      products go into individual consumption” (III, 1, 289. Russian
      translation,

      242).[8]
      In the final analysis, therefore, productive
      consumption (the consumption of means of production) is always bound up
      with individual consumption and is always dependent on it. Inherent in
      capitalism, on the one hand, is the tendency toward the limitless
      expansion of productive consumption, toward the limitless expansion of
      accumulation and production, and, on the other, the proletarisation of the
      masses of the people that sets quite narrow limits for the expansion of
      individual consumption. It is obvious that we have here a contradiction in
      capitalist production, and in the above-quoted passage Marx simply
      reaffirms this

      contradiction.[3]
    

      The analysis of realisation in Volume II does not in any way refute this
      contradiction (Mr. Tugan-Baranovsky’s opinion notwithstanding); it shows,
      on the contrary, the connection between productive and personal
      consumption. It stands to reason that it would be a serious error to
      conclude from this contradiction of capitalism (or from its other
      contradictions) that capitalism is impossible or unprogressive as compared
      with former economic regimes (in the way our Narodniks like
      doing). Capitalism cannot develop except in a whole series of
      contradictions, and the indication of these contradictions merely explains
      to us the historically transitory nature of capitalism, explains the
      conditions and causes of its tendency to go forward to a higher form.

    

      Summarising all that has been said above, we arrive at the following conclusion:
      the solution of the question of the role of the foreign market as expounded by
      Mr. Tugan-Baranovsky was taken precisely from Marx; there is no contradiction
      whatsoever on the question of realisation (or on the theory of markets) between
      Volumes II and III of Capital.
    

      Let us proceed. Mr. Bulgakov accuses Mr. Tugan-Baranovsky of an incorrect
      assessment of the market theories of pre-Marxian
      economists. Mr. Tugan-Baranovsky accuses Mr. Bulgakov of uprooting Marx’s
      ideas from the scientific soil in which they grew and of picturing matters
      as though “Marx’s views had no connection with those of his
      predecessors.” This last reproach is absolutely groundless, for
      Mr. Bulgakov not only did not express such an absurd opinion but, on the
      contrary, cited the views of representatives of various pre-Marxian
      schools. In our opinion, both Mr. Bulgakov and Mr. Tugan-Baranovsky, in
      outlining the history of the question, were wrong in paying too little
      attention to Adam Smith, who absolutely should have been treated in the
      greatest detail in a special exposition of the “market

    

      theory”; “absolutely” because it was precisely Adam
      Smith who was the founder of that fallacious doctrine of the division of
      the social product into variable capital and surplus- value (wages, profit
      and rent, in Adam Smith’s terminology), which persisted until Marx and
      which, not only prevented the solution of the question of realisation, but
      did not even pose it correctly. Mr. Bulgakov says in all justice that
      “with incorrect premises and a false formulation of the problem
      itself, these disputes [on the market theory, that arose in economic
      literature] could only lead to empty, scholastic discussions”
      (op. cit., p. 21, note). The author, incidentally, devoted only one page
      to Adam Smith, omitting the brilliant, detailed analysis of Adam Smith’s
      theory given by Marx in the 19th chapter of Volume II of Capital
      (§ II,

S. 353-83),[9]
      and instead dwelt on the theories of the
      secondary and unoriginal theoreticians, J. S. Mill and von Kirchmann. As
      far as Mr. Tugan-Baranovsky is concerned, he ignored Adam Smith
      altogether and, as a result, in his outline of the views of later
      economists omitted their fundamental error (that of repeating
      Adam Smith’s above-mentioned error). It goes without saying that under
      these circumstances the exposition could not be satisfactory. We shall
      confine ourselves to two examples. Having out lined his Scheme No. I that
      explains simple reproduction, M . Tugan-Baranovsky says: “But the
      case of simple reproduction assumed by us does not, of course, give rise
      to any doubts; the capitalists, according to our assumption, consume all
      their profits, so it is obvious that the supply of commodities will not
      exceed the demand” (Industrial Crises, p. 409). This is
      wrong. It was not at all “obvious” to former economists, for
      they could not explain even the simple reproduction of social capital,
      and, indeed, it cannot be explained unless it is understood that the value
      of the social product is divided into constant capital+variable
      capital+surplus-value, and in its material form into two great
      departments—means of production and articles of consumption. For
      this reason even this case gave Adam Smith cause for “doubts,” in
      which, as Marx showed, he got tangled up. If the later economists repeated
      Smith’s error without sharing his doubts, this only
      shows that they had taken a step backwards in theory as far as the present
      question

    

      is concerned. It is likewise incorrect for Mr. Tugan Baranovsky to state:
      “The Say-Ricardo doctrine is correct theoretically; if its opponents
      had taken the trouble to make numerical computations of the way
      commodities are distributed in capitalist economy, they would easily have
      under stood that their refutation of this theory contains a logical
      contradiction” (loc. cit., 427). No. The Say-Ricardo
      doctrine is incorrect theoretically—Ricardo repeated Smith’s error
      (see his Works, translated by Sieber, St. Petersburg, 1882,
      p. 221), and Say put the finishing touches to it by maintaining that the
      difference between the gross and the net product of society is fully
      subjective. And however hard Say-Ricardo and their opponents had applied
      themselves to “numerical computations,” they would never have
      reached a solution, because this is not merely a matter of figures, as
      Bulgakov has rightly remarked in respect of another passage in
      Mr. Tugan-Baranovsky’s book (Bulgakov, loc. cit., p. 21, note).
    

      We now come to another subject for dispute between Messrs. Bulgakov and
      Tugan-Baranovsky—the question of numerical schemes arid their
      significance. Mr. Bulgakov maintains that Mr. Tugan-Baranovsky’s Schemes,
      “owing to their departure from the model [i.e., from Marx’s Scheme],
      to a great extent lose their power of conviction and do not ex plain the
      process of social reproduction” (loc. cit., 248); and
      Mr. Tugan-Baranovsky says that “Mr. Bulgakov does not properly
      understand what such schemes are intended for” (Mir Bozhy,
      No. 6 for 1898, p. 125). In our opinion the truth in this case is entirely
      on Mr. Bulgakov’s side. It is more likely that Mr. Tugan-Baranovsky
      “does not properly under stand what the schemes are intended
      for” when he assumes that they “prove the deduction”
      (ibid.). Schemes alone can not prove anything: they can only
      illustrate a process, if its separate elements have
      been theoretically explained. Mr. Tugan-Baranovsky compiled his own
      Schemes which differed from Marx’s (and which were incomparably less clear
      than Marx’s), at the same time omitting a theoretical explanation of those
      elements of the process that they were supposed to illustrate. The basic
      postulate of Marx’s theory, that the social product does not consist of
      only variable capital+surplus-value (as Adam Smith, Ricardo, Proudhon,
      Rodbertus, and others thought), but of

    

      constant capital+the above two parts—this postulate is not
      explained at all by Mr. Tugan-Baranovsky, although he adopted it in his
      Schemes. The reader of Mr. Tugan-Baranovsky’s book is unable to
      understand this basic thesis of the new theory. Mr. Tugan-Baranovsky
      did not in any way show why it is essential to divide social production
      into two departments (I: means of production and II: articles of
      consumption), although, as Mr. Bulgakov justly remarked, “in this
      one division there is greater theoretical meaning than in all former
      arguments about the market theory” (loc. cit., p. 27). This
      is why Mr. Bulgakov’s exposition of the Marxian theory is much clearer and
      more correct than Mr. Tugan Baranovsky’s.
    

      In conclusion, examining Mr. Bulgakov’s book in greater detail, we must
      note the following. About a third of the book is devoted to questions of
      the “differences in the turn over of capital” and of the
      “wages fund.” The sections under these headings seem to us to be the
      least successful. In the first of these the author tries to add to Marx’s
      analysis (see p. 63, note) and delves into very intricate computations and
      schemata to illustrate how the process of realisation takes place with
      differences in the turnover of capital. It seems to us that Mr. Bulgakov’s
      final conclusion (that, in order to explain realisation with differences
      in the turnover of capital, it is necessary to assume that the capitalists
      in both departments have reserves, cf. p. 85) follows naturally from the
      general laws of the production and circulation of capital, so that there
      was no need to assume different cases of relations of the turnover of
      capital in Departments I and II and to draw up a whole series of
      diagrams. The same must be said of the second of the above mentioned
      sections. Mr. Bulgakov correctly points out Mr. Herzenstein’s error in
      asserting that he had found a contradiction in Marx’s theory on this
      question. The author rightly says that “if the turnover period of
      all individual capitals is made to equal one year, at the beginning of the
      given year the capitalists will be the owners both of the entire product
      of the preceding year and of a sum of money equal to its value”
      (pp. 142-43). But Mr. Bulgakov was entirely wrong to take (p. 92, et seq.)
      the purely scholastic presentation of the problem by earlier economists
      (whether wages are derived

    

      from current production or from the production of the preceding working
      period); he created additional difficulties for himself in
      “dismissing” the statement by Marx, who “seems to
      contradict his basic point of view, arguing as though” “wages
      are not derived from capital but from cur rent production”
      (p. 135). But Marx did not pose the question in this way at
      all. Mr. Bulgakov found it necessary to “dismiss” Marx’s
      statement because he tried to apply to Marx’s theory a completely alien
      formulation of the question. Once it has been established how the entire
      process of social production takes place in connection with the
      consumption of the product by different classes of society, how the
      capitalists contribute the money necessary for the circulation of the
      product—once all this has been explained, the question of whether
      wages are derived from current or preceding production loses all serious
      significance. Engels, publisher of the last volumes of Capital,
      therefore, said in the preface to Volume II that arguments like that of
      Rodbertus, for example, as to “whether wages are derived from
      capital or income, belong to the domain of scholasticism and are
      definitely settled in Part III of the second book of Capital”
      (Das Kapital, ii, Vorwort,

S. xxi).[10]


 
Notes
 

[1]

      To swear by the words of the master .—.Ed.
    —Lenin

[2]

      Interpolations in square brackets (within passages quoted by Lenin) have been
      introduced by Lenin, unless otherwise indicated.—Ed.
    

[3]

      The other passage quoted by Mr. Tugan-Baranovsky has precisely the same
      meaning (III, 1, 231, cf. S. [Seite—German for
      page.—Ed.] 232 to the end of the

      paragraph),[11]
      as well as
      the following passage on crises: “The ultimate cause of all real
      crises always remains the poverty and limited consumption of the masses as
      opposed to the drive of capitalist production to develop the productive
      forces as though only the absolute consuming power of society constituted
      their limit” (Das Kapital, III, 2, 21. Russian translation,

      p. 395).[12]
      The following observation by Marx expresses
      the same idea: “Contradiction in the capitalist mode of production:
      the labourers as buyers of commodities are important for the market. But
      as sellers of their own commodity—labour-power—capitalist

   

society tends to keep them down to the minimum price” (Das Kapital,
      II,

303).[13]
      We have already spoken of Mr. N.—on’s
      incorrect interpretation of this passage in Novoye

Slovo,[14]
      1897, May. (See present edition, Vol. 2, A Characterisation of
      Economic Romanticism, pp. 468-69.—Ed.) There is no
      contradiction whatsoever between all these passages and the analysis of
      realisation in Section III of Volume II.
    —Lenin
 



[4]

Nauchroye Obozreniye (Science Review)—a scientific
      magazine issued in St. Petersburg from 1894 to 1903 (when it became a
      literary magazine). It published Lenin’s three articles: “A Note on
      the Question of the Market Theory” and “Once More on the
      Theory of Realisation” (see present volume, pp. 55-64, 74-93); and
      “Uncritical Criticism” (see present edition, Vol. 3 ,
      pp. 609-32).
    



[5]

      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. II, Moscow, 1957, p. 470.
    



[6]

      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. III, Moscow, 1959, pp. 299-300.
    



[7]

      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. III, Moscow, 1959, pp. 239-40.
    



[8]

      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. III, Moscow, 1959, pp. 299-300.
    



[11]

      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. III, Moscow, 1959, p. 244.
    



[12]

      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. III, Moscow, 1959, pp. 472-73.
    



[13]

      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. II, Moscow, 1957, p. 316.
    



[14]

Novoye Slovo (New Word)—a monthly scientific, literary, and
      political magazine, published in St. Petersburg from 1894 by liberal
      Narodniks. Early in 1897 it was taken over by the “legal
      Marxists” (P. B. Struve, M. I. Tugan-Baranovsky, and
      others). Novoye Slovo published two of Lenin’s articles when he
      was in exile in Siberia—“A Characterisation of Economic
      Romanticism” and “About a Certain Newspaper Article.” The
      magazine also

   

presented writings by G. V. Plekhanov, V. I. Zasulich,
      L. Martov, A. M. Gorky, and others. It was closed down by the tsarist
      authorities in December 1897.
    



[9]

      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. II, Moscow, 1957,
      pp. 362-89.
    



[10]

      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. II, Moscow, 1957, p. 17.
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 4

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Book Review: Parvus. The World Market and the Agricultural Crisis









Lenin: Book Review: Parvus. The World Market and the Agricultural Crisis







V. I.  

      Lenin
Book Review: Parvus. The World Market and the Agricultural Crisis




Written: Written in February 1899 

Published:

      Published in March 1899 in the magazine Nachalo,[1] No. 3.

      Signed: Vl. Ilyin.

      Published according to the text in the magazine.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 4,

      pages 65-66.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



 


Parvus. The World Market and the Agricultural Crisis.
      
Economic essays. Translated from the German by L. Y. St. Petersburg,
1898. Publ. 0. N. Popova (Educational Library, Series 2,
No. 2). 142 pp. Price 40 kopeks.


      This book, by the gifted German journalist who writes under the pseudonym
      of Parvus, consists of a number of essays describing some of the phenomena
      of modern world economy, with the greatest attention paid to
      Germany. Parvus’ central theme is the development of the world market and
      he describes mainly the recent stages of this development in the period of
      the decline of England’s industrial hegemony. Of the greatest interest are
      his remarks on the role being played by the old industrial countries that
      serve as a market for the younger capitalist countries: England, for
      example, swallows up an ever-growing amount of German manufactured goods
      and at the present time takes from one- fifth to a quarter of the total
      German export. Parvus employs the data of commercial and industrial
      statistics to describe the peculiar division of labour between the various
      capitalist countries, some of whom produce mainly for the colonial market
      and others for the European market. In the chapter headed “Towns and
      Railways” the author makes an extremely interesting attempt to
      describe the most important “forms of capitalist towns” and
      their significance in the general system of capitalist economy. The
      remaining and greater part of the book (pp. 33-142) is devoted to
      questions concerning the contradictions in present-day capitalist
      agriculture and the agrarian crisis. Parvus first explains the influence
      of industrial development on grain prices, on ground rent, etc. He then
      outlines the theory of ground rent developed by Marx in Volume III of
      Capital and explains

    

      the basic cause of capitalist agrarian crises from the stand point of this
      theory. Parvus adds data on Germany to the purely theoretical analysis of
      this question and comes to the conclusion that “the last and basic
      cause of the agrarian crisis is increased ground rent due exclusively to
      capitalist development and the consequent increased price of land.”
      “Eliminate these prices,” says Parvus, “and European
      agriculture will again be able to compete with the Russian and American.”
      “Its [private property’s] only weapon against the agrarian crisis
      is, with the exception of fortuitous favourable combinations on the world
      market, the auctioning of all capitalist landed properties”
      (141). The conclusion drawn by Parvus, therefore, coincides, by and large,
      with Engels’ opinion; in Volume III of Capital Engels pointed to
      the fact that the present-day agricultural crisis makes the ground rents
      formerly obtained by European landowners

      impossible.[2]
      We
      strongly recommend to all readers who are interested in the questions
      mentioned above to acquaint themselves with Parvus’ book. It is an
      excellent reply to the current Narodnik arguments on the present
      agricultural crisis which are constantly to be met with in the Narodnik
      press and which suffer from a most essential shortcoming: the fact of the
      crisis is examined in disconnection from the general development of world
      capitalism; it is examined, not from the stand point of definite social
      classes, but solely for the purpose of deducing the petty-bourgeois moral
      on the viability of small peasant farming.
    

      The translation of Parvus’ book, can, on the whole, be considered satisfactory,
      although in places awkward and heavy turns of speech are to be met with.
    

 
Notes
 
 



[1]

Nachalo (The Beginning)—a monthly literary
      and political magazine that was published in St. Petersburg during the first
      months of 1899 by “legal Marxists”; its editors were P. B. Struve,
      M. I. Tugan-Baranovsky, and others. It published articles by G. V. Plekhanov,
      V. I. Zasulich, and others. The magazine was closed down by the tsarist
      authorities in June 1899.
    



[2]

      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. III, 1959, pp. 708-10.
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 4

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Book Review: R. Gvozdev. Kulak Usury, Its Social and Economic Significance









Lenin: Book Review: R. Gvozdev. Kulak Usury, Its Social and Economic Significance







V. I.  

      Lenin
Book Review: R. Gvozdev. Kulak Usury, Its Social and Economic Significance




Written: Written in February 1899 

Published:

      Published in March 1899 in the magazine Nachalo, No. 3.

      Signed: Vl. Ilyin.

      Published according to the text in the magazine.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 4,

      pages 67-69.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.
Other Formats:  
Text



 

R. Gvozdev.

      Kulak Usury, Its Social and Economic Significance. St. Petersburg,
1899. Publ. N. Garin.

      Mr. Gvozdev’s book sums up data gathered by our economic literature on the
      interesting question of kulak usurers. The author mentions a number of
      indications of the development of commodity circulation and production in
      the pre-Reform period that brought about the emergence of trading and
      usurer’s capital. He then reviews the material on usury in grain
      production, on kulakism in connection with migration, handicraft
      industries, and peasants’ auxiliary employments, as well as in connection
      with taxation and credit. Mr. Gvozdev rightly points out that
      representatives of Narodnik economics have held a wrong view of kulakism,
      regarding it as some sort of an “excrescence” on the organism
      of “people’s production” and not as one of the forms of
      capitalism, closely and indivisibly bound up with the entire Russian
      social economy. The Narodniks ignored the connection between kulakism and
      the differentiation of the peasantry, the closeness of the village usurer
      “bloodsuckers” and others to the “enterprising muzhiks,”
      those representatives of the rural petty bourgeoisie in Russia. The
      survivals of medieval institutions that still weigh down on our
      countryside (social-estate seclusion of the village

      commune,[2]
      the tying of the peasant to his

      allotment,[3]
      collective

      liability,[4]
      the social-estate inequality of taxation) create tremendous barriers
      against the investment of small amounts of capital in production, against
      their employment in agriculture

    

      and industry. The natural result of all this is the tremendous prevalence
      of the lowest and worst forms of capital, viz., trading and
      usurer’s capital. In the midst of a mass of “economically
      weak” peasants dragging out an existence of semi- starvation on
      their small allotments, the small group of prosperous peasants inevitably
      turns into exploiters of the worst type, enslaving the poor by money
      loans, winter

      hiring,[5]
      etc., etc. Outdated institutions
      hindering the growth of capitalism both in agriculture and in industry
      thereby reduce the demand for labour-power but, at the same time, do not
      protect the peasant from the most shameless and uncurbed exploitation or
      even from starving to death. A rough estimate of the sums paid by indigent
      peasants to the kulaks and usurers, quoted by Mr. Gvozdev in his book,
      shows clearly the groundlessness of the usual comparison made between the
      Russian allotment-holding peasantry and the West-European proletariat. In
      actual fact the masses of that peasantry are in a far worse condition than
      is the rural proletariat in the West; in actual fact our indigent peasants
      are paupers and the years in which it is necessary to take extraordinary
      measures of help for millions of starving peasants occur with ever-growing
      frequency. If the fiscal institutions did not artificially lump together
      the prosperous and poor peasantry, the latter would undoubtedly have to be
      officially regarded as paupers, which would more accurately and more
      truthfully define the attitude of modern society to those strata of the
      population. Mr. Gvozdev’s book is valuable because it gives a summary of
      data on the process of “non-proletarian

      impoverishment”[1]

      and very
      justly describes this process as the lowest and worst form of the
      differentiation of the peasantry. Mr. Gvozdev is apparently well
      acquainted with Russian economic literature, but his book would have
      gained had he given less space to quotations from various magazines and
      allowed more space for an independent study of the material. The Narodnik
      analysis of the available material usually leaves untouched the aspects of
      the given question that are most important from the theoretical point of
      view. Furthermore, Mr. Gvozdev’s

    

      own arguments are frequently too sweeping and general. This must be said,
      in particular, of the chapter on handicraft industries. The style of the
      book suffers, at times, from mannerisms and haziness.
    

 
Notes
 

[1]

      Parvus, The World Market and the Agricultural Crisis.
      St. Petersburg, 1898, p. 8, footnote.
    —Lenin
 



[2]

The village (land) commune (Russ. obshchina or
      mir) was the communal form of peasant use of land characterised
      by compulsory crop rotation and undivided woods and pastures. Its
      principal features were collective liability, the periodical
      redistribution of the land without the right to refuse the allotment, and
      prohibition of purchase or sale of the allotted land.
    

      The Russian village commune dates back to ancient times and in the course
      of its historical development it gradually became one of the mainstays of
      feudalism in Russia. The landlords and the tsarist government used the
      village commune to intensify feudal oppression and to squeeze land
      redemption payments and taxes out of the people. Lenin pointed out that
      the village commune “does not save the peasant from turning into a
      proletarian; actually it serves as a medieval barrier dividing the
      peasants who are as if chained to small associations and to categories
      that have lost all ‘reason for existence’\thinspace” (see “The Agrarian
      Question in Russia To wards the Close of the Nineteenth Century,” present
      edition, Vol.15).
    

      The problem of the village commune aroused heated debates and brought an
      extensive economic literature into existence. Particularly great interest
      in the village commune was displayed by the Narodniks, who saw in it the
      guarantee of Russia’s evolution to socialism by a special path. By
      tendentiously gathering their material, falsifying facts, and employing
      so-called “average figures,” the Narodniks sought to prove that the
      commune peasantry in Russia possessed a special sort of
      “steadfastness,” that the village commune protected the peasants
      against the penetration of capitalist relations into their lives and
      “saved” them from ruin and class differentiation. As early as
      the 1880s, G. V. Plekhanov showed

   

that the Narodnik illusions about
      “commune socialism” were unfounded and in the 1890s Lenin
      completely refuted the Narodnik theories. Lenin made use of a tremendous
      amount of statistical material and countless facts to show how capitalist
      relations were developing in the Russian village and how capital, by
      penetrating into the patriarchal village commune, was splitting the
      peasantry into two antagonistic classes, the kulaks and the poor peasants.
    

      In 1906 the tsarist minister Stolypin issued a law favouring the kulaks
      which allowed peasants to leave the commune and sell their
      allotments. This law marked the beginning of the official abolition of the
      village commune system and intensified the differentiation of the
      peasantry. In the nine years following the adoption of the law, over two
      million peasant families withdrew from the communes.
    



[3]

Allotment land—land left for the use of the peasants after
      the abolition of serfdom in 1861. The allotted land was not permitted to
      be sold by the peasants. It was held by the village commune and was
      periodically redistributed among the peasants.
    



[4]

Collective liability was a compulsory measure making the peasants
      of each village commune collectively liable for timely and full payments
      and for the fulfilment of all sorts of services to the state and the
      landlords (payment of taxes and land redemption instalments, provision of
      recruits for the army, etc.). This form of bondage was retained after
      serfdom had been abolished and remained in force until 1906.
    



[5]

Winter hiring—the hiring of peasants for summer work by
      land lords and kulaks in the winter, when the peasants were particularly
      in need of cash and were willing to agree to extortionate terms.
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 4

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Book Review: Commercial and Industrial Russia









Lenin: Book Review: Commercial and Industrial Russia







V. I.  

      Lenin
Book Review: Commercial and Industrial Russia




Written: Written in February 1899 

Published:

      Published in March 1899 in the magazine Nachalo, No. 3.

      Signed: Vl. Ilyin.

      Published according to the text in the magazine.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 4,

      pages 70-73.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



 

Commercial and Industrial Russia.

      Handbook for Merchants and Factory Owners. Compiled under the
editorship of A. A. Blau, Head of the Statistical Division of the
Department of Commerce and Manufactures. St. Petersburg, 1899. Price 10
rubles.

    

      The publishers of this gigantic tome set themselves the aim of
      “filling a gap in our economic literature” (p. i), that is, to
      give at one and the same time the addresses of commercial and industrial
      establishments throughout Russia and information on the “condition
      of the various branches of industry.” No objection could be made to such a
      combination of reference and scientific-statistical material, were both
      the one and the other sufficiently complete. In the book named above,
      unfortunately, the directory completely overwhelms the statistical
      material, the latter being incomplete and insufficiently analysed. First
      of all, this publication compares unfavourably with previous publications
      of the same nature, since it does not give statistical data for each
      individual establishment or enterprise included in its lists. As a
      result. the lists of establishments and enterprises, occupying 2,703 huge
      columns of small print, lose all their scientific significance. In view of
      the chaotic state of our commercial and industrial statistics it is
      extremely important to have data precisely on each individual
      establishment or enterprise, since our official statistical institutions
      never make anything like a tolerable analysis of these data but confine
      themselves to announcing totals in which relatively reliable material is
      mixed up with absolutely unreliable material. We shall now show that this
      last; remark applies equally to

    

      the book under review; but first let us mention the following original
      method employed by the compilers. Printing the addresses of establishments
      and enterprises in each branch of production, they gave the number of
      establishments and the sum of their turnover for the whole of Russia only;
      they calculated the average turnover for one establishment in each branch
      and indicated with a special symbol those having a turnover greater or
      less than the average. It would have been much more to the purpose (if it
      was impossible to print information on each individual establishment) to
      fix a number of categories of establishments and enterprises that are
      similar for each branch of commerce and industry (according to the amount
      of turnover, the number of workers, the nature of the motive power, etc.)
      and to distribute all establishments according to these categories. It
      would then at; least have been possible to judge the completeness and
      comparability of the material for different gubernias and different
      branches of production. As far as factory statistics, for example, are
      concerned, it is enough to read the phenomenally vague definition of this
      concept on page 1 (footnote) of the publication under review and then
      glance over the lists of factory owners in some branches to become
      convinced of the heterogeneity of the statistical material published in
      the book. it is, therefore, necessary to exercise great caution in dealing
      with the summarised factory statistics in Section 1, Part I of
      Commercial and Industrial Russia (Historical Statistical Survey
      of Russian Industry and Trade). We read here that in 1896 (partly also in
      1895) there were, throughout the Russian Empire, 38,401 factories with an
      aggregate out put of 2,745 million rubles, employing 1,742,181 workers;
      these data include excise-paying and non-excise-paying industries and
      mining and metallurgical enterprises. We are of the opinion that this
      figure cannot, without substantial verification, be compared with the
      figures of our factory statistics for previous years. In 1896 a number of
      branches of production were registered that formerly (until 1894-95) had
      not come under the heading of “factories”: bakeries,
      fisheries, abattoirs, print-shops, lithograph shops, etc., etc. The value
      of the total output of all mining and metallurgical establishments in the
      Empire was fixed at 614 million rubles by original methods about which we
      are told only

    

      that the value of pig-iron is, apparently, repeated in the value of iron
      and steel. The total number of workers in the mining and metallurgical
      industries is, on the contrary, apparently underestimated: the figure for
      1895-96 was given as 505,000. Either this is an error or many branches
      have been omitted. From the figures scattered throughout the book it can
      be seen that for only a few branches in this department the number of
      workers is 474,000, not including those engaged in coal-mining (about
      53,000), salt-mining (about 20,000), stone-quarrying (about 10,000), and
      in other mining industries (about 20,000). There were more than 505,000
      workers in all the mining and metallurgical industries of the Empire in
      1890, and precisely these branches of production have developed
      particularly since that time. For example: in five branches of this
      division for which historical-statistical data are given in the text of
      the book (iron founding, wire drawing, machine building, gold- and
      copper-ware manufacturing) there were, in 1890, 908 establishments, with a
      total output valued at 77 million rubles and employing 69,000 workers,
      while in 1896 the figures were—1,444 establishments, with a total
      output valued at 221.5 million rubles, employing 147,000 workers. By
      assembling the historical-statistical data scattered throughout the book,
      which, unfortunately, do not cover all branches of production but only a
      certain number (cotton processing, chemical production, and more than 45
      other branches), we can obtain the following information for the Empire as
      a whole. In 1890 there were 19,639 factories, with a total output valued
      at 929 million rubles, employing 721,000 workers, and in 1896 there were
      19,162 factories, with a total output valued at 1,708 million rubles,
      employing 985,000 workers. If we add two branches subject to
      excise—beet-sugar and distilling— (1890-91—116,000
      workers and 1895-96—123,000 workers), we get the number of workers
      as 837,000 and 1,108,000 respectively, an increase of nearly one-third
      in a period of six years. Note that the
      decrease in the number of factories is due to the differences in the
      registration of flour-mills:

      in 1890, among the factories, 7,003 mills were included (156 million
      rubles, 29,638 workers), while in 1896 only 4,379 mills (272 million
      rubles, 37,954 workers) were included.
    
 

      Such are the data that can be extracted from the publication under review
      and which allow us to get some conception of the industrial boom in Russia
      in the nineties. It will be possible to deal with this question in greater
      detail when the full statistical data for 1896 have been published.
    

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 4

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Once More on the Theory of Realisation









Lenin: Once More on the Theory of Realisation







V. I.  

      Lenin
Once More on the Theory of Realisation




Written: Written in March 1899 

Published:

      Published in August 1899 in the magazine Nauchnoye Obozreniye, No. 8.

      Signed: V. Ilyin.

      Published according to the text in the magazine.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 4,

      pages 74-93.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

      
• README



 

      My “Note on the Question of the Market Theory (Concerning the
      Polemic of Messrs. Tugan-Baranovsky and Bulgakov)” was published in the
      number of Nauchnoye Obozreniye for January of the present year
      (1899) and was followed by P. B. Struve’s article, “Markets under
      Capitalist Production (Apropos of Bulgakov’s Book and Ilyin’s Article).”
      Struve “rejects, to a considerable extent, the theory proposed by
      Tugan-Baranovsky, Bulgakov, and Ilyin” (p. 63 of his article) and
      expounds his own conception of Marx’s theory of realisation.
    

      In my opinion, Struve’s polemic against the above-mentioned writers is due
      not so much to an essential difference of views as to his mistaken
      conception of the content of the theory he defends. In the first place,
      Struve confuses the market theory of bourgeois economists who taught that
      products are exchanged for products and that production, there fore,
      should correspond to consumption, with Marx’s theory of realisation which
      showed by analysis how the reproduction and circulation of the
      aggregate social capital, i.e., the realisation of the product in
      capitalist society, takes

      place.[1]

      Neither Marx nor those writers who have
      expounded his theory and with whom Struve has entered into a polemic
      deduced the harmony of production and consumption from this analysis, but,
      on the contrary, stressed forcefully the contradictions that are inherent
      in capitalism and that are bound to make their appearance in the course of
      capitalist

    

      realisation.[2]

      Secondly, Struve confuses the abstract theory of realisation (with which
      his opponents dealt exclusively) with concrete historical conditions
      governing the realisation of the capitalist product in some one country
      and some one epoch. This is just the same as confusing the abstract theory
      of ground rent with the concrete conditions of the development of
      capitalism in agriculture in some one country. These two basic delusions
      of Struve engendered a whole series of misunderstandings which can only be
      cleared up by an analysis of the individual propositions of his article.
    

      1. Struve does not agree with me when I say that in expounding the theory of
      realisation we must give Adam Smith special emphasis. “If it is a
      matter of going back to Adam,” he writes, “then we should not stop at
      Smith but at the

      physiocrats.”[25]

      But this is not so. It was
      precisely Adam Smith who did not confine himself to admitting the truth
      (known also to the physiocrats) that products are exchanged for products but
      raised the question of how the different component parts of social
      capital and the product are replaced (realised) according to their

      value.[3]

      For this reason Marx, who fully recognised that in the theory of the
      physiocrats, i.e., in Quesnay’s Tableau économique, some postulates
      were, “for their time,

      brilliant”[4]

;

      who recognised that in the
      analysis of the process of reproduction Adam Smith had, in some respects,
      taken a step backwards as compared with the physiocrats (Das
Kapital,



I2,

612, Anm.

      32[26]),
      nevertheless
      devoted only about a page and a half to the physiocrats in his review of the
      history of the question of realisation (Das Kapital, II1,
      S.

      350-51[27]),
      whereas he devoted

    

      over thirty pages to Adam Smith (ibid.,

      351-83[28])
      and analysed in detail Smith’s basic error which was inherited by
      the entire subsequent political economy. It is, therefore, necessary to
      pay greater attention to Adam Smith in order to explain the bourgeois
      economists’ theory of realisation, since they all repeated Smith’s
      mistake.

    

      2. Mr. Bulgakov quite correctly says in his book that bourgeois economists
      confuse simple commodity circulation with capitalist commodity
      circulation, whereas Marx established the difference between them. Struve
      believes that Mr. Bulgakov’s assertion is based on a misunderstanding. In
      my opinion it is just the opposite, the misunderstanding is not
      Mr. Bulgakov’s but Struve’s. And how, in deed, has Struve refuted
      Mr. Bulgakov? In a manner most strange: he refutes his postulate by
      repeating it. Struve says:

      Marx cannot be regarded as a champion of that theory of realisation
      according to which the product can be realised inside the given community,
      because Marx “made a sharp distinction between simple commodity
      circulation and capitalist circulation” (!! p. 48). But that is
      precisely what Mr. Bulgakov said! This is precisely why Marx’s Theory is
      not confined to a repetition of the axiom that products are ex changed for
      products. That is why Mr. Bulgakov is correct in regarding the disputes
      between bourgeois and petty-bourgeois economists on the possibility of
      over-production to be “empty and scholastic discussions”: the
      two disputants confused commodity and capitalist circulation; both of them
      repeated Adam Smith’s error.
    

      3. Struve is wrong in giving the theory of realisation the name of the
      theory of proportional distribution. It is inaccurate and must inevitably
      lead to misunderstandings. The theory of realisation is an

      abstract[5]

      theory that shows how the reproduction and circulation of the aggregate
      social capital takes place. The essential premises of this abstract theory
      are, firstly, the exclusion of foreign trade, of the foreign markets. But,
      by excluding foreign trade, the theory of realisation does not, by any
      means, postulate that a capitalist society has ever existed or could ever

    

      exist without foreign

      trade.[6]

      Secondly, the abstract theory of realisation assumes and must assume the
      proportional distribution of the product between the various branches of
      capitalist production. But, in assuming this, the theory of realisation
      does not, by any means, assert that in a capitalist society products are
      always distributed or could be distributed

      proportionally.[7]

      Mr. Bulgakov rightly compares the theory of realisation with the theory of
      value. The theory of value presupposes and must presuppose the equality of
      supply and demand, but it does not by any means assert that this equality
      is always observed or could be observed in capitalist society. The law of
      realisation, like every other law of capitalism, is “implemented
      only by not being implemented” (Bulgakov, quoted in Struve’s
      article, p. 56). The theory of the average and equal rate of profit
      assumes, in essence, the same proportional distribution of production
      between its various branches. But surely Struve will not call it a theory
      of proportional distribution on these grounds.
    

      4. Struve challenges my opinion that Marx justly accused Ricardo of repeating
      Adam Smith’s error. “Marx was wrong,” writes Struve. Marx, however,
      quotes directly a passage from Ricardo’s work (II1,

      383).[29]
      Struve ignores this passage. On the next page Marx quotes the opinion of

    

      Ramsay, who had also noted Ricardo’s error. I also indicated another
      passage from Ricardo’s work where he says forth rightly: “The whole
      produce of the land and labour of every country is divided into three
      portions: of these, one portion is devoted to wages, another to profits,
      and the other to rent” (here constant capital is erroneously
      omitted. See Ricardo’s Works, translated by Sieber,
      p. 221). Struve also passes over this passage in silence. He quotes only
      one of Ricardo’s comments which points out the absurdity of Say’s argument
      on the difference between gross and net revenue. In Chapter 49, Volume III
      of Capital, where deductions from the theory of realisation are
      expounded, Marx quotes precisely this comment of Ricardo, saying the
      following about it: “By the way, we shall see
      later”—apparently, this refers to the still unpublished Volume IV of

      Capital[30]—“that

      Ricardo nowhere refuted Smith’s
      false analysis of commodity-price, its reduction to the sum of the values
      of the revenues (Revenuen). He does not bother with it, and
      accepts its correctness so far in his analysis that he ’abstracts’ from
      the constant portion of the value of commodities. He also falls back into
      the same way of looking at things from time to time” (i.e., into
      Smith’s way of looking at things. Das Kapital, III, 2,
      377. Russian translation,

      696). [31]
      We shall leave the reader to judge who is right:

      Marx, who says that Ricardo repeats Smith’s

      error,[8]

      or Struve, who says that Ricardo “knew perfectly well I? I that the
      whole social product is not exhausted by wages, profit, and rent,” and
      that Ricardo “unconsciously



III wandered away from the parts of the
      social product that constitute production costs.” Is it possible to know
      perfectly well and at the same time unconsciously wander
      away?
    

      5. Struve not only did not refute Marx’s statement that Ricardo had adopted
      Smith’s error, but repeated that very error in his own article. “It is
      strange ... to think,”

    

      he writes, “that any one division of the social product into categories
      could have substantial importance for the general comprehension of realisation,
      especially since all portions of the product that is being realised actually
      take on the form of revenue (gross) in the process of realisation and the
      classics regarded them as revenues” (p. 48). That is precisely the
      point—not all the portions of the product in realisation take on
      the form of revenue (gross); it was precisely this mistake of Smith that Marx
      explained when he showed that a part of the product being realised does not and
      cannot ever take on the form of revenue. That is the part of the social product
      which replaces the constant capital that serves for the production of means of
      production (the constant capital in Department I, to use Marx’s
      terminology). Seed grain in agriculture, for instance, never takes on the form
      of revenue; coal used for the extraction of more coal never takes on the form of
      revenue, etc., etc. The process of the reproduction and circulation of the
      aggregate social capital cannot be understood unless that part of the gross
      product which can serve only as capital, the part that can never take on the
      form of revenue, is separated from

      it.[9]

      In a developing capitalist society this
      part of the social product must necessarily grow more rapidly than all the
      other parts of the product. Only this law will explain one of the most profound
      contradictions of capitalism: the growth of the national wealth proceeds with
      tremendous rapidity, while the growth of national consumption proceeds (if at
      all) very slowly.
    

      6. Struve “cannot at all understand” why Marx’s differentiation
      between constant and variable capital “is essential to the theory of
      realisation” and why I “particularly insist” on it.
    

      Struve’s lack of comprehension is, on the one hand, the result of a simple
      misunderstanding. In the first place, Struve himself admits one point of merit
      in this differentiation—that it includes not only revenues, but the whole
      product. Another point of merit is that it links up the analysis of the process
      of realisation logically with the

    

      analysis of the process of production of an individual capital. What is
      the aim of the theory of realisation? It is to show how the
      reproduction and circulation of the aggregate social capital takes
      place. Is it not obvious from the first glance that the role of variable
      capital must be radically different from that of constant capital?
      Products that replace variable capital must be exchanged, in the final
      analysis, for articles of consumption for the workers and meet
      their usual requirements. The products that replace constant capital must,
      in the final analysis, be exchanged for means of production and
      must be employed as capital for fresh production. For this reason the
      differentiation between constant and variable capital is absolutely
      essential for the theory of realisation. Secondly, Struve’s
      misunderstanding is due t.o his having, here also, arbitrarily and
      erroneously understood the theory of realisation as showing that the
      products are distributed proportionally (see, especially, pp. 50-51). We
      have said above and say again that such a conception of the content of the
      theory of realisation is fallacious.

    

      Struve’s failure to understand is, on the other hand, due to the fact that
      he deems it necessary to make a distinction between
      “sociological” and “economic” categories in Marx’s
      theory and makes a number of general remarks against that theory. I must
      say, first, that none of this has anything whatsoever to do with the
      theory of realisation, and, secondly, that I consider Struve’s distinction
      to be vague and that I see no real use for it. Thirdly, that I consider
      not only debatable, but even directly incorrect, Struve’s assertions that
      “it is indisputable that the relation of the sociological
      principles” of his theory to the analysis of market phenomena
      “was not clear to Marx himself,” that “the theory of value, as
      expounded in Volumes I and III of Capital, undoubtedly suffers
      from

      contradiction.”[10]

      All these statements of Struve

    

      are mere empty words. They are not arguments but decrees. They are the
      anticipated results of the criticism of Marx which the

      Neo-Kantians[32]
      intend to

      undertake.[11]

      If we live long enough we shall see what the
      criticism brings. In the meantime we assert that this criticism has provided
      nothing on the theory of realisation.
    
 

      7. On the question of the significance of Marx’s Schemes In the third
      section of Capital II, Struve maintains that the abstract theory
      of realisation can be well explained by the most varied methods of
      dividing the social product. This amazing assertion is to be fully
      explained by Struve’s basic misunderstanding—that the theory of
      realisation “is completely exhausted” (??!) by the banality
      that products are exchanged for products. Only this misunderstanding could
      have led Struve to write such a sentence: “The role played by these
      masses of commodities [those being realised] in production, distribution,
      etc., whether they represent capital (sic!!) and what sort of
      capital, constant or variable, is of absolutely no significance to the
      essence of the theory under discussion” (51). It is of no
      significance to Marx’s theory of realisation, a theory that consists in
      the analysis of the re production and circulation of the aggregate social
      capital, whether or not commodities constitute capital I! This
      amounts to saying that as far as the essence of the theory of ground rent
      is concerned, there is no significance in whether or not the rural
      population is divided into landowners, capitalists, and labourers, since
      the theory is reduced, as it were, to an indication of the differing
      fertility of the different plots of land.

    

      Only because of the same misunderstanding could Struve have asserted that
      the “natural relations between the elements of social
      consumption—social metabolism—can best be shown," not
      by the Marxian division of the product, but by the following division:
      means of production+articles of consumption+surplus-value (p. 50).
    

      What is this social metabolism? Primarily it is the ex change of means of
      production for articles of consumption. How can this exchange be shown if
      surplus-value Is especially separated from means of production and
      from articles of consumption? After all, surplus-value is embodied
      either in means of production or in articles of consumption! Is it not obvious
      that such a division, which is logically groundless (in that it confuses
      division according to the natural form of the product with division by elements
      of value), obscures the process of social

      metabolism?[12]
   

    
 

      8. Struve says that I ascribed to Marx the bourgeois- apologetic theory of
      Say-Ricardo (52), the theory of harmony between production and consumption
      (51), a theory that is in howling contradiction to Marx’s theory of the
      evolution and eventual disappearance of capitalism (51-52); that,
      therefore, my “perfectly correct argument” that Marx, in both
      the second and third volumes, stressed the contradiction, inherent in
      capitalism, between the unlimited expansion of production and the limited
      consumption on the part of the masses of the people, “jettisons that
      theory of realisation ... whose defender” I am “in other
      cases.”
    

      This statement of Struve is likewise untrue and derives likewise from the
      above-mentioned misunderstanding to which he has become subject.

    

      Whence comes Struve’s assumption that I do not understand the theory of
      realisation as an analysis of the process of reproduction and circulation of
      the aggregate social capital but as a theory which says only that products are
      exchanged for products, a theory which preaches the harmony of production and
      consumption? Struve could not have shown by an analysis of my articles that I
      understand the theory of realisation in the second way, for I have stated
      definitely and directly, that I understand it in the first way. In the article,
      “A Characterisation of Economic Romanticism,” in the section devoted to an
      explanation of Smith’s and Sismondi’s error, I say: “The whole question is
      how realisation takes place—that is, the replacement of
      all parts of the social product. Hence, the point of departure in discussing
      social capital and revenue—or, what is the same thing, the realisation
      of the product in capitalist society—must be the distinction between
      ... means of production and articles of consumption”
(Studies,

      17).[13]

      “The problem of realisation consists in analysing the
      replacement of all parts of the social product in terms of value
      and in terms of material form” (ibid.,

      26).[14]

      Is not Struve repeating this when he

    

      says—supposedly against me—that the theory which interests us
      “shows the mechanism of realisation ... insofar as that realisation
      is effected” (Nauchnoye Obozreniye, 62)? Am 1  contradicting that theory of realisation which I defend when
      I say that realisation is effected “in the midst of difficulties, in
      the midst of continuous fluctuations, which become increasingly violent as
      capitalism grows, in the midst of fierce competition, etc.”
      (Studies,

      27)[15]

;

      when I say that the Narodnik theory “not only reveals a failure to
      under stand this realisation, but, in addition, reveals an extremely
superficial understanding of the contradictions inherent in this
realisation”

      (26-27)[16]

;

      when 1 
      say that the realisation of the product, effected not so much on account
      of articles of consumption as on account of means of production,
      “is, of course, a contradiction, but the sort of contradiction that
      exists in reality, that springs from the very nature of capitalism”

      (24),[17]

      a contradiction that “fully corresponds to the historical mission of
      capitalism and to its specific social structure: the former” (the
      mission) “is to develop the productive forces of society (production
      for production); the latter” (the social structure of capitalism)
      “precludes their utilisation by the mass of the population”

      (20)[18]

?
    

      9. Apparently there are no differences of opinion between Struve and me on
      the question of the relations between production and consumption in
      capitalist society. But if Struve says that Marx’s postulate (which
      asserts that consumption is not the aim of capitalist production)
      “bears the obvious stamp of the polemical nature of Marx’s whole
      system in general,” that “it is tendentious” (53), then I most
      decidedly challenge the appropriateness and justification of such
      expressions. It is a fact that consumption is not the aim of capitalist
      production. The contradiction between this fact and the fact that, in the
      final analysis, production is bound up with consumption, that it is also
      dependent on consumption in capitalist society—this contradiction
      does not spring from a doctrine but from reality. Marx’s theory of
      realisation

    

      has, incidentally, tremendous scientific value, precisely because it shows how
      this contradiction occurs, and because it puts this contradiction in the
      foreground. “Marx’s system” is of a “polemical nature,” not
      because it is

      “tendentious,”[19]

      but because it provides an exact picture, in theory, of all the
      contradictions that are present in reality. For this reason, incidentally,
      all attempts to master “Marx’s system” without mastering
      its"polemical nature” are and will continue to be unsuccessful: the
      “polemical nature” of the system is nothing more than a true
      reflection of the “polemical nature” of capitalism itself.
    

10. “What is the real significance of the theory of realisation?” asks
    Mr. Struve and answers by quoting the opinion of Mr. Bulgakov, who says that
    the possible expansion of capitalist production is actually effected even if
    only by a series of crises. “Capitalist production is increasing
    through out the world,” says Mr. Bulgakov. “This argument,” objects
    Struve, “is quite groundless. The fact is that the real ’expansion of
    capitalist production’ is not by any means effected in that ideal and
    isolated capitalist state which Bulgakov presupposes and which, by his
    assumption, is sufficient unto itself, but in the arena of world economy
    where the most differing levels of economic development and differing forms
    of economic existence come into collision” (57).

    

      Thus, Struve’s objection may be summed up as follows: In actual fact
      realisation does not take place in an isolated, self-sufficing, capitalist
      state, but “in the arena of world economy,” i.e., by the marketing
      of products in other countries. It is easy to see that this objection is
      based on an error. Does the problem of realisation change to any extent if
      we do not confine ourselves to the home market
      (“self-sufficing” capitalism) but make reference to the foreign
      market, if we take several countries instead of only one? If we do not
      think that the capitalists throw their goods into the sea or give them
      away gratis to foreigners—if we do not take individual, exceptional
      cases or periods, it is obvious that we must accept a certain equilibrium
      of export and import.

    

      If a country exports certain products, realising them “in the arena of
      world economy,” it imports other products in their place. From the
      standpoint of the theory of realisation it must necessarily be accepted
      that “foreign commerce only replaces home products
      [Artikel—goods] by articles of other use- or bodily
      form” (Das Kapital, II,

      469. [33]
      Quoted by me in Nauchnoye Obozreniye,

      p. 38[20]

).

      Whether we take one country or a group of countries, the essence of the
      process of realisation does not change in the slightest. In his objection
      to Mr. Bulgakov, therefore, Struve repeats the old error of the Narodniks,
      who connected the problem of realisation with that of the foreign

      market.[21]


      In actual fact these two questions have nothing in common. The problem of
      realisation is an abstract problem that is related to the general theory of
      capitalism. Whether we take one country or the whole world, the basic laws of
      realisation, revealed by Marx, remain the same.
    

      The problem of foreign trade or of the foreign market is an historical problem,
      a problem of the concrete conditions of the development of capitalism in some
      one country and in some one

      epoch.[22]


      11. Let us dwell for a while on the problem that has “long
      Interested” Struve: what is the real scientific value of the theory
      of realisation?
    

      It has exactly the same value as have all the other postulates of Marx’s
      abstract theory. If Struve is bothered by the circumstance that
      “perfect realisation is the ideal of capitalist production, but by
      no means its reality,” we must remind him that all other laws of
      capitalism, revealed by Marx, also depict only the ideal of capitalism and
      not its reality. “We need present,” wrote Marx, “only the
      inner organisation of the capitalist mode of production, in its ideal
      average (in ihrem idealen Durchschnitt), as it were”
      (Das Kapital, III, 2, 367; Russian translation,

p. 688). [34]
      The
      theory of capital assumes that the worker receives the full value of his
      labour-power. This is the ideal of capitalism,

    

      but by no means its reality. The theory of rent presupposes that the entire
      agrarian population has been completely divided into landowners, capitalists,
      and hired labourers. This is the ideal of capitalism, but by no means its
      reality. The theory of realisation presupposes the proportional distribution of
      production. This is the ideal of capitalism, but by no means its reality.
    

      The scientific value of Marx’s theory is its explanation of the process of
      the reproduction and circulation of the aggregate social capital. Further,
      Marx’s theory showed how the contradiction, inherent in capitalism, comes
      about, how the tremendous growth of production is definitely not
      accompanied by a corresponding growth in people’s consumption. Marx’s
      theory, therefore, not only does not restore the apologetic bourgeois
      theory (as Struve fancies), but, on the contrary, provides a most
      powerful weapon against apologetics. It follows from the theory that,
      even with an ideally smooth and proportional reproduction and
      circulation of the aggregate social capital, the contradiction between the
      growth of production and the narrow limits of consumption is
      inevitable. But in reality, apart from this, realisation does not
      proceed in ideally smooth proportions, but only amidst
      “difficulties,” “fluctuations,” “crises,” etc.
    

      Further, Marx’s theory of realisation provides a most powerful weapon
      against the petty-bourgeois reactionary criticism of capitalism, as well
      as against apologetics. It was precisely this sort of criticism against
      capitalism that our Narodniks tried to substantiate with their fallacious
      theory of realisation. Marx’s conception of realisation inevitably leads
      to the recognition of the historical progressiveness of capitalism (the
      development of the means of production and, consequently, of the
      productive forces of society) and, thereby, it not only does not obscure
      the historically transitory nature of capitalism, but, on the contrary,
      explains it.
    

      12. “In relation to an ideal or isolated, self-sufficing capitalist
      society,” asserts Struve, extended reproduction would be impossible,
      “since the necessary additional workers can nowhere be obtained.”
    

      I certainly cannot agree with Struve’s assertion. Struve has not proved, and it
      cannot be proved, that it is impossible

    

      to obtain additional workers from the reserve army. Against the fact that
      additional workers can be obtained from the natural growth of the
      population, Strove makes the unsubstantiated statement that
      “extended reproduction, based on the natural increase in the
      population, may not be arithmetically identical with simple reproduction,
      but from the practical capitalist standpoint, i.e., economically, may
      fully coincide with it.” Realising that the impossibility of obtaining
      additional workers cannot be proved theoretically, Struve evades the
      question by references to historical and practical conditions. “I do
      not think that Marx could solve the historical I?!] question on the basis
      of this absolutely abstract construction."... “Self-sufficing
      capitalism is the historically I!] inconceivable limit." ... “The
      intensification of the labour that can be forced on a worker is extremely
      limited, not only in actual fact, but also logically." ... “The
      constant raising of labour productivity cannot but weaken the very
      compulsion to work.”

    

      The illogicality of these statements is as clear as day light! None of
      Struve’s opponents has ever or anywhere given voice to the absurdity that
      an historical question can be solved with the aid of abstract
      constructions. In the present instance Struve himself did not propound an
      historical question, but one that is an absolute abstraction, a purely
      theoretical question, “in relation to an ideal capitalist
      society” (57). Is it not obvious that he is simply evading the
      question? 1, of course, would not dream of denying that there exist
      numerous historical and practical conditions (to say nothing of the
      immanent contradictions of capitalism) that are leading and will lead to
      the destruction of capitalism rather than to the conversion of present-day
      capitalism into an ideal capitalism. But on the purely theoretical
      question “in relation to an ideal capitalist society” I still
      retain my former opinion that there are no theoretical grounds for denying
      the possibility of extended reproduction in such a society.
    

      13. “Messrs. V. V. and N.—on have pointed out the
      contradictions and stumbling-blocks in the capitalist development of
      Russia, but they are shown Marx’s Schemes and told that capital is always
      exchanged for capital...” (Struve, op. cit., 62).
    
 

      This is sarcasm in the highest degree. The pity is that matters are
      depicted in an absolutely false light. Anyone who reads Mr. V. V. ’s
      Essays on Theoretical Economics and Section XV of the
      second part of Mr. N.—on’s Sketches will see that both
      these writers raised precisely the abstract-theoretical question of
      realisation—the realisation of the product in capitalist society in
      general. This is a fact. There is another circumstance which is also a
      fact; other writers, those who opposed them, “deemed it essential to
      explain, first and foremost, the basic, abstract-
      theoretical points of the market theory” (as is stated in the
      opening lines of my article in Nauchnoye Obozreniye).
      Tugan-Baranovsky wrote on the theory of realisation in the chapter of his
      book on crises, which bears the subtitle, “The Market Theory.”
      Bulgakov gave his book the subtitle, “A Theoretical Study.” It is
      therefore a question of who confuses abstract-theoretical and
      concrete-historical questions, Struve’s opponents or Struve himself?
    

      On the same page of his article Struve quotes my statement to the effect
      that the necessity for a foreign market is not due to the conditions of
      realisation but to historical conditions. “But,” Struve objects (a
      very typical “but”!), “Tugan-Baranovsky. Bulgakov, and Ilyin
      have examined only the abstract conditions of realisation and have not
      examined the historical conditions” (p. 62).
    

      The writers mentioned did not explain historical conditions for the
      precise reason that they took it upon themselves to speak of
      abstract-theoretical and not concrete-historical questions. In my book,
      On the Question of the Development of Capitalism in Russia
      (“The Home Market for Large-Scale Industry and the Process of Its
      Formation in

      Russia”),[23]

      the printing of which has now (March 1899) been
      completed. I did not raise the question of the market theory but of a home
      market for Russian capitalism. In this case, therefore, the abstract
      truths of theory play only the role of guiding principles, a means of
      analysing concrete data.
    
 

      14. Struve “wholly supports” his “point of view”
      on the theory of “third persons” which he postulated in
      his Critical Remarks. I, in turn, wholly support what I said
      in this connection at the time Critical Remarks

      appeared.[35]


      In his Critical Remarks (p. 251) Struve says that Mr. V. V.’s
      argument “is based on a complete theory, an original one, of markets
      in a developed capitalist society.” “This theory,” says Struve,
      “is correct insofar as it confirms the fact that surplus-value
      cannot ho realised by consumption, either by the capitalists or the
      workers, and presupposes consumption by third persons.” By these third
      persons “in Russia” Struve “presumes the Russian
      agricultural peasantry” (p. 61 of the article in Nauchnoye
      Obozreniye).
    

      And so, Mr. V. V. propounds a complete and original theory of markets in a
      developed capitalist society, and the Russian agricultural peasantry is
      pointed out to him! Is this not confusing the abstract-theoretical
      question of realisation with the concrete-historical question of
      capitalism in Russia? Further, if Struve acknowledges Mr. V. V.’s theory
      to be even partly correct, he must have overlooked Mr. V. V. ’s basic
      theoretical errors on the question of realisation, he must have overlooked
      the incorrect view that the “difficulties” of capitalist
      realisation are confined to surplus-value or are specially bound up with
      that part of the value of the product—he must have overlooked the
      incorrect view that connects the question of the foreign market with the
      question of realisation.
    

      Struve’s statement that the Russian agricultural peasantry, by the
      differentiation within it, creates a market for our capitalism is
      perfectly correct (in the above-mentioned book I demonstrated this thesis
      in detail by an analysis of Zemstvo statistical data). The theoretical
      substantiation of this thesis, however, relates in no way to the theory of
      the realisation of the product in capitalist society, but to the theory of
      the formation of capitalist society. We must also note that calling the
      peasants “third persons” is not very fortunate and is likely
      to cause a misunderstanding. If the peasants are “third
      persons” for capitalist industry, then the industrial producers,
      large and small, the factory owners and workers,

    

      are “third persons” for capitalist farming. On the other hand,
      the peasant farmers (“third persons”) create a market for capitalism
      only to the extent that they are differentiated into the classes of
      capitalist society. (rural bourgeoisie and rural proletariat), i.e., only
      insofar as they cease to be “third” persons and
      become active persons in the capitalist system.
    

      15. Struve says: “Bulgakov makes the very subtle remark that no
      difference in principle can be discerned between the home and the foreign
      market for capitalist production.” I fully agree with this remark: in
      actual fact a tariff or political frontier is very often quite unsuitable
      as a line drawn between the “home” and “foreign”
      markets. But for reasons lust indicated I cannot agree with Struve that
      “the theory asserting the necessity for third persons ... arises out
      of this.” One demand does arise directly out of this: do not stop at the
      traditional separation of the home and foreign markets when analysing the
      question of capitalism. This distinction, groundless from a strictly
      theoretical point of view, is of particularly little use for such
      countries as Russia. It could be replaced by another division which
      distinguishes, for instance, the following aspects of capitalist
      development: 1) the formation and development of capitalist relations
      within the bounds of a certain fully populated and occupied territory; 2)
      the expansion of capitalism to other territories (in part completely
      unoccupied and being colonised by emigrants from the old country, and in
      part occupied by tribes that remain outside the world market and world
      capitalism). The first side of the process might be called the development
      of capitalism in depth and the second its development in

      breadth.[24]

      Such a
      division would include the whole process of the historical development of
      capitalism: on the one hand, its development in the old countries, where
      for centuries the forms of capitalist relations up to and including
      large-scale machine industry have

    

      been built up; on the other hand, the mighty drive of developed capitalism
      to expand to other territories, to populate and plough up new parts of the
      world, to set up colonies and to draw savage tribes into the whirlpool of
      world capitalism. In Russia this last-mentioned capitalist tendency has
      been and continues to be seen most clearly in our outlying districts whose
      colonisation has been given such tremendous impetus in the post-Reform,
      capitalist period of Russian history. The south and south-east of European
      Russia, the Caucasus, Central Asia, and Siberia serve as some thing like
      colonies for Russian capitalism and ensure its tremendous development, not
      only in depth but also in breadth.

    

      Finally, the division proposed is convenient because it clearly determines
      the range of questions which precisely is embraced by the theory of
      realisation. It is clear that the theory applies only to the first side of
      the process, only to the development of capitalism in depth. The theory of
      realisation (i.e., the theory which examines the process of the
      reproduction and circulation of the aggregate social capital) must
      necessarily take an isolated capitalist society for its constructions,
      i.e., must ignore the process of capitalist expansion to other countries,
      the process of commodity exchange between countries, because this process
      does not provide anything for the solution of the question of realisation
      and only transfers the question from one country to several countries. It
      is also obvious that the abstract theory of realisation must take as a
      prerequisite an ideally developed capitalist society.
    

      In regard to the literature of Marxism, Struve makes the following general
      remark: “The orthodox chorus still continues to dominate, but it
      cannot stifle the new stream of criticism because true strength in
      scientific questions is always on the side of criticism and not of faith.”
      As can be seen from the foregoing exposition, we have satisfied ourselves
      that the “new stream of criticism” is not a guarantee against
      the repetition of old errors. No, let us better remain"under the sign of
      orthodoxy"! Let us not believe that orthodoxy means taking things on
      trust, that orthodoxy precludes critical application and further
      development, that it permits historical problems to be obscured by
      abstract schemes. If there

    

      are orthodox disciples who are guilty of these truly grievous sins, the
      blame must rest entirely with those disciples and not by any means with
      orthodoxy, which is distinguished by diametrically opposite qualities.
    

 
Notes
 

[1]

      See my Studies, p. 17, et al. (See present edition, Vol.2, A
Characterisation of Economic Romanticism, p. 151, et
al.—Ed.)
    —Lenin

[2]

Ibid., pp. 20, 27, 24, et al. (See present edition, Vol. 2, pp. 155,
      163-64, 16O-61.–Ed.)
    —Lenin

[3]

      Incidentally, in my article in Nauchnoye Obozreniye the term
      “stoimost” (value) was everywhere changed to “tsennost.” This was
      not my doing, but the editor’s. I do not regard the use of any one term as
      being of particularly great importance, but I deem it necessary to state that
      I used and always use the word “stoimost.”
    —Lenin

[4]

      Frederick Engels, Herrn E. Dühring’s Umwälzung der
      Wissenschaft, Dritte Auflage (Frederick Engels, Herr Eugen
      Dühring’s Revolution in Science [Anti—Dühring], third
      ed.—Ed.),

p. 270,[36]

      from the chapter written by Marx.
    —Lenin

[5]

      See my article in Nauchnoye Obozreniye, p. 37. (See p. 55 of this
      volume.—Ed.)
    —Lenin

[6]

Ibid., p. 38. (See p. 56 of this volume.—Ed.)
      Cf. Studies, p. 25 (see present edition, Vol. 2,
      p. 162.—Ed.): “Do we deny that capitalism needs a foreign
      market? Of course not. But the question of a foreign market has absolutely
      nothing to do with the question of realisation.”
    —Lenin

[7]

      “Not only the products ... which replace surplus-value, but also
      those which replace variable ... and constant capital ... all these
      products are realised in the same way, in the midst of ’difficulties,’ in
      the midst of continuous fluctuations, which become increasingly violent as
      capitalism grows” [Studies, p. 27 (see present edition,
      Vol. 2, p. 164.—Ed.)]. Perhaps Struve will say that this passage is
      contradicted by other passages, e. g., that on p. 31 (see present edition,
      Vol. 2, p. 164.—Ed.): "... the capitalists
      can realise surplus-value”? This is only a seeming
      contradiction. Since we take an abstract theory of realisation (and the
      Narodniks put forward precisely an abstract theory of the impossibility of
      realising surplus-value), the deduction that realisation is possible
      becomes inevitable. But while expounding the abstract theory, it is
      necessary to indicate the contradictions that are inherent in the actual
      process of realisation. This was done in my article.
    —Lenin

[8]

      The correctness of Marx’s assessment is also seen with particular clarity from
      the fact that Ricardo shared Smith’s fallacious views on the accumulation of
      an individual capital. Ricardo thought that the accumulated part of the
      surplus-value is expended entirely on wages, whereas it is expended as: 1)
      constant capital and 2) wages. See Das Kapital, 12, 611-13, Chapter
      22,

§ 2.[37]
      Cf. Studies, p. 29, footnote. (See present edition, Vol. 2,
      p. 167.—Ed.)
    —Lenin

[9]

      Cf. Das Kapital, III, 2, 375-76 (Russian translation,

      696),[38]
      on distinguishing the gross product from gross revenue.
    —Lenin

[10]

      In opposition to this last statement of Struve let me quote the latest
      exposition of the theory of value made by K. Kautsky, who states and
      proves that the law of the average rate of profit “does not abolish
      the law of value but merely modifies it” (Die Agrarfrage,
      S. 67-68). (The Agrarian Question,
      pp. 67-68.—Ed.) We would point out, incidentally, the
      following interesting statement made by Kautsky in the introduction to his
      excellent book: “If I have succeeded in developing new and fruitful
      ideas in this work I am grateful, first and

   

foremost, to my two great
      teachers for this; I stress this the more readily since there have been,
      for some time, voices heard even in our circles that declare the viewpoint
      of Marx and Engels to be obsolete.... In my opinion this scepticism
      depends more on the personal peculiarities of the sceptics than on the
      qualities of the disputed theory. I draw this conclusion, not only from
      the results obtained by analysing the sceptics’ objections, but also on
      the basis of my own personal experience. At the beginning of my
      ... activities I did not sympathise with Marxism at all. I approached it
      quite as critically and with as much mistrust as any of those who now look
      down with an air of superiority on my dogmatic fanaticism. I became a
      Marxist only after a certain amount of resistance. But then, and later,
      whenever I had doubts regarding any question of principle, I always came
      to the ultimate conclusion that it was I who was wrong and not my
      teachers. A more profound study of the subject compelled me to admit the
      correctness of their viewpoint. Every new study of the subject, therefore,
      every at tempt to re-examine my views served to strengthen my conviction 
      to strengthen in me my recognition of the theory, the dissemination and
      application of which I have made the aim of my life.”
    —Lenin

[11]

      Incidentally, a few words about this (future) “criticism,” on which
      Struve is so keen. Of course, no right-minded person will, in general, object
      to criticism. But Struve, apparently, is repeating his favourite idea of
      fructifying Marxism with “critical philosophy.” It goes without saying
      that I have neither the desire nor the opportunity to deal here at length with
      the philosophical content of Marxism and therefore confine myself to the
      following remark. Those disciples of Marx who call ,"Back to Kant,” have
      so far produced exactly nothing to show the necessity for such a turn or to
      show convincingly that Marx’s theory gains anything from its impregnation with
      Neo-Kantianism. They have not even fulfilled the obligation that should be a
      priority with them—to analyse in detail and refute the negative
      criticism of Neo-Kantianism made by Engels. On the contrary, those disciples
      who have gone back to pre-Marxian materialist philosophy and not to Kant, on
      the one hand, and to dialectical Idealism, on the other, have produced a
      well-ordered and valuable exposition of dialectical materialism, have shown
      that it constitutes a legitimate and inevitable product of the entire latest
      development of philosophy and social science. It is enough for me to cite the
      well-known work by Mr. Beltov in Russian literature and Beiträge zur
Geschichte des Materialismus (Stuttgart,

      1896)[39]
[Essays on the History of Materialism (Stuttgart, 1896)
—Ed] in German literature.
    —Lenin

[12]

      Let us remind the reader that Marx divides the aggregate social product into
      two departments according to the natural form of the

   

product: I—means of production and II—articles of consumption. In
      each of these departments the product is divided into three parts according to
      elements of value: 1) constant capital, 2) variable capital,
      and 3) surplus-value.
    —Lenin

[13]

      See present edition, Vol. 2, p. 152.—Ed.
    

[14]

Ibid., p. 162.—Ed.
    

[15]

      See present edition, Vol. 2, p. 164.—Ed.
    

[16]

Ibid., p. 163.—Ed.
    

[17]

Ibid., p. 160.—Ed.
    

[18]

Ibid., p. 156.—Ed.
    

[19]

      The classical example of gentlemen à la A. Skvortsov who sees
      tendentiousness in Marx’s theory of the average rate of profit could serve as
      a warning against the use of such expressions.
    —Lenin

[20]

      See present volume, pp. 56-57.—Ed.
    

[21]

      I analysed this error of the Narodniks in my Studies,
      pp. 25-29. (See present edition, Vol. 2, pp. 161-66.— Ed.)
    —Lenin

[22]

Ibid., cf. Nauchnoye Obozreniye, No. 1, p. 37 (see
      present volume, p. 55.—Ed.)
    —Lenin

[23]

      The reference is to The Development of Capitalism in Russia (see
      present edition, Vol. 3).—Ed.
    

[24]

      It goes without saying that the two sides of the process are actually
      closely united, and that their separation is a mere abstraction, merely a
      method of investigating a complicated process. My book mentioned above is
      devoted entirely to the first side of the process. See Chapter VIII,
      Section V.
    —Lenin
 



[25]

Physiocrats—representatives of a trend in bourgeois classical
      political economy in the fifties and sixties of the eighteenth century
      when the French Revolution was being prepared ideologically. The school
      was founded by F. Quesnay. The physiocrats’ formula for economic policy
      was “laissez faire, laissez passer,” which aimed at
      providing the most favourable conditions for developing bourgeois
      relations. The physiocrats proclaimed the principle of the unlimited rule
      of private property; they rejected protectionism, struggled against the
      limitations of the guilds, and demanded free trade and free competition.
    

      The physiocrats transferred the investigation of the sources of wealth and
      the surplus-product from the sphere of circulation to that of production,
      but confined it to agricultural production. They were the first to attempt
      a study of the laws of the reproduction and distribution of the aggregate
      social product. Quesnay’s Tableau économique was an
      attempt to depict the capitalist production process as a whole. The
      physiocrats, however, did not understand the nature of value and did not
      realise that surplus-value

   

is congealed surplus-labour but regarded It as
      a peculiar gift of nature (“the net product”).
    



[36]

      Frederick Engels, Anti-Dühring. Lenin refers to the chapter
      “From the Critical History” (Part II, Chapter X).
    



[26]

      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. I, Moscow, 1958, p. 591.
    



[27]

      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. II, Moscow, 1957, pp. 359-60
    



[28]

      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. II, Moscow, 1957, pp. 360-89.
    



[29]

      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. II, Moscow, 1957, p. 389.
    



[30]

Volume IV of Capital—the designation given by Lenin, in
      accordance with the view expressed by Engels, to Marx’s Theories of
      Surplus-Value, written in the years 1862-63. In the preface to Volume
      II of Capital, Engels wrote: “After eliminating the
      numerous passages covered by Books II and III, I intend to publish the
      critical
      part of this manuscript as Book IV of Capital” (Karl Marx,
      Capital, Vol. II, p. 2). Death prevented Engels from preparing
      Volume IV for the press; it was first published in German, after being
      edited by Karl Kautsky, in 1905-10. In this edition basic principles
      governing the scientific publication of a text were violated and there
      were distortions of a number of the tenets of Marxism.
    

      The Institute of Marxism-Leninism of the C. C. of the C. P. S. U. is
      issuing a new (Russian) edition of Theories of Surplus-Value
      (Volume IV of Capital) in three parts, according to the
      manuscript of 1862-63. Part I appeared in 1955 and Part II in 1957.
    



[31]

      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. III, Moscow, 1959, p. 820.
    



[37]

      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. I, Moscow, 1958, pp. 589-91.
    



[38]

      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. III, Moscow, 1959, p. 819.
    



[32]

Neo-Kantians—-adherents of Neo-Kantianism, a trend in
      bourgeois philosophy that arose in Germany in the latter half of the
      nineteenth century; it was a resuscitation of the more reactionary,
      idealist concepts of Kant’s philosophy. Neo-Kantianism opposed dialectical
      and historical materialism with the slogan of “Back to Kant!” In his
      book, Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German
      Philosophy, Engels called the Neo-Kantians “theoretical
      reactionaries” and “cobweb-spinning eclectic flea-crackers.”
      The Neo-Kantians among the German Social-Democrats (Eduard Bern stein,
      Karl Schmidt, and others) subjected to revision the Marxist philosophy,
      Marx’s economic theory, and the Marxist theory of the class struggle and
      the dictatorship of the proletariat. Russian supporters of Neo-Kantianism
      included the “legal Marxists,” Socialist-Revolutionaries, and
      Mensheviks. Lenin subjected the

   

reactionary philosophy of the Neo-Kantians
      to a comprehensive criticism in his Materialism and
      Empirio-Criticism (see present edition, Vol. 14).
    



[39]

      Lenin refers to G. V. Plekhanov’s Development of the Monist View of
History, published legally in St. Petersburg in 1895 under the
      pen-name of N. Beltov, and to his Essays on the History of
Materialism published in German.
    



[33]

      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. II, Moscow, 1957, p. 470.
    



[34]

      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. III, Moscow, 1959, p. 810.
    



[35]

      Lenin refers to his work, “The Economic Content of Narodism and the
      Criticism of It in Mr. Struve’s Book” (see present edition, Vol. 1,
      pp. 333-507).
    
*








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 4

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Book Review: Karl Kautsky. Die Agrarfrage









Lenin: Book Review: Karl Kautsky. Die Agrarfrage







V. I.  

      Lenin
Book Review: Karl Kautsky. Die Agrarfrage




Written: Written in March 1899 

Published:

      Published in April 1899 in the magazine Nachalo, No. 4.

      Signed: Vl. Ilyin.

      Published according to the text in the magazine.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 4,

      pages 94-99.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.
Other Formats:  
Text
• README



 

Karl Kautsky.
      Die Agrarfrage.

      Eine Uebersicht über die
Tendenzen der modernen Landwirtschalt und die Agrarpolitik

u.s.w.[1]

Stuttgart, Dietz, 1899.
    

      Kautsky’s book is the most important event in present-day economic
      literature since the third volume of Capital. Until now Marxism
      has lacked a systematic study of capitalism in agriculture. Kautsky has
      filled this gap with “The Development of Agriculture in Capitalist
      Society,” the first part (pp. 1-300) of his voluminous (450-page) book. He
      justly remarks in his preface that an “overwhelming” mass of
      statistical and descriptive economic material on the question of
      agricultural capitalism has been accumulated and that there is an urgent
      need to reveal the “basic tendencies   of economic evolution in this
      branch of the economy in order to demonstrate the varied phenomena of
      agricultural capitalism as “partial manifestations of one common
      [integral] process” (eines Gesammtprozesses). It is true
      that agricultural forms and the relations among the agricultural
      population in contemporary society are marked by such tremendous variety
      that there is nothing easier than to seize upon a whole mass of facts and
      pointers taken from any inquiry that will “confirm” the views
      of the given writer. This is precisely the method used in a large number
      of arguments by our Narodnik press which tries to prove the viability of
      petty peasant economy or even its superiority over large-scale production

    

      in agriculture. A distinguishing feature of all these arguments is that
      they isolate individual phenomena, cite individual cases, and do not even
      make an attempt to connect them with the general picture of the whole
      agrarian structure of capitalist countries in general and with the basic
      tendencies of the entire present-day evolution of capitalist
      farming. Kautsky does not make this usual mistake. He has been studying
      the problem of capitalism in agriculture for over twenty years and is in
      possession of very extensive material; in particular, Kautsky bases his
      inquiry on the data of the latest agricultural censuses and questionnaires
      in England, America, France (1892), and Germany (1895). He never loses his
      way amidst piles of facts and never loses sight of the connection between
      the tiniest phenomenon and the general structure of capitalist farming and
      the general evolution of capitalism.
    

      Kautsky does not confine himself to anyone particular question, e.g., the
      relations between large-scale and small-scale production in agriculture,
      but deals with the general question of whether or not capital is bringing
      agriculture under its domination, whether it is changing forms of
      production and forms of ownership in agriculture and how this process is
      taking place. Kautsky gives every recognition to the important role played
      by pre-capitalist and non-capitalist forms of agriculture in modern
      society and to the necessity of examining the relationship of these forms
      to the purely capitalist forms; he begins his investigation with an
      extremely brilliant and precise characterisation of the patriarchal
      peasant economy and of agriculture in the feudal epoch. Having thus
      established the starting-points for the development of capitalism in
      agriculture, he proceeds to characterise “modern agriculture.” The
      description is given first of all from the technical standpoint (the crop
      rotation system, division of labour, machinery, fertilisers,
      bacteriology), and the reader is given a splendid picture of the great
      revolution capitalism has wrought in the course of a few decades by making
      agriculture a science instead of a routine craft. Further comes
      the investigation of “the capitalist character of modern
      agriculture"—a brief and popularly written, but extremely precise
      and talented, exposition of Marx’s theory of profit and rent. Kautsky
      shows that the tenant farmer system

      and the mortgage system are merely two sides of one and the same process,
      noted by Marx, of separating the agricultural producers from the
      landowners. The relations between large- scale and small-scale production
      are then examined and it is shown that the technical superiority of the
      former over the latter is beyond doubt. Kautsky effectively demonstrates
      this thesis and explains in detail how the stability of petty production
      in agriculture does not depend in any way on its technical rationality but
      on the fact that the small peasants work far harder than hired labourers
      and reduce their vital necessities to a level lower than that of the
      latter. The supporting data which Kautsky cites are in the highest degree
      interesting and clear-cut. An analysis of the question of associations in
      agriculture leads Kautsky to the conclusion that associations are
      undoubtedly indicative of progress but that they are a transition to
      capitalism and not to communal production; associations do not decrease
      but increase the superiority of large-scale over small-scale agricultural
      production. It is absurd to think that the peasant in modern society can
      go over to communal production. Reference is usually made to statistical
      data which do not show that the small producer is ousted by the big
      producer, but which merely serve to show that the development of
      capitalism in agriculture is much more complicated than in industry. In
      industry, too, such manifestations as the spread of capitalist work in the
      home, etc., are not infrequently interconnected with the basic tendency
      development. But in agriculture the ousting of the small producer is
      hampered, primarily, by the limited size of the land area; the buying-up
      of small holdings to form a big holding is a very difficult matter; with
      intensified farming an increase in the quantity of products obtained is
      sometimes compatible with a reduction in the area of the land (for which
      reason statistics operating exclusively with data on the size of the farm
      have little evidential significance). The concentration of production
      takes place through the buying-up of many holdings by one proprietor; the
      latifundia thus formed serve as a basis for one of the higher forms of
      large-scale capitalist farming. Lastly, it would not even be advantageous
      for the big land owners to force out the small proprietors completely: the
      latter provide them with hand! For this reason the landowners

    

      and capitalists frequently pass laws that artificially maintain the small
      peasantry. Petty farming becomes stable when it ceases to compete with
      large-scale farming, when it is turned into a supplier of labour-power for
      the latter. The relations between large and small landowners come still
      closer to those of capitalists and proletarians. Kautsky devotes a special
      chapter to the “proletarisation of the peasantry,” one that is rich
      in data, especially on the question of the “auxiliary
      employments” of the peasants, i.e., the various forms of hired
      labour.
    

      After elucidating the basic features of the development of capitalism in
      agriculture, Kautsky proceeds to demonstrate the historically transitory
      character of this system of social economy. The more capitalism develops,
      the greater the difficulties that commercial (commodity) farming
      encounters. The monopoly in land ownership (ground rent), the right of
      inheritance, and entailed

      estates[4]
      hamper the rationalisation of farming. The towns exploit the countryside
      to an ever greater extent, taking the best labour forces away from the
      farmers and absorbing an ever greater portion of the wealth produced by
      the rural population, whereby the rural population is no longer able to
      return to the soil that which is taken from it. Kautsky deals in
      particularly great detail with the depopulating of the countryside and
      acknowledges to the full that it is the middle stratum of farmers which
      suffers least of all from a shortage of labour-power, and he adds that
      “good citizens” (we may also add: and the Russian Narodniks)
      are mistaken in rejoicing at this fact, in thinking that they can see in
      it the beginnings of a rebirth of the peasantry which refutes the
      applicability of Marx’s theory to agriculture. The peasantry may suffer
      less than other agricultural classes from a shortage of hired labour, but
      it suffers much more from usury, tax oppression, the irrationality of its
      economy, soil exhaustion, excessive toil, and under consumption. The fact
      that not only agricultural labourers, but even the children of the
      peasants, flee to the towns is a clear refutation of the views of
      optimistically-minded petty- bourgeois economists! But the biggest changes
      in the condition of European agriculture have been brought about by the
      competition of cheap grain imported from America, the Argentine, India,
      Russia, and other countries. Kautsky made

    

      a detailed study of the significance of this fact that arose out of the
      development of industry in quest for markets. He describes the decline in
      European grain production under the impact of this competition, as well as
      the lowering of rent, and makes a particularly detailed study of the
      “industrialisation of agriculture” which is manifested, on the
      one hand, in the industrial wage-labour of the small peasants and,on the
      other, in the development of agricultural technical production
      (distilling, sugar refining, etc.), and even in the elimination of some
      branches of agriculture by manufacturing industries. Optimistic
      economists, says Kautsky, are mistaken in believing that such changes in
      European agriculture can save it from crisis; the crisis is spreading and
      can only end in a general crisis of capitalism as a whole. This, of
      course, does not give one the least right to speak of the ruin of
      agriculture, but its conservative character is gone for ever; it has
      entered a state of uninterrupted transformation, a state that is typical
      of the capitalist mode of production in general. “A large area of
      land under large-scale agricultural production, the capitalist nature of
      which is becoming more and more pronounced; the growth of leasing and
      mortgaging, the industrialisation of agriculture—these are the
      elements that are preparing the ground for the socialisation of
      agricultural production....” It would be absurd to think, says Kautsky in
      conclusion, that one part of society develops in one direction and another
      in the opposite direction. In actual fact “social development in
      agriculture is taking the same direction as in industry.”

    

      Applying the results of his theoretical analysis to questions of agrarian
      policy, Kautsky naturally opposes all attempts to support or
      “save” peasant economy. There is no reason even to think that
      the village commune, says Kautsky, could go over to large-scale communal
      farming (p. 338, section, “Der

Dorfkommunismus”[2]

;

      cf. p. 339). “The protection of the peasantry (der
      Bauernschutz) does not mean protection of the person of the
      peasant (no one, of course, would object to such protection), but
      protection of the peasant’s property. Incidentally, it is
      precisely the peasant’s property that is the main cause of his
      impoverishment and

    

      his degradation. Hired agricultural labourers are now quite frequently in
      a better position than the small peasants. The protection of the peasantry
      is not protection from poverty but the protection of the fetters that
      chain the peasant to his poverty” (p. 320). The radical
      transformation of agriculture by capitalism is a process that is only just
      beginning, but it is one that is advancing rapidly, bringing about the
      transformation of the peasant into a hired labourer and increasing the
      flight of the population from the countryside. Attempts to check this
      process would be reactionary and harmful: no matter how burdensome the
      consequences of this process may be in present-day society, the
      consequences of checking the process would be still worse and would place
      the working population in a still more helpless and hopeless
      position. Progressive action in present-day society can only strive to
      lessen the harmful effects which capitalist advance exerts on the
      population, to increase the consciousness of the people and their capacity
      for collective self-defence. Kautsky, therefore, insists on the guarantee
      of freedom of movement, etc., on the abolition of all the remnants of
      feudalism in agriculture (e.g., die

Gesindeordnungen,[3]

      which place farm workers in a personally dependent, semi- serf position),
      on the prohibition of child labour under the age of fourteen, the
      establishment of an eight-hour working day, strict sanitary police to
      exercise supervision over workers’ dwellings, etc., etc.

    

      It is to be hoped that Kautsky’s book will appear in a Russian

      translation.[5]


 
Notes
 

[1]

      Karl Kautsky. The Agrarian Question. A Review of
      the Tendencies in Modern Agriculture and Agrarian Policy, etc.—
      Ed.
    

[2]

      Village communism.—Ed.
    

[3]

      Legislation defining relations between landowners and
      serfs.–Ed.
    —Lenin
 



[4]

Entailed estates—a system of Inheritance that has been
      preserved in some capitalist countries from feudal times. Under this
      system estates are inherited undivided by the eldest in the family or by
      the eldest son of the holder.
    



[5]

      A translation of one of the chapters of Karl Kautsky’s The Agrarian
      Question was published in Nauchnoye Obozrentye, No. 8, for
      1899, under the title “Modern Agriculture.”
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 4

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Book Review: J. A. Hobson. The Evolution of Modern Capitalism









Lenin: Book Review: J. A. Hobson. The Evolution of Modern Capitalism







V. I.  

      Lenin
Book Review: J. A. Hobson. The Evolution of Modern Capitalism




Written: Written in April 1899 

Published:

      Published in May 1899 in the magazine Nachalo, No. 5.

      Signed: Vl. Ilyin.

      Published according to the text in the magazine.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 4,

      pages 100-104.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



 

J. A. Hobson.

      The Evolution of Modern Capitalism.
Translated
from the English. St. Petersburg, 1898. Publ. 0. N. Popova.
Price 1 rb. 50 kop.
    

      Hobson’s book is, strictly speaking, not a study of the evolution of
      modern capitalism, but a series of sketches, based mainly on English data,
      dealing with the most recent industrial development. Hence, the title of
      the book is somewhat broad: the author does not touch upon agriculture at
      all and his examination of industrial economics is far from complete. Like
      the well-known writers Sidney and Beatrice Webb, Hobson is a
      representative of one of the advanced trends of English social
      thought. His attitude towards “modern capitalism” is critical;
      he fully admits the necessity of replacing it by a higher form of social
      economy and treats the problem of its replacement with typically English
      reformist practicality. His conviction of the need for reform is, in the
      main, arrived at empirically, under the influence of the recent history of
      English factory legislation, of the English labour movement, of the
      activities of the English municipalities, etc. Hobson lacks well-knit and
      integral theoretical views that could serve as a basis for his reformist
      programme and elucidate specific problems of reform. He is, therefore, at
      his best when he deals with the grouping and description of the latest
      statistical and economic data. When, on the other hand, he deals with the
      general theoretical problems of political economy, he proves to be very
      weak. The Russian reader will oven find it strange to see a writer with
      such extensive

    

      knowledge and practical aspirations deserving of full sympathy helplessly
      labouring over questions like, what is “capital,” what is the role
      of “savings,” etc. This weak side of Hobson is fully explained by
      the fact that he regards John Stuart Mill as a greater authority on
      political economy than Marx, whom he quotes once or twice but whom he
      evidently does not understand at all or does not know. One cannot but
      regret the vast amount of unproductive labour wasted by Hobson in an
      attempt to get clear on the contradictions of bourgeois and professorial
      political economy. At best he comes close to the solutions given by Marx
      long ago; at worst he borrows erroneous views that are in sharp
      contradiction to his attitude towards “modern capitalism.”  The most
      unfortunate chapter in his book is the seventh: “Machinery and
      Industrial Depression.” In this chapter Hobson tried to analyse the
      theoretical problems of crises, of social capital and revenue in
      capitalist society, and of capitalist accumulation. Correct ideas on the
      disproportionateness of production and consumption in capitalist society
      and on the anarchic character of capitalist economy are submerged in a
      heap of scholastic arguments about “saving” (Hobson confuses
      accumulation with “saving”), amidst all sorts of Crusoeisms (suppose
      “a man working with primitive tools, discovers an
      implement... saving food,” etc.), and the like. Hobson is very fond of
      diagrams, and in most cases he uses them very ably for graphic
      illustration of his exposition. But the idea of the “mechanism of
      production” given in his diagram on page 207 (Chap. VII) can only
      elicit a smile from the reader who is at all acquaint ed with the real
      “mechanism” of capitalist “production.” Hobson
      here confuses production with the social system of production and evinces
      an extremely vague understanding of what capital is, what its component
      parts are, and into what classes capitalist society is necessarily
      divided. In Chapter VIII he cites interesting data on the composition of
      the population according to occupation, and on the changes in this
      composition in the course of time, but the great flaw in his theoretical
      arguments on “machinery and the demand for labour” is that he
      ignores the theory of “capitalist over population” or the
      reserve army. Among the more happily written chapters of Hobson’s book are
      those in which he examines modern towns and the position of women in
      modern

    

      industry. Citing statistics on the growth of female labour and describing
      the extremely bad conditions under which this labour is performed, Hobson
      justly points out that the only hope of improving these conditions lies in
      the supplanting of domestic labour by factory labour, which leads to
      “closer social intercourse” and to “organisation.”
      Similarly, on the question of the significance of towns, Hobson comes
      close to Marx’s general views when he admits that the anti thesis between
      town and country contradicts the system of collectivist society. Hobson’s
      conclusions would have been much more convincing had he not ignored Marx’s
      teaching on this question too. Hobson would then, probably, have
      emphasised more clearly the historically progressive role of the cities
      and the necessity of combining agriculture with industry under the
      collectivist organisation of economy. The last chapter of Hobson’s book,
      “Civilisation and Industrial Development,” is perhaps the best. In
      this chapter the author proves by a number of very apt arguments the need
      to re form the modern industrial system along the line of expanding
      “public control” and the “socialisation of industry.” In
      evaluating Hobson’s somewhat optimistic views regarding the methods by
      which these “reforms” can be brought about, the special
      features of English history and of English life must be borne in mind: the
      high development of democracy, the absence of militarism, the enormous
      strength of the organised trade unions, the growing investment of English
      capital outside of England, which weakens the antagonism between the
      English employers and workers, etc.

    

      In his well-known book on the social movement in the nineteenth century,
      Prof. W. Sombart notes among other things a “tendency towards
      unity” (title of Chapter VI), i. e., a tendency of the social
      movement of the various countries, in its various forms and shades,
      towards uniformity and along with it a tendency towards the spread of the
      ideas of Marxism. In regard to England Sombart sees this tendency in the
      fact that the English trade unions are increasingly abandoning “the
      purely Manchester standpoint.” In regard to Hobson’s book we can say that
      under pressure of the demands of life, which is increasingly corroborating
      Marx’s “prognosis,” progressive English writers are beginning to

    

      realise the unsoundness of traditional bourgeois political economy and,
      freeing themselves from its prejudices, are involuntarily approaching
      Marxism.
    

      The translation of Hobson’s book has substantial short comings.
    

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 4

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Capitalism in Agriculture









Lenin: Capitalism in Agriculture








V. I.  

      Lenin
Capitalism in Agriculture




Written: Written in April-May 1899 

Published:

      Published in January–February 1900 in the magazine Zhizn[1].

      Signed: Vl. Ilyin.

      Published according to the text in the magazine.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 4,

      pages 105-159.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



Contents






First Article
  109



Second Article
  146

 
 
 

Notes
 
 



[1]

      Lenin’s study, “Capitalism in Agriculture (Kautsky’s
Book and Mr.

Bulgakov s 

Article),” was intended for publication in
      Nachalo, but upon the closing-down of that magazine it was
      published in Zhizn.
    

Zhizn (Life)—a literary, scientific, and political
      magazine published in St. Petersburg from 1897 to 1901; in 1902 it was
      published abroad. From 1899 onwards the magazine was in the hands of the
      “legal Marxists.”
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 4

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## First Article









Lenin: 1899/agriculture: First Article







V. I.  

      Lenin
Capitalism in Agriculture



    

    
    


    
 

    First Article

Nachalo, No. 1-2 (Section II, pp. 1-21), contains an article by
      Mr. S. Bulgakov entitled: “A Contribution to the Question of the
      Capitalist Evolution of Agriculture,” which is a criticism of Kautsky’s
      work on the agrarian question. Mr. Bulgakov rightly says that
      “Kautsky’s book represents a whole world outlook,” that it is of
      great theoretical and practical importance. It is, perhaps, the first
      systematic and scientific investigation of a question that has stimulated
      a heated controversy in all countries, and still continues to do so, even
      among writers who are agreed on general views and who regard themselves as
      Marxists. Mr. Bulgakov “confines himself to negative criticism,” to
      criticism of “individual postulates in Kautsky’s book” (which
      he “briefly”—too briefly and very inexactly, as we shall
      see—re views for the readers of Nachalo). “Later on,”
      Mr. Bulgakov hopes “to give a systematic exposition of the question
      of the capitalist evolution of agriculture” and thus “also
      present a whole world outlook” in opposition to Kautsky’s.

    

      We have no doubt that Kautsky’s book will give rise to no little
      controversy among Marxists in Russia, and that in Russia, too, some will
      oppose Kautsky, while others will support him. At all events, the writer
      of these lines disagrees most emphatically with Mr. Bulgakov’s opinion,
      with his appraisal of Kautsky’s book. Notwithstanding Mr. Bulgakov’s
      admission that Die

Agrarfrage[1]

      is “a remark able work,” his appraisal is astonishingly sharp, and
      is written in a tone unusual in a controversy between authors of

    

      related tendencies. Here are samples of the expressions Mr. Bulgakov uses:
      “extremely superficial” .. ."equally little of both real
      agronomics and real economics” ... “Kautsky employs empty
      phrases to evade serious scientific problems” (Mr. Bulgakov’s
      italics!!), etc., etc. We shall therefore care fully examine the
      expressions used by the stern critic and at the same time introduce the
      reader to Kautsky’s book.
    
I

      Even before Mr. Bulgakov gets to Kautsky, he, in passing, takes a shot at
      Marx. It goes without saying that Mr. Bulgakov emphasises the enormous
      services rendered by the great economist, but observes that in Marx’s
      works one “some times” comes across even “erroneous
      views.., which have been sufficiently refuted by history.” “Among
      such views is, for example, the one that in agriculture variable capital
      diminishes in relation to constant capital just as it does in
      manufacturing industry, so that the organic composition of agricultural
      capital continuously rises.” Who is mistaken here, Marx or Mr. Bulgakov?
      Mr. Bulgakov has in mind the fact that in agriculture the progress of
      technique and the growing intensity of farming often lead to an
      increase in the amount of labour necessary to cultivate a given plot
      of land. This is indisputable; but it is very far from being a refutation
      of the theory of the diminution of variable capital relatively to
      constant capital, in proportion to constant capital. Marx’s
      theory merely asserts that the ratio

      v / c

      (v= variable capital,

      C= constant capital)

      in general has a tendency to diminish, even when v increases per
      unit of area. Is Marx’s theory refuted if, simultaneously, c
      increases still more rapidly? Agriculture in capitalist countries, taken
      by and large, shows a diminution of v and an increase of
      c. The rural population and the number of workers employed in
      agriculture are diminishing in Germany, in France, and in England, whereas
      the number of machines employed in agriculture is increasing. In Germany,
      for example, from 1882 to 1895, the rural population diminished from
      19,200,000 to 18,500,000 (the number of wage-workers in agriculture
      diminished from 5,900,000 to 5,600,000), whereas the number of machines

    

      employed in agriculture increased from 458,369 to

      913,391[2]

;

      the number of
      steam-driven machines employed in agriculture increased from 2,731 (in
      1879) to 12,856 (in 1897), while the total horse power of the steam-driven
      machinery employed increased still more. The number of cattle in creased
      from 15,800,000 to 17,500,000 and the number of pigs from 9,200,000 to
      12,200,000 (in 1883 and 1892 respectively). In France, the rural
      population diminished from 6,900,000 (“independent”) in 1882 to
      6,600,000 in 1892; and the number of agricultural machines increased as
      follows: 1862—132,784; 1882—278,896; 1892—355,795. The
      number of cattle was as follows: 12,000,000; 13,000,000; 13,700,000
      respectively; the number of horses: 2,910,000; 2,840,000; 2,790,000
      respectively (the reduction in the number of horses in the period 1882-92
      was less significant than the reduction in the rural population). Thus, by
      and large, the history of modern capitalist countries has certainly not
      refuted, but has confirmed the applicability of Marx’s law to
      agriculture. The mistake Mr. Bulgakov made was that he too hastily raised
      certain facts in agronomics, without examining their significance, to the
      level of general economic laws. We emphasise “general,”
      because neither Marx nor his disciples ever regarded this law otherwise
      than as the law of the general tendencies of capitalism, and not as a law
      for all individual cases. Even in regard to industry Marx himself pointed
      out that periods of technical change (when the ratio

      v / c

      diminishes) are followed by periods of progress on the given technical
      basis (when the ratio

      v / c

      remains constant, and in certain cases may even increase). We know of
      cases in the industrial history of capitalist countries in which this law
      is contravened by entire branches of industry, as when large capitalist
      workshops (incorrectly termed factories) are broken up and supplanted by
      capitalist domestic industry. There cannot be any doubt that in
      agriculture the process of development of capitalism is immeasurably more
      complex and assumes incomparably more diverse forms.
    
 

      Let us now pass to Kautsky. The outline of agriculture in the feudal epoch
      with which Kautsky begins is said to be “very superficially compiled
      and superfluous.” It is difficult to understand the motive for such a
      verdict. We are sure that if Mr. Bulgakov succeeds in realising his plan
      to give a systematic exposition of the capitalist evolution of
      agriculture, he will have to outline the main features of the
      pre-capitalist economics of agriculture. Without this the
      character of capitalist economics and the transitional forms
      which connect it with feudal economics cannot be understood. Mr. Bulgakov
      himself admits the enormous importance of “the form which
      agriculture assumed at the beginning [Mr. Bulgakov’s italics] of
      its capitalist course.” It is precisely with “the beginning of the
      capitalist course” of European agriculture that Kautsky begins. In
      our opinion, Kautsky’s out line of feudal agriculture is excellent; it
      reveals that remark able distinctness and ability to select what is most
      important and essential without becoming submerged in details of secondary
      importance which, in general, are characteristic of this author. In his
      introduction Kautsky first of all gives an extremely precise and correct
      presentation of the question. In most emphatic terms he declares:
      “There is not the slightest doubt—we are prepared to accept
      this a priori (von vornherein)—that agriculture
      does not
      develop according to the same pattern as industry: it is subject to
      special laws” (S. 5-6). The task is “to investigate whether
      capital is bringing agriculture under its domination and how it is
      dominating it, how it transforms it, how it invalidates old forms of
      production and forms of property and creates the need for new forms”
      (S. 6). Such, and only such, a presentation of the question can result in
      a satisfactory explanation of “the development of agriculture in
      capitalist society” (the title of the first, theoretical, part of
      Kautsky’s book).
    

      At the beginning of the “capitalist course,” agriculture was in the
      hands of the peasantry, which, as a general rule, was
      subordinated to the feudal regime of social economy. Kautsky first of all
      characterises the system of peasant farming, the combining of
      agriculture with domestic industry, and further the elements of decay in
      this paradise of petty-bourgeois and conservative writers (à
la
      Sismondi), the significance of usury and the gradual “penetration
      into the countryside,

    

      deep into the peasant household itself, of the class antagonism which
      destroys the ancient harmony and community of interests”
      (S. 13). This process, which began as far back as the Middle Ages, has not
      completely come to an end to this day. We emphasise this statement because
      it shows immediately the utter incorrectness of Mr. Bulgakov’s assertion
      that Kautsky did not even raise the question of who was the carrier of
      technical progress in agriculture. Kautsky raised and answered that
      question quite definitely; anyone who reads his book carefully will grasp
      the truth (often forgotten by the Narodniks, agronomists, and many others)
      that the carrier of technical progress in modern agriculture is the
      rural bourgeoisie, both petty and big; and (as Kautsky has shown)
      the big bourgeoisie plays a more important role in this respect than the
      petty bourgeoisie.
    
II

      After describing (in Chapter III) the main features of feudal agriculture:
      the predominance of the three-field system, the most conservative system
      in agriculture; the oppression and expropriation of the peasantry by the
      big landed aristocracy; the organisation of feudal-capitalist farming by
      the latter; the transformation of the peasantry into starving paupers
      (Hungerleider) in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries; the
      development of bourgeois peasants (Grossbauern, who cannot manage
      without regular farm labourers and day labourers), for whom the old forms
      of rural relations and land tenure were unsuitable; the abolition of these
      forms and the paving of the way for “capitalist, intensive
      farming” (S. 26) by the forces of the bourgeois class which had
      developed in the womb of industry and the towns—after describing all
      this, Kautsky goes on to characterise “modern agriculture”
      (Chapter IV).
    

      This chapter contains a remarkably exact, concise, and lucid outline of
      the gigantic revolution which capitalism brought about in agriculture by
      transforming the routine craft of peasants crushed by poverty and
      ignorance into the scientific application of agronomics, by disturbing the
      age long stagnation of agriculture, and by giving (and continuing

    

      to give) an impetus to the rapid development of the productive forces of
      social labour. The three-field system gave way to the crop rotation
      system, the maintenance of cattle and the cultivation of the soil were
      improved, the yield increased and specialisation in agriculture and the
      division of labour among individual farms greatly
      developed. Pre-capitalist uniformity was replaced by increasing diversity,
      accompanied by technical progress in all branches of agriculture. Both the
      use of machinery in agriculture and the application of steam power were
      introduced and underwent rapid development; the employment of electric
      power, which, as specialists point

      out., 

      is destined to play an even
      greater role in this branch of production than steam power, has begun. The
      use of access roads, land improvement schemes, and the application of
      artificial fertilisers adapted to the physiology of plants have been
      developed; the application of bacteriology to agriculture has
      begun. Mr. Bulgakov’s assertion that “Kautsky’s

      data[3]

      are not
      accompanied by an economic analysis” is completely
      groundless. Kautsky shows precisely the connection between this revolution
      and the growth of the market (especially the growth of the
      towns), and the sub ordination of agriculture to competition
      which forced the changes and specialisation. “This
      revolution, which has its origin in urban capital, increases the
      dependence of the farmer on the market and, moreover, constantly changes
      market conditions of importance to him. A branch of production that was
      profitable while the local market’s only connection with the world market
      was a high road becomes unprofitable and must necessarily be superseded by
      another branch of production when a railway is run through the
      locality. If, for example, the railway brings cheaper grain, grain
      production

    

      becomes unprofitable; but at the same time a market for milk is
      created. The growth of commodity circulation makes it possible to
      introduce new, improved varieties of crops into the country,”
      etc. (S. 37-38). “In the feudal epoch,” says Kautsky, “the
      only agriculture was small-scale agriculture, for the landlord cultivated
      his fields with the peasant’s implements. Capitalism first created the
      possibility for large-scale production in agriculture, which is
      technically more rational than small-scale production.” In discussing
      agricultural machinery, Kautsky (who, it should be said in passing, points
      precisely to the specific features of agriculture in this respect)
      explains the capitalist nature of its employment; he explains the
      influence of agricultural machinery upon the workers, the significance of
      machinery as a factor of progress, and the “reactionary
      utopianism” of schemes for restricting the employment of
      agricultural machinery. “Agricultural machines will continue their
      transformative activity: they will drive the rural workers into the towns
      and in this way serve as a powerful instrument for raising wages in the
      rural districts, on the one hand, and for the further development of the
      employment of machinery in agriculture, on the other” (S. 41). Let
      it be added that in special chapters Kautsky explains in detail the
      capitalist character of modern agriculture, the relation between large-
      and small-scale production, and the proletarisation of the peasantry. As
      we see, Mr. Bulgakov’s assertion that Kautsky “does not raise the
      question of knowing why all these wonder-working changes were necessary”
      is entirely untrue.

    

      In Chapter V (“The Capitalist Character of Modern Agriculture”)
      Kautsky expounds Marx’s theory of value, profit, and rent. “Without
      money, modern agricultural production is impossible,” says Kautsky,
      “or, what is the same thing, it is impossible without
      capital. Indeed, under the present mode of production any sum of
      money which does not serve the purpose of individual consumption can be
      transformed into capital, i.e., into a value begetting surplus-value and,
      as a general rule, actually is transformed into capital. Hence, modern
      agricultural production is capitalist production” (S.
      56). This passage, incidentally, enables us to appraise the following
      statement made by Mr. Bulgakov: “I employ this term (capitalist
      agriculture) in the ordinary sense

    

      (Kautsky also employs it in the same sense), i.e., in the sense of
      large-scale production in agriculture. Actually, however (sic!),
      when the whole of the national economy is organised on capitalist
      lines, there is no non-capitalist agriculture, the whole of it
      being determined by the general conditions of the organisation of
      production, and only within these limits should the distinction be made
      between large-scale, entrepreneur farming and small-scale farming. For
      the sake of clarity a new term is required here also.” And so it seems,
      Mr. Bulgakov is correcting Kautsky.... “Actually, however,”
      as the reader sees, Kautsky does not employ the term
      “capitalist agriculture” in the “ordinary,” inexact
      sense in which Mr. Bulgakov employs it. Kautsky understands perfectly
      well, and says so very precisely and clearly, that under the capitalist
      mode of production all agricultural production is “as a general
      rule” capitalist production. In support of this opinion he adduces
      the simple fact that in order to carry on modern agriculture money is
      needed, and that in modern society money which does not serve the purpose
      of individual consumption becomes capital. It seems to us that this is
      somewhat clearer than Mr. Bulgakov’s “correction,” and that Kautsky
      has fully proved that it is possible to.  dispense with a
      “new term.”
    

      In Chapter V of his book Kautsky asserts, inter alia, that both
      the tenant farmer system, which has developed so fully in England, and the
      mortgage system, which is developing with astonishing rapidity in
      continental Europe, express, in essence, one and the same process, viz.,
      the separation of the land from the

farmer.[4]

      Under the capitalist
      tenant farmer system this separation is as clear as daylight. Under the
      mortgage system it is “less clear, and things are not so simple; but
      in essence it amounts to the same thing” (S. 86). Indeed, It is
      obvious that the mortgaging of land is the mortgaging, or sale, of ground
      rent. Consequently, under the mortgage system, as well as under the tenant
      farmer system, the recipients of rent (=the landowners) are separated from
      the

    

      recipients of the profit of enterprise (=farmers, rural
      entrepreneurs). “In general, the significance of this assertion of
      Kautsky is unclear” to Mr. Bulgakov. “It can hardly be
      considered as proved that the mortgage system expresses the separation of
      the land from the farmer.”  “Firstly, it cannot be proved that debt
      absorbs the whole rent; this is possible only by way of
      exception....” To this we reply: There is no need to prove that interest
      on mortgage debts absorbs the whole rent, just as there is no
      need to prove that the actual amount paid for land leased
      coincides with rent. It is sufficient to prove that mortgage debts are
      growing with enormous rapidity; that the landowners strive to mortgage all
      their land, to sell the whole of the rent. The existence of this
      tendency—a theoretical economic analysis can, in general, deal only
      with tendencies—cannot be doubted. Consequently, there can be no
      doubt about the process of separation of the land from the farmer. The
      combination of the recipient of rent and the recipient of the profit of
      enterprise in one person is, “from the historical point of view, an
      exception” (ist historisch eine Ausnahme, S.
      91).... “Secondly, the causes and sources of the debt must be
      analysed in each separate case for its significance to be understood.”
      Probably this is either a misprint or a slip. Mr. Bulgakov cannot demand
      that an economist (who, moreover, is dealing with the “development
      of agriculture in capitalist society” in general) should
      investigate the causes of the debt “in each separate
      case” or even expect that he would be able to do so. If
      Mr. Bulgakov wanted to say that it is necessary to analyse the causes of
      debt in different countries at different periods, we cannot agree with
      him. Kautsky is perfectly right in saying that too many monographs on the
      agrarian question have accumulated, and that the urgent task of modern
      theory is not to add new monographs but to “investigate the main
      trends of the capitalist evolution of agriculture as a whole”
      (Vorrede,

S.vi[5]

).

      Among these main trends is undoubtedly the
      separation of the land from the farmer in the form of an increase in
      mortgage debts. Kautsky precisely and clearly defined the real
      significance of mortgages, their progressive historical character (the
      separation of the land from the farmer being one of the conditions

    

      for the socialisation of agriculture, S. 88), and the essential role they
      play in the capitalist evolution of

      agriculture.[6]

      All Kautsky’s arguments
      on this question are extremely valuable theoretically and provide a
      powerful weapon against the widespread bourgeois talk (particularly in
      “any handbook of the economics of agriculture”) about the
      “misfortune” of debts and about “measures of
      assistance.”

      ..."Thirdly,” concludes Mr. Bulgakov, “land leased out may, in
      its turn, be mortgaged; and in this sense it may assume the same position
      as land not leased out.” A strange argument! Let Mr. Bulgakov point to at
      least one economic phenomenon, to at least one economic category, that is
      not interwoven with others. The fact that there are cases of combined
      leasing and mortgaging does not refute, does not even weaken, the
      theoretical proposition that the separation of the land from the farmer is
      expressed in two forms: in the tenant farmer system and in mortgage debts.

    

      Mr. Bulgakov also declares that Kautsky’s statement that “countries
      in which the tenant farmer system is developed are also countries in which
      large land ownership predominates” (S. 88) is “still more
      unexpected” and “altogether untrue.” Kautsky speaks here of
      the concentration of land ownership (under the tenant farmer system) and
      the concentration of mortgages (under the system in which the landowners
      manage their own farms) as conditions that facilitate the abolition of the
      private ownership of land. On the question of concentration of land
      ownership, continues Kautsky, there are no statistics “which would
      enable one to trace the amalgamation of several properties in single
      hands”; but “in general it may be taken” that the
      increase in the number of leases and in the area of the leased land
      proceeds side by side with concentration of land
      ownership. “Countries in which the tenant farmer system is developed
      are also countries in which large land ownership predominates.”

    

      It is clear that Kautsky’s entire argument applies only to countries in
      which the tenant farmer system is developed; but Mr. Bulgakov refers to
      East Prussia, where he “hopes to show” an increase in the
      number of leases side by side with the break-up of large landed
      properties—and he thinks that by means of this single example he is
      refuting Kautsky! It is a pity, however, that Mr. Bulgakov forgets to
      inform his readers that Kautsky himself points to the break-up of large
      estates and the growth of peasant tenant farming in the East Elbe province
      and, in doing so, explains, as we shall see later, the real significance
      of these processes.

    

      Kautsky points to the concentration of mortgage institutions as proof that
      the concentration of land ownership is taking place in countries in which
      mortgage debts exist. Mr. Bulgakov thinks that this is no proof. In his
      opinion, “It might easily be the case that the deconcentration of
      capital (by the issue of shares) is proceeding side by side with the
      concentration of credit institutions.” Well, we shall not argue with
      Mr. Bulgakov on this point.
    
III

      After examining the main features of feudal and capitalist agriculture,
      Kautsky passes on to the question of “large and small-scale
      production” in agriculture (Chapter VI). This chapter is one of the
      best in Kautsky’s book. In it he first examines the"technical superiority
      of large-scale production." In deciding the question in favour of
      large-scale production, Kautsky does not give an abstract formula that
      ignores the enormous variety of agricultural relations (as Mr. Bulgakov,
      altogether groundlessly, supposes); on the contrary, he clearly and
      precisely points to the necessity of taking this variety into account in
      the practical applications of the theoretical law. In the first place,
      “it goes without saying” that the superiority of
      large-scale over small-scale production in agriculture is inevitable only
      when “all other conditions are equal” (S. 100. My
      italics). In industry, also, the law of the superiority of large-scale
      production is not as absolute and as simple as is sometimes thought;
      there, too, it is the equality of “other conditions”
      (not always existing in reality) that ensures the full applicability of
      the law. In

    

      agriculture, however, which is distinguished for the incomparably greater
      complexity and variety of its relations, the full applicability of the law
      of the superiority of large-scale production is hampered by considerably
      stricter conditions. For instance, Kautsky very aptly observes that on the
      borderline between the peasant and the small landlord estates quantity is
      transformed into quality”: the big peasant farm may be
      “economically, if not technically, superior” to the small
      landlord farm. The employment of a scientifically educated manager (one of
      the important advantages of large-scale production) is too costly for a
      small estate; and the management by the owner himself, is very often
      merely “Junker,” and by no means scientific, management. Secondly,
      large-scale production in agriculture is superior to small production only
      up to a certain limit. Kautsky closely investigates this limit further
      on. It also goes without saying that this limit differs in different
      branches of agriculture and under different social-economic
      conditions. Thirdly, Kautsky does not in the least ignore the fact that,
      “so far," there are branches of agriculture in which, as
      experts admit, small-scale production can compete with large-scale
      production; for example, vegetable gardening, grape growing, industrial
      crops, etc. (S. 115). But these branches occupy a position quite
      subordinate to the decisive (entscheidenden) branches of
      agriculture, viz., the production of grain and animal husbandry. Moreover,
      “even in vegetable gardening and grape growing there are already
      fairly successful large-scale enterprises” (S. 115). Hence,
      “taking agriculture as a whole (in Allgemeinen), those
      branches in which small-scale production is superior to large-scale
      production need not be taken into account, and it is quite permissible to
      say that large-scale production is decidedly superior to small-scale
      production” (S. 116).
    

      After demonstrating the technical superiority of large-scale production in
      agriculture (we shall present Kautsky’s arguments in greater detail later
      on in examining Mr. Bulgakov’s objections), Kautsky asks: “What can
      small production offer against the advantages of large-scale production?”
      And he replies: “The greater diligence and greater care of the
      worker, who, unlike the hired labourer, works for himself, and the low
      level of requirements of the small independent

    

      farmer, which is even lower than that of the agricultural labourer”
      (S. 106); and, by adducing a number of striking facts concerning the
      position of the peasants in France, England, and Germany, Kautsky leaves
      no doubt whatever about “overwork and under-consumption in
      small-scale production.”  Finally, he points out that the superiority of
      large-scale production also finds expression in the striving of farmers to
      form associations: “Associated production is large-scale
      production.” The fuss made by the ideologists of the petty bourgeoisie in
      general, and the Russian Narodniks in particular (e.g., the
      above-mentioned book by Mr. Kablukov), over the small farmers’
      associations is well known. The more significant, therefore, is Kautsky’s
      excellent analysis of the role of these associations. Of course, the small
      farmers’ associations are a link in economic progress; but they ex press a
      transition to capitalism (Fortschritt zum Kapitalismus) and not toward
      collectivism, as is often thought and asserted (S. 118). Associations
      do not diminish but enhance the superiority (Vorsprung) of
      large-scale over small-scale production in agriculture, because the big
      farmers enjoy greater opportunities of forming associations and take
      greater ad vantage of these opportunities. It goes without saying that
      Kautsky very emphatically maintains that communal, collective large-scale
      production is superior to capitalist large- scale 
      production. He deals with the experiments in collective farming made in
      England by the followers of Robert

      Owen[7]

      and with analogous communes in
      the United States of North America. All these experiments, says Kautsky,
      irrefutably prove that it is quite possible for workers to carry
      on large-scale modern farming collectively, but that for this possibility
      to become a reality “a number of definite economic, political, and
      intellectual conditions” are necessary. The transition of the small
      producer (both artisan and peasant) to collective production is hindered
      by the extremely low development of solidarity and discipline, the
      isolation, and the “property-owner fanaticism,” noted not only among
      West-European peasants, but, let us add,

    

      also among the Russian “commune” peasants (recall A.
      N. Engelhardt and G. Uspensky). Kautsky categorically declares that
      “it is absurd to expect that the peas ant in modern society
      will go over to communal production” (S. 129).

    

      Such is the extremely rich content of Chapter VI of Kautsky’s
      book. Mr. Bulgakov is particularly displeased with this chapter. Kautsky,
      we are told, is guilty of the “fundamental sin” of confusing
      various concepts; “technical advantages are confused with economic
      advantages.” Kautsky “proceeds from the false assumption that the
      technically more perfect mode of production is also
      economically more perfect, i.e., more viable.” Mr. Bulgakov’s
      emphatic statement is altogether groundless, of which, we hope, the reader
      has been convinced by our exposition of Kautsky’s line of
      argument. Without in the least confusing technique with

      economics,[8]

      Kautsky rightly investigates the question of the relation of large-scale
      to small-scale production in agriculture, other conditions being
      equal, under the capitalist system of production. In the opening
      sentence of the first section of Chapter VI Kautsky points precisely to
      this connection
    

      between the level of development of capitalism and the degree of the
general applicability of the law of the superiority of large-scale
agriculture: “The more capitalist agriculture becomes, the
more it develops the qualitative difference between the techniques of
small- and large-scale production” (S. 92). This qualitative
difference did not exist in pre-capitalist agriculture. What then can be
said of this stern admonition to which Mr. Bulgakov treats Kautsky:

      “In point of fact, the question should have been put as follows: what
      significance in the competition between large- and small-scale production
      can any of the specific features of either of these forms of production
      have under the present social-economic conditions?” This
      “correction” bears the same character as the one we examined above.
    

      Let us see now how Mr. Bulgakov refutes Kautsky’s arguments in favour of
      the technical superiority of large-scale production in
      agriculture. Kautsky says: “One of the most important features
      distinguishing agriculture from industry is that in agriculture production
      in the proper sense of the word [Wirtschaftsbetrieb, an economic
      enterprise] is usually connected with the household (Haushalt),
      which is not the case in industry.” That the larger household has the
      advantage over the small household in the saving of labour and materials
      hardly needs proof.... The former purchases (note this!  V. I.)
      “kerosene, chicory, and margarine wholesale; the latter purchases
      these articles retail, etc.” (S. 93). Mr. Bulgakov “corrects”:
      “Kautsky did not mean to say that this was technically more
      advantageous, but that it cost less”!... Is it not clear that in
      this case (as in all the others) Mr. Bulgakov’s attempt to
      “correct” Kautsky was more than unfortunate? “This
      argument,” continues the stern critic, “is also very questionable in
      itself; because under certain conditions the value of the product may not
      include the value of the scattered huts, whereas the value of a common
      house is included, even with the interest added. This, too, depends upon
      social-economic conditions, which—and not the alleged technical
      advantages of large-scale over small-scale production—should have
      been investigated."... In the first place, Mr. Bulgakov forgets the trifle
      that Kautsky, after comparing the significance of large-scale production
      with that of small-scale production, all other conditions being
      equal,

    

      proceeds to examine these conditions in detail. Consequently,
      Mr. Bulgakov wants to throw different questions together. Secondly, how
      is it that the value of the peasants’ huts does not enter into the value
      of the product? Only because the peasant “does not count”
      the value of the timber he uses or the labour he expends in building and
      repairing his hut. Insofar as the peasant still conducts a natural
      economy, he, of course, may “not count” his labour; there is
      no justification for Mr. Bulgakov’s not telling his readers that
      Kautsky very clearly and precisely points this out on pp. 166-67 of
his book (Chapter VIII, “The Proletarisation of the
      Peasant”). But we are now discussing the “social-economic
      condition” of capitalism and not of natural economy or of simple
      commodity production. Under capitalist social conditions “not to
      count” one’s labour means to work for nothing (for the merchant or
      another capitalist); it means to work for incomplete remuneration for
      the labour-power expended; it means to lower the level of consumption
      below the standard. As we have seen, Kautsky fully recognised and
      correctly appraised this distinguishing feature of small
      production. In his objection to Kautsky, Mr. Bulgakov repeats the usual
      trick and the usual mistake of the bourgeois and petty-bourgeois
      economists. These economists have deafened us with their praises of the
      “viability” of the small peasant, who, they say, need not
      count his own labour, or chase after profit and rent, etc. These good
      people merely forget that such arguments confuse the
      “social-economic conditions” of natural economy, simple
      commodity production, and capitalism. Kautsky excellently explains all
      these mistakes and draws a strict distinction between the
      various systems of social-economic relations. He says: “If the
      agricultural production of the small peasant is not drawn into the
      sphere of commodity production, if it is merely a part of household
      economy, it also remains outside the sphere of the centralising
      tendencies of the modern mode of production. However irrational his
      parcellised economy may be, no matter what waste of effort it may lead
      to, he clings to it tightly, just as his wife clings to her wretched
      household economy, which likewise produces infinitely miserable results
with an enormous expenditure of labour-power, but which represents the
only sphere in which she is not subject to another’s rule and is

    

free from exploitation” (S. 165). The situation changes when
natural economy is supplanted by commodity economy. The peasant then has
to sell his produce, purchase implements, and purchase land. As
long as the peasant remains a simple commodity producer, he can
be satisfied with the standard of living of the wage-worker; he needs
neither profit nor rent; he can pay a higher price for land than the
capitalist entrepreneur (S. 166). But simple commodity production is
supplanted by capitalist production. If, for instance, the
peasant has mortgaged his land, he must also obtain the rent which he
has sold to the creditor. At this stage of development the peasant can
only formally be regarded as a simple commodity producer. De
facto, he usually has to deal with the
capitalist—the creditor, the merchant, the industrial
entrepreneur—from whom he must seek “auxiliary employment,”
i.e., to whom he must sell his labour-power. At this stage— and
Kautsky, we repeat, compares large-scale with small-scale farming in
capitalist society—the possibility for the peasant “not to
count his labour” means only one thing to him, namely, to work
himself to death and continually to cut down his consumption.

    

      Equally unsound are the other objections raised by
      Mr. Bulgakov. Small-scale production permits of the employment of
      machinery within narrower limits; the small proprietor finds credit more
      difficult to obtain and more expensive, says Kautsky. Mr. Bulgakov
      considers these arguments false and refers to—peasant associations!
      He completely ignores the evidence brought forward by Kautsky, whose
      appraisal of these associations and their significance we quoted above. On
      the question of machinery, Mr. Bulgakov again reproaches Kautsky for not
      raising the “more general economic question: What, upon the whole,
      is the economic role of machinery in agriculture [Mr. Bulgakov has
      forgotten Chapter IV of Kautsky’s book!] and is it as inevitable an
      instrument in agriculture as in manufacturing industry?” Kautsky clearly
      pointed to the capitalist nature of the use of machinery in modern
      agriculture (S. 39, 40, et seq.); noted the specific features of
      agriculture which create “technical and economic difficulties”
      for the employment of machinery in agriculture (S. 38, et seq.); and
      adduced data on the growing employment of machinery (S. 40), on its
      technical

    

      significance (42, et seq.), and on the role of steam and
      electricity. Kautsky indicated the size of farm necessary, according to
      agronomic data, for making the fullest use of various machines (94), and
      pointed out that according to the German census of 1895 the employment of
      machinery steadily and rapidly increases from the small farms to the big
      ones (2 per cent in farms up to two hectares, 13.8 per cent in farms of 2
      to 5 hectares, 45.8 per cent in farms of 5 to 20 hectares, 78.8 per cent
      in farms of 20 to 100 hectares, and 94.2 per cent in farms of 100 and more
      hectares). Instead of these figures, Mr. Bulgakov would have preferred
      “general” arguments about the “invincibility” or
      non-invincibility of machines!...
    

      “The argument that a larger number of draught animals per hectare is
      employed in small-scale production is unconvincing.., because the relative
      intensity of animal maintenance per farm... is not
      investigated"—says Mr. Bulgakov. We open Kautsky’s book at the page
      that contains this argument and read the following: “The large
      number of cows in small-scale farming [per 1,000 hectares] is to no small
      extent also determined by the fact that the peasant engages more in animal
      husbandry and less in the production of grain than the big farmer; but
      this does not explain the difference in the number of horses
      maintained” (page 96, on which are quoted figures for Saxony for
      1860, for the whole of Germany for 1883, and for England for 1880). We
      remind the reader of the fact that in Russia the Zemstvo statistics reveal
      the same law expressing the superiority of large-scale over small-scale
      farming: the big peasant farms manage with a smaller number of cattle and
      implements per unit of

      land.[9]


      Mr. Bulgakov gives a far from complete exposition of Kautsky’s arguments
      on the superiority of large-scale over small-scale production in
      capitalist agriculture. The superiority of large-scale farming does not
      only lie in the fact that there is less waste of cultivated area, a saving
      in live stock and implements, fuller utilisation of implements,

    

      wider possibilities of employing machinery, and more opportunities for
      obtaining credit; it also lies in the commercial superiority of
      large-scale production, the employment in the latter of scientifically
      trained managers (Kautsky, S. 104). Large-scale farming utilises the
      co-operation of workers and division of labour to a larger extent. Kautsky
      attaches particular importance to the scientific, agronomic education of
      the farmer. “A scientifically well-educated farmer can be employed
      only by a farm sufficiently large for the work of management and
      supervision to engage fully the person’s labour-power” (S. 98:
      “The size of such farms varies, according to the type of
      production,” from three hectares of vineyards to 500 hectares of extensive
      farming). In this connection Kautsky mentions the interesting and
      extremely characteristic fact that the establishment of primary and
      secondary agricultural schools benefits the big farmer and not the peasant
      by providing the former with employees (the same thing is observed in
      Russia). “The higher education that is required for fully
      rationalised production is hardly compatible with the peasants’ present
      conditions of existence. This, of course, is a condemnation, not of higher
      education, but of the peasant.s’ conditions of life. It merely means that
      peas ant production is able to exist side by side with large-scale
      production, not because of its higher productivity, but be cause of its
      lower requirements” (S. 99). Large-scale production must employ, not
      only peasant labourers, but also urban workers, whose requirements are on
      an incomparably higher level.
    

      Mr. Bulgakov calls the highly interesting and important data which Kautsky
      adduces to prove “overwork and under consumption in small-scale
      production” “a few [!] casual [??] quotations.” Mr. Bulgakov
      “undertakes” to cite as many quotations of an opposite
      character."  He merely forgets to say whether he also undertakes to make
      an opposite assertion which he would prove by “quotations
      of an opposite character.” This is the whole point! Does Mr. Bulgakov
      undertake to assert that large-scale production in capitalist society
      differs from peasant production in the prevalence of overwork and the
      lower consumption of its workers?  Mr. Bulgakov is too cautious to make
      such a ludicrous assertion. He considers it possible to avoid the fact of
      the peasants’

    

      overwork and lower consumption by remarking that “in some places
      peasants are prosperous and in other places they are poor”!! What would be
      said of an economist who, instead of generalising the data on the position
      of small- and large- scale production, began to investigate the difference
      in the “prosperity” of the population of various
      “places”?  

      What would be said of, an economist who evaded the overwork and lower
      consumption of handicraftsmen, as compared with factory workers, with the
      remark that “in some places handicraftsmen are prosperous and in
      other places they are poor”?  Incidentally, a word about
      handicraftsmen. Mr. Bulgakov writes: “Apparently Kautsky was
      mentally drawing a parallel with

      Hausindustrie,[10]

      where there are
      no technical limit.s 
      to overwork [as in agriculture], but this parallel
      is unsuitable here.” Apparently, we say in reply, Mr. Bulgakov was
      astonishingly inattentive to the book he was criticising, for Kautsky did
      not “mentally draw a parallel” with Hausindustrie,
      but pointed to it directly and precisely on the very fist page of that
      part of the chapter which deals with the question of overwork
      (Chapter VI, b, S. 106): “As in domestic industry
      (Hausindustrie), the work of the children of the family in small
      peasant farming is even more harmful than wage-labour for others.”
      However emphatically Mr. Bulgakov decrees that this parallel is unsuitable
      here, his opinion is nevertheless entirely erroneous. In industry, over
      work has no technical limits; but for the peasantry it is “limited
      by the technical conditions of agriculture,” argues Mr. Bulgakov. The
      question arises: who, indeed, confuses technique with economics, Kautsky
      or Mr. Bulgakov? What has the technique of agriculture, or of domestic
      industry, to do with the case when facts prove that the small producer in
      agriculture and in industry drives his children to work at an earlier age,
      works more hours per day, lives “more frugally,” and cuts down his
      requirements to such a level that he stands out in a civilised country as
      a real “barbarian” (Marx’s expression)? Can the economic
      similarity of such phenomena in agriculture and in industry be denied on
      the grounds that agriculture has a large number of specific features
      (which Kautsky does not forget in the least) ? 
      “The

    

      small peasant could not put in more work than his field requires even if
      he wanted to,” says Mr. Bulgakov. But the small peasant can and does work
      fourteen, and not twelve, hours a day; he can and does work with that
      super-normal intensity which wears out his nerves and muscles much more
      quickly than the normal intensity. Moreover, what an incorrect and extreme
      abstraction it is to reduce all the peasant’s work to field work! You will
      find nothing of the kind in Kant- sky’s book. Kautsky knows perfectly well
      that the peasant also works in the household, works on building and
      repairing his hut, his cowshed, his implements, etc., “not
      counting” all this additional work, for which a wage-worker on
      a big farm would demand payment at the usual rate. Is it not clear to
      every unprejudiced person that overwork has incomparably wider
      limits for the peasant—for the small farmer— than for the
      small industrial producer if he is only such? The overwork of the
      small farmer is strikingly demonstrated as a universal phenomenon by the
      fact that all bourgeois writers unanimously testify to The
      “diligence” and “frugality” of the peasant and
      accuse the workers of “indolence” and “extravagance.”
    

      The small peasants, says an investigator of the life of the rural
      population in Westphalia quoted by Kautsky, overwork their children to
      such an extent that their physical development is retarded; working for
      wages has not such bad sides. A small Lincolnshire farmer stated the
      following to the parliamentary commission which investigated agrarian
      conditions in England (1897): “I have brought up a family and nearly
      worked them to death.” Another said: “I and my children have been
      working eighteen hours a day for several days and average ten to twelve
      during the year.” A third:

      “We work much harder than labourers, in fact, like slaves.” Mr. Read
      described to the same commission the conditions of the small farmer, in
      the districts where agriculture in the strict sense of the word
      predominates, in the following manner: “The only way in which he can
      possibly succeed is this, in doing the work of two agricultural labourers
      and living at the expense of one ... as regards his family, they are worse
      educated and harder worked than the children of the agricultural
      labourers” (Royal Commission on Agriculture, Final Report, pp. 34,
      358. Quoted by Kautsky,

    

      S. 109). Will Mr. Bulgakov assert that not less frequently a day labourer does
      the work of two peasants? Particularly characteristic is the following
      fact cited by Kautsky showing that “the peasant art of
      starvation (Hungerkunst) may lead to the economic superiority of
      small production”: a comparison of the profitableness of two peasant
      farms in Baden shows a deficit of 933 marks in one, the large one,
      and a surplus of 191 marks in the other, which was only half the
size of the first. But the first farm, which was con ducted
      exclusively with the aid of hired labourers, had to feed the latter
      properly, at a cost of nearly one mark (about 45 kopeks) per person per day;
      whereas the smaller farm was conducted exclusively with the aid of the
      members of the family (the wife and six grown-up children), whose
      maintenance cost only half the amount spent on the day labourers:
      48 pfennigs per person per day. If the family of the small peasant had
      been fed as well as the labourers hired by the big farmer, the small
      farmer would have suffered a deficit of 1,250 marks! “His surplus
      came, not from his full corn bins, but from his empty stomach.” What a
      huge number of similar examples would be discovered, were the comparison
      of the “profitableness” of large and small farms accompanied
      by calculation of the consumption and work of peasants and of

      wage-workers.[11]

      Here is another calculation of the higher profit of a
      small farm (4.6 hectares) as compared with a big farm (26.5 hectares), a
      calculation made in one of the special magazines. But how is this higher
      profit obtained?—asks Kautsky. It turns out that the small farmer is
      assisted by his children, assisted from the time they begin to walk;
      whereas the big farmer has to spend money on his children (school,
      gymnasium). In the small farm even the old people, over 70 years
      of age, “take the place of a full worker.” “An ordinary day
      labourer, particularly on a big farm, goes about his work and thinks to
      himself: ’I wish it was knocking-off time.’ The small peasant,
      however, at all events in all the busy seasons, thinks to himself: ’Oh, if
      only the day were an hour or two longer.” The small producers, the
      author of this article in the agricultural magazine says didactically,
      make

    

      better use of their time in the busy seasons: “They rise earlier,
      retire later and work more quickly, whereas the labourers employed by the
      big farmer do not want to get up earlier, go to bed later or work harder
      than at other times.” The peasant is able to obtain a net income thanks to
      the simple” life he leads: he lives in a mud hut built mainly by the
      labour of his family; his wife has been married for 17 years and has worn
      out only one pair of shoes; usually she goes barefoot, or in wooden
      sabots; and she makes all the clothes for her family. Their food consists
      of potatoes, milk, and on rare occasions, herring. Only on Sundays does
      the husband smoke a pipe of tobacco. “These people did not realise
      that they were leading a particularly simple life and did not express
      dissatisfaction with their position.... Following this simple way of life,
      they obtained nearly every year a small surplus from their farm.”
    
IV

      After completing his analysis of the interrelations between large- and
      small-scale production in capitalist agriculture, Kautsky proceeds to make
      a special investigation of the “limits of capitalist
      agriculture” (Chapter VII). Kautsky says that objection to the
      theory that large-scale farming is superior to small-scale is raised
      mainly by the “friends of humanity” (we almost said, friends
      of the people...) among the bourgeoisie, the pure Free Traders, and the
      agrarians. Many economists have recently been advocating small-scale
      farming. The statistics usually cited are those showing that big farms are
      not eliminating small farms. And Kautsky quotes these statistics: in
      Germany, from 1882 to 1895, it was the area of the medium-sized farms that
      increased most; in France, from 1882 to 1892, it was the area of the
      smallest and biggest farms that increased most; the area of the medium-
      sized farms diminished. In England, from 1.885 to 1895, the area of the
      smallest and the biggest farms diminished; it was the area of the farms
      ranging from 40 to 120 hectares (100 to 300 acres), i.e., farms that
      cannot be put in the category of small farms, which increased most. In
      America, the average area of farms is diminishing: in 1850 it was 203
      acres; in 1860—199 acres; in 1870—153 acres; in 1880—134

    

      acres; and in 1890—137 acres. Kautsky makes a closer examination of
      the American statistics and, Mr. Bulgakov’s opinion notwithstanding, his
      analysis is extremely important from the standpoint of principle.
      The main reason for the diminution in the average farm area is the
      break-up of the large plantations in the South after the emancipation of
      the Negroes; in the Southern States the average farm area diminished by
      more than one-half. “Not a single person who understands the subject
      will regard these figures as evidence of the victory of small-scale over
      modern [=capitalist] large-scale production.” In general, an
      analysis of American statistics by regions shows a large variety
      of relations. In the principal “wheat states,” in the northern part
      of the Middle West, the average farm area increased from 122 to
      133 acres. “Small-scale production becomes predominant only in those
      places where agriculture is in a state of decline, or where
      pre-capitalist, large-scale production enters into competition with
      peasant production” (135). This conclusion of Kautsky is very
      important, for it shows that if certain conditions are not adhered to, the
      handling of statistics may become merely mishandling: a
      distinction must be drawn between capitalist and pre-capitalist
      large-scale production. A detailed analysis must be made for
      separate districts that differ materially from one another in the forms of
      farming and in the historical conditions of its development. It is said,
      “Figures prove !" But one must analyse the figures to see what
      they prove. They only prove what they directly say. The figures
      do not speak directly of the scale on which production is carried on, hut
      of the area of the farms. It is possible, and in fact it so
      happens, that “with intensive farming, production can be carried on
      upon a larger scale on a small estate than on a large estate extensively
      farmed.” “Statistics that tell us only about the area of farms tell
      us nothing as to whether the diminution of their area is due to the actual
      diminution of the scale of farming, or to its intensification”
      (146). Forestry and pastoral farming, these first forms of capitalist
      large-scale farming, permit of the largest area of estates. Field
      cultivation requires a smaller area. But the various systems of field
      cultivation differ from one another in this respect: the exhaustive,
      extensive system of farming (which has prevailed in America up to

    

      now) permits of huge farms (up to 10,000 hectares, such as the bonanza

farms[12]

      of Dalrymple, Glenn, and others. In our steppes, too, peasant farms, and
      particularly merchants’ farms, attain such dimensions). The introduction
      of fertilisers, etc., necessarily leads to a diminution in the area of
      farms, which in Europe, for instance, are smaller than in America. The
      transition from field farming to animal husbandry again causes a
      diminution in the area of farms: in England, in 1880, the average size of
      livestock farms was 52.3 acres, whereas that of field farms was 74.2
      acres. That is why the transition from field farming to animal husbandry
      which is taking place in England mast give rise to a tendency for
      the area of farms to diminish. “But it would be judging very
      superficially if the conclusion were drawn from this that there has been a
      decline in production” (149). In East Elbe (by the investigation of
      which Mr. Bulgakov hopes some time to refute Kautsky), it is precisely the
      introduction of intensive farming that is taking place: the big farmers,
      says Sering, whom Kautsky quotes, are increasing the productivity of their
      soil and are selling or leasing to peasants the remote parts of their
      estates, since with intensive farming it is difficult to utilise these
      remote parts. “Thus, large estates in East Elbe are being reduced in
      size and in their vicinity small peasant farms are being established;
      this, however, is not because small-scale production is superior to
      large-scale, but because the former dimensions of the estates were adapted
      to the needs of extensive farming” (150). The diminution in farm
      area in all these cases usually leads to an increase in the quantity of
      products (per unit of land) and frequently to an increase in the number of
      workers employed, i.e., to an actual increase in the scale of
      production.
    

      From this it is clear how little is proved by general agricultural
      statistics on the area of farms, and how cautiously one must
      handle them. In industrial statistics we have direct indices of
      the scale of production (quantity of goods, total value of the output, and
      number of workers employed), and, besides, it is easy to distinguish the
      different branches. Agricultural statistics hardly ever satisfy these
      necessary conditions of evidence.
    
 

      Furthermore, the monopoly in landed property limits agricultural
      capitalism: in industry, capital grows as a result of
      accumulation, as a result of the conversion of surplus- value
      into capital; centralisation, i.e., the amalgamation of several
      small units of capital into a large unit, plays a lesser role. In
      agriculture, the situation is different. The whole of the land is occupied
      (in civilised countries), and it is possible to enlarge the area of a farm
      only by centralising several lots; this must be done in such a
      way as to form one continuous area. Clearly, enlarging an estate
      by purchasing the surrounding lots is a very difficult matter,
      particularly in view of the fact that the small lots are partly occupied
      by agricultural labourers (whom the big farmer needs), and partly by small
      peasants who are masters of the art of maintaining their hold by reducing
      consumption to an unbelievable minimum. For some reason or other the
      statement of this simple and very clear fact, which indicates the limits
      of agricultural capitalism, seemed to Mr. Bulgakov to be a mere
      “phrase” (??!!) and provided a pretext for the most ground
      less rejoicing: “And so [!], the superiority of large-scale
      production comes to grief



HI at the very first obstacle." First,
      Mr. Bulgakov misunderstands the law of the superiority of large-scale
      production, ascribing to it excessive abstractness, from which Kautsky is
      very remote, and then turns his misunderstanding into an argument against
      Kautsky! Truly strange is Mr. Bulgakov’s belief that he can refute Kautsky
      by referring to Ireland (large landed property, but without large-scale
      production). The fact that large landed property is one of the conditions
      of large-scale production does not in the least signify that it is a
      sufficient condition. Of course, Kautsky could not examine the historical
      and other causes of the specific features of Ireland, or of any other
      country, in a general work on capitalism in agriculture. It would not
      occur to anyone to demand that Marx, in analysing the general laws of
      capitalism in industry, should have explained why small industry continued
      longer in France, why industry was developing slowly in Italy,
      etc. Equally groundless is Mr. Bulgakov’s assertion that concentration
      “could” proceed gradually: it is not as easy to enlarge
      estates by purchasing neighbouring lots as it is to add new premises to a
      factory for an additional number of machines, etc.
    
 

      In referring to this purely fictitious
      possibility of the gradual concentration, or renting, of land for the
      purpose of forming large farms, Mr. Bulgakov paid little attention to the
      really specific feature of agriculture in the process of
      concentration—a feature which Kautsky indicated. This is the
      latifundia, the concentration of several estates in the hands of a single
      owner. Statistics usually register the number of individual estates and
      tell us nothing about the process of concentration of various estates in
      the hands of big landowners. Kautsky cites very striking instances, in
      Germany and Austria, of such concentration which leads to a special and
      higher form of large-scale capitalist farming in which several large
      estates are combined to form a single economic unit managed by a single
      central body. Such gigantic agricultural enterprises make possible the
      combination of the most varied branches of agriculture and the most
      extensive use of the advantages of large-scale production.
    

      The reader will see how remote Kautsky is from abstractness and from a
      stereotyped understanding of “Marx’s theory,” to which he remains
      true. Kautsky warned against this stereotyped understanding, even
      inserting a special section on the doom of small-scale production in
      industry in the chapter under discussion. He rightly points out that even
      in industry the victory of large-scale production is not so easy of
      achievement, and is not so uniform, as those who talk about Marx’s theory
      being inapplicable to agriculture are in the habit of thinking. It is
      sufficient to point to capitalist domestic industry; it is sufficient to
      recall the remark Marx made about the extreme variety of transitional and
      mixed forms which obscure the victory of the factory system. How much more
      complicated this is in agriculture! The increase in wealth and luxury
      leads, for example, to millionaires purchasing huge estates which they
      turn into forests for their pleasures. In Salzburg, in Austria, the number
      of cattle has been declining since 1869. The reason is the sale of the
      Alps to rich lovers of the hunt. Kautsky says very aptly that if
      agricultural statistics are taken in general, and uncritically, it is
      quite easy to discover in the capitalist mode of production a tendency to
      transform modern nations into hunting tribes!
    
 

      Finally, among the conditions setting the limits to capitalist
      agriculture, Kautsky also points to the fact that the shortage of
      workers—due to the migration of the rural population—compels
      the big landowners to allot land to labourers, to create a small peasantry
      to provide labour-power for the landlord. An absolutely propertyless
      agricultural labourer is a rarity, because in agriculture rural economy,
      in the strict sense, is connected with household economy. Whole categories
      of agricultural wage-workers own or have the use of land. When small
      production is eliminated too greatly, the big landowners try to
      strengthen or revive it by the sale or lease of land. Sering, whom
      Kautsky quotes, says: “In all European countries, a movement has
      recently been observed towards... settling rural labourers by allotting
      plots of land to them.” Thus, within the limits of the capitalist mode of
      production it is impossible to count on small-scale production being
      entirely eliminated from agriculture, for the capitalists and agrarians
      themselves strive to revive it when the ruination of the peasantry has
      gone too far. Marx pointed to this rotation of concentration and
      parcellisation of the land in capitalist society as far back as 1850, in
      the Neue Rheinische

      Zeitung.[22]


      Mr. Bulgakov is of the opinion that these arguments of Kautsky contain
      “an element of truth, but still more of error.” Like all
      Mr. Bulgakov’s other verdicts, this one has also extremely weak and
      nebulous grounds. Mr. Bulgakov thinks that Kautsky has “constructed
      a theory of proletarian small-scale production,” and that this theory is
      true for a very limited region. We hold a different opinion. The
      agricultural wage-labour of small cultivators (or what is the same thing,
      the agricultural labourer and day labourer with an allotment) is a
      phenomenon characteristic, more or less, of all capitalist countries.
      No writer who desires to describe capitalism in agriculture can, without
      violating the truth, leave this phenomenon in the

      background.[13]

      Kautsky, in Chapter VIII of his book, viz., “The Proletarisation of
      the Peasant,” adduces extensive evidence to prove that in Germany, in

    

      particular, proletarian small-scale production is general. Mr. Bulgakov’s
      statement that other writers, including Mr. Kablukov, have pointed to the
      “shortage of workers” leaves the most important thing in
      the background—the enormous difference in principle between
      Mr. Kablukov’s theory and Kautsky’s theory. Because of his
      characteristically

      Kleinbürger[14]

      point of view, Mr. Kablukov “constructs” out of the shortage
      of workers the theory that large-scale production is unsound and that
      small-scale production is sound. Kautsky gives an accurate description of
      the facts and indicates their true significance in modern class society:
      the class interests of the landowners compel them to strive to allot land
      to the workers. As far as class position is concerned, the agricultural
      wage-workers with allotments are situated between the petty bourgeoisie
      and the proletariat, but closer to the latter. In other words,
      Mr. Kablukov develops one side of a complicated process into a theory of
      the unsoundness of large-scale production, whereas Kautsky analyses the
      special forms of social-economic relations created by the interests of
      large-scale production at a certain stage of its development and under
      certain historical conditions.
    
V

      We shall now pass to the next chapter of Kautsky’s book, the title of
      which we have just quoted. In this chapter Kautsky investigates, firstly,
      the “tendency toward the parcellisation of landholdings,” and,
      secondly, the “forms of peasant auxiliary employments.” Thus, here
      are depicted those extremely important trends of capitalism in agriculture
      that are typical of the overwhelming majority of capitalist
      countries. Kautsky says that the break-up of landholdings leads to an
      increased demand for small plots on the part of small peasants, who pay a
      higher price for the land than the big farmers. Several writers have
      adduced this fact to prove that small-scale farming is superior to
      large-scale farming. Kautsky very appropriately replies to this by
      comparing the price of land with the price of houses: it is well known
      that small and cheap houses are dearer per unit of

    

      capacity (per cubic foot, etc.) than large and costly houses. The higher
      price of small plots of land is not due to the superiority of small-scale
      farming, but to the particularly oppressed condition of the peasant. The
      enormous number of dwarf farms that capitalism has called into being is
      seen from the following figures: in Germany (1895), out of 5,500,000
      farms, 4,250,000, i.e., more than three-fourths, are of an area of less
      than five hectares (58 per cent are less than two hectares). In Belgium,
      78 per cent (709,500 out of 909,000) are less than two hectares. In
      England (1895), 118,000 out of 520,000 are less than two hectares. In
      France (1892), 2,200,000 (out of 5,700,000) are less than one hectare;

      4,000,000 are less than five hectares. Mr. Bulgakov thinks that he can
      refute Kautsky’s argument that these dwarf farms are very irrational
      (insufficient cattle, implements, money, and labour-power which is
      diverted to auxiliary occupations) by arguing that “very
      often” (??) the land is spade-tilled “with an incredible
      degree of intensity,” although

      with “an extremely irrational expenditure of labour-power.” It goes
      without saying that this objection is totally ground less, that individual
      examples of excellent cultivation of the soil by small peasants are as
      little able to refute Kautsky’s general characterisation of this type of
      farming as the above-quoted example of the greater profitableness of a
      small farm is able to refute the thesis of the superiority of large-scale
      production. That Kautsky is quite right in placing these farms, taken
      as a

whole,[15]

      in the proletarian category is seen from the fact, revealed by the German
      census of 1895, that very many of the small farmers cannot dispense with
      subsidiary earnings. Of a total of 4,700,000 persons obtaining an
      independent livelihood in agriculture, 2,700,000, or 57 per cent,
      have subsidiary earnings. Of 3,200,000 farms of less than two hectares
      each, only 400,000, or 13 per cent, have no subsidiary incomes!
      In the whole of Germany, out of

    

      5,500,000 farms, 1,500,000 belong to agricultural and industrial
      wage-workers (±704,000 to artisans). And after this Mr. Bulgakov
      presumes to assert that the theory of proletarian small landholdings was
      “constructed” by

      Kautsky![16]

      Kautsky thoroughly investigated the forms assumed by the proletarisation
      of the peasantry (the forms of peasant auxiliary employment)
      (S. 174-93). Unfortunately, space does not permit us to deal in detail
      with his description of these forms (agricultural work for wages, domestic
      industry—Hausindustrie, “the vilest system of
      capitalist exploitation—work in factories and mines, etc.). Our
      only observation is that Kautsky makes the same appraisal of auxiliary
      employment as that made by Russian economists. Migratory workers

    

      are less developed and have a lower level of requirements than urban
      workers; not infrequently, they have a harmful effect on the living
      conditions of the urban workers. “But for those places from which
      they come and to which they return they are pioneers of progress.... They
      acquire new wants and new ideas” (S. 192), they awaken among the
      back woods peasants consciousness, a sense of human dignity, and
      confidence in their own strength.

    

      In conclusion we shall deal with the last and particularly sharp attack
      Mr. Bulgakov makes upon Kautsky. Kautsky says that in Germany, from 1882
      to 1895, it was the smallest (in area) and the largest farms that grew
      most in number (so that the parcellisation of the land proceeded at the
      expense of the medium farms). Indeed, the number of farms under one
      hectare increased by 8.8 per cent; those of 5 to 20 hectares increased by
      7.8 per cent; while those of over

      1,000 hectares increased by 1.1 per cent (the number of those in the
      intervening categories hardly increased at all, while the total number of
      farms increased by 5.3 per cent). Mr. Bulgakov is extremely indignant
      because the percentage is taken of the biggest farms, the number of which
      is insignificant (515 and 572 for the respective years). Mr. Bulgakov’s
      indignation is quite groundless. He forgets that these farms,
      insignificant in number, are the largest in size and that they occupy
      nearly as much land as 2,300,000 to 2,500,000 dwarf farms (up to one
      hectare). If I were to say that the number of very big factories in a
      country, those employing 1,000 and more workers, increased, say, from 51
      to 57, by 11 per cent, while the total number of factories increased 5.3
      per cent, would not that show an increase in large-scale production,
      notwithstanding the fact that the number of very large factories
      may be insignificant as compared with the total number of factories?
      Kautsky is fully aware of the fact that it was the peasant farms of from 5
      to 20 hectares which grew most in total area (Mr. Bulgakov, p. 18), and he
      deals with it in the ensuing chapter.

    

      Kautsky then takes the changes in area in the various categories in 1882
      and 1895. It appears that the largest increase (±563,477 hectares)
      occurred among the peasant farms of from 5 to 20 hectares, and the next
      largest among the biggest farms, those of more than 1,000 hectares
      (±94,014), whereas

    

      the area of farms of from 20 to 1,000 hectares diminished by
      86,809 hectares. Farms up to one hectare increased their area by 32,683
      hectares, and those from 1 to 5 hectares, by 45,604 hectares.

    

      And Kautsky draws the following conclusion: the diminution in the area of
      farms of from 20 to 1,000 hectares (more than balanced by an increase in
      the area of farms of 1,000 hectares and over) is due, not to the decline
      of large-scale production, but to its intensification. We have already
      seen that intensive farming is making progress in Germany and that it
      frequently requires a diminution in the area of farms. That there is
      intensification of large-scale production can be seen from the growing
      utilisation of steam-driven machinery, as well as from the enormous
      increase in the number of agricultural non-manual employees, who in
      Germany are employed only on large farms. The number of estate managers
      (inspectors), overseers, bookkeepers, etc., increased from 47,465 in 1882
      to 76,978 in 1895, i.e., by 62 per cent; the percentage of women among
      these employees increased from 12 to 23.4.

    

      “All this shows clearly how much more intensive and more capitalist
      large-scale farming has become since the beginning of the eighties. The next
      chapter will explain why simultaneously there has been such a big increase in
      the area of middle-peasant farms” (S. 174).

    

      Mr. Bulgakov regards this description as being “in crying
      contradiction to reality,” but the arguments he falls back on again fail
      to justify such an emphatic and bold verdict, and not by one iota do they
      shake Kautsky’s conclusion. “In the first place, the intensification
      of farming, if it took place, would not in itself explain the relative and
      absolute diminution of the cultivated area, the diminution of the total
      pro portion of farms in the 20- to 1,000-hectare group. The cultivated
      area could have increased simultaneously with the increase in the number
      of farms. The latter need merely (sic!)  have increased somewhat
      faster, so that the area of each farm would have

      diminished.”[17]

 

      We have deliberately quoted in full this argument, from which Mr. Bulgakov
      draws the conclusion that “the diminution in the size of farms owing
      to the growth of intensive farming is pure fantasy” (sic!),
      because it strikingly reveals the very mistake of mishandling
      “statistics” against which Kautsky seriously
      warned. Mr. Bulgakov puts ridiculously strict demands upon the statistics
      of the area of farms and ascribes to these statistics a
      significance which they never can have. Why, indeed, should the cultivated
      area have increased “somewhat”? Why “should not” the
      intensification of farming (which, as we have seen, some times leads to
      the sale and renting to peasants of parts of estates remote from the
      centre) have shifted a certain number of farms from a higher category to a
      lower? Why “should it not” have diminished the cultivated area
      of farms of from 20 to 1,000

      hectares?[18]

      In industrial statistics a
      reduction in the output of the very big factories would have
      indicated a decline in large-scale production. But the diminution in
      area of large estates by 1.2 per cent does not and cannot
      indicate the volume of production, which very often increases with a
      decrease in the area of the farm. We know that the process of livestock
      breeding replacing grain farming, particularly marked in England, is going
      on in Europe as a whole. We know that sometimes this change causes a
      decrease in the farm area; but would it not be strange to draw from this
      the conclusion that the smaller farm area implied a decline in large-scale
      production? That is why, incidentally, the “eloquent table”
      given by Mr. Bulgakov on page 20, showing the reduction in the number of
      large and small farms and the increase in the number of medium farms (5 to
      20 hectares) possessing animals for field work, proves nothing at
      all. This may have been due to a change in the system of farming.
    

      That large-scale agricultural production in Germany has become more
      intensive and more capitalist is evident, firstly, from the increase in
      the number of steam-driven machines employed: from 1879 to 1897
      their number increased

    

      fivefold. It is quite useless for Mr. Bulgakov to argue in his objection
      that the number of all machines in general (and not
      steam-driven machines only) owned by small farms (up to 20 hectares) is
      much larger than that owned by the large farms; and also that in America
      machines are employed in extensive farming. We are not discussing America
      now, but Germany, where there are no bonanza

farms.[19]

      The following table gives the percentage of
      farms in Germany (1895) employing steam ploughs and steam threshing machines:
    





Farms
Per cent of farms employing



steam ploughs
steam threshing machines





Under 2 hectares
 0.00 
 1.08 


2 to 5 "
 0.00 
 5.20 


5 to 20 "
 0.01 
 10.95 


2O to 100 "
 0.10 
 16.60 


100 hectares and over
 5.29 
 61.22 




      And now, if the total number of steam-driven machines employed in
      agriculture in Germany has increased fivefold, does it not prove that
      large-scale farming has become more intensive? Only it must not be
      forgotten, as Mr. Bulgakov forgets on page 21, that an increase in the
      size of enterprises in agriculture is not always identical with an
      increase in the area of farms.

    

      Secondly, the fact that large-scale production has become more capitalist is
      evident from the increase in the number of agricultural non-manual
      employees. It is useless for Bulgakov to call this argument of Kautsky a
      “curiosity”:

      “an increase in the number of officers, side by side with a reduction of
      the army”—with a reduction in the number of agricultural
      wage-workers. Again we say: Rira bien qui rira le

dernier![20]

      Kautsky not only does not forget the reduction in the number of
      agricultural labourers, but shows it

    

      in detail in regard to a number of countries; only this fact has
      absolutely nothing to do with the matter in hand, be cause the rural
      population as a whole is diminishing, while the number of proletarian
      small farmers is increasing. Let us assume that the big farmer abandons
      the production of grain and takes up the production of sugar-beet and the
      manufacture of sugar (in Germany in 1871-72, 2,200,000 tons of beets were
      converted into sugar; in 1881-82, 6,300,000 tons; in 1891-92, 9,500,000
      tons, and in 1896-97, 13,700,000 tons). He might even sell, or rent, the
      remote parts of his estate to small peasants, particularly If he needs the
      wives and children of the peasants as day labourers on the beet
      plantations. Let us assume that he introduces a steam plough which
      eliminates the former ploughmen (on the beet plantations in
      Saxony—“models of intensive

      farming”[21]

–steam

      ploughs have now come
      into common use). The number of wage-workers diminishes. The number of
      higher grade employees (bookkeepers, managers, technicians, etc.)
      necessarily increases. Will Mr. Bulgakov deny that we see here an increase
      in intensive farming and capitalism in large-scale production? Will he
      assert that nothing of the kind is taking place in Germany?
    

      To conclude the exposition of Chapter VIII of Kautsky’s book, viz., on the
      proletarisation of the peasants, we need to quote the following
      passage. “What interests us here,” says Kautsky, after the passage
      we have cited above, quoted also by Mr. Bulgakov, “is the fact that
      the proletarisation of the rural population is proceeding in Germany, as
      in other places, notwithstanding the fact that the tendency to parcellise
      medium estates has ceased to operate there. From 1882 to 1895 the total
      number of farms increased by 281,000. By far the greater part of this
      increase was due to the greater number of proletarian farms up to one
      hectare in area. The number of these farms increased by 206,000.

    

      “As we see, the development of agriculture is quite a special one,
      quite different from the development of industrial and trading capital. In
      the preceding chapter we pointed out that in agriculture the tendency to
      centralise farms does not lead to the complete elimination of small-scale
      production.

    

      When this tendency goes too far it gives rise to an opposite tendency, so
      that the tendency to centralise and the tendency to parcellise alternate
      with each other. Now we see that both tendencies can operate side by
      side. There is an increase in the number of farms whose owners come into
      the commodity market as proletarians, as sellers of labour-power.... All
      the material interests of these small farmers as sellers of the commodity
      labour-power are identical with the interests of the industrial
      proletariat, and their land owner ship does not give rise to antagonism
      between them and the proletariat. His land more or less emancipates the
      peasant small holder from the dealer in food products; but it does not
      emancipate him from the exploitation of the capitalist entrepreneur,
      whether industrial or agricultural” (S. 174).
    


      In the following article we shall deal with the remaining part of
      Kautsky’s book and give the work a general appraisal; in passing, we shall
      examine the objections Mr. Bulgakov raises in a later article.
    

    

     
Notes
 

[1]

      The Agrarian Question.—Ed.
    

[2]

      Machines of various types are combined. Unless
      otherwise stated, all figures are taken from Kautsky’s book.
    —Lenin

[3]

      “All these data,” thinks Mr. Bulgakov, “can be obtained from
      any (sic!) handbook of the economics of agriculture.” We do not
      share Mr. Bulgakov’s roseate views on “handbooks.” Let us take from
      “any” of the Russian books these of Messrs. Skvortsov
      (Steam Transport) and N. Kablukov (Lectures, half of
      them reprinted in a “new” book The Conditions of
      Development of Peasant Economy in Russia). Neither from the one nor
      from the other would the reader he able to obtain a picture of that
      transformation which was brought about by capitalism in
      agriculture, because neither even sets out to give a general picture of
      the transition from feudal to capitalist economy.
    —Lenin

[4]

      Marx pointed to this process in Volume III of
      Capital (without examining its various forms in different
      countries) and observed that this separation of “land as an instrument
      of production from landed property and landowner” is “one of the
      major results of the capitalist mode of production” (III, 2, S. 456-57;
      Russian translation,

      509-10).[23]

    —Lenin

[5]

      Foreword, p. vi.—Ed.
    

[6]

      The increase in mortgage debts does not always imply that agriculture is
      in a depressed state.... The progress and prosperity of agriculture (as
      well as its decline) “should find expression in an increase in
      mortgage debts—firstly, because of the growing need of capital on
      the part of progressing agriculture, and, secondly, because of the
      increase in ground rent, which facilitates the expansion of agricultural
      credit” (S. 87).
    —Lenin

[7]

      On pages 124-26 Kautsky describes the agricultural commune in Ralahine, of
      which, incidentally, Mr. Dioneo tells his Russian readers in Russkoye

      Bogatstvo,[24]

      No. 2, for this year.
    —Lenin

[8]

      The only thing Mr. Bulgakov could quote in support of his claim is the
      title Kautsky gave to the first section of his Chapter VI:
      "(a) The Technical Superiority of Large-Scale Production,”
      although this section deals with both the technical and the economic
      advantages of large-scale production. But does this prove that Kautsky
      confuses technique with economics? And, strictly speaking, it is
      still an open question as to whether Kautsky’s title is inexact. The point
      is that Kautsky’s object was to contrast the content of the first and
      second sections of Chapter VI: in the first section (a) he deals with the
      technical superiority of large-scale production in capitalist agriculture,
      and here, in addition to machinery, etc., he mentions, for instance,
      credit. “A peculiar sort of technical superiority,” says
      Mr. Bulgakov ironically. But Rirabien qui rira le dernier! (He
      laughs best who laughs last.—Ed.) Glance into Kautsky’s
      book and you will see that he has in mind, principally, the progress made
      in the technique of credit business (and further on in the
      technique of trading); which is accessible only to the big
      farmer. On the other hand, in t.he second section of this chapter (b) he
      compares the quantity of labour expended and the rate of consumption by
      the workers in large-scale production with those in small-scale
      production. Consequently, in this part Kautsky examines the purely
      economic difference between small- and large-scale production. The
      economics of credit and commerce is the same for both; but the
      technique is different.
    —Lenin

[9]

      See V. Y. Postnikov, Peasant Farming in South
      Russia. Cf. V. Ilyin, The Development of Capitalism, Chapter
      II, Section 1. (See present edition, Vol. 3.—Ed.)
    —Lenin

[10]

      Domestic industry.—Ed.
    

[11]

      Cf. V. Ilyin, The Development of Capitalism in Russia, pp. 112,
      175, 201. (See present edition, Vol. 3, pp. 168-70, 244-46,
      273-75.—Ed.)
    —Lenin

[12]

      These words are in English in the original.—Ed.
    

[13]

      Cf. The Development of Capitalism in Russia, Chapter II, Section
      XII, p. 120. (See present edition, Vol. 3, p. 478.—Ed.) It is
      estimated that in France about 75 per cent of the rural labourers own
      land. Other examples are also given.
    —Lenin

[14]

      Petty-bourgeois. — Ed.
    

[15]

      We emphasise “taken as a whole,” because it cannot, of course, be
      denied that in certain cases even these farms having an insignificant area
      of land can provide a large quantity of products and a large income
      (vineyards, vegetable gardens, etc.). But what would we say of an
      economist who tried to refute the reference to the lack of horses among
      Russian peasants by pointing, for instance, to the vegetable growers in
      the suburbs of Moscow who may sometimes carry on rational and profitable
      farming without horses?
    —Lenin

[16]

      In a footnote to page 15, Mr. Bulgakov says that Kautsky, believing that grain
      duties were not in the interest of the overwhelming majority of the rural
      population, repeats the mistake committed by authors of the book on grain

      prices.[25]
      We cannot agree with this opinion either. The authors of the book on grain
      prices made a large number of mistakes (which I indicated repeatedly in
      the above-mentioned book); but there is no mistake whatever in admitting
      that high grain prices are not in the interests of the mass of the
      population. What is a mistake is the direct deduction that the
      interests of the masses coincide with the interests of the whole social
      development. Messrs. Tugan-Baranovsky and Struve have rightly pointed out
      that the criterion in appraising grain prices must be whether,
      more or less rapidly, through capitalism, they eliminate labour-service,
      whether they stimulate social development. This is a question of fact
      which I answer differently from the way Struve does. I do not at all
      regard it as proved that the development of capitalism in agriculture is
      retarded by low prices. On the contrary, the particularly rapid growth of
      the agricultural machinery industry and the stimulus to specialisation in
      agriculture which was given by the reduction of grain prices show that low
      prices stimulate the development of capitalism in Russian
      agriculture (cf. The Development of Capitalism in Russia, Chapter
      III, Section V, p. 147, footnote 2). (See present edition, Vol. 3,
      pp. 212-13.—Ed.) The reduction of grain prices has a profound
      transforming effect upon all other relations in agriculture.
    

      Mr. Bulgakov says: “One of the important conditions for the
      intensification of farming is the raising of grain prices.” (The same
      opinion is expressed by Mr. P. 5. in the “Review of Home
      Affairs” column, p. 299 in the same issue of Nachalo.) This
      is inexact. Marx showed in Part VI of Volume III of

      Capital[26]

      that the productivity of additional capital invested in land may diminish,
      but may also increase; with a reduction in the price of grain,
      rent may fall, but it may also rise.  Consequently,
      intensification may be due—in different historical periods and in
      different countries—to altogether different conditions, irrespective
      of the level of grain prices.
    —Lenin

[17]

      Mr. Bulgakov adduces data, in still greater detail, but they add nothing
      whatever to Kautsky’s data, since they show the same increase in the
      number of farms in one group of big proprietors and a reduction in the
      land area.
    —Lenin

[18]

      There was a reduction in this category from 16,986,101 hectares to 16,802,115
      hectares, i.e., by a whole ... 1.2 per cent! Does not this speak in
      favour of the “death agony” of large-scale production
      seen by Mr. Bulgakov?
    —Lenin

[19]

      These words are in English in the original.—Ed.
    

[20]

      What is indeed a curiosity is Mr. Bulgakov’s remark that the increase in
      the number of non-manual employees testifies, perhaps, to the growth of
      agricultural industry, but not (!) to the growth of intensive
      large-scale farming. Until now we have thought one of the most important
      forms of increased intensification to be the growth of industry in
      agriculture (described in detail and appraised by Kautsky in Chapter
      X).
    —Lenin

[21]

      Kärger, quoted by Kautsky, S. 45.
    —Lenin
 



[23]

      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. III, Moscow, 1959, p. 603.
    



[24]

Russkoye Bogatstvo (Russian Wealth)—a monthly
      magazine published in St. Petersburg from 1876 to the middle of 1918. In
      the early 1890s it became the organ of the liberal Narodniks and was
      edited by S. N. Krivenko and N. K. Mikhailovsky. The magazine advocated
      conciliation of the tsarist government and waged a bitter struggle against
      Marxism and the Russian Marxists. In 1906 it became the organ of the
      semi-Cadet “Popular Socialist” Party.
    



[22]

      The reference Is
      
      to Marx’s article criticising an essay by
      E. de Girardin, “Le Socialisme et l’impôt”
      (“Socialism and Taxes”).
    

      The article was published in issue No. 4 of the journal Neue
Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue (New Rhenish
Gazette. Political-Economic Review), issued in May 1850. The
journal was published by Marx in Hamburg in 1850 and was a continuation
of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung.
    



[25]

      This is a reference to The Influence of Harvests and Grain Prices on
      Certain Aspects of Russian Economy, in two volumes, compiled by a
      group of authors of the liberal-bourgeois and Narodnik trend and edited by
      Professor A. I. Chuprov and A. S. Posnikov (1897). Lenin read this book
      when he was in exile and criticised it in his The Development of
      Capitalism in Russia.
    



[26]

      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. III, Moscow, 1959, pp. 600-793.
    

 
  


|

Second Article

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 4

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Second Article









Lenin: 1899/agriculture: Second Article







V. I.  

      Lenin
Capitalism in Agriculture



    

    Second Article
I

      In Chapter IX of his book (“The Growing Difficulties of Commercial
      Agriculture”) Kautsky proceeds to analyse the contradictions
      inherent in capitalist agriculture. From the objections which Mr. Bulgakov
      raises against this chapter, which we shall examine later, it is evident
      that the critic has not quite properly understood the general significance
      of these “difficulties.” There are “difficulties” which,
      while being an “obstacle” to the full development of rational
      agriculture, at the same time stimulate the development of
      capitalist agriculture. Among the “difficulties” Kautsky
      points, for example, to the depopulation of the countryside. Undoubtedly,
      the migration from the countryside of the best and most intelligent
      workers is an “obstacle” to the full development of rational
      agriculture; but it is equally indubitable that the farmers combat this
      obstacle by developing technique, e.g., by introducing machinery.
    

      Kautsky investigates the following “difficulties”: a) ground
      rent; b) right of inheritance; c) limitation of right of inheritance;
      entailment (fideicommissum,

Anerbenrecht)[15];

      d) the exploitation of the
      countryside by the town; e) depopulation of the countryside.
    

      Ground rent is that part of surplus-value which remains after the average
      profit on invested capital is deducted. The monopoly of landed property
      enables the landowner to appropriate this surplus, and the price of land
      (=capitalised rent) keeps rent at the level it has once
      reached. Clearly, rent “hinders” the complete rationalisation
      of agriculture: under the tenant farmer system the incentive to
      improvements,

    

      etc., becomes weaker, and under the mortgage system the major part of the
      capital has to be invested, not in production, but in the purchase of
      land. In his objection Mr. Bulgakov points out, first, that there is
      “nothing terrible” in the growth of mortgage debts. He
      forgets, however, that Kautsky, not “in another sense,” but
      precisely in this sense, has pointed to the necessary increase in
      mortgages even when agriculture is prospering (see above, First Article,
      II). Here, Kautsky does not raise the question as to whether an increase
      in mortgages is “terrible” or not, but asks what difficulties
      prevent capitalism from accomplishing its mission. Secondly, in
      Mr. Bulgakov’s opinion, “it is hardly correct to regard increased
      rent only as an obstacle.... The rise in rent, the possibility of raising
      it, serves as an independent incentive to agriculture, stimulating
      progress of technique and every other form” of progress
      (“process” is obviously a misprint). Stimuli to progress in
      capitalist agriculture are:

      population growth, growth of competition, and growth of, industry; rent,
      however, is a tribute exacted by the landowner from social development,
      from the growth of technique. It is, therefore, incorrect to state, that
      the rise in rent is an “independent incentive” to
      progress. Theoretically, it is possible for capitalist production to
      exist in the absence of private property in land, i.e., with the land
      nationalised (Kautsky, S. 207), when absolute rent would not exist at
      all, and differential rent would be appropriated by the state. This
      would not weaken the incentive to agronomic progress; on the contrary,
      it would greatly increase it.
    

      “There can be nothing more erroneous than to think that it is in the
      interest of agriculture to force up (in die Höhetreiben) the
      prices of estates or artificially to keep them at a high level,” says
      Kautsky. “This is in the interest of the present
      (augenblicklichen) landowners, of the mortgage banks and the real
      estate speculators, but not in the interest of agriculture, and least of
      all in the interest of its future, of the future generation of
      farmers” (S. 199). As to the price of land, it is capitalised rent.
    

      The second difficulty confronting commercial agriculture is that it
      necessarily requires private property in land. This leads to the
      situation in which the land is either split up on passing to heirs (such
      parcellisation even

    

      leading in some places to technical retrogression) or is burdened
      by mortgages (when the heir who receives the land pays the co-heirs money
      capital which he obtains by a mortgage on the land). Mr. Bulgakov
      reproaches Kautsky for “overlooking, in his exposition, the positive
      side” of the mobilisation of the land. This reproach is absolutely
      ground less; for in the historical part of his book (in particular Chapter
      III of Part I, which deals with feudal agriculture and the reasons for its
      supersession by capitalist agriculture), as well as in the practical

      part,[1]

      Kautsky clearly pointed out to his readers the positive side and the
      historical necessity of private property in land, of the subjection of
      agriculture to competition, and, consequently, of the mobilisation of the
      land. The other reproach that Mr. Bulgakov directs at Kautsky, namely,
      that he does not investigate the problem of “the different degrees
      of growth of the population in different places,” is one that we simply
      cannot understand. Did Mr. Bulgakov really expect to find studies in
      demography in Kautsky’s book?
    

      Without dwelling on the question of entailment, which, after what has been
      said above, represents nothing new, we shall proceed to examine the
      question of the exploitation of the countryside by the
      town. Mr. Bulgakov’s assertion that Kautsky “does not contrapose the
      positive to the negative sides and, primarily, the importance of the town
      as a market for agricultural produce,” is in direct contradiction to the
      facts. Kautsky deals very definitely with the importance of the town as a
      market for agriculture on the very first page of the chapter
      which investigates “modern agriculture” (S. 30, et seq.). It
      is precisely to “urban industry” (S. 292) that Kautsky
      ascribes the principal role in the transformation of agriculture, in its
      rationalisation,

      etc.[2]


      That is why we cannot possibly understand how Mr. Bulgakov could repeat in
      his article (page 32, Nachalo, No. 3) these very ideas as
      i/in opposition to Kautsky! This is a

    

      particularly striking example of this stern critic’s false exposition of
      the book he is subjecting to criticism. “It must not be forgotten,”
      Mr. Bulgakov says to Kautsky admonishingly, that “part of the values
      [which flow to the towns] returns to the countryside.” Anyone would think
      that Kautsky forgets this elementary truth. As a matter of fact Kautsky
      distinguishes between the flow of values (from the countryside to the
      town) with or without an equivalent re turn much more clearly than
      Mr. Bulgakov attempts to do. In the first place, Kautsky examines the
      “flow of commodity values from the country to the town without
      equivalent return (Gegenleistung)” (S. 210) (rent which is spent
      in the towns, taxes, interest on loans obtained in city banks) and justly
      regards this as the economic exploitation of the countryside by the
      town. Kautsky further discusses the question of the efflux of values with
      an equivalent return, i.e., the exchange of agricultural produce for
      manufactured goods. He says: “From the point of view of the law of
      value, this efflux does not signify the exploitation of

      agriculture[3]

;

      actually, however, in the same way as the above-mentioned factors, it
      leads to its agronomic (stofflichen) exploitation, to the
      impoverishment of the land in nutritive substances” (S. 211).
    

      As for the agronomic exploitation of the countryside by the town, here too
      Kautsky adheres to one of the fundamental propositions of the theory of
      Marx and Engels, i.e., that the antithesis between town and country
      destroys the necessary correspondence and interdependence between
      agriculture and industry, and that with the transition of capitalism to a
      higher form this antithesis must

      disappear.[4]
    

      Mr. Bulgakov thinks that Kautsky’s opinion on the agronomic exploitation
      of the country by the town is a “strange” one; that, “at
      all events, Kautsky has here stepped on the soil of absolute
      fantasy” (sic!!!). What surprises us is that Mr. Bulgakov
      ignores the fact that Kautsky’s opinion, which he criticises, is identical
      with one of the fundamental ideas of Marx and Engels. The reader would be
      right in concluding that Mr. Bulgakov considers the idea of the abolition
      of the antithesis between town and country to be “absolute fantasy.”
      If such indeed is the critic’s opinion, then we emphatically disagree with
      him and go over to the side of “fantasy” (actually, not to the
      side of fantasy, of course, but to that of a more profound criticism of
      capitalism). The view that the idea of abolishing the antithesis between
      town and country is a fantasy is not new by any means. It is the ordinary
      view of the bourgeois economists. It has even been borrowed by several
      writers with a more profound outlook. For ex ample, Dühring was of
      the opinion that antagonism between town and country “is inevitable
      by the very nature of things.”
    

      Further, Mr. Bulgakov is “astonished” (I) at the fact that
      Kautsky refers to the growing incidence of epidemics among plants and
      animals as one of the difficulties confronting commercial agriculture and
      capitalism. “What has this to do with capitalism...?” asks
      Mr. Bulgakov. “Could any higher social organisation abolish the
      necessity of improving the breeds of cattle?” We in our turn are
      astonished at Mr. Bulgakov’s failure to understand Kautsky’s perfectly
      clear idea. The old breeds of plants and animals created by natural
      selection are being superseded by “improved” breeds created by
      artificial selection. Plants and animals are be coming more susceptible
      and more demanding; with the present means of communication epidemics
      spread with astonishing rapidity. Meanwhile, farming remains individual,
      scattered, frequently small (peasant) farming, lacking knowledge and
      resources. Urban capitalism strives to provide all the resources of modern
      science for the development of the technique of agriculture, but it leaves
      the social position of the producers at the old miserable level; it does
      not systematically and methodically transplant urban culture to the rural
      districts. No higher social organisation will

    

      abolish the necessity of improving the breeds of cattle (and Kautsky, of
      course, did not think of saying anything so absurd); but the more
      technique develops, the more susceptible the breeds of cattle and

      plants[5]

      become, the more the present capitalist social organisation suffers from
      lack of social control and from the degraded state of the peasants and
      workers.
    

      The last “difficulty” confronting commercial agriculture that
      Kautsky mentions is the “depopulation of the countryside,” the
      absorption by the towns of the best, the most energetic and most
      intelligent labour forces. Mr. Bulgakov is of the opinion that in its
      general form this proposition “is at all events incorrect,” that
      “the present development of the urban at the expense of the rural
      population in no sense expresses a law of development of capitalist
      agriculture,” but the migration of the agricultural population of
      industrial, exporting countries overseas, to the colonies. I think that
      Mr. Bulgakov is mistaken. The growth of the urban (more generally:
      industrial) population at the expense of the rural population is
      not only a present-day phenomenon but a general phenomenon which expresses
      precisely the law of capitalism. The theoretical grounds of this
      law are, as I have pointed out

      elsewhere,[6]

      first, that the growth of social division of labour wrests from primitive
      agriculture an increasing number of branches of

      industry,[7]

      and,

    

      secondly, that the variable capital required to work a given plot of land,
      on the whole, diminishes (cf. Das Kapital, III, 2, S. 177;
      Russian translation,

p. 526,[16]
      which I quote In my hook, The
      Development of Capitalism, pp. 4 and

      444[8]

).

      We have indicated above
      that in certain cases and certain periods we observed an increase in the
      variable capital required for the cultivation of a given plot of land; but
      this does not affect the correctness of the general law. Kautsky, of
      course, would not think of denying that not in every case does the
      relative diminution of the agricultural population become absolute
      diminution; that the degree of this absolute diminution is also determined
      by the growth of capitalist colonies. In relevant places in his book
      Kautsky very clearly points to this growth of capitalist colonies which
      flood Europe with cheap grain. (“The flight from the land of the
      rural population (Landflucht) which leads to the depopulation of
      the European countryside, constantly brings, not only to the towns, but
      also to the colonies, fresh crowds of robust country dwellers...” S. 242.)
      The phenomenon of industry depriving agriculture of its strongest, most
      energetic, and most intelligent workers is general, not only in
      industrial, but also In agricultural, countries; not only in Western
      Europe, but also in America and in Russia. The contradiction between the
      culture of the towns and the barbarism of the countryside which capitalism
      creates inevitably leads to this. The “argument” that
      “a decrease in the agricultural population side by side with a
      general increase in the population is inconceivable without the
      importation of large quantities of grain” is, in Mr. Bulgakov’s
      opinion, “obvious.” But in my opinion this argument is not only not
      obvious, but wrong. A decrease in the agricultural population side by side
      with a general increase in the population (growth of the towns) is quite
      conceivable without grain imports (the productivity of agricultural labour
      in creases and this enables a smaller number of workers to produce as much
      as and even more than was formerly produced). A general increase in the
      population parallel with a

    

      decrease in the agricultural population and a decrease (or a
      disproportionate increase) in the quantity of agricultural products is
      also conceivable —“conceivable” because the nourishment
      of the people has deteriorated under capitalism.
    

      Mr. Bulgakov asserts that the increase of the medium- sized peasant farms
      in Germany in the period 1882-95, a fact established by Kautsky, which he
      connected with the other fact that these farms suffer least from a
      shortage of labour, “is capable of shaking the whole
      structure” of Kautsky’s argument. Let us examine Kautsky’s
      statements more closely.
    

      According to agricultural statistics, the largest increase in area in the
      period 1882-95 occurred in the farms of from 5 to 20 hectares. In 1882
      these farms occupied 28.8 per cent of the total area of all farms and in
      1895, 29.9 per cent. This increase in the total area of medium-sized
      peasant farms was accompanied by a decrease in the area of big peasant
      farms (20 to 100 hectares; 1882—31.1 per cent, 1895—30.3 per
      cent). “These figures,” says Kautsky, “glad den the hearts of
      all good citizens who regard the peasantry as the strongest bulwark of the
      present system. ’And so, it does not move, this agriculture,’ they exclaim
      in triumph; ’Marx’s dogma does not apply to it."’ This increase in the
      medium-sized peasant farms is interpreted as the beginning of a new era of
      prosperity for peasant farming.
    

      “But this prosperity is rooted in a bog,” Kautsky replies to these
      good citizens. “It arises, not out of the well-being of the
      peasantry, but out of the depression of agriculture as a
      whole” (230). Shortly before this Kautsky said that, “not
      withstanding all the technical progress which has been made, In some
      places [Kautsky’s italics] there is a decline in agriculture; there
      can be no doubt of that” (228). This decline is leading, for
      example, to the revival of feudalism—to attempts to tie the workers
      to the land and impose certain duties upon them. Is it surprising that
      backward forms of agriculture should revive on the soil of this
      “depression”? That the peasantry, which in general is distinguished
      from workers employed in large-scale production by its lower level of
      requirements, greater ability to starve, and greater exertion while at
      work, can hold out longer during a

    

      crisis?[9]

      “The agrarian crisis affects all agricultural classes that produce
      commodities; it does not stop at the middle peasant” (S. 231).
    

      One would think that all these propositions of Kautsky are so clear that
      it is impossible not to understand them. Nevertheless, the critic has
      evidently failed to understand them. Mr. Bulgakov does not come forward
      with an opinion:
      he does not tell us how he explains this increase in the medium-sized

    

      peasant farms, but he ascribes to Kautsky the opinion that “the
      development of the capitalist mode of production is ruining agriculture.”
      And Mr. Bulgakov exclaims angrily:

      “Kautsky’s assertion that agriculture is being destroyed is wrong,
      arbitrary, unproved, and contradicts all the main facts of reality,” etc.,
      etc.
    

      To this we can only say that Mr. Bulgakov conveys Kautsky’s ideas
altogether incorrectly. Kautsky does not state that the development
of capitalism is ruining agriculture; he says the opposite. Only by
being very inattentive in reading Kautsky’s book can one deduce from his
words on the depression (=crisis) in agriculture and on the technical
retrogression to be observed in some places (nota
bene) that he speaks of the “destruction,” the
“doom” of agriculture. In Chapter X, which deals especially
with the question of over seas competition (i.e., the main reason for
the agrarian crisis), Kautsky says: “The impending crisis, of
course (natürlich), need not necessarily (braucht
nicht) ruin the industry which it affects. It does so only in very
rare cases. As a general rule, a crisis merely causes a change in the
existing property relations in the capitalist sense”
(273-74). This observation made in connection with the crisis in the
agricultural industries clearly reveals Kautsky’s general view of the
significance of a crisis. In the same chapter Kautsky again expresses
the view in relation to the whole of agriculture: “What has been
said above does not give one the least right to speak about the doom of
agriculture (Man braucht deswegen noch langenlcht von einem
Untergang der Landwirtschaft zu sprechen), but where the modern
mode of production has taken a firm hold its conservative character has
disappeared for ever. The continuation of the old routine (das
Verharren beim Alten) means certain ruin for the farmer; he must
constantly watch the development of technique and continuously adapt his
methods of production to the new conditions.... Even in the rural
districts economic life, which hitherto has with strict uniformity moved
in an eternal rut, has dropped into a state of constant
revolutionisation, a state that is characteristic of the capitalist mode
of production” (289).
    

      Mr. Bulgakov “does not understand” how trends toward the
      development of productive forces in agriculture can be combined

    

      with trends that increase the difficulties of commercial agriculture. What
      is there unintelligible in this? Capitalism in both agriculture and
      industry gives an enormous impetus to the development of productive
      forces; but it is precisely this development which, the more it proceeds,
      causes the contradictions of capitalism to become more acute and creates
      new “difficulties” for the system. Kautsky develops one of the
      fundamental ideas of Marx, who categorically emphasised the progressive
      historical role of agricultural capitalism (the rationalisation of
      agriculture, the separation of the land from the farmer, the emancipation
      of the rural population from the relations of master and slave, etc.), at
      the same time no less categorically pointing to the impoverishment and
      oppression of the direct producers and to the fact that capitalism is
      incompatible with the requirements of rational agriculture. It is very
      strange indeed that Mr. Bulgakov, who admits that his “general
      social-philosophic world outlook is the same as

      Kautsky’s,”[10]

      should fail
      to note that Kautsky here develops a fundamental idea of Marx. The readers
      of Nachalo must inevitably remain in perplexity over
      Mr. Bulgakov’s attitude towards these fundamental ideas and wonder how, in
      view of the identity of their general world outlook, he can say:
      “De principiis non est

disputandum”!!?[11]

      We permit
      ourselves not to believe Mr. Bulgakov’s statement; we consider that an
      argument between him and other Marxists is possible precisely because of
      the community of these “principia.” In saying that
      capitalism rationalises agriculture and that industry provides machinery
      for agriculture, etc., Mr. Bulgakov merely repeats one of these
      “principia.” Only he should not have said “quite the
      opposite” in this connection. Readers might think that Kautsky holds
      a different opinion, whereas he very emphatically and definitely develops
      these fundamental ideas of Marx in his book. He says: “It is
      precisely industry which has created the technical and scientific
      conditions for new, rational agriculture. It is precisely industry which
      has revolutionised agriculture by means of machines

    

      and artificial fertilisers, by means of the microscope and the chemical
      laboratory, giving rise in this way to the technical superiority of
      large-scale capitalist production over small- scale, peasant
      production” (S. 292). Thus, Kautsky does not fall into the
      contradiction in which we find Mr. Bulgakov bogged: on the one hand,
      Mr. Bulgakov admits that “capitalism [i.e., production carried on
      with the aid of wage- labour, i.e., not peasant, but large-scale
      production?] rationalises agriculture,” while on the other, he argues that
      “it is not large-scale production which is the vehicle of this
      technical progress”!

II

      Chapter X of Kautsky’s book deals with the question of overseas
      competition and the industrialisation of agriculture. Mr. Bulgakov treats
      this chapter in a very offhand manner: “Nothing particularly new or
      original, more or less well-known main facts,” etc., he says, leaving in
      the background the fundamental question of the conception of the agrarian
      crisis, its essence and significance. And yet this question is of enormous
      theoretical importance.
    

      The conception of the agrarian crisis inevitably follows from the general
      conception of agrarian evolution which Marx presented and on which Kautsky
      enlarges in detail. Kautsky sees the essence of the agrarian crisis in the
      fact that, owing to the competition of countries which produce very cheap
      grain, agriculture in Europe has lost the opportunity of shifting to the
      masses of consumers the burdens imposed on it by the private ownership of
      land and capitalist commodity production. From now on agriculture in
      Europe “must itself bear them [these burdens], and this
      is what the present agrarian crisis amounts to” (S. 239,
      Kautsky’s italics). Ground rent is the main burden. In Europe, ground rent
      has been raised by preceding historical development to an extremely high
      level (both differential and absolute rent) and is fixed in the
      price of

      land.[12]

      On the other hand, in

    

      the colonies (America, Argentina, and others), insofar as they remain
      colonies, we see free land occupied by new settlers, either
      entirely gratis or for an insignificant price; more over, the virginal
      fertility of this land reduces production costs to a minimum. Up to now,
      capitalist agriculture in Europe has quite naturally transferred the
      burden of excessively high rents to the consumer (in the form of high
      grain prices); now, however, the burden of these rents falls upon the
      farmers and the landowners themselves and ruins

      them.[13]

      Thus, the agrarian
      crisis has upset, and continues to upset, the prosperity which capitalist
      landed property and capitalist agriculture formerly enjoyed. Hitherto
      capitalist landed property has exacted an ever-increasing tribute from
      social development; and it fixed the level of this tribute in the price of
      land. Now it has to forego this

      tribute.[14]

      Capitalist agriculture has now
      been reduced to the state of instability that is characteristic of
      capitalist industry and is compelled to adapt itself to new market
      conditions. Like every crisis, the agrarian crisis is ruining a large
      number of farmers, is bringing about important changes in the established
      property relations, and in some places is leading to technical
      retrogression, to the revival of medieval relations and forms of
      economy. Taken as a whole, however, it is accelerating social
      evolution, ejecting patriarchal stagnation from its last refuge, and
      making necessary the further specialisation of agriculture (a principal
      factor of agricultural progress in capitalist society), the further
      application of machinery, etc. On the whole, as Kautsky shows by data

    

      for several countries, in Chapter IV of his book, even in Western
      Europe, instead of the stagnation in agriculture in the period 1880-90, we
      see technical progress. We say even in Western Europe, because in
      America, for example, this progress is still more marked.
    

      In short, there are no grounds for regarding the agrarian crisis as an
      obstacle to capitalism and capitalist development.
    

 
Notes
 

[1]

      Kautsky emphatically expressed his opposition to every medieval
      restriction upon the mobilisation of the land, to entailment
      (fideicommissum, Anerbenrecht), and to the preservation of the
      medieval peasant commune (S. 332), etc.
    —Lenin

[2]

      Cf. also S. 214, where Kautsky discusses the role urban capital plays in
      the rationalisation of agriculture.
    —Lenin

[3]

      Let the reader compare Kautsky’s clear statement as quoted above with the
      following “critical” remark by Mr. Bulgakov: “If Kautsky
      regards the giving of grain to the non-agricultural population by direct
      grain p reducers as exploitation,” etc. One cannot believe that a critic
      who has read Kautsky’s book at all attentively could have written that
      “if”!
    —Lenin

[4]

      It goes without saying that the opinion that it is necessary to abolish
      the antithesis between town and country in a society of associated
      producers does not in the least contradict the admission that the
      attraction of the population to industry from agriculture plays a
      historically progressive role. I had occasion to discuss this
      elsewhere (Studies, p. 81, footnote 69). (See present edition,
      Vol. 2, p. 229.—Ed.)
    —Lenin

[5]

      That is why in the practical part of his book Kautsky recommends the
      sanitary inspection of cattle and of the conditions of their maintenance
      (S. 397).
    —Lenin

[6]

The Development of Capitalism in Russia, Chapter I, Section II,
      and Chapter VIII, Section II. (See present edition,
      Vol. 3.—Ed.)
    —Lenin

[7]

      Pointing to this circumstance, Mr. Bulgakov says that “the
      agricultural population may diminish relatively [his italics]
      even when agriculture is flourishing.” Not only “may,” but
      necessarily must in capitalist society.... “The relative
      diminution [of the agricultural population] merely (sic!)
      indicates here a growth of new branches of people’s labour,” concludes
      Mr. Bulgakov.That “merely” is very strange. New branches of
      industry do actually withdraw “the most energetic and most
      intelligent labour forces” from agriculture. Thus, this simple
      reason is sufficient to enable one to accept Kautsky’s general thesis as
      being fully correct: the relative diminution of the
      rural population sufficiently confirms the correctness of the general
      thesis (that capitalism withdraws the most energetic and most intelligent
      labour forces from agriculture).
    —Lenin

[8]

      See present edition, Vol. 3, pp. 40, 561.—Ed.
    

[9]

      Kautsky says elsewhere: “The small farmers hold out longer in a
      hopeless position. We have every reason to doubt that this is an advantage
      of small-scale production” (S. 134).
    

      In passing, let us mention data fully confirming Kautsky’s view that are
      given by Koenig in his book, in which he describes in detail the condition
      of English agriculture in a number of typical counties (Die Lage der
      englischen Landwirtschaft, etc. [The Condition of English Agriculture,
      etc.], Jena, 1896, von Dr. F. Koenig). In this book we find any
      amount of evidence of overwork and under-consumption on the part of
      the small farmers, as compared with hired labourers, but no evidence of
      the opposite. We read, for instance, that the small farms pay
      “because of immence

      (ungeheuer) 

      diligence and frugality” (88); the farm buildings of the small
      farmers are inferior (107); the small landowners (yeoman farmers
      [these words are in English in the original.—Ed.])are worse
      off than the tenant farmers (149); “their conditions are very
      miserable (in Lincolnshire), their cottages being worse than those of the
      labourers employed on the big farms, and some are in a very bad state. The
      small landowners work harder and for longer hours than ordinary labourers,
      but they earn less. They live more poorly and eat less meat ... their sons
      and daughters work without pay and are badly clothed”
      (157). “The small farmers work like slaves; in the sum mer they
      often work from 3 a.m. to 9 p.m.” (a report of the Chamber of Agriculture
      in Boston, S. 158). “Without a doubt,” says a big farmer, “the
      small man (der kleine Mann), who has little capital and on whose
      farm all the work is done by members of his family, finds it easier to cut
      down housekeeping expenses, while the big farmer must feed his labourers
      equally well in bad years and good” (218). The small farmers (in
      Ayrshire) “are extraordinarily (ungeheuer) diligent; their
      wives and children do no less, and often more, work than the day
      labourers; it is said that two of them will do as much work in a day as
      three hired labourers” (231). “The life of the small tenant
      farmer, who must work with his whole family, is the life of a slave”
      (253). “Taken as a whole... the small farmers have evidently
      withstood the crisis better than the big farmers; but this does not imply
      that the small farm is more profitable. The reason, in our opinion, is
      that the small man (der kleine Mann) utilises the unpaid
      assistance of his family.... Usually ... the whole family of the small
      farmer works on the farm.... The children are fed and clothed, and only
      rarely do they get a definite daily wage” (277-78), etc., etc.
    —Lenin

[10]

      As for the philosophic world outlook, we do not know whether what
      Mr. Bulgakov says is true. Kautsky does not seem to be an adherent of the
      critical philosophy, as Mr. Bulgakov is.
    —Lenin

[11]

      In matters of principle there is no disputing.—Ed.
    

[12]

      For the process of inflating and fixing rent see the
      apt remarks of Parvus in The World Market and the Agricultural
      Crisis. Parvus shares Kautsky’s main views on the crisis and on the
      agrarian question generally.
    —Lenin

[13]

      Parvus, op. cit., p. 141, quoted in a review of Parvus’ book in
      Nachalo, No. 3, p. 117. (See present volume,
      p. 66.—Ed.) We should add that the other
      “difficulties” of commercial agriculture confronting Europe
      affect the colonies to an incomparably smaller degree.
    —Lenin

[14]

      Absolute rent is the result of monopoly. “Fortunately, there is a
      limit to the raising of absolute rent....Until recent times it rose
      steadily in Europe in the same way as differential rent. But overseas
      competition bas undermined this monopoly to a very considerable extent. We
      have no grounds for thinking that differential rent in Europe has suffered
      as a result of overseas competition, except for a few counties in
      England.... But absolute rent has dropped, and this has benefited (zu
      gute gekommen) primarily the working classes” (S. 80; cf. also
      S. 328).
    —Lenin
 



[15]

Fideicommissum—entailment of an estate. Under this system a
      landed estate passed to the eldest son of the testator and could not be
      mortgaged; divided, or sold in parte or in toto.
    

Anerbenrecht—a peasant variant of fideicommissum
      which gave the landed proprietor a somewhat greater right in respect of
      the inherited estate but which forbade the division of the
      inheritance. p. 146
    



[16]

      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. III, Moscow, 1959, p. 622.
    

 
  

First Article

|


  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 4

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Reply to Mr. P. Nezhdanov









Lenin: Reply to Mr. P. Nezhdanov







V. I.  

      Lenin
Reply to Mr. P. Nezhdanov




Written: Written in May 1899 

Published:

      Published in December 1899 in the magazine Zhizn.

      Signed: Vladimir Ilyin.

      Published according to the text in the magazine.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 4,

      pages 160-166.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

      
• README



    

    

      In Issue No. 4 of Zhizn, Mr. P. Nezhdanov examined articles by me
      and other authors on the market theory. I intend to reply to only one of
      Mr. Nezhdanov’s assertions— that in my article in Nauchnoye
      Obozreniye, issue No. I for this year, I “distorted my struggle
      against the theory of third persons.” As far as the other questions are
      concerned, those raised by Mr. P. Nezhdanov in respect of the market
      theory and, in particular, of P. B. Struve’s views, I shall confine myself
      to a reference to my article in reply to Struve (“Once More on the
      Theory of Realisation”; the delay in its publication in
      Nauchnoye Obozreniye was due to circumstances over which the
      author had no control).

    

      Mr. P. Nezhdanov maintains that “capitalist production does not
      suffer from any contradiction between production and consumption.” From
      this he concludes that Marx, in recognising this contradiction,
      “suffered from a serious internal contradiction” and that I
      am repeating Marx’s error.

    

      I believe Mr. Nezhdanov’s opinion to be a mistaken one (or one based on
      a misunderstanding) and cannot see any contradiction in Marx’s views.

    

      Mr. P. Nezhdanov’s assertion that there is no contradiction between
      production and consumption in capitalism is so strange that it is only
      to be explained by the very special meaning that he attaches to
      the concept “contradiction.” Mr. P. Nezhdanov is of the opinion
      that “if there really were a contradiction between production and
      consumption that contradiction would provide a regular
      surplus-product” (p. 301; the same in the final theses,
      p. 316). This is an utterly

    

      arbitrary and, in my opinion, utterly incorrect interpretation. In
      criticising my assertions on the contradiction between production and
      consumption in capitalist society, Mr.

      P. Nezhdanov should (I think) have told the reader how I understand that
      contradiction and should not have limited himself to an exposition of
      his own views on the essence and significance of that contradiction. The
      whole essence of the question (which has given rise to
      Mr. P. Nezhdanov’s polemic against me) is that I understand the
      contradiction under discussion quite differently from the way in which
      Mr. P. Nezhdanov wishes to understand it. I did not say anywhere that
      this contradiction should

      regularly[1]

      produce a surplus-product; I do not think so and such a view cannot be
      deduced from Marx’s words. The contradiction between production and
      consumption that is inherent in capitalism is due to the tremendous rate
      at which production is growing, to the tendency to unlimited expansion
      which competition gives it, while consumption (individual), if it grows
      at all, grows very slightly; the proletarian condition of the masses of
      the people makes a rapid growth of individual consumption impossible. It
      seems to me that any one reading carefully pages 20 and 30 of my
      Studies (the article on the Sismondists cited by
      Mr. P. Nezhdanov) and page 40 of Nauchnoye Obozreniye (1899,

      No. 1)[2]

      can convince himself that, from the outset, I gave only this
meaning to the contradiction between production and consumption in
      capitalism. Indeed, no other meaning can be ascribed to this
      contradiction by one who adheres strictly to Marx’s theory. The
      contradiction between production and consumption that is inherent in
      capitalism consists only in this, that the growth of the national wealth
      proceeds side by side with the growth of the people’s poverty; that the
      productive forces of society increase without a corresponding increase
      in consumption by the people, without the employment of these productive
      forces for the benefit of the working masses. The contradiction

    

      under discussion, understood in this sense, is a fact that does not. admit
      of any doubt and that is confirmed by the daily experience of millions of
      people, and it is the observation of this fact that leads the working men
      to the views that have found a full scientific expression in Marx’s
      theory. This contradiction does not, by any means, lead inevitably to the
      regular production of a surplus-product (as Mr. Nezhdanov would like to
      think). We can quite well imagine (if we argue from a purely theoretical
      standpoint about an ideal capitalist society) the realisation of the
      entire product in a capitalist society without any surplus-product,
      but we cannot imagine capitalism without a disparity between
      production and consumption. This disparity is expressed (as Marx has
      demonstrated clearly in his Schemes) by the fact that the production of
      the means of production can and must out strip the production of articles
      of consumption.

    

      Mr. Nezhdanov, therefore, was completely mistaken in his deduction that
      the contradiction between production and consumption must regularly
      provide a surplus-product, and this mistake led to his unjustly accusing
      Marx of inconsistency. Marx, on the contrary, remains consistent when he
      shows:
    

      1) that the product can be realised in a capitalist society (it goes
      without saying that this is true if proportionality between the various
      branches of industry is assumed); that it would be incorrect to introduce
      foreign trade or “third persons” to explain this realisation;
    

      2) that the theories of the petty-bourgeois economists (à la
      Proudhon) on the impossibility of realising surplus-value are based
      on a complete misunderstanding of the very process of realisation in general;
    

      3) that even with fully proportional, ideally smooth realisation we cannot
      imagine capitalism without a contradiction between production and
      consumption, without the tremendous growth of production being accompanied
      by an extremely slow growth (or even stagnation and worsening) of consumption
      by the people. Realisation is due more to means of production than to
      articles of consumption—this is obvious from Marx’s Schemes; and from
      this, in turn, it follows inevitably that “the more productiveness
      develops, the more it finds itself at variance with the narrow basis on

    

      which the conditions of consumption rest”

      (Marx).[8]

      it is obvious from all the passages in Capital devoted to the
      contradiction between production and

      consumption[3]

      that it is only in this sense that Marx understood the
      contradiction between production and consumption.
    

      Incidentally, Mr. P. Nezhdanov is of the opinion that Mr. Tugan-Baranovsky also
      denies the contradiction between production and consumption in a capitalist
      society. I do not know whether this is true. Mr. Tugan-Baranovsky himself
      introduced into his book a scheme showing the possibility of the growth of
      production accompanied by a contraction of consumption (which, of course, is
      possible and actual under capitalism). How can one deny that we see here a
      contradiction between production and consumption, although there is no
      surplus-product?
    

      In charging Marx (and me) with inconsistency, Mr. P. Nezhdanov also lost
      sight of the fact that he should have explained, as a basis for his
      viewpoint, how one should understand the “independence” of the
      production of means of production from the production of articles of
      consumption. According to Marx, this “independence” is limited
      to the following: a certain (and constantly growing) part of the product
      which consists of means of production is realised by ex changes within the
      given department, i.e., exchanges of means of production for means of
      production (or the use of the product obtained, in

natura,[4]

      for fresh production); but in the final analysis the manufacture
      of means of production is necessarily bound up with that of articles of
      consumption, since the former are not manufactured for their own sake, but
      only because more and more means of production are demand ed by the
      branches of industry manufacturing articles of

      consumption.[5]

      The views of the petty-bourgeois economists, therefore, do not differ from
      those of Marx because the

    

      former recognised in general the connection between production and
      consumption in a capitalist society while the latter denied in general
      that connection (which would be absurd). The difference is that the
      petty-bourgeois economists considered this connection between production
      and consumption to be a direct one, that they thought
      production follows consumption. Marx showed that this connection
      is an indirect one, that it only makes itself felt in the
      final analysis, because in capitalist society consumption follows
      production. But the connection nevertheless exists, even if it is
      indirect; consumption must, in the final analysis, follow production,
      and. if the productive forces are driving towards an unlimited growth of
      production, while consumption is restricted by the proletarian condition
      of the masses of the people, there is undoubtedly a contradiction
      present. This contradiction does not signify the impossibility of

      capitalism,[6]

      but it does signify that its transformation to a higher form is a
      necessity:

      the stronger this contradiction becomes, the more developed become the
      objective conditions for this transformation, as well as the subjective
      conditions, i.e., the workers’ consciousness of this contradiction.
    

      The question now arises: what position could Mr. Nezhdanov adopt on the
      question of the “independence” of the means of production as
      regards articles of consumption? One of two: either he will completely
      deny any dependence between them, will assert the possibility of realising
      means of production that are in no way connected with articles of
      consumption, that are not connected even in “the final
      analysis”—in which case he will inevitably descend to the
      absurd, or he will admit, following Marx, that in the final analysis means
      of production are connected with articles of consumption, in which case he
      must admit the correctness of my understanding of Marx’s theory.
    

      In conclusion, let me take an example to illustrate these abstract
      arguments with concrete data. It is known that in any capitalist society
      exceptionally low wages (=the low

    

      level of consumption by the masses of the people) often hinder the
      employment of machinery. What is more, it even happens that machines
      acquired by entrepreneurs are in disuse because the price of labour drops
      so low that manual labour becomes more profitable to the

      owner![7]

      The existence of a contradiction between consumption and production,
      between the drive of capitalism to develop the productive forces to an
      unlimited extent and the limitation of this drive by the proletarian
      condition, the poverty and unemployment of the people, is, in this case,
      as clear as daylight. But it is no less clear that it is correct to draw
      one single conclusion from this contradiction—that the development
      of the productive forces themselves must, with irresistible force, lead to
      the replacement of capitalism by an economy of associated producers. It
      would, on the other hand, be utterly incorrect to draw from this
      contradiction the conclusion that capitalism must regularly
      provide a surplus-product, i.e., that capitalism cannot, in general,
      realise the product, and can, therefore, play no progressive historical
      role, and so on.
    

 
Notes
 

[1]

I stress regularly because the irregular production of a
surplus-product (crises) is inevitable in capitalist society as a result
of the disturbance in proportion between the various branches of
industry. But a certain state of consumption is one of the elements of
proportion.
      —Lenin

[2]

See present edition, Vol. 2, pp. 155 and 167 and pp. 58-59 of the
present volume.—Ed.
    

[3]

      These passages are quoted in my article in Nauchnoye Obozreniye,
1899, No. I (see present volume, p. 56, et
seq.—Ed.)  and are repeated in the first chapter of
The Development of Capitalism in Russia, pp. 18-19. (See
present edition, Vol. 3, p. 5657.—Ed.)
    —Lenin

[4]

      In its natural form.—Ed.
    

[5]

Das Kapital, III, 1,

      289. [9]

      Quoted by me in Nauchnoye Obozreniye, p. 40 (see present volume,
p. 59.—Ed.), and in The Development of
Capitalism, 17. (See present edition, Vol. 3,
p. 55.—Ed.)
    —Lenin

[6]

Studies, p. 20 (see present edition, Vol. 2, p. 155.—Ed.);
      Nauchnoye Obozreniye, No. 1, p. 41 (see present volume,
      p. 60.—Ed.); The Development of Capitalism,
      pp. 19-20. (See present edition, Vol. 3, p. 58.—Ed.) If this
      contradiction were to lead to “a regular surplus product,” it would
      signify precisely the impossibility of capitalism.
    —Lenin

[7]

      I bring an instance of this phenomenon in the sphere of Russian capitalist
      agriculture in The Development of Capitalism In Russia, page
      165. (See present edition, Vol. 3, p. 234.—Ed.) Similar
      phenomena are not individual instances but are the usual and
      inevitable consequences of the basic features of capitalism,
    —Lenin
 



[8]

      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. III, Moscow, 1959, p. 240.
    



[9]

      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. III, Moscow, 1959, p. 299.
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 4

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## A Protest by Russian Social-Democrats









Lenin: A Protest by Russian Social-Democrats







V. I.  

      Lenin
A Protest by Russian Social-Democrats[2]




Written: Written at the end of August–beginning of September 1899 

Published:

      First published abroad in December 1899 as the separate reprints from No. 4–5 of the magazine Rabocheye Dyelo[3].

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 4,

      pages 167-182.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.
Other Formats:  
Text
• README



    

    
    


    

    
      A MEETING OF SOCIAL-DEMOCRATS, SEVENTEEN IN NUMBER, HELD AT A CERTAIN
      PLACE (IN RUSSIA), ADOPTED UNANIMOUSLY THE FOLLOWING RESOLUTION
      AND RESOLVED TO PUBLISH IT AND TO SUBMIT IT TO ALL COMRADES FOR THEIR
      CONSIDERATION
    

      A tendency has been observed among Russian Social-Democrats recently to
      depart from the fundamental principles of Russian Social-Democracy that
      were proclaimed by its founders and foremost fighters, members of the
      Emancipation of Labour

      group[4]
      as well as by the Social-Democratic publications of the
      Russian workers’ organisations of the nineties. The Credo reproduced
      below, which is presumed to express the fundamental Views of certain
      (“young”) Russian

      Social- Democrats, 

      represents an attempt at a systematic
      and definite exposition of the “new views.” The following is its full
      text:
    


      “The guild and manufacture period in the West laid a sharp impress on
      all subsequent history and particularly on the history of Social-
      Democracy. The fact that the bourgeoisie had to fight for free forms, that
      it strove to release itself from the guild regulations fettering
      production, made the bourgeoisie a revolutionary element; everywhere in
      the West it began with liberté, fraternité,
      égalité (liberty, fraternity, equality), with the
      achievement of free political forms. By these gains, however, as Bismarck
      expressed it, it drew a bill on the future payable to its
      antipode—the working class. Hardly anywhere in the West did the
      working class, as a class, win the democratic institutions—it made
      use of them. Against this it may he argued that the working class took
      part in revolutions. A reference to history will refute this opinion, for,
      precisely in 1848, when the consolidation of Constitutions took place in
      the West, the working class represented the urban artisan element, the
      petty-bourgeois democracy; a factory proletariat hardly existed,

    

      while the proletariat employed in large-scale industry (the German weavers
      depicted by Hauptmann, the weavers of Lyons) represented a wild mass
      capable only of rioting, but not of advancing any political demands. It
      can be definitely stated that the Constitutions of 1848 were won by the
      bourgeoisie and the small urban artisans. On the other hand, the working
      class (artisans, manufactory workers, printers, weavers, watchmakers,
      etc.) have been accustomed since the Middle Ages to membership in
      organisations, mutual benefit societies, religious societies, etc. This
      spirit of organisation is still alive among the skilled workers in the
      West, sharply distinguishing them from the factory proletariat, which
      submits to organisation badly and slowly and is capable only of
      lose-organisation (temporary organisations) and not of permanent
      organisations with rules and regulations. It was these manufactory skilled
      workers that comprised the core of the Social-Democratic parties. Thus,
      we get the picture: on the one hand, the relative ease of political
      struggle and every possibility for it; on the other hand, the possibility
      for the systematic organisation of this struggle with the aid of the
      workers trained in the manufacturing period. It was on this basis that
      theoretical and practical Marxism grew up in the West. The starting-point
      was the parliamentary political struggle with the prospect—only
      superficially resembling Blanquism, but of totally different
      origin—of capturing power, on the one hand, and of a
      Zusammenbruch (collapse), on the other. Marxism was the
      theoretical expression of the prevailing practice: of the political
      struggle predominating over the economic. In Belgium, in France, and
      particularly in Germany, the workers organised the political struggle with
      incredible ease; but it was with enormous difficulty and tremendous
      friction that they organised the economic struggle. Even to this day the
      economic organisations as compared with the political organisations
      (leaving aside England) are extraordinarily weak and unstable, and
      everywhere laissent à désirer quelque chose (leave
      something to be desired). So long as the energy in the political struggle
      had not been completely exhausted, Zusammenbruch was an essential
      organisational Schlagwort (slogan) destined to play an extremely
      important historical role. The fundamental law that can be discerned by
      studying the working-class movement is that of the line of least
      resistance. In the West, this line was political activity, and Marxism, as
      formulated in the Communist Manifesto, was the best possible form
      the movement could assume. But when all energy in political activity had
      been exhausted, when the political movement had reached a point of
      intensity difficult and almost impossible to surpass (the slow increase in
      votes in the recent period, the apathy of the public at meetings, the note
      of despondency in literature), this, in conjunction with the
      ineffectiveness of parliamentary action and the entry into the arena of
      the ignorant masses, of the unorganised and almost unorganisable factory
      proletariat, gave rise in the West to what is now called

      Bernsteinism,[5]
      the crisis of Marxism. It is difficult to imagine a more logical course
      than the period of development of the labour movement from the
      Communist Manifesto to Bernsteinism, and a careful study of this
      whole process can determine with astronomical exactitude the outcome of
      this “crisis.” Here, of course, the issue is not the defeat or

    

      victory of Bernsteinism—that is of little interest; It is the
      radical change in practical activity that has been gradually taking place
      for a long time within the party.
    

      “The change will not only be towards a more energetic prosecution of
      the economic struggle and consolidation of the economic organisations, but
      also, and most importantly, towards a change in the party’s attitude to
      other opposition parties. Intolerant Marxism, negative Marxism, primitive
      Marxism (whose conception of the class division of society is too
      schematic) will give way to democratic Marxism, and the social position of
      the party within modern society must undergo a sharp change. The party
      will recognise society; its narrow corporative and, in the
      majority of cases, sectarian tasks will be widened to social tasks, and
      its striving to seize power will be transformed into a striving for
      change, a striving to reform present-day society on democratic lines
      adapted to the present state of affairs, with the object of protecting the
      rights (all rights) of the labouring classes In the most effective and
      fullest way. The concept ’politics’ will be enlarged and will acquire a
      truly social meaning, and the practical demands of the moment will
      acquire greater weight and will be able to count on receiving greater
      attention than they have been getting up to now.
    

      “It is not difficult to draw conclusions for Russia from this brief
      description of the course of development taken by the working-class
      movement in the West. In Russia, the line of least resistance will never
      tend towards political activity. The incredible political oppression will
      prompt much talk about it and cause attention to be concentrated precisely
      on this question, but it will never prompt practical action. While in the
      West the fact that the workers were drawn into political activity served
      to strengthen and crystallise their weak forces, in Russia, on the
      contrary, these weak forces are confronted with a wall of political
      oppression. Not only do they lack practical ways of struggle against this
      oppression, and hence, also for their own development, but they are
      systematically stifled and cannot give forth even weak shoots. If to this
      we add that the working class in our country has not inherited the spirit
      of organisation which distinguished the fighters in the West, we get a
      gloomy picture, one that is likely to drive into despondency the most
      optimistic Marxist who believes that an extra factory chimney stack will
      by the very fact of its existence bring great welfare. The economic
      struggle too is hard, infinitely hard, but it is possible to wage it, and
      it is in fact being waged by the masses themselves. By learning in this
      struggle to organise, and coming into constant conflict with the political
      regime in the course of it, the Russian worker will at last create what
      may be called a form of the labour movement, the organisation or
      organisations best conforming to Russian conditions. At the present, it
      can be said with certainty that the Russian working-class movement is
      still in the amoeba state and has not yet acquired any form. The strike
      movement, which goes on with any form of organisation, cannot yet be
      described as the crystallised form of the, Russian movement, while the
      illegal organisations are not worth consideration even from the mere
      quantitative point of view (quite apart from the question of their
      usefulness under present conditions).
    
 

      “Such is the situation. If to this we add the famine and the process
      of ruination of the countryside, which facilitate

      Streikbrecher-ism[1]

      and, consequently, the even greater
      difficulty of raising the masses of the workers to a more tolerable
      cultural level, then ... well, what is there for the Russian Marxist to
      do?! The talk about an independent workers’ political party merely results
      from the transplantation of alien aims and alien achievements to our
      soil. The Russian Marxist, so far, is a sad spectacle. His practical tasks
      at the present time are paltry, his theoretical knowledge, insofar as he
      utilises it not as an instrument br research but as a schema for
      activity, is worthless for the purpose of fulfilling even these paltry
      practical tasks. Moreover, these borrowed patterns are harmful from the
      practical point of view. Our Marxists, forgetting that the working class
      in the West entered political activity after that field had already been
      cleared, are much too contemptuous of the radical or liberal opposition
      activity of all other non-worker strata of society. The slightest attempt
      to concentrate attention on public manifestations of a liberal political
      character rouses the protest of the orthodox Marxists, who forget that a
      number of historical conditions prevent us from being Western Marxists and
      demand of us a different Marxism, suited to, and necessary in, Russian
      conditions. Obviously, the lack in even Russian citizen of political
      feeling and sense cannot be compensated by talk about politics or by
      appeals to a non-existent force.This political sense can only be acquired
      through education, i.e., through participation in that life (however
      un-Marxian it may be) which is offered by Russian conditions. ’Negation’
      is as harmful in Russia as it was appropriate (temporarily) in the West,
      because negation proceeding from something organised and possessing real
      power is one thing, while negation proceeding from an amorphous mass of
      scattered individuals is another.

    

      “For the Russian Marxist there is only one course: participation in,
      i.e., assistance to, the economic struggle of the proletariat, and
      participation in liberal opposition activity. As a ’negator,’ the Russian
      Marxist came on the scene very early, and this negation has weakened the
      share of his energy that should be turned in the direction of political
      radicalism. For the time being, this is not terrible; but if the class
      schema prevents the Russian intellectual from taking an active part in
      life and keeps him too far removed from opposition circles, it will be a
      serious loss to all who are compelled to fight for legal forms separately
      from the working class, which has not yet put forward political aims. The
      political innocence concealed behind the cerebrations of the Russian
      Marxist intellectual on political topics may play mischief with him.”
    


      We do not know whether there are many Russian Social-Democrats who share
      these views. But there is no doubt that ideas of this kind have their
      adherents, and we therefore

    

      feel obliged to protest categorically against such views and to warn all
      comrades against the menacing deflection of Russian Social-Democracy from
      the path it has already marked out—the formation of an independent
      political working-class party which is inseparable from the class struggle
      of the proletariat and which has for its immediate aim the winning of
      political freedom.
    

      The above-quoted Credo represents, first, “a brief description
      of the course of development taken by the working-class movement in the West,”
      and, secondly, “conclusions for Russia.”
    

      First of all, the authors of the Credo have an entirely false
      concept.ion of the history of the West-European working-class movement. It
      is not true to say that the working class in the West did not take part in
      the struggle for political liberty and in political revolutions. The
      history of the Chartist movement and the revolutions of 1848 in France,
      Germany, and Austria prove the opposite. It is absolutely untrue to say
      that “Marxism was the theoretical expression of the prevailing
      practice: of the political struggle predominating over the economic.” On
      the contrary, “Marxism” appeared at a time when non-political
      socialism prevailed (Owenism, “Fourierism,” “true socialism”)
      and the Communist Manifesto took up the cudgels at once against
      non-political socialism. Even when Marxism came out fully armed with
      theory (Capital) and organised the celebrated International
      Working Men’s

      Association,[6]
      the political struggle was by no means the prevailing practice (narrow
      trade-unionism in England, anarchism and Proudhonism in the Romance
      countries). In Germany the great historic service performed by Lassalle
      was the transformation of the working class from an appendage of the
      liberal bourgeoisie into an independent political party. Marxism linked up
      the economic and the political struggle of the working class into a single
      inseparable whole; and the effort of the authors of the Credo to
      separate these forms of struggle is one of their most clumsy and
      deplorable departures from Marxism.
    

      Further, the authors of the Credo also have an entirely wrong
      conception of the present state of the West-European working-class
      movement and of the theory of Marxism, under the banner of which that
      movement is marching.

    

      To talk about a “crisis of Marxism” is merely to repeat the
      nonsense of the bourgeois hacks who are doing all they can to exacerbate
      every disagreement among the socialists and turn it into a split in the
      socialist parties. The notorious Bernsteinism—in the sense in which
      it is commonly understood by the general public, and by the authors of the
      Credo in particular—is an attempt to narrow the theory of
      Marxism, to convert the revolutionary workers’ party into a reformist
      party. As was to be expected, this attempt has been strongly condemned by
      the majority of the German Social-Democrats. Opportunist trends have
      repeatedly manifested themselves in the ranks of German Social-Democracy,
      and on every occasion they have been repudiated by the Party, which
      loyally guards the principles of revolutionary international
      Social-Democracy. We are convinced that every attempt to transplant
      opportunist views to Russia will encounter equally determined resistance
      on the part of the overwhelming majority of Russian Social-Democrats.
    

      Similarly, there can be no suggestion of a “radical change in the
      practical activity” of the West—European workers parties, in
      spite of what the authors of the Credo say: the tremendous
      importance of the economic struggle of the proletariat, and the necessity
      for such a struggle, were recognised by Marxism from the very outset. As
      early as the forties Marx and Engels conducted a polemic against the
      utopian socialists who denied the importance of this

      struggle.[7]


      When the International Working Men’s Association was formed about twenty
      years later, the question of the importance of trade unions and of the
      economic struggle was raised at its very first Congress, in Geneva, in
      1866. The resolution adopted at that Congress spoke explicitly of the
      importance of the economic struggle and warned the socialists and the
      workers, on the one hand, against exaggerating its importance (which the
      English workers were inclined to do at that time) and, on the other,
      against underestimating its importance (which the French and the Germans,
      particularly the Lassalleans, were inclined to do). The resolution
      recognised that the trade unions were not only a natural, but also an
      essential phenomenon under capitalism and considered them an extremely
      important means for organising the working class in its daily struggle
      against capital and

    

      for the abolition of wage-labour. The resolution declared that the trade
      unions must not devote attention exclusively to the “immediate
      struggle against capital,” must not remain aloof from the general
      political and social movement of the working class; they must not pursue
      “narrow” aims, but must strive for the general emancipation of the
      millions of oppressed workers. Since then the workers’ parties in the
      various countries have discussed the question many times and, of course,
      will discuss it again and again—whether to devote more or less
      attention at any given moment to the economic or to the political struggle
      of the proletariat; but the general question, or the question in
      principle, today remains as it was presented by Marxism. The conviction
      that the class struggle must necessarily combine the political and the
      economic struggle into one integral whole has entered into the flesh and
      blood of international Social-Democracy. The experience of history has,
      furthermore, incontrovertibly proved that absence of freedom, or
      restriction of the political rights of the proletariat, always make it
      necessary to put the political struggle in the forefront.
    

      Still less can there be any suggestion of a serious change in the attitude
      of the workers’ party towards the other opposition parties. In this
      respect, too, Marxism has mapped out the correct line, which is equally
      remote from exaggerating the importance of politics, from conspiracy
      (Blanquism, etc.), and from decrying politics or reducing it to
      opportunist, reformist social tinkering (anarchism, utopian and petty-
      bourgeois socialism, state socialism, professorial socialism, etc.). The
      proletariat must strive to form independent political workers’ parties,
      the main aim of which must be the capture of political power by the
      proletariat for the purpose of organising socialist society. The
      proletariat must not regard the other classes and parties as “one
      reactionary

      mass”[8];
      on the contrary, it must take part in all political and social life,
      support the progressive classes and parties against the reactionary
      classes and parties, support every revolutionary movement against the
      existing system, champion the interests of every oppressed nationality
      or race, of every persecuted religion, of the disfranchised sex, etc. The
      arguments the Credo authors advance on this subject merely reveal
      a desire to obscure the class character of the struggle

    

      of the proletariat, weaken this struggle by a meaningless
      “recognition of society,” and reduce revolutionary Marxism to a
      trivial reformist trend. We are convinced that the over-whelming majority
      of Russian Social-Democrats will resolutely reject this distortion of the
      fundamental principles of Social-Democracy. Their erroneous premises
      regarding the West-European working-class movement led the authors of the
      Credo to draw still more erroneous “conclusions for
      Russia.”
    

      The assertion that the Russian working class “has not yet put forward
      political aims” simply reveals ignorance of the Russian revolutionary
      movement. The North-Russian Workers’

      Union[9]
      formed in 1878 and the South-Russian Workers’

      Union[10]
      formed in 1875 put forward even then the demand for political liberty in
      their programmes. After the reaction of the eighties, the working class
      repeatedly put forward the same demand in the nineties. The assertion that
      “the talk about an independent workers’ political party merely
      results from the transplantation of alien aims and alien achievements to
      our soil” reveals a complete failure to understand the historical
      role of the Russian working class and the most vital tasks of Russian
      Social-Democracy. Apparently, the programme of the authors of the
      Credo inclines to the idea that the working class, following
      “the line of least resistance,” should confine itself to the
      economic struggle, while the “liberal opposition elements”
      fight, with the “participation” of the Marxists, for
      “legal forms.” The application of such a programme would be
      tantamount to the political suicide of Russian Social-Democracy, it would
      greatly retard and debase the Russian working-class movement and the
      Russian revolutionary movement (for us the two concepts coincide). The
      mere fact that it was possible for a programme like this to appear shows
      how well ground ed were the fears expressed by one of the foremost
      champions of Russian Social-Democracy, P. B. Axelrod, when, at the end of
      1897, he wrote of the possibility of the following prospect:
    


      “The working-class movement keeps to the narrow but of purely
      economic conflicts between the workers and employers and, in itself, taken
      as a whole, is not of a political character, while in the struggle for
      political freedom the advanced strata of the proletariat follow the

    

      revolutionary circles and groups of the so-called intelligentsia”
      (Axelrod, Present Tasks and Tactics of the Russian
      Social-Democrats, Geneva, 1898, p. 19).
    


      Russian Social-Democrats must declare determined war upon the whole body
      of ideas expressed in the Credo, for these ideas lead straight to
      the realisation of this prospect. Russian Social-Democrats must bend every
      effort to translate into reality another prospect, outlined by
      P. B. Axelrod in the following words:
    


      “The other prospect: Social-Democracy organises the Russian
      proletariat into an independent political party which fights for liberty,
      partly side by side and in alliance with the bourgeois
      revolutionary groups (if such should exist), and partly by recruiting
      directly into its ranks or securing the following the most
      democratic-minded and revolutionary elements from among the
      Intelligentsia” (ibid., p. 20).
    


      At the time P. B. Axelrod wrote the above lines the declarations made by
      Social-Democrats in Russia showed clearly that the overwhelming majority of them
      adhered to the same point of view. It is true that one St. Petersburg workers’
      paper, Rabochaya

Mysl,[11]
      seemed to incline toward the ideas of the authors of the Credo.
      In a leading article setting forth its programme (No. 1, October 1897) it
      expressed, regrettably, the utterly erroneous idea, an idea running
      counter to Social-Democracy, that the “economic basis of the
      movement” may be “obscured by the effort to keep the political
      ideal constantly in mind.” At the same time, however, another
      St. Petersburg workers’ newspaper, S. Peterburgsky Rabochy

      Listok[12]
      (No. 2, September 1897), emphatically expressed
      the opinion that “the overthrow of the autocracy ... can be achieved
      only by a well-organised and numerically strong working-class party”
      and that “organised in a strong party” the workers will
      “emancipate themselves, and the whole of Russia, from all political
      and economic oppression.” A third newspaper, Rabochaya

      Gazeta,[13]
      in its leading article in issue No. 2 (November
      1897), wrote: “The fight against the autocratic government for
      political liberty is the immediate task of the Russian working-class
      movement” “The Russian working-class movement will increase
      its forces tenfold if it comes out as a single harmonious whole, with a
      common name and a well-knit organisation...." “The

    

      separate workers’ circles should combine into one common party.”
      “The Russian workers’ party will be a Social-Democratic Party.”
    

      That precisely these views of Rabochaya Gazeta were fully shared by the
      vast majority of Russian Social-Democrats is seen, furthermore, from the fact
      that the Congress of Russian

      Social-Democrats[14]
      in the spring of 1898 formed the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party,
      published its manifesto and recognised Rabochaya Gazeta as the
      official Party organ. Thus, the Credo authors are taking an
      enormous step back ward from the stage of development which Russian
      Social-Democracy has already achieved and which it has recorded in the
      Manifesto of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party. Since
      the frenzied persecution by the Russian Government has led to the present
      situation in which the Party’s activity has temporarily subsided and its
      official organ has ceased publication, it is the task of all Russian
      Social-Democrats to exert every effort for the utmost consolidation of the
      Party, to draw up a Party programme and revive its official organ. In view
      of the ideological vacillations evidenced by the fact that programmes like
      the above-examined Credo can appear, we think it particularly
      necessary to emphasise the following fundamental principles that were
      expounded in the Manifesto and that are of enormous importance to
      Russian Social-Democracy. First, Russian Social-Democracy “desires
      to be and to remain the class movement of the organised working masses.”
      Hence it follows that the motto of Social-Democracy must be: aid to the
      workers, not only in their economic, but also in their political struggle;
      agitation, not only in connection with immediate economic needs, but also
      in connection with all manifestations of political oppression; propaganda,
      not only of the ideas of scientific socialism, but also of democratic
      ideas. Only the theory of revolutionary Marxism can be the banner of the
      class movement of the workers, and Russian Social-Democracy must concern
      itself with the further development and implementation of this theory and
      must safeguard it against the distortions and vulgarisations to which
      “fashionable theories” are so often subjected (and the
      successes of revolutionary Social-Democracy in Russia have already made
      Marxism a “fashionable” theory). While concentrating all their
      present efforts on activity among factory

    

      and mine workers, Social-Democrats must not forget that with the expansion of
      the movement home workers, handicraftsmen, agricultural labourers, and the
      millions of ruined and starving peasants must be drawn into the ranks of the
      labouring masses they organise.
    

      Secondly: “On his strong shoulders the Russian worker must and will
      carry to a finish the cause of winning political liberty.” Since its
      immediate task is the overthrow of the autocracy, Social-Democracy must
      act as the vanguard in the fight for democracy, and consequently, if for
      no other reason, must give every support to all democratic elements of the
      population of Russia and win them as allies. Only an independent
      working-class party can serve as a strong bulwark in the fight against the
      autocracy, and only in alliance with such a party, only by supporting it,
      can all the other fighters for political liberty play an effective part.
    

      Thirdly and finally: “As a socialist movement and trend, the Russian
      Social-Democratic Party carries on the cause and the traditions of the whole
      preceding revolutionary movement in Russia; considering the winning of political
      liberty to be the most important of the immediate tasks of the Party as a whole,
      Social-Democracy marches towards the goal that was already clearly indicated by
      the glorious representatives of the old Narodnaya

      Volya.[15]”

      The traditions of the whole preceding revolutionary movement demand that
      the Social-Democrats shall at the present time concentrate all their
      efforts on organising the Party, on strengthening its internal discipline,
      and on developing the technique for illegal work. If the members of the
      old Narodnaya Volya managed to play an enormous role in the history of
      Russia, despite the fact that only narrow social strata supported the few
      heroes, and despite the fact that it was by no means a revolutionary
      theory which served as the banner of the movement, then Social-Democracy,
      relying on the class struggle of the proletariat, will be able to render
      itself invincible. “The Russian proletariat will throw off the yoke
      of autocracy in order to continue the struggle against capital and the
      bourgeoisie for the complete victory of socialism with still greater
      energy.”
    

      We invite all groups of Social-Democrats and all workers’ circles in
      Russia to discuss the above-quoted Credo
    

      and our resolution, and to express a definite opinion on the question
      raised, in order that all differences may be re moved and the work of
      organising and strengthening the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party
      may be accelerated.
    

      Groups and circles may send their resolutions to the Union of Russian
      Social-Democrats Abroad which, by Point 10 of the decision of the 1898
      Congress of Russian Social-Democrats, is a part of the Russian
      Social-Democratic Party and its representative abroad.
    

 
Notes
 

[1]

      Strike-breaking —Ed.
    
 



[2]

“A Protest by Russian Social-Democrats” was written
      by Lenin in August 1899 when he was in exile and when he received the
      manifesto of the “economists” which A. I. Ulyanova-Yelizarova
      sent him from St. Petersburg and which she called the Credo of
      the “Young.” The author of the Credo was Y. D. Kuskova, at
      the time a member of the Union of Russian Social-Democrats Abroad. The
      manifesto of the group of “economists” was not intended for
      the press; as Lenin said, it was published “irrespective of, and
      perhaps even against, the wishes of its authors,” because the
      “economists” feared public criticism of their opportunist
      views.
    

      The draft of the “Protest” which Lenin prepared to oppose the
      manifesto of the Russian Bernsteinians was discussed at a meeting of
      seventeen Marxists in exile in Minusinsk Region at the village of
      Yermakovskoye. The “Protest” was adopted unanimously. A colony
      of exiles in Turukhansk also subscribed to the “Protest.” Another
      colony of 17 exiled Social-Democrats in the town of Or by, Vyatka
      Gubernia, also came out against the Credo of the
      “economists.”
    

      The “Protest” was sent abroad and immediately upon its receipt
      G. V. Plekhanov sent it to the press for inclusion in the cur rent number
      of Rabocheye Dyelo. The “young” members of the Union
      Abroad, engaged in editing Rabocheye Dyelo, however, published
      the “Protest” as a separate leaflet in December 1899 without
      Plekhanov’s knowledge. The “Protest” was followed by a
      postscript stating that the Credo represented the opinion of
      individuals whose position did not constitute a danger to the Russian
      working-class movement and denying that “economism” was
      current among members of the Union of Russian Social-Democrats
      Abroad. Early in 1900 Plekhanov reprinted the “Protest” in the
      Vademecum,

   

a collection of essays against the “economists
      ." Plekhanov welcomed the appearance of the “Protest” as
      evidence that the Russian Social-Democrats had recognised the serious
      danger of “economism” and had emphatically declared war on it.
    



[3]

Rabocheye Dyelo (The Workers’ Cause)—the magazine
      of the “economists” which appeared irregularly in Geneva
      between April 1899 and February 1902 as an organ of the Union of Russian
      Social-Democrats Abroad. For a criticism of the Rabocheye Dyelo
      group see Lenin’s What Is to Be Done? (see present edition,
      Vol. 5).
    



[4]

      The Emancipation of Labour was the first Russian Marxist
      group. It was founded in Geneva by G. V. Plekhanov in 1883 and included
      P. B. Axelrod, L. G. Deutsch, V. I. Zasulich, and V. N. Ignatov among its
      members.
    

      The group did much to spread Marxism in Russia. It translated such Marxist
      works as The Manifesto of the Communist Party by Marx and Engels,
      Wage-Labour and Capital by Marx, Socialism: Utopian and
      Scientific by Engels, etc., published them abroad and organised their
      distribution in Russia. Plekhanov and his group seriously undermined
      Narodism. In 1883 and in 1885 Plekhanov wrote two draft programmes of the
      Russian Social-Democrats; these were published by the Emancipation of
      Labour group and marked an important step towards the establishment of a
      Social-Democratic party in Russia. Plekhanov’s Socialism and the
      Political Struggle (1883), Our Differences (1885), and
      The Development of the Monist View of History (1895) played a
      considerable part in disseminating Marxist ideas. The group, however, made
      some serious mistakes. It clung to remnants of Narodnik views,
      underestimated the revolutionary role of the peasantry, and overestimated
      the part played by the liberal bourgeoisie. These errors were the germs of
      the future Menshevik ideas espoused by Plekhanov and other members of the
      group. The group had no practical ties with the working-class
      movement. Lenin pointed out that the Emancipation of Labour group
      “only theoretically founded the Social-Democratic Party and took the
      first step in the direction of the working-class movement” (see
      present edition, Vol. 20, “Ideological Struggle in the Working-Class
      Movement”).
    

      At the Second Congress of the R.S.D.L.P., held in August 1903, the Emancipation
      of Labour group announced its dissolution.
    



[5]

Bernsteinism—a trend hostile to Marxism in international
      Social-Democracy. It emerged in Germany at the end of the nineteenth
      century and became connected in name with the Social-Democrat Eduard
      Bernstein who attempted to revise Marx’s revolutionary theory in the
      spirit of bourgeois liberalism. The Russian Bernsteinians were the
      “legal Marxists,” the “economists the Bundists, and the
      Mensheviks.
    



[6]

The International Working Men’s Association (First
      International)—the first international organisation of the
      proletariat, founded

   

      by Karl Marx in 1864 at an international workers’ meeting convened in
      London by English and French workers. The foundation of the first
      International was the result of many years of persistent struggle waged by
      Marx and Engels to establish a revolutionary party of the working
      class. Lenin said that the First International “laid the foundation
      of an international organisation of the workers for the preparation of
      their revolutionary assault on capital,” “laid the foundation for
      the proletarian, international struggle for socialism” (see present
      edition, Vol. 29, “The Third International and Its Place In
      History”).
    

      The central, leading body of the International Working Men’s Association
      was the General Council, of which Marx was a permanent member. In the
      course of the struggle against the petty-bourgeois influences and
      sectarian tendencies then prevalent in the working-class movement (narrow
      trade-unionism in England, Proudhonism and anarchism in the Romance
      countries), Marx rallied around himself the most class-conscious members
      of the General Council (Friedrich Lessner, Eugène Dupont, Hermann
      Jung, and others). The First International directed the economic and
      political struggle of the workers of different countries and strengthened
      their international solidarity. The First International played a
      tremendous p art in disseminating Marxism, in connecting socialism with
      the working-class movement.
    

      Following the defeat of the Paris Commune, the working class faced the
      task of creating mass national parties based on the principles advanced by
      the First International. “As I view European conditions,” wrote Marx
      in 1873, “it is quite useful to let the formal organisation of the
      International recede into the background for the time being” (Marx
      to Sorge, London, September 27, 1873). In 1876 the First International was
      officially disbanded at a convention in Philadelphia.
    



[7]

      Karl Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy, Moscow,
      1959, pp. 187-97.
    



[8]

      Lenin criticises the well-known Lassallean thesis that all other classes
      constitute a reactionary mass with respect to the working class. This
      thesis was included in the programme of the German Social-Democrats that
      was adopted at the Gotha Congress in 1875, the Congress which united the
      two hitherto separately existing German socialist parties, the Eisenachers
      and the Lassalleans.
    

      Marx exposed the anti-revolutionary nature of this thesis in his
Critique of the Gotha Programme (see Marx and Engels,
Selected Works, Vol. II, Moscow, 1958, pp. 25-26).
    



[9]

The North-Russian Workers’ Union, organised in 1878 in
      St. Petersburg, was one of the early revolutionary political organisations
      of the Russian working class. The leaders of the Union were Stepan
      Khalturin, a joiner, and Victor Obnorsky, a mechanic. The Union organised
      strikes and issued a number of proclamations. It had a membership of over
      200. In 1879 the Union was suppressed

   

by the tsarist government. In
      February 1880 the members of the Union who remained at liberty published
      one issue of Rabochaya Zarya (Workers’ Dawn), the first
      working-class newspaper in Russia.
    



[10]

The South-Russian Workers’ Union, founded in 1875 in Odessa by
      Y. O. Zaslavsky, was the first workers’ revolutionary political
      organisation in Russia. The Union was suppressed by the tsarist government
      after having been in existence for eight or nine months.
    



[11]

Rabochaya Mysl (Workers’ Thought)—the newspaper of
      the “economists,” published from October 1897 to December 1902;
      altogether 16 issues appeared (under the editorship of K. M. Takhtarev and
      others).
    

      Lenin criticised the views of Rabochaya Mysl in his “A
      Retrograde Trend in Russian Social-Democracy” (see pp. 255-85 of
      this volume), in articles published in Iskra, and in his work
      What Is to Be Done? (see present edition, Vol. 5).
    



[12]

S. Peterburgsky Rabochy Listok (St. Petersburg Workers’
Paper)—an illegal newspaper, organ of the St. Petersburg
League of Struggle for the Emancipation of the Working Class. Two
numbers appeared: No. I in February (dated January) 1897, which was
mimeographed in Russia, some 300-400 copies having been run off; No. 2
in September 1897, in Geneva (printed).
    

      The paper advanced the aim of combining the economic struggle of the
      working class with extensive political demands and stressed the necessity
      for the foundation of a working-class party.
    



[13]

Rabochaya Gazeta (Workers’ Gazette)—the illegal
      organ of the Kiev group of Social-Democrats. Two issues
      appeared—No. I in August 1897 and No. 2 in December (dated November)
      of the same year. The First Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. adopted
      Rabochaya Gazeta as the Party’s official organ. The newspaper did
      not appear after the Congress, the print-shop having been destroyed by the
      police and the members of the Central Committee arrested. Concerning the
      attempts to resume its publication made in 1899, see present volume,
      pp. 207-09.
    



[14]

The First Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. was held in March 1898 in
      Minsk. The Congress was attended by nine delegates from six
      organisations—the St. Petersburg, Moscow, Ekaterinolsav, and Kiev
      Leagues for the Emancipation of the Working Class, the Rabochaya
      Gazeta (Kiev) editorial group, and the Bund.
    

      The Congress elected a Central Committee, adopted Rabochaya
      Gazeta as the official organ of the Party, published a
      Manifesto, and declared the Union of Russian Social-Democrats
      Abroad to be the Party’s representative abroad. Soon after the Congress
      the Central Committee was arrested.
    


      The First Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. was important for its decisions and its
      Manifesto which proclaimed the formation of the Russian
      Social-Democratic Labour Party.
    



[15]

Narodnaya Volya (People’s Will)—a secret political
      organisation of Narodnik terrorists that came into being in August 1879 as
      a result of a split in the ranks of the Narodnik organisation Zemlya
      Volya (Land and Liberty). The Narodnaya Volya was headed by an
      Executive Committee whose membership included A. I. Zhelyabov,
      A. D. Mikhailov, M. F. Frolenko, N. A. Morozov, V. N. Figner,
      S. L. Perovskaya, and A. A. Kvyatkovsky. The Narodnaya Volya clung to the
      utopian socialism of the Narodniks, but took the path of political
      struggle, considering its most important task to he the overthrow of the
      autocracy and the winning of political liberty. Its programme envisaged
      the organisation of a “permanent popular assembly” elected on
      the basis of universal suffrage, the proclamation of democratic liberties,
      the transfer of the land to the people, and the elaboration of measures
      for the transfer of the factories to the workers. “The Narodovoltsi
      (members and followers of the Narodnaya Volya),” wrote Lenin, “made
      a step forward in their transition to the political struggle, but they did
      not succeed in connecting it with socialism” (see present edition,
      Vol. 8, “Working-Class and Bourgeois Democracy”).
    

      The Narodovoltsi carried on a heroic struggle against the autocracy. They
      based their activities on the fallacious theory of active
      “heroes” and the passive “mass” and expected to
      recast society without the participation of the people, employing only
      their own forces and attempting to overawe and disorganise the government
      by means of individual terror. After the assassination of Alexander II on
      March 1, 1881, the government undertook brutal repressions and by
      executions and provocations broke up the Narodnaya Volya
      organisation. Many attempts were made to reconstitute the Narodnaya Volya
      throughout the eighties, but all were unsuccessful. In 1886, for instance,
      a group that followed the traditions of the Narodnaya Volya was organised
      under the leadership of A. I. Ulyanov (Lenin’s brother) and
      P. Y. Shevyrev. After an unsuccessful attempt on the life of Alexander III
      in 1887, the group was exposed and its active members were executed.
    

      Although Lenin criticised the fallacious, utopian programme of the
      Narodnaya Volya, he had a great respect for the selfless struggle of its
      members against tsarism and placed a high value on their secrecy technique
      and their strictly centralised organisation.
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 4

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Book Review: S. N. Prokopovich. The Working-Class Movement in the West









Lenin: Book Review: S. N. Prokopovich. The Working-Class Movement in the West







V. I.  

      Lenin
Book Review: S. N. Prokopovich. The Working-Class Movement in the West




Written: Written at the end of 1899 

Published:

      First published in 1928 in Lenin Miscellany VII.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 4,

      pages 183-192.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



 

S. N. Prokopovich.

      The Working-Class Movement in the

West[6]


      “...to turn to social science and to its alleged conclusion that the
      capitalist system of society is hastening inexorably to Its doom by virtue
      of the contradictions developing within It. We find the relevant
      explanations in Kautsky’s Erfurt Programme” (147). Before
      dealing with the content of the passage quoted by Mr. Prokopovich, we must
      take note of a peculiarity highly typical of him and similar reformers of
      theory. Why is it that our “critical investigator,” in turning to
      “social science,” looks for “explanations” in Kautsky’s
      popular booklet and nowhere else? Does he really believe that the whole of
      “social science” is contained in that little booklet? He knows
      perfectly well that Kautsky is “a faithful custodian of the
      traditions of Marx” (I, 187) and that an exposition and a
      substantiation of the “conclusions” of a certain school of
      “social science” are to be found precisely in Marx’s treatises
      on political economy; yet he acts as though such a thing were altogether
      unknown to him. What are we to think of an “investigator” who
      confines himself to attacks on “custodians” of a theory but
      who does not once, throughout his book, risk crossing swords openly and
      directly with the theory itself?
    

      In the passage quoted by Mr. Prokopovich, Kautsky says that the
      technological revolution and the accumulation of capital are progressing
      with increasing rapidity, that the expansion of production is made
      necessary by the fundamental properties of capitalism and must be
      uninterrupted, while the expansion of the market “has for some time
      been proceeding

    

      too slowly” and that “the time is apparently at hand when the
      market for European industry will not only cease its further expansion but
      will even begin to shrink. This event can only mean the bankruptcy of the
      entire capitalist society.” Mr. Prokopovich “criticises” the
      “conclusions” drawn by “social science”
      (i.e., Kautsky’s citation of one of the laws of
      development evolved by Marx): “The basis thus given for the
      inevitability of the collapse of capitalist society allots the chief role
      to the contradiction between ’the constant drive to expand production and
      the ever slower expansion of the market and, finally, its shrinkage.’ It
      is this contradiction, according to Kautsky, that must bring about the
      collapse of the capitalist system of society. But [listen well!] the
      expansion of production presumes the ’productive consumption’ of part of
      the surplus—value—i.e., first its realisation and then its
      expenditure on machinery, buildings, etc., for new production. In other
      words, the expansion of production is most closely connected with the
      existence of a market for the commodities already produced; the constant
      expansion of production with a market that is relatively shrinking is,
      therefore, an impossibility” (148). And Mr. Prokopovich is so well
      satisfied with his excursion into the sphere of “social
      science” that in the very next line he speaks with condescending
      disdain of a “scientific” (in inverted commas) substantiation
      of faith, etc. Such jockeying with criticism would be outrageous, were it
      not for the fact that it is, more than anything else, amusing. Our good
      Mr. Prokopovich has heard a knell, but knows not from what
      bell. Mr. Prokopovich has heard of the abstract theory of realisation that
      has recently been heatedly discussed in Russian literature in the course
      of which the role of “productive consumption” has been
      particularly stressed on account of errors in Narodnik
      economics. Mr. Prokopovich has not properly understood this theory and
      imagines that it denies (!) the existence in capitalism of those
      basic and elementary contradictions Kautsky speaks of. To listen to
      Mr. Prokopovich. we would have to believe that “productive
      consumption” could develop quite independently of
      individual consumption (in which consumption by the masses plays the
      dominant role), i.e., that capitalism does not contain within itself any
      contradiction between production and

    


    

      consumption. This is simply absurd, and Marx and his Russian

      supporters[1]

      have clearly opposed such misconstructions. Not only does the
      bourgeois-apologetic theory into which our “critical
      investigator” has wandered not follow from the fact that “the
      expansion of production presumes productive consumption,” but, on the
      contrary, from it follows the contradiction between the tendency towards
      the unlimited growth of production and limited consumption that is
      inherent precisely in capitalism and that must bring about its collapse.
    

      Apropos of what has been said, it is worth while mentioning the following
      interesting point. Mr. Prokopovich is a fervent follower of Bernstein,
      whose magazine articles he quotes and translates for several pages. In his
      well-known book, Die Voraussetzungen,

etc.,[2]

      Bernstein even recommends Mr. Prokopovich to the German public as his
      Russian supporter, but he makes a reservation, the substance of which is
      that Mr. Prokopovich is more Bernsteinian than Bern stein. And, a
      remarkable thing, Bernstein and his Russian yesman both distort the theory
      of realisation, but in diametrically opposite directions, so that
      they cancel each other out. Firstly, Bernstein regarded as a
      “contradiction” the fact that Marx turned against Rodbertus’
      theory of crises and at the same time declared that “the ultimate
      cause of all real crises is the poverty and limited consumption of the
      masses.” Actually there is no contradiction here at all, as I have had
      occasion to point out in other places (Studies,

p. 30,[3]
The Development of Capitalism in Russia,

p. 19[4]

).

      Secondly, Bernstein argues in precisely the same manner as does Mr.
      V. V. here in Russia, that the tremendous growth of the surplus-product
      must inevitably mean an increase in the number of well-to-do (or the
      greater prosperity of the workers),

    

      since the capitalists themselves and their servants (sic I)
      cannot “consume” the entire surplus-product (Die
      Voraussetzungen, etc., S. 51-52). This naïve argument completely
      ignores the role of productive consumption, as Kautsky pointed out in
      his book against Bernstein (Kautsky, Gegen Bernstein,
      II.

      Abschnitt,[5]

–the

      paragraph on “the employment of surplus-value”). And now there
      appears a Russian Bernsteinian, recommended by Bernstein, who says exactly
      the opposite, who lectures Kautsky on the role of “productive
      consumption” and then reduces Marx’s discovery to the absurdity that
      productive consumption can develop quite independently of individual
      consumption (I), that the realisation of surplus-value by its use for the
      production of means of production does away with the dependence, in the
      final analysis, of production on consumption and, consequently, with the
      contradiction between them! By this example the reader may judge whether
      Mr. Prokopovich’s “loss of a good half of the theoretical
      premises” is due to the “investigations” or whether our
      “critical investigator” is “at a loss” due to some
      other cause.

    

      A second example. Taking up three pages (25-27), our author
      “investigated” the question of peasant associations in
      Germany. He gave a list of the various kinds of associations and
      statistical data on their rapid growth (especially of dairy associations)
      and argued: “The artisan has been almost deprived of his roots in
      the modern economic system, whereas the peasant continues to stand firm
      [!] in it.” How very simple, isn’t it really?  The undernourishment of the
      German peasants, their exhaustion from excessive labour, the mass flight
      of people from the countryside to the towns— all that must be mere
      invention. It suffices to point to the rapid growth of associations
      (especially dairy associations that result in depriving the peasants’
      children of milk and lead to the peasants’ greater dependence on
      capitalists) in order to prove the “stability” of the
      peasantry. “The development of capitalist relations in the
      manufacturing industry ruins the artisan but improves the condition of the
      peasant. It [the

      condition? I 

      hinders the penetration of capitalism into
      agriculture.” This is new! Until now it has been

    

      believed that it is the development of capitalism in the manufacturing
      industry that is the main force which gives rise to, and develops,
      capitalism in agriculture. But Mr. Prokopovich, like his German
      prototypes, could truly say of him self: nous avons changé tout
      ca—we have changed all that!  But would that be true,
      gentlemen? Have you really changed anything at all, have you
      shown the error in even one of the basic postulates of the theory you have
      “torn to pieces” and replaced it by a truer postulate? Have
      you not, on the contrary, returned to the old prejudices?... “On the
      other hand, the development of the manufacturing industry ensures
      subsidiary earnings for the peasant.”... A return to the doctrine of
      Messrs. V. V. & Co. on the subsidiary earnings of the peasantry!
      Mr. Prokopovich does not deem it worth mentioning the fact that in a large
      number of cases these “earnings” express the conversion of the
      peasant into a wage-labourer. He prefers to conclude his
      “investigation” with the high-sounding sentence: “The
      sap of life has not yet left the peasant class.” It is true that Kautsky
      has shown, precisely in respect of Germany, that agricultural associations
      are a transition stage on the way to capitalism—but, you
      see, we already know how the terrible Mr. Prokopovich has crushed Kautsky!
    

      We see this resurrection of Narodnik views (Narodnik views of the
      V. V. hue) not only in the above passage but in many other places in
      Mr. Prokopovich’s “critical investigation.” The reader probably
      knows the fame (a sorry fame) that Mr. V. V. earned for himself by his
      excessive narrowing and debasing of the theory known as
      “economic” materialism: this theory, as “adapted”
      by Mr. V. V., did not postulate that in the final analysis all factors are
      reduced to the development of the productive forces, but postulated that
      many extremely important (although in the final analysis secondary)
      factors could be neglected. Mr. Prokopovich offers us a very similar
      distortion when he attempts to expose Kautsky as one who does not
      understand the significance of “material forces” (144), in the
      course of which Mr. Prokopovich himself light-mindedly confuses
      “economic organisation” (145) with “economic
      force” (on 146 and especially 149). Unfortunately we cannot dwell to
      the needed extent on an analysis of this error of Mr. Prokopovich, but
      must refer the reader to the above-mentioned book by Kautsky

    

      against Bernstein (Abschnitt III, Section a), where the original
      versions of Mr. Prokopovich’s rehashings are discussed at length. We also
      hope that the reader who peruses Mr. Prokopovich’s book attentively will
      see quite easily that the theory torn to pieces by our “critical
      investigator” (Mr. Prokopovich, incidentally, here, too, maintains a
      modest silence about the views of the founders of the theory and refrains
      from examining them, preferring to confine himself to extracts from the
      speeches and articles of present-day adherents of this theory)—that
      the theory is in no way to blame for this disgraceful narrowing of
      “economic” materialism (cf., for example, statements by
      authoritative Belgian spokesmen on pp. 74, 90, 92, 100 in the second
      part).
    

      As far as the extracts quoted by Mr. Prokopovich are concerned, it should
      be said that he often seizes on individual passages and gives the reader a
      distorted impression of views and arguments that have not been expounded
      in Russian literature. On account of this, Mr. Prokopovich’s jockeying
      with criticism creates a most repulsive impression. In some cases it would
      be worth the while of those who read Mr. Prokopovich’s book to refer even
      to a book by Professor Herkner that has recently been translated into
      Russian: Wage-Labour in Western Europe (St. Petersburg, 1899,
      published by the magazine Obrazovaniye). For instance, in a note
      to page 24 (Part I) Mr. Prokopovich writes that the Congress of 1892
      “adopted a resolution sympathising with the organisation of
      producers’ associations” and follows this up with a quotation which,
      first, does not fully support the words of the author and, secondly,
      breaks o/J precisely at the point where It speaks of the
      necessity “to conduct a particular struggle against the belief that
      associations are in a position to bring any influence to bear on
      capitalist production relations, etc.” (Herkner, Notes, pp. xi-xii, Note 6
      to Chapter IX).
    

      Mr. Prokopovich is just as successful in his crushing of Kautsky on pages 56,
      150, 156, 198, and in many other places as he is in the case we have
      examined. Mr. Prokopovich’s assertions that Liebknecht, in the sixties, for a
      time renounced his ideals, betrayed them, etc. (111, 112), are in no sense to
      be taken seriously. We have had occasion to see how well-founded his judgements
      are, and the following

    

      sentence (once again directed, not against the founder of the theory, but
      against its “custodian”) will, for example, show us to what Pillars
      of Hercules the insolence and self-assurance of our
      “investigator” will take him: “We should be acting
      superficially, if we undertook to criticise this whole conception of the
      working-class movement from the stand point of its conformity to the true
      course taken by the development of this movement—from the standpoint
      of its scientific basis [Mr. Prokopovich’s italics]. There is not
      and can not be (sic!) a grain of science in it” (156). This
      is what you call categorical criticism! All this Marxism, it isn’t even
      worth criticising, and that’s that! Obviously we have be fore us either a
      man who is destined to make a great revolution in the science “of
      which there cannot be even a grain in the theory that is dominant in
      Germany, or ... or—how can it be put delicately?—or a man who,
      when “at a loss,” repeats the phrases of others. Mr. Prokopovich
      prostrates him self with such fervour before this very latest of gods who
      has pronounced those words for the thousandth time that he has no pity on
      his own forehead. Bernstein, if you please, “has some shortcomings
      in his theoretical views” (198) that consist—can you imagine
      it?—in his belief in the necessity of a scientific theory that
      defines the aims of the men of action concerned. “Critical
      investigators” are not subject to this strange
      belief. “Science will become free,” utters Mr. Prokopovich,
      “only when it is admitted that it must serve the aims of a
      party and not define them. It must be recognised that science
      cannot define the aims of a practical party” (197). Be it noted that
      Bernstein renounced precisely these views of his follower. “A
      principled programme inevitably leads to dogmatism and is only a hindrance
      in the way of the party’s sound development.... Theoretical principles are
      all very well In propaganda but not in a programme”
      (157). “Programmes are unnecessary; they are harmful.” “The
      individual himself may be a programme if he is sensitive to, and has a
      fine feeling for, the needs of the times.”... The reader probably thinks
      that I am continuing to quote Mr. Prokopovich. But no, I am now quoting
      the newspaper Novoye

Vremya,[7]
      which recently published articles on a programme that attracted a great
      deal of attention—not the programme of a party, of course, but of
      the new Minister for Internal Affairs....
    
 

      The relationship of the freedom of unprincipledness—excuse me,
      “freedom of science”—preached by Mr. Prokopovich to the views
      of the majority of the West-European personalities of whom our valiant
      critic so valiantly writes, may be seen from the following quotations
      drawn from that same book by Mr. Prokopovich: “Of course, without a
      betrayal of principles...” (159). “Not in any way violating one’s
      independence, loyalty to principle....” “I renounce compromise only
      in the case ... in which it leads to a renunciation of principles or even
      to the ignoring of principles...” (171). “Introducing no
      unprincipledness...” (174). “Not, of course, selling one’s soul, in
      the present case, one’s principles...” (176). “The principles are
      now firmly established...” (183). “A compass [is needed] that would
      rid us of the need to grope our way,” against “short-sighted
      empiricism,” against “a thoughtless attitude to principles”
      (195). “Primary importance attaches to principles, to the
      theoretical part...” (103, Part II), etc.
    

      In conclusion, two more quotations: “If German Social-Democracy
      were the expression of socialism and not of the proletariat that is acting
      in defence of its own interests in present-day society, for the first time
      recognising its significance, then—since not all Germans are
      idealists—side by side with this party that pursues idealist aims we
      should see another, stronger party, a working-class party that represents
      the practical interests of that part of the German proletariat that is not
      idealist.”... “If socialism were not to play the role of a mere
      symbol in that movement, a symbol distinguishing one definite
      organisation, if it were the motive idea, the principle that demands of
      party members a certain specific service—in that case the socialist
      party would separate from the general labour party, and the mass of the
      proletariat, which strives for better living conditions under the existing
      system and cares little for the ideal future, would form an independent
      labour party.” The reader will again probably think....
    

 
Notes
 

[1]

      Cf. my article in Nauchnoye Obozreniye for August 1899,
      especially page 1572 (see pp. 74-93 of this volume, especially
      p. 84.—Ed.), and The Development of Capitalism in
      Russia, p. 16, et seq. (See present edition, Vol. 3, p. 54, et
      seq.—Ed.)
    —Lenin

[2]

The Premises, etc.—Ed.
    

[3]

      See present edition, Vol. 2, A Characterisation of Economic
Romanticism, pp. 167-68.—Ed.
    

[4]

      See present edition, Vol. 3, p. 58.—Ed.
    

[5]

      Kautsky, Against Bernstein, Section II.—Ed.
    
 



[6]

      Lenin’s review of Prokopovich’s Working-Class Movement in the West. An
Experiment in Critical Investigation. Vol. 1. Germany. Belgium
(St. Petersburg, 1899) was written at the end of 1899. The first three
pages and the end of the manuscript have been lost; apparently the
manuscript was prepared for the press, for it contains some slight
corrections made by Martov. The present translation has been made from
Lenin’s original text without the

   

corrections. Lenin’s review was not
published at the time, in view of the fact that Prokopovich’s book was
held up by the St. Petersburg Censorship Committee on May 22, 1899, and
did not appear until the end of January 1900. p. 183
    



[7]

Novoye Vremya (New Times)—a newspaper published in
      St. Petersburg from 1868 to October 1917; at first it was moderately
      liberal, but from 1876 onwards it became an organ of the reactionary
      circles among the aristocracy and bureaucracy. The newspaper opposed not
      only the revolutionary, but the bourgeois-liberal movement. From 1905
      onwards it was an organ of the Black Hundreds.
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 4

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Book Review: Karl Kautsky. Bernstein und das sozialdemokratische Programm. Eine Antikritik









Lenin: Book Review: Karl Kautsky. Bernstein und das sozialdemokratische Programm. Eine Antikritik







V. I.  

      Lenin
Book Review: Karl Kautsky. Bernstein und das sozialdemokratische Programm. Eine Antikritik




Written: Written at the end of 1899 

Published:

      First published in 1928 in Lenin Miscellany VII.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 4,

      pages 193-204.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



    

    

Karl Kautsky.

      Bernstein tend das sozialdemokratische
  Programm. Eine

  Antikritik[1]


      ... In the introduction Kautsky gives voice to some extremely valuable and
      apt ideas on the conditions that must be satisfied by serious and
      conscientious criticism if those undertaking it do not wish to confine
      themselves with in the narrow bounds of soulless pedantry and
      scholasticism, if they do not wish to lose sight of the close and
      indestructible bonds that exist between the “theoretical
      reason” and the “practical reason”—not the practical
      reason of individuals, but of the masses of the population placed in
      specific conditions. Truth, of course, comes first, says Kautsky, and if
      Bernstein has become sincerely convinced of the error of his former
      views, it is his plain duty to give definite expression to his
      convictions. But the trouble with Bernstein is his lack of precisely
      this directness and definiteness. His pamphlet is amazingly
      “encyclopaedic” (as Antonio Labriola has remarked in a
      French magazine); it touches on a mass of problems, an agglomeration of
      questions, but not on any one of them does it provide an
      integral and precise exposition of the critic’s new views. The critic
      merely expresses his doubts and abandons difficult and complicated
      questions without any independent analysis after having scarcely touched
      upon them. This brings about, Kautsky notes sarcastically, a strange
      phenomenon: Bernstein’s followers understand his

    

      book in the most diverse ways, whereas his opponents all understand it in
      the same way. Bernstein’s chief objection to his opponents is that they do
      not understand him, that they do not want to understand him. The whole
      series of newspaper and magazine articles that Bernstein has written in
      answer to his opponents has failed to explain his positive views.
    

      Kautsky begins his counter-criticism with the question of method. He
      examines Bernstein’s objections to the materialist conception of history
      and shows that Bernstein confuses the concept of “determinism”
      with that of “mechanism,” that he confuses freedom of will with
      freedom of action, and without any grounds identifies historical necessity
      with the hopeless position of people under compulsion. The outworn
      accusation of fatalism, which Bernstein also repeats, is refuted by the
      very premises of Marx’s theory of history. Not everything can be reduced
      to the development of the productive forces, says Bernstein. Other factors
      “must be taken into consideration.”
    

      Very well, answers Kautsky, that is something every investigator must do,
      irrespective of what conception of history guides him. Anyone who wants to
      make us reject Marx’s method, the method that has so brilliantly justified
      itself and continues to justify itself in practice, must take one of two
      paths: either he must reject altogether the idea of objective laws, of the
      necessity of the historical process, and in so doing abandon all attempts
      at providing a scientific basis for sociology; or he must show how he can
      evolve the necessity of the historical process from other factors (ethical
      views, for example), he must show this by an analysis that will stand
      up to at least a remote comparison with Marx’s analysis in
      Capital. Not only has Bernstein not made the slightest attempt to
      do this, but, confining him self to empty platitudes about “taking
      into consideration” other factors, he has continued to use
      the old materialist method in his book as though he did not declare it to
      be wanting! As Kautsky points out, Bernstein, at times, even applies
      this method with the most impermissible crudity and one sidedness! Further
      on Bernstein’s accusations are levelled against dialectics which, he
      alleges, lead to arbitrary constructions, etc., etc. Bernstein repeats
      these phrases (that

    

      have already managed to disgust also the Russian readers) without making
      the slightest attempt to show what is in correct in dialectics, whether
      Hegel or Marx and Engels are guilty of methodological errors (and
      precisely what errors). The only means by which Bernstein tries to
      motivate and fortify his opinion is a reference to the
      “tendentiousness” of one of the concluding sections of
      Capital (on the historical tendency of capitalist
      accumulation). This charge has been worn threadbare: it was made by Eugen
      Dühring and Julius Wolf and many others in Germany, and it was made
      (we add on our part) by Mr. Y. Zhukovsky in the seventies and by
      Mr. N. Mikhailovsky in the nineties—by the very same
      Mr. Mikhailovsky who had once accused Mr. Y. Zhukovsky of acrobatics for
      making the selfsame charge. And what proof does Bernstein offer
      in confirmation of this worn-out nonsense?  Only the following: Marx began
      his “investigation” with ready-made conclusions, since in 1867
      Capital drew the same conclusion that Marx had drawn as early as
      the forties. Such “proof” is tantamount to fraud, answers
      Kautsky, because Marx based his conclusions on two investigations and not
      on one, as he points out very definitely in the introduction to Zur
      Kritik (see Russian translation: A Critique 01 Some of the
      Propositions of Political

Economy[2]).
      Marx made his first
      investigation in the forties, after leaving the Editorial Board of the
      Rheinische

Zeitung.[3]
      Marx left the newspaper because he had to treat of material interests and
      he realised that he was not sufficiently prepared for this. From the arena
      of public life, wrote Marx about himself, I withdrew into the study. And
      so (stresses Kautsky, hinting at Bernstein), Marx had doubts regarding the
      correctness of his judgement of material interests, regarding the
      correctness of the dominant views on this subject at that time, but he did
      not think his doubts to be important enough to write a whole book and
      Inform the world about them. On the contrary, Marx set out to study in
      order to advance from doubtings of the old views to positive new ideas. He
      began to study French social theories and English political economy. He
      came into close contact with Engels, who was at that time making a
      detailed study of the actual state of the economy in England. The result
      of this joint work, this first inquiry, was the

    

      well-known conclusions which the two writers expounded very definitely
      towards the end of the

      forties.[4]
      Marx moved to London in 1850, and the favourable conditions there for
      research determined him “to begin afresh from the very
      beginning and to work through the new material critically”
      (A Critique of Some of the Propositions, 1st edition,

p. xi.[5]
      Our italics). The fruit of this second inquiry, lasting many long
      years, were the works: Zur Kritik (1859) and Das Kapital
      (1867). The conclusion drawn in Capital coincides with the former
      conclusion drawn in the forties because the second inquiry confirmed the
      results of the first. “My views, however they may be judged ... are
      the result of conscientious investigation lasting many years,” wrote Marx
      in 1859 (ibid.,

p. xii).[6]
      Does this, asks Kautsky, resemble conclusions found ready-made long before
      the investigation?
    

      From the question of dialectics Kautsky goes over to the question of
      value. Bernstein says that Marx’s theory is unfinished, that it leaves
      many problems “that are by no means fully explained.” Kautsky does
      not think of refuting this: Marx’s theory is not the last word in science,
      he says. History brings new facts and new methods of investigation that
      require the further development of the theory. if Bernstein had made an
      attempt to utilise new facts and new methods of inquiry for the further
      development of the theory, everybody would have been grateful to him. But
      Bernstein does not dream of doing that; he confines himself to cheap
      attacks on Marx’s disciples and to extremely vague, purely eclectic
      remarks, such as: the Gossen-Jevons-Böhm theory of marginal utility
      is no less just than Marx’s theory of labour-value. Both theories retain
      their significance for different purposes, says Bernstein, because
      Böhm-Bawerk has as much right, a priori, to abstract from
      the property of commodities that they are produced by labour, as Marx has
      to abstract from the property that they are use-values. Kautsky points out
      that it is utterly absurd to regard two opposite, mutually exclusive
      theories suitable for different purposes (and, furthermore, Bernstein does
      not say for what purposes either of the two theories is suit able). It is
      by no means a question as to which property of commodities we are, a
      priori (von Hause aus), entitled to abstract from; the question is
      how to explain the principal

    

      phenomena of present-day society, based on the exchange of
      products, how to explain the value of commodities, the function of money,
      etc. Even if Marx’s theory may leave a number of still unexplained
      problems, Bernstein’s theory of value is a totally unexplained
      problem. Bernstein further quotes Buch, who constructed the concept of the
      maximum density” of labour; but Bernstein does not give a complete
      exposition of Buch’s views or make a definite statement of his own opinion
      on that question. Buch, it seems, gets entangled in contradictions by
      making value depend on wages and wages depend on value. Bernstein senses
      the eclecticism of his statements on value and tries to defend eclecticism
      in general. He calls it “the revolt of the sober intellect against
      the tendency inherent in every dogma to constrict thought within narrow
      confines.” If Bern stein were to recall the history of thought, retorts
      Kautsky, he would see that the great rebels against the constriction of
      thought within narrow confines were never eclectics, that what has always
      characterised them has been the striving for the unity, for the integrity
      of ideas. The eclectic is too timid to dare revolt. If, indeed, I click my
      heels politely to Marx and at the same time click my heels politely to
      Böhm-Bawerk, that is still a long way from revolt! Let anyone name
      even one eclectic in the republic of thought, says Kautsky, who has proved
      worthy of the name of rebel!
    

      Passing from the method to the results of its application, Kautsky deals
      with the so-called Zusammenbruchstheorie, the theory of collapse,
      of the sudden crash of West-European capitalism, a crash that Marx
      allegedly believed to be inevitable and connected with a gigantic economic
      crisis. Kautsky says and proves that Marx and Engels never propounded a
      special Zusammenbruchstheorie, that they did not connect a
      Zusammenbruch necessarily with an economic crisis. This is a
      distortion chargeable to their opponents who expound Marx’s theory
      one-sidedly, tearing out of con text odd passages from different writings
      in order thus triumphantly to refute the “one-sidedness” and
      “crudeness” of the theory. Actually Marx and Engels considered
      the transformation of West-European economic relations to be dependent on
      the maturity and strength of the classes

    

      brought to the fore by modern European history. Bernstein tries to assert
      that this is not the theory of Marx, but Kautsky’s interpretation and
      extension of it. Kautsky, however, with precise quotations from Marx’s
      writings of the forties and sixties, as well as by means of an analysis of
      the basic ideas of Marxism, has completely refuted this truly pettifogging
      trickery of the Bernstein who so blatantly accused Marx’s disciples of
      “apologetics and pettifoggery.” This part of Kautsky’s book Is
      particularly interesting, the more so, since some Russian writers (e.g.,
      Mr. Bulgakov in the magazine Nachalo) have been In a hurry to
      repeat the distortion of Marx’s theory which Bernstein offered in the
      guise of “criticism” (as does Mr. Prokopovich in his
      Working-Class Movement in the West, St. Petersburg, 1899).
    

      Kautsky analyses the basic tendencies of contemporary economic development
      in particularly great detail in order to refute Bernstein’s opinion that
      this development is not proceeding in the direction indicated by Marx. It
      stands to reason that we cannot present here a detailed exposition of the
      chapter “Large- and Small-Scale Production” and of other
      chapters of Kautsky’s book which are devoted to a political-economic
      analysis and contain extensive numerical data, but shall have to confine
      ourselves to a brief mention of their contents. Kautsky emphasises the
      point that the question is one of the direction, by and large, of
      development and by no means of particularities and superficial
      manifestations, which no theory can take into account in all
      their great variety. (Marx reminds the reader of this simple but oft for
      gotten truth in the relevant chapters of Capital.) By a detailed
      analysis of the data provided by the German industrial censuses of 1882
      and 1895 Kautsky shows that they are a brilliant confirmation of Marx’s
      theory and have placed beyond all doubt the process of the concentration
      of capital and the elimination of small-scale production. In 1896
      Bernstein (when he himself still belonged to the guild of apologists and
      pettifoggers. says Kautsky ironically) most emphatically recognised this
      fact, but now he is excessive in his exaggeration of the strength and
      importance of small-scale production. Thus, Bernstein estimates the number
      of enterprises employing fewer than 20 workers at several hundred thou
      sand, “apparently adding in his pessimistic zeal an extra

    

      nought to the figure,” since there are only 49,000 such enterprises in
      Germany. Further, whom do the statistics not place among the petty
      entrepreneurs—cabmen, messengers, gravediggers, fruit hawkers,
      seamstresses (even though they may work at home for a capitalist), etc.,
      etc.!  Here let us note a remark of Kautsky’s that is particularly
      important from the theoretical standpoint—that petty commercial and
      industrial enterprises (such as those mentioned above) in capitalist
      society are often merely one of the forms of relative over-population;
      ruined petty producers, workers unable to find employment turn (sometimes
      temporarily) into petty traders and hawkers, or rent out rooms or beds
      (also “enterprises,” which are registered by statistics equally with
      all other types of enterprise!), etc. The fact that these employments are
      overcrowded does not by any means indicate the viability of petty
      production but rather the growth of poverty in capitalist
      society. Bernstein, however, emphasises and exaggerates the importance of
      the petty “industrial producers” when to do so seems to him to
      serve his advantage (on the question of large- and small-scale
      production), but keeps silent about them when he finds it to his
      disadvantage (on the question of the growth of poverty).
    

      Bernstein repeats the argument, long known to the Russian public as well,
      that joint-stock companies “permit” the fragmentation of
      capital and “make unnecessary” its concentration, and he cites
      some figures (cf. Zhizn, No. 3 for 1899) on the number of small
      shares. Kautsky replies that these figures prove exactly nothing, since
      small shares in any companies might belong to big capitalists (as even
      Bernstein must admit). Bernstein does not adduce any evidence, nor can he,
      to prove that joint-stock companies increase the number of
      property-owners, for the joint-stock companies actually serve to
      expropriate the gullible men of small means for the benefit of big
      capitalists and speculators. The growth in the number of shares merely
      shows that wealth has a tendency to take on the form of shares; but this
      growth tells us nothing about the distribution of wealth. In general,
      Bernstein’s attitude to the question of an increase in the number of
      wealthy people, the number of property-owners, is an astonishingly thought
      less one, which has not prevented his bourgeois followers

    

      from praising precisely this part of his book and announcing that it is
      based on “a tremendous amount of numerical data.” And Bernstein
      proved himself skilful enough, says Kautsky ironically, to compress this
      tremendous amount of data into two pages! He confuses property-owners with
      capitalists, although no one has denied an increase in the number of the
      latter. In analysing income-tax data, he ignores their fiscal character,
      and their confusion of income from property with income in the form of
      salary, etc. He compares data for different times that have been collected
      by different methods (on Prussia, for example) and are, therefore, not
      comparable. He even goes so far as to borrow data on the growth of
      property-owners in England (printing these figures in heavy type, as his
      trump card) from an article in some sensational newspaper that was singing
      the praises of Queen Victoria’s jubilee and whose handling of statistics
      was the nec plus ultra of light-mindedness! The source of this in
      formation is unknown and, indeed, such information cannot be obtained on
      the basis of data on the English income tax, since these do not permit one
      to determine the number of tax-payers and the total income of each
      tax-payer. Kautsky adduces data from Kolb’s book on the English income tax
      from 1812 to 1847 and shows that they, in exactly the same way as
      Bernstein’s newspaper data, indicate an (apparent) increase in the number
      of property-owners—and that, in a period of the most terrible
      increase in the most horrible poverty of the people in England! A detailed
      analysis of Bernstein’s data led Kautsky to the conclusion that Bernstein
      had not. quoted a single figure that actually proved a growth in the
      number of property-owners.
    

      Bernstein tried to give this phenomenon a theoretical grounding: the
      capitalists, he said, cannot themselves consume the entire surplus-value
      that increases to such a colossal extent; this means that the number of
      property-owners that consume it must grow. It is not very difficult for
      Kautsky to refute this grotesque argument that totally ignores Marx’s
      theory of realisation (expounded many times in Russian literature). It is
      particularly interesting that for his refutation Kautsky does not employ
      theoretical arguments alone, but offers concrete data attesting to the
      growth of luxury and lavish spending in the West-European countries;

    

      to the influence of rapidly changing fashions, which greatly intensify
      this process; to mass unemployment; to the tremendous increase in the
      “productive consumption” of surplus-value, i.e., the
      investment of capital in new enterprises, especially the investment of
      European capital in the railways and other enterprises of Russia, Asia,
      and Africa.
    

      Bernstein declares that everyone has abandoned Marx’s “theory of
      misery” or “theory of impoverishment.” Kautsky demonstrates
      that this is again a distorted exaggeration on the part of the opponents
      of Marx, since Marx propounded no such theory. He spoke of the growth of
      poverty, degradation, etc., indicating at the same time the counteracting
      tendency and the real social forces that alone could give rise to this
      tendency. Marx’s words on the growth of poverty are fully justified by
      reality: first, we actually see that capitalism has a tendency to engender
      and increase poverty, which acquires tremendous proportions when the
      above-mentioned counteracting tendency is absent. Secondly, poverty grows,
      not in the physical but in the social sense, i.e., in the sense of the
      disparity between the increasing level of consumption by the bourgeoisie
      and consumption by society as a who]e, and the level of the living
      standards of the working people. Bernstein waxes ironical over such a
      conception of “poverty,” saying that this is a Pickwickian
      conception. In reply Kautsky shows that people like Lassalle, Rodbertus,
      and Engels have made very definite statements to the effect that poverty
      must be understood in its social, as well as in its physical, sense. As
      you see—he parries Bernstein’s irony—it is not such a bad
      company that gathers at the “Pickwick Club”! Thirdly and lastly, the
      passage on increasing impoverishment remains perfectly true in respect of
      the “border regions” of capitalism, the border regions being
      understood both in the geographical sense (countries in which capitalism
      is only beginning to penetrate and frequently not only gives rise to
      physical poverty but to the outright starvation of the masses) and in the
      political-economic sense (handicraft industries and, in general, those
      branches of economy in which backward methods of production are still
      retained).
    

      The chapter on the “new middle estate” is likewise extremely

    

      interesting and, for us Russians, particularly instructive. If Bernstein
      had merely wanted to say that in place of the declining petty
      producers a new middle estate, the intelligentsia, is appearing, he would
      be perfectly correct, says Kautsky, pointing out that he himself noted the
      importance of this phenomenon several years before. In all spheres of
      people’s labour, capitalism increases the number of office and
      professional workers with particular rapidity and makes a growing
      demand for intellectuals. The latter occupy a special position among the
      other classes, attaching themselves partly to the bourgeoisie by their
      connections, their outlooks, etc., and partly to the wage-workers as
      capitalism increasingly deprives the intellectual of his independent
      position, converts him into a hired worker and threatens to lower his
      living standard. The transitory, unstable, contradictory position of that
      stratum of society now under discussion is reflected in the particularly
      widespread diffusion in its midst of hybrid, eclectic views, a farrago of
      contrasting principles and ideas, an urge to rise verbally to the higher
      spheres and to conceal the conflicts between the historical groups of the
      population with phrases—all of which Marx lashed with his sarcasm
      half a century ago.
    

      In the chapter on the theory of crises Kautsky shows that Marx did not at
      all postulate a “theory” of the ten- year cycle of industrial
      crises, but merely stated a fact. The change in this cycle in recent times
      has been noted by Engels himself. It is said that cartels of
      industrialists can counteract crises by limiting and regulating
      production. But America is a land of cartels; yet instead of a limitation
      we see there a tremendous growth of production. Further, the cartels limit
      production for the home market but expand it for the foreign market,
      selling their goods abroad at a loss and extracting monopoly prices from
      consumers in their own country. This system is inevitable under
      protectionism and there are no grounds for anticipating a change from
      protectionism to Free Trade. The cartels close small factories,
      concentrate and monopolise production, introduce improvements, and in this
      way greatly worsen the condition of the producers. Bernstein is of the
      opinion that the speculation which gives rise to crises weakens as the
      conditions on the world market change from unforeseeable to foreseeable

    

      and known conditions; but he forgets that it is the
      “unforeseeable” conditions in the new countries that give a
      tremendous impetus to speculation in the old countries. Using statistical
      data, Kautsky shows the growth of speculation in precisely the last few
      years, as well as the growth in the symptoms indicating a crisis in the
      not very distant future.
    

      With regard to the remaining part of Kautsky’s book, we must mention his
      analysis of the muddle people get into through confusing (as does
      Mr. S. Prokopovich, op. cit.) the economic strength of certain groups with
      their economic organisations. We must mention Kautsky’s statement to the
      effect that Bernstein ascribes to purely temporary conditions of a given
      historical situation the dignity of a general law— his refutation of
      Bernstein’s incorrect views on the essence of democracy; and his
      explanation of Bernstein’s statistical error, in comparing the number of
      industrial workers in Germany with the number of voters and overlooking
      the mere trifle that not all the workers in Germany (but only males over
      the age of 25) enjoy the franchise and that not all participate in the
      elections. We can only strongly recommend to the reader who is interested
      in the question of the significance of Bernstein’s book and in the polemic
      around it to turn to the German literature and under no circumstances to
      believe the biased and one-sided reviews by the proponents of eclecticism
      that dominate in Russian literature. We have heard that part of Kautsky’s
      book here under review will probably be translated into Russian. This is
      very desirable, but is no substitute for an acquaintanceship with the
      original.
    

 
Notes
 

[1]

Karl Kautsky. Bernstein and the Social-Democratic Programme.
  A Counter-Critique.—Ed.
    
 



[2]

Zur Kritik — Marx’s Zur Kritik der politisehen
Ökonomie (A Contribution to the Critique of Political
Economy). Lenin’s references are to the Russian edition of the book
published in 1896.
    



[3]

Rheinische Zeitung für Politik, Handel und Gewerb (Rhenish
Gazette for Politics, Trade, and Manufacture)—a daily
newspaper that appeared in Cologne from January 1, 1842, to March 31,
1843. The paper was founded by representatives of Rhineland bourgeois
who were opposed to Prussian absolutism. Certain Left Hegelians were
invited to contribute to the paper. Marx became a collaborator in April
1842 and was one of the paper’s editors from October of that year. The
Rheinische Zeitung also published a series of articles by
Frederick Engels. Under Marx the paper began to take on a more definite
revolutionary-democratic character. The course taken by the
Rheinische Zeitung, and the great popularity it achieved in
Germany, caused alarm and discontent in government circles and led to
the vicious persecution of the paper by the reactionary press. On
January 19, 1843, the Prussian Government issued an order to close down
the Rheinische Zeitung from April 1, 1843, and to establish a
particularly strict, double censorship for the remaining period of its
existence.
    



[4]

      Lenin refers to the Manifesto of the Communist Party.
    



[5]

      Karl Marx, “Preface to A Contribution to the Critique of
Political Economy” (Marx and Engels, Selected Works,
Vol. I, Moscow, 1958, p. 365).
    



[6]

      See Note 78.
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 4

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Articles for “Rabochaya Gazeta”









Lenin: Articles for 'Rabochaya Gazeta'








V. I.  

      Lenin
Articles for “Rabochaya Gazeta”[1]




Written: Written in the second half of 1899 

Published:

      First published in 1925 in Lenin Miscellany III.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 4,

      pages 205-226.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



Contents






LETTER TO THE EDITORIAL GROUP
  207



OUR PROGRAMME
  210



OUR IMMEDIATE TASK
  215



AN URGENT QUESTION
  221

 
 
 

Notes
 
 



[1]

      Lenin wrote “Our Programme,” “Our Immediate Task,”
      and “A.n Urgent Question” during his exile. He
      intended the articles for Rabochaya Gazeta, which had been
      adopted as official organ of the Party at the First Congress of the
      R.S.D.L.P. An attempt to renew the publication of the newspaper was made
      in 1899 and the editorial group proposed to Lenin that be assume the
      editor ship; later it invited him to collaborate. Lenin sent the articles
      with the letter to the editorial group. The attempt to renew publication
      was unsuccessful and the articles were never printed.
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 4

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Letter to the Editorial Group









Lenin: 1899/articles: LETTER TO THE EDITORIAL GROUP







V. I.  

      Lenin
Articles for “Rabochaya Gazeta”



    

    
    

 
    LETTER TO THE EDITORIAL GROUP

      Dear Comrades!
    

      In response to your request I am sending three articles for the newspaper and
      deem it essential to say a few words about my collaboration in general and the
      relations between us in particular.
    

      From your previous communication I gathered that you wanted to found a
      publishing firm and give me a series of Social-Democratic pamphlets to edit.
    

      Now I see that matters are different, that you have set up your Editorial
      Board, which is beginning the publication of a newspaper and invites me to
      collaborate.
    

      Needless to say, I agree willingly to this proposal as well, but I must
      state, in doing so, that I consider successful collaboration possible
      only on the following terms:

      1) regular relations between the editors and the collaborator,
who shall be informed of decisions on all manuscripts
(accepted, rejected, changed) and of all publications of your
firm; 2) my articles to be signed with a special pseudonym (if the
one I sent you has been lost, choose another yourselves); 3) agreement
between the editors and the collaborator on fundamental views concerning
theoretical questions, concerning immediate practical tasks, and
concerning the desired character of the newspaper (or series of
pamphlets).
    

      I hope the editors will agree to these terms and, in order to effect the
      earliest possible agreement between us, I will deal in brief with the questions
      arising out of the third condition.
    
 

      I am informed that you find that “the old current is strong”
      and that there is no particular need for a polemic against Bernsteinism
      and its Russian echoers. I consider this view to be too
      optimistic. Bernstein’s public announcement that the majority of the
      Russian Social-Democrats agree with

      him[1];
      the split between the
      “young” Russian Social-Democrats abroad and the Emancipation
      of Labour

      group[2]
      which is the founder, the representative, and the most
      faithful custodian of the “old current”; the vain efforts of
      Rabochaya Mysl to say some new word, to revolt against the
      “extensive” political tasks, to raise petty matters and
      amateurish work to the heights of apotheosis, to wax vulgarly ironical
      over “revolutionary theories” (No. 7, “In Passing”);
      lastly, complete disorder in the legal Marxist literature and the frantic
      efforts on the part of the majority of its representatives to seize upon
      Bernsteinism, the “criticism” à la mode—all
      this, in my opinion, serves to show clearly that the re-establishment of
      the “old current” and its energetic defence is a matter of
      real urgency.
    

      You will see from the articles what my views on the tasks of the paper and
      the plan of its publication are, and I should very much like to know the
      extent of our solidarity on this question (unfortunately the articles have
      been written in somewhat of a hurry: it is very important for me to know
      the deadline for their delivery).
    

      I think it is necessary to launch a direct polemic against
      Rabochaya Mysl, but for this purpose I should like to receive
      Nos. 1-2, 6, and those following 7; also Proletarskaya

Borba.[3]
      I need the last-named pamphlet also in order to review
it in the paper.
    

      As to length, you write that I am to impose no constraint on myself. I
      think that as long as there is a newspaper I shall give preference to
      newspaper articles and deal in them even with pamphlet themes, reserving
      for myself the right to work the articles up into pamphlets at a later
      date. The subjects with which I propose to deal in the immediate future
      are: 1) the Draft Programme (I’ll send it

      soon)[4];
      2) questions of tactics and organisation that are to be discussed at the
      next congress of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour

      Party[5];

      3) a pamphlet on rules of conduct for workers and socialists at liberty,
      in prison, and in exile—modelled after

    

      the Polish pamphlet (on “rides of conduct”—if you can, I
      should like you to obtain it for me); 4) strikes (I —their
      significance, II—laws on strikes; Ill—a review of some of the
      strikes of recent years); 5) the pamphlet, Woman and the Working-Class
      Cause, and others.
    

      I should like to know approximately what material the Editorial Board has
      in hand, so as to avoid repetition and the tackling of questions that have
      already been “exhausted.”
    

      I shall await an answer from the Editorial Board through the same
      channels. (Apart from this way I have not had nor have I any other
      means of communicating with your group.)
    

      F.P.[6]
 

    

    
 
Notes
 
 



[1]

      Russian opportunists, the “economists” and the Bundists, were
      in agreement with Bernstein’s views. In his Premises of
      Socialism, Bernstein represented their agreement with his views as
      being that of the majority of the Russian Social-Democrats.
    



[2]

      This is a reference to the split in the Union of Russian Social-Democrats
      Abroad at its first conference held in Zurich in November 1898.
    



[3]

      The collection, Proletarskaya Borba (Proletarian Struggle),
No. 1, published by the Social-Democratic group of the Urals, was
printed in the winter of 1898-99 at the group’s own press. The writers
who prepared the collection adopted an “economist” position,
denied the necessity for an independent working-class political p arty
and believed that the political revolution could be effected by a
general strike. Lenin characterised the views of the authors of this
collection in an assessment in Chapter IV of What Is to Be
Done? (see present edition, Vol. 5).
    



[4]

      The reference is to “A Draft Programme of Our Party” (see pp.
      227-54 of this volume).
    



[5]

      This refers to the Second Congress of the R.S.D.L.P., which was to have
      been convened in the spring of 1900. For Lenin’s attitude to the convening
      of a congress at this time see pp. 323 and 353 of this volume.
    



[6]

F. P.— one of Lenin’s pen-names.
    

 
  


|

OUR PROGRAMME

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 4

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Our Programme









Lenin: 1899/articles: OUR PROGRAMME







V. I.  

      Lenin
Articles for “Rabochaya Gazeta”



    

    OUR PROGRAMME

      International Social-Democracy is at present in a state of ideological
      wavering. Hitherto the doctrines of Marx and Engels were considered to
      be the firm foundation of revolutionary theory, but voices are now being
      raised every where to proclaim these doctrines inadequate and
      obsolete. Whoever declares himself to be a Social-Democrat and intends
      to publish a Social-Democratic organ must define precisely his attitude
      to a question that is preoccupying the attention of the German
      Social-Democrats and not of them alone.
    

      We take our stand entirely on the Marxist theoretical position: Marxism
      was the first to transform socialism from a utopia into a science, to lay
      a firm foundation for this science, and to indicate the path that must be
      followed in further developing and elaborating it in all its parts. It
      disclosed the nature of modern capitalist economy by explaining how the
      hire of the labourer, the purchase of labour-power, conceals the
      enslavement of millions of propertyless people by a handful of
      capitalists, the owners of the land, factories, mines, and so forth. It
      showed that all modern capitalist development displays the tendency of
      large-scale production to eliminate petty production and creates
      conditions that make a socialist system of society possible and
      necessary. It taught us how to discern, beneath the pall of rooted
      customs, political intrigues, abstruse laws, and intricate
      doctrines—the class struggle, the struggle between the
      propertied classes in all their variety and the propertyless mass, the
      proletariat, which is at the head of all the propertyless. It
      made clear the real task of

    

      a revolutionary socialist party: not to draw up plans for refashioning
      society, not to preach to the capitalists and their hangers-on about
      improving the lot of the workers, not to hatch conspiracies, but to
organise the class struggle of the proletariat and to lead this
struggle, the ultimate aim of which is the conquest of political power
by the proletariat and the organisation of a socialist society.
    

      And we now ask: Has anything new been introduced into this theory by its
      loud-voiced “renovators” who are raising so much noise in
      our day and have grouped themselves around the German socialist
      Bernstein?  Absolutely nothing. Not by a single step have they
      advanced the science which Marx and Engels enjoined us to develop; they
      have not taught the proletariat any new methods of struggle; they have
      only retreated, borrowing fragments of backward theories and preaching
      to the proletariat, not the theory of struggle, but the theory of
      concession—concession to the most vicious enemies of the
      proletariat, the governments and bourgeois parties who never tire of
      seeking new means of baiting the socialists. Plekhanov, one of the
      founders and leaders of Russian Social-Democracy, was entirely right in
      ruthlessly criticising Bernstein’s latest

      “critique”[1];
      the views of Bern stein have now been rejected by the
      representatives of the German workers as well (at the Hannover

      Congress).[2]


We anticipate a flood of accusations for these words; the shouts will
rise that we want to convert the socialist party into an order of
“true believers” that persecutes “heretics” for
deviations from “dogma,” for every independent opinion, and so
forth. We know about all these fashionable and trenchant phrases. Only
there is not a grain of truth or sense in them. There can be no strong
socialist party without a revolutionary theory which unites all
socialists, from which they draw all their convictions, and which they
apply in their methods of struggle and means of action. To defend such a
theory, which to the best of your knowledge you consider to be true,
against unfounded attacks and at tempts to corrupt it is not to imply
that you are an enemy of all criticism. We do not regard Marx’s
theory as some thing completed and inviolable; on the contrary, we arc
convinced that it has only laid the foundation stone of the science
which socialists must develop in all directions if

    

      they wish to keep pace with life. We think that an independent
      elaboration of Marx’s theory is especially essential for Russian
      socialists; for this theory provides only general guiding
      principles, which, in particular, are applied in England
      differently than in France, in France differently than in Germany, and in
      Germany differently than in Russia. We shall therefore gladly afford space
      in our paper for articles on theoretical questions and we invite all
      comrades openly to discuss controversial points.
    

      What are the main questions that arise in the application to Russia of the
      programme common to all Social-Democrats? We have stated that the essence
      of this programme is to organise the class struggle of the proletariat and
      to lead this struggle, the ultimate aim of which is the conquest of
      political power by the proletariat and the establishment of a socialist
      society. The class struggle of the proletariat comprises the economic
      struggle (struggle against individual capitalists or against individual
      groups of capitalists for the improvement of the workers’ condition) and
      the political struggle (struggle against the government for the broadening
      of the people’s rights, i.e., for democracy, and for the broadening of the
      political power of the proletariat). Some Russian Social-Democrats (among
      them apparently those who direct Rabochaya Mysl) regard the
      economic struggle as incomparably the more important and almost go so far
      as to relegate the political struggle to the more or less distant
      future. This standpoint is utterly false. All Social- Democrats are agreed
      that it is necessary to organise the economic struggle of the working
      class, that it is necessary to carry on agitation among the workers on
      this basis, i.e., to help the workers in their day-to-day struggle against
      the employers, to draw their attention to every form and every case of
      oppression and in this way to make clear to them the necessity for
      combination. But to forget the political struggle for the economic would
      mean to depart from the basic principle of international Social-Democracy,
      it would mean to forget what the entire history of the labour movement
      teaches us. The confirmed adherents of the bourgeoisie and of the
      government which serves it have even made repeated attempts to organise
      purely economic unions of workers and to divert them in this way from
      “politics,” from

    

      socialism. It is quite possible that the Russian Government, too, may
      undertake something of the kind, as it has always endeavoured to throw
      some paltry sops or, rather, sham sops, to the people, only to turn their
      thoughts away from the fact that they are oppressed and without rights. No
      economic struggle can bring the workers any lasting improvement, or can
      even be conducted on a large scale, unless the workers have the right
      freely to organise meetings and unions, to have their own newspapers, and
      to send their representatives to the national assemblies, as do the
      workers in Germany and all other European countries (with the exception of
      Turkey and Russia). But in order to win these rights it is necessary to
      wage a political struggle. In Russia, not only the workers, but
      all citizens are deprived of political rights. Russia is an absolute and
      unlimited monarchy. The tsar alone promulgates laws, appoints officials
      and controls them. For this reason, it seems as though in Russia
      the tsar and the tsarist government are independent of all classes and
      accord equal treatment to all. But in reality all officials are
      chosen exclusively from the proper tied class and all are subject to the
      influence of the big capitalists, who make the ministers dance to their
      tune and who achieve whatever they want. The Russian working class is
      burdened by a double yoke; it is robbed and plundered by the capitalists
      and the landlords, and to prevent it from fighting them, the police bind
      it hand and foot, gag it, and every attempt to defend the rights of the
      people is persecuted. Every strike against a capitalist results in the
      military and police being let loose on the workers. Every economic
      struggle necessarily becomes a political struggle, and Social-Democracy
      must indissolubly combine the one with the other into a single class
      struggle of the proletariat. The first and chief aim of such a
      struggle must be the conquest of political rights, the conquest of
      political liberty. If the workers of St. Petersburg alone, with a
      little help from the socialists, have rapidly succeeded in wringing a
      concession from the government—the adoption of the law on the
      reduction of the working

      day[3]—then
      the Russian working class as a whole, led by a single Russian
      Social-Democratic Labour Party, will be able, in persistent struggle, to
      win incomparably more important concessions.
    
 

      The Russian working class is able to wage its economic and political
      struggle alone, even if no other class comes to its aid. But in the
      political struggle the workers do not stand alone. The people’s complete
      lack of rights and the savage lawlessness of the bashi-bazouk officials
      rouse the indignation of all honest educated people who cannot reconcile
      themselves to the persecution of free thought and free speech; they rouse
      the indignation of the persecuted Poles, Finns, Jews, and Russian
      religious sects; they rouse the indignation of the small merchants,
      manufacturers, and peasants, who can nowhere find protection from the
      persecution of officials and police. All these groups of the population
      are incapable, separately, of carrying on a persistent political
      struggle. But when the working class raises the banner of this struggle,
      it will receive support from all sides. Russian Social-Democracy will
      place itself at the head of all fighters for the rights of the people, of
      all fighters for democracy, and it will prove invincible!
    

      These are our fundamental views, and we shall develop them systematically
      and from every aspect in our paper. We are convinced that in this way we
      shall tread the path which has been indicated by the Russian
      Social-Democratic Labour Party in its published Manifesto.
    

    

    
 
Notes
 
 



[1]

      The reference is to Plekhanov’s article, “Bernstein and
      Materialism,” published in issue No. 44 of Neue Zeit (New Times),
      organ of the German Social-Democrats, in July 1898.
    



[2]

      The Hannover Congress of the German Social-Democrats was held in
      1899 from September 27 to October 2 (October 9-14). In the discussion of
      the chief point on the agenda, “The Attack on the Fundamental Views
      and Tactics of the Party,” the Congress voted against Bernstein’s
      revisionist views, without, however, subjecting them to an extensive
      criticism.
    



[3]

      The law of June 2 (14), 1897, establishing an eleven-and-a-half- hour day
      for industrial enterprises and railway workshops. Prior to this the
      working day in Russia had not been regulated and was as long as fourteen
      or fifteen hours. The tsarist government was forced to issue the June 2
      law because of pressure on the part of the working-class movement headed
      by the Leninist “League of Struggle for the Emancipation of the
      Working Class.” Lenin made a detailed analysis and criticism of the law in
      a pamphlet entitled The New Factory Law (see present edition,
      Vol. 2, pp. 267-315).
    

 
  

LETTER TO THE EDITORIAL GROUP

|

OUR IMMEDIATE TASK

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 4

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Our Immediate Task









Lenin: 1899/articles: OUR IMMEDIATE TASK







V. I.  

      Lenin
Articles for “Rabochaya Gazeta”



    

    OUR IMMEDIATE TASK

      The Russian working-class movement is today going through a period of
      transition. The splendid beginning achieved by the Social-Democratic
      workers’ organisations in the Western area, St. Petersburg, Moscow, Kiev,
      and other cities was consummated by the formation of the Russian
      Social-Democratic Labour Party (spring 1898). Russian Social-Democracy
      seems to have exhausted, for the time being, all its strength in making
      this tremendous step forward and has gone back to the former isolated
      functioning of separate local organisations. The Party has not ceased to
      exist, it has only withdrawn into itself in order to gather strength and
      put the unification of all Russian Social-Democrats on a sound footing. To
      effect this unification, to evolve a suitable form for it and to get rid
      completely of narrow local isolation—such is the immediate and most
      urgent task of the Russian Social-Democrats.
    

      We are all agreed that our task is that of the organisation of the
      proletarian class struggle. But what is this class struggle? When the
      workers of a single factory or of a single branch of industry engage in
      struggle against their employer or employers, is this class struggle? No,
      this is only a weak embryo of it. The struggle of the workers becomes a
      class struggle only when all the foremost representatives of the entire
      working class of the whole country are conscious of themselves as a single
      working class and launch a struggle that is directed, not against
      individual employers, but against the entire class of capitalists
      and against the government that supports that class. Only when the
      individual worker realises that he is a member

    

      of the entire working class, only when he recognises the fact that his
      petty day-to-day struggle against individual employers and individual
      government officials is a struggle against the entire bourgeoisie and the
      entire government, does his struggle become a class struggle. “Every
      class struggle is a political

      struggle”[1]—these
      famous words of Marx are not to be understood to mean that any struggle of
      workers against employers must always be a political
      struggle. They must be understood to mean that the struggle of the workers
      against, the capitalists inevitably becomes a political struggle
      insofar as it becomes a class struggle. It is the task
      of the Social-Democrats, by organising the workers, by conducting
      propaganda and agitation among them, to turn their spontaneous
      struggle against their oppressors into the struggle of the whole class,
      into the struggle of a definite political party for definite
      political and socialist ideals. This is some thing that cannot be achieved
      by local activity alone.
    

      Local Social-Democratic activity has attained a fairly high level in our
      country. The seeds of Social-Democratic ideas have been broadcast
      throughout Russia; workers’ leaf lets—the earliest form of
      Social-Democratic literature—are known to all Russian workers from
      St. Petersburg to Krasnoyarsk, from the Caucasus to the Urals. All that is
      now lacking is the unification of all this local work into the work of a
      single party. Our chief drawback, to the overcoming of which we
      must devote all our energy, is the narrow “amateurish”
      character of local work. Because of this amateurish character many
      manifestations of the working-class movement in Russia remain purely local
      events and lose a great deal of their significance as examples for the
      whole of Russian Social-Democracy, as a stage of the whole Russian
      working-class movement. Because of this amateurishness, the consciousness
      of their community of interests throughout Russia is insufficiently
      inculcated in the workers, they do not link up their struggle sufficiently
      with the idea of Russian socialism and Russian democracy. Because of this
      amateurishness the comrades’ varying views on theoretical and practical
      problems are not openly discussed in a central newspaper, they do not
      serve the purpose of elaborating a common programme and devising common
      tactics for the Party, they are lost in narrow study-circle life or they
      lead

    

      to the inordinate exaggeration of local and chance peculiarities. Enough
      of our amateurishness! We have attained sufficient maturity to go over to
      common action, to the elaboration of a common Party programme, to
      the joint discussion of our Party tactics and organisation.
    

      Russian Social-Democracy has done a great deal in criticising old
      revolutionary and socialist theories; it has not limited itself to
      criticism and theorising alone; it has shown that its programme is not
      hanging in the air but is meeting the extensive spontaneous movement among
      the people, that is, among the factory proletariat. It has now to make the
      following, very difficult, but very important, step—to elaborate an
      organisation of the movement adapted to our conditions. Social-Democracy
      is not confined to simple service to the working-class movement: it
      represents “the combination of socialism and the working-class
      movement” (to use Karl Kautsky’s definition which repeats the
      basic ideas of the Communist Manifesto); the task of
      Social-Democracy is to bring definite socialist ideals to the spontaneous
      working-class movement, to connect this movement with socialist
      convictions that should attain the level of contemporary science, to
      connect it with the regular political struggle for democracy as a means of
      achieving socialism—in a word, to fuse this spontaneous movement
      into one indestructible whole with the activity of the revolutionary
      party. The history of socialism and democracy in Western Europe, the
      history of the Russian revolutionary movement, the experience of our
      working-class movement—such is the material we must
      master to elaborate a purposeful organisation and purposeful tactics for
      our Party. “The analysis” of this material must, however, be
      done in dependently, since there are no ready-made models to be found
      anywhere. On the one hand, the Russian working-class movement exists under
      conditions that are quite different from those of Western Europe. It would
      be most dangerous to have any illusions on this score. On the other hand,
      Russian Social-Democracy differs very substantially from former
      revolutionary parties in Russia, so that the necessity of learning
      revolutionary technique and secret organisation from the old Russian
      masters (we do not in the least hesitate to admit this necessity) does not
      in any way relieve

    

      us of the duty of assessing them critically and elaborating our own
      organisation independently.
    

      In the presentation of such a task there are two main questions that come
      to the fore with particular insistence:

      1) How is the need for the complete liberty of local

      Social- Democratic 

      activity to be combined with the need for establishing a single—and,
      consequently, a centralist—party? Social-Democracy draws its
      strength from the spontaneous working-class movement that manifests itself
      differently and at different times in the various industrial centres; the
      activity of the local Social-Democratic organisations is the
      basis of all Party activity. If, however, this is to be the
      activity of isolated “amateurs,” then it cannot, strictly speaking,
      be called Social-Democratic, since it will not be the organisation and
      leadership of the class struggle of the proletariat. 2) How can
      we combine the striving of Social-Democracy to become a revolutionary
      party that makes the struggle for political liberty its chief purpose with
      the determined refusal of Social-Democracy to organise political
      conspiracies, its emphatic refusal to “call the workers to the
      barricades” (as correctly noted by P. B. Axelrod), or, in general,
      to impose on the workers this or that “plan” for an attack on
      the government, which has been thought up by a company of revolutionaries?
    

      Russian Social-Democracy has every right to believe that it has provided
      the theoretical solution to these questions; to dwell on this
      would mean to repeat what has been said in the article, “Our
      Programme.” It is now a matter of the practical solution to these
      questions. This is not a solution that can be made by a single person or a
      single group; it can be provided only by the organised activity of Social-
      Democracy as a whole. We believe that the most urgent task of the moment
      consists in undertaking the solution of these questions, for which purpose
      we must have as our immediate aim the founding of a Party organ that
      will appear regularly and be closely connected with all the local
      groups. We believe that all the activity of the
      Social-Democrats should be directed to this end throughout the whole of
      the forthcoming period. Without such an organ, local work will remain
      narrowly “amateurish.” The formation of the Party—if the
      correct representation of that Party in a

    

      certain newspaper is not organised—will to a considerable extent
      remain bare words. An economic struggle that is not united by a central
      organ cannot become the class struggle of the entire Russian
      proletariat. It is impossible to conduct a political struggle if the Party
      as a whole fails to make statements on all questions of policy and to give
      direction to the various manifestations of the struggle. The organisation
      and disciplining of the revolutionary forces and the development of
      revolutionary technique are impossible without the discussion of all these
      questions in a central organ, without the collective elaboration of
      certain forms and rules for the conduct of affairs, without the
      establishment—through the central organ—of every Party
      member’s responsibility to the entire Party.
    

      In speaking of the necessity to concentrate all Party
      forces—all literary forces, all organisational abilities, all
      material resources, etc.—on the foundation and correct conduct of
      the organ of the whole Party, we do not for a moment think of pushing
      other forms of activity into the background—e.g., local agitation,
      demonstrations, boycott, the persecution of spies, the bitter campaigns
      against individual representatives of the bourgeoisie and the government,
      protest strikes, etc., etc. On the contrary, we are convinced that all
      these forms of activity constitute the basis of the Party’s
      activity, but, without their unification through an organ of the
      whole Party, these forms of revolutionary struggle lose nine-tenths 01
      their significance; they do not lead to the creation of common Party
      experience, to the creation of Party traditions and continuity. The Party
      organ, far from competing with such activity, will exercise tremendous
      influence on its extension, consolidation, and systematisation.
    

      The necessity to concentrate all forces on establishing a
      regularly appearing and regularly delivered organ arises out of the
      peculiar situation of Russian Social-Democracy as compared with that of
      Social-Democracy in other European countries and with that of the old
      Russian revolutionary parties. Apart from newspapers, the workers of
      Germany, France, etc., have numerous other means for the public
      manifestation of their activity, for organising the movement—
      parliamentary activity, election agitation, public meetings,

    

      participation in local public bodies (rural and urban), the open conduct
      of trade unions (professional, guild), etc., etc. In place of all of
      that, yes, all of that, we must be served—until we
      have won political liberty—by a revolutionary newspaper, without
      which no broad organisation of the entire working-class movement
      is possible. We do not believe in conspiracies, we renounce individual
      revolutionary ventures to destroy the government; the words of Liebknecht,
      veteran of German Social-Democracy, serve as the watchword of our
      activities: “Studieren, propagandieren,
      organisieren”— Learn, propagandise, organise— and the
      pivot of this activity can and must be only the organ of the
      Party.
    

      But is the regular and more or less stable establishment of such an organ
      possible, and under what circumstances is it possible? We shall deal with
      this matter next time.
    
    

    
 

Notes
 
 



[1]

      Marx and Engels, The Manifesto of the Communist Party (Select ed
Works, Vol. I, Moscow, 1958, pp. 42-43). P. 216
    

 
  

OUR PROGRAMME

|

AN URGENT QUESTION

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 4

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## An Urgent Question









Lenin: 1899/articles: AN URGENT QUESTION







V. I.  

      Lenin
Articles for “Rabochaya Gazeta”



    

    AN URGENT QUESTION

      In the previous article we said that our immediate task is to establish a
      Party organ, one that appears and can be delivered regularly, and we
      raised the question of whether and under what circumstances it is possible
      to achieve this aim. Let us examine the more important aspects of this
      question.
    

      The main objection that may be raised is that the achievement of this
      purpose first requires the development of local group
      activity. We consider this fairly widespread opinion to be fallacious. We
      can and must immediately set about founding the Party organ—and, it
      follows, the Party itself—and putting them on a sound footing. The
      conditions essential to such a step already exist: local Party work is
      being carried on and obviously has struck deep roots; for the destructive
      police attacks that are growing more frequent lead to only short
      interruptions; fresh forces rapidly replace those that have fallen in
      battle. The Party has resources for publishing and literary forces, not
      only abroad, but in Russia as well. The question, therefore, is whether
      the work that is already being conducted should be continued in
      “amateur” fashion or whether it should be organised into the
      work of one party and in such a way that it is reflected in its entirety
      in one common organ.
    

      Here we come to the most urgent question of our movement, to its sore
      point—organisation. The improvement of revolutionary organisation
      and discipline, the perfection of our underground technique are an
      absolute necessity. We must openly admit that in this respect we are
      lagging behind

    

      the old Russian revolutionary parties and must bend all our efforts to
      overtake and surpass them. Without improved organisation there can be no
      progress of our working-class movement in general, and no establishment of
      an active party with a properly functioning organ, in particular. That is
      on the one hand. On the other, the existing Party organs (organs in the
      sense of institutions and groups, as well as newspapers) must pay greater
      attention to questions of organisation and exert an influence in this
      respect on local groups.
    

      Local, amateurish work always leads to a great excess of personal
      connections, to study-circle methods, and we have grown out of the
      study-circle stage which has become too narrow for our present-day work
      and which leads to an over-expenditure of forces. Only fusion into a
      single party will enable us strictly to observe the principles of division
      of labour and economy of forces, which must be achieved in order to reduce
      the losses and build as reliable a bulwark as possible against the
      oppression of the autocratic government and against its frantic
      persecutions. Against us, against the tiny groups of socialists hidden in
      the expanses of the Russian “underground,” there stands the huge
      machine of a most powerful modern state that is exerting all its forces to
      crush socialism and democracy. We are convinced that we shall, in the end,
      smash that police state, because all the sound and developing sections of
      our society are in favour of democracy and socialism; but, in order to
      conduct a systematic struggle against the government, we must raise
      revolutionary organisation, discipline, and the technique of underground
      work to the highest degree of perfection. It is essential for individual
      Party members or separate groups of members to specialise in the different
      aspects of Party work—some in the duplication of literature, others
      in its transport across the frontier, a third category in its distribution
      inside Russia, a fourth in its distribution in the cities, a fifth in the
      arrangement of secret meeting places, a sixth in the collection of funds,
      a seventh in the delivery of correspondence and all information about the
      movement, an eighth in maintaining relations, etc., etc. We know that this
      sort of specialisation requires much greater self-restraint, much greater
      ability to concentrate on

    

      modest, unseen, everyday work, much greater real heroism than the usual
      work in study circles.
    

      The Russian socialists and the Russian working class, however, have shown
      their heroic qualities and, in general, it would be a sin to complain of a
      shortage of people. There is to be observed among the working youth an
      impassioned, uncontrollable enthusiasm for the ideas of democracy and
      socialism, and helpers for the workers still continue to arrive from among
      the intellectuals, despite the fact that the prisons and places of exile
      are overcrowded. If the idea of the necessity for a stricter organisation
      is made widely known among all these recruits to the revolutionary cause,
      the plan for the organisation of a regularly published and delivered Party
      newspaper will cease to be a dream. Let us take one of the conditions for
      the success of this plan—that the news paper be assured a regular
      supply of correspondence and other material from everywhere. Has not
      history shown that at all times when there has been a resurgence of our
      revolutionary movement such a purpose has proved possible of achievement
      even in respect of papers published abroad? If Social-Democrats working in
      various localities come to regard the Party newspaper as their
      own and consider the maintenance of regular contact with it, the
      discussion of their problems and the reflection of the whole movement in
      it to be their main task, it will be quite possible to ensure the supply
      to the paper of full information about the movement, provided methods of
      maintaining secrecy, not very complicated ones, are observed. The other
      aspect of the question, that of delivering the newspaper regularly to all
      parts of Russia, is much more difficult, more difficult than the similar
      task under previous forms of revolutionary movement in Russia when
      newspapers were not, to such an extent, intended for the masses of the
      people. The purpose of Social-Democratic newspapers, however, facilitates
      their distribution. The chief places to which the newspaper must be
      delivered regularly and in large numbers are the industrial centres,
      factory villages and towns, the factory districts of big cities, etc. In
      such centres the population is almost entirely working class; in actual
      fact the worker in such places is master of the situation and has hundreds
      of ways of outwitting the police; relations with neighbouring factory
      centres are

    

      distinguished by their extraordinary activity. At the time of the
      Exceptional Law against the Socialists

      (1878-90)[2]
      the German political police did not function worse, but probably better,
      than the Russian police; nevertheless, the German workers, thanks to their
      organisation and discipline, were able to ensure the regular transport
      across the frontiers of a weekly illegal newspaper and to deliver it to
      the houses of all subscribers, so that even the ministers could not
      refrain from admiring the Social-Democratic post (“the red mail”). We
      do not, of course, dream of such successes, but we can, if we bend our
      efforts towards it, ensure that our Party newspaper appears no less than
      twelve times a year and is regularly delivered in all the main centres of
      the movement to all groups of workers that can be reached by socialism.
    

      To return to the question of specialisation, we must also point out that
      its insufficiency is due partially to the dominance of “amateur’
      work and partially to the fact that our Social-Democratic newspapers
      usually devote far too little attention to questions of organisation.
    

      Only the establishment of a common Party organ can give the “worker
      in a given field” of revolutionary activity the consciousness that
      he is marching with the “rank and file,” the consciousness that his
      work is directly essential to the Party, that he is one of the links in
      the chain that will form a noose to strangle the most evil enemy of the
      Russian proletariat and of the whole Russian people—the Russian
      autocratic government. Only strict adherence to this type of
      specialisation can economise our forces; not only will every aspect of
      revolutionary work be carried out by a smaller number of people, but there
      will be an opportunity to make a number of aspects of present-day
      activities legal affairs. This legalisation of activity,
      its conduct within the framework of the law, has long been advised for
      Russian socialists by Vorwärts

      (Forward),[3]
      the chief organ of the German Social-Democrats. At first sight one is
      astonished at such advice, but in actual fact it merits careful
      attention. Almost everyone who has worked in a local study circle in some
      city will easily remember that among the numerous and diverse affairs in
      which the circle engaged some were, in themselves, legal (e.g. the
      gathering

    

      of information on the workers’ conditions; the study of legal literature
      on many questions; consultation and reviewing of certain types of foreign
      literature; maintenance of certain kinds of relations; aid to workers in
      obtaining a general education, in studying factory laws, etc.). Making
      affairs of this sort the specific function of a special contingent of
      people would reduce the strength of the revolutionary army “in the
      firing line” (without any reduction of its “fighting
      potential”) and increase the strength of the reserve, those who replace
      the “killed and wounded.” This will be possible only when both the
      active members and the reserve see their activities reflected in the
      common organ of the Party and sense their connection with it. Local
      meetings of workers and local groups will, of course, always be necessary,
      no matter to what extent we carry out our specialisation; but, on the one
      hand, the number of mass revolutionary meetings (particularly dangerous
      from the standpoint of police action and often having results far from
      commensurate with the danger involved) will become considerably less and,
      on the other hand, the selection of various aspects of revolutionary work
      as special functions will provide greater opportunities to screen such
      meetings behind legal forms of assembly: entertainments, meetings of
      societies sanctioned by law, etc. Were not the French workers under
      Napoleon III and the German workers at the time of the Exceptional Law
      against the Socialists able to devise all possible ways to cover up their
      political and socialist meetings? Russian workers will be able to do
      likewise.
    

      Further: only by better organisation and the establishment of a common Party
      organ will it be possible to extend and deepen the very content of
      Social-Democratic propaganda and agitation. We stand in great need of
      this. Local work must almost inevitably lead to the exaggeration of local

      particularities, to . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

      .[1]

      this is impossible without a central organ which will, at the same time,
      be an advanced democratic organ. Only then will our urge to
      convert. Social-Democracy into a leading fighter for democracy become
      reality. Only then, too, shall

    

      we be able to work out definite political tactics. Social- Democracy has
      renounced the fallacious theory of the “one reactionary mass.” It
      regards utilisation of the support of the progressive classes against the
      reactionary classes to be one of the most important political tasks. As
      long as the organisations and publications are local in character, this
      task can hardly be carried out at all: matters do not go farther than
      relations with individual “liberals” and the extraction of
      various “services” from them. Only a common Party organ,
      consistently implementing the principles of political struggle and holding
      high the banner of democracy will be able to win over to its side all
      militant democratic elements and use all Russia’s progressive forces in
      the struggle for political freedom. Only then shall we be able to convert
      the workers’ smouldering hatred of the police and the authorities into
      conscious hatred of the autocratic government and into determination to
      conduct a desperate struggle for the rights of the working class and of
      the entire Russian people! In modern Russia, a strictly organised
      revolutionary party built up on this foundation will prove the greatest
      political force!
    


      In subsequent issues we shall publish the draft programme of the Russian
      Social-Democratic Labour Party and begin a more detailed discussion of the
      various organisational questions.
    

 

Notes
 

[1]

      Part of the manuscript is not extant.—Ed.
    
 



[2]

The Exceptional Law Against the Socialists was promulgated in
      Germany in 1878. The law suppressed all organisations of the
      Social-Democratic Party, mass working-class organisations, and the labour
      press; socialist literature was confiscated and the banishing of
      socialists began. The law was annulled in 1890 under pressure of the mass
      working-class movement.
    



[3]

Vorwärts (Forward)—the central organ of
      German Social-Democracy; it was first published in 1876 and was edited by
      Wilhelm Liebknecht and others. Engels made use of its columns for the
      struggle against all manifestations of opportunism. From the middle
      nineties, however, after the death of Engels, Vorwärts began
      regularly to print articles of the opportunists, who predominated in
      German Social-Democracy and in the Second International.
    

 
  

OUR IMMEDIATE TASK

|


  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 4

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## A Draft of Our Party Programme









Lenin: A Draft of Our Party Programme







V. I.  

      Lenin
A Draft of Our Party Programme[1]




Written: Written at the end of 1899 

Published:

      First published in 1924 in the first edition of V. I. Lenin’s Collected Works, Vol. 1.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 4,

      pages 227-254.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



    

    
    


 

      The thing to begin with, most likely, is the question of whether there is
      really a pressing need for a programme of the Russian
      Social-Democrats. From comrades active in Russia we have heard the opinion
      expressed that at this particular moment there is no special need to draw
      up a programme; that the urgent question is one of developing and
      strengthening local organisations, of placing agitation and the delivery
      of literature on a more sound footing; that it would be better to postpone
      the elaboration of a programme until such time as when the movement stands
      on firmer ground; that a programme might, at the moment, turn out to be
      unfounded.
    

      We do not share this opinion. It goes without saying that “every step of
      real movement is more important than a dozen

      programmes,”[2]
      as Karl Marx said. But neither Marx nor any other theoretician or
      practical worker in the Social-Democratic movement has ever denied the
      tremendous importance of a programme for the consolidation and consistent
      activity of a political party. The Russian Social-Democrats have just got
      over the period of the most bitter polemics with socialists of other
      trends and with non-socialists who were unwilling to understand Russian
      Social-Democracy; they have also got over the initial stages of the
      movement during which the work was carried on piecemeal by small local
      organisations. The need for unity, for the establishment of common
      literature, for the appearance of Russian workers’ newspapers arises out
      of the real situation, and the foundation in the spring of 1898 of the
      Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party, which announced its intention of
      elaborating a Party programme in the near future, showed clearly that the
      demand for a programme grew out of the needs of the

    

      movement itself. At the present time the urgent question of our movement
      is no longer that of developing the former scattered “amateur”
      activities, but of uniting—of organisation. This is a step for which
      a programme is a necessity. The programme must formulate our basic views;
      precisely establish our immediate political tasks; point out the immediate
      demands that must show the area of agitational activity; give unity to the
      agitational work, expand and deepen it, thus raising it from fragmentary
      partial agitation for petty, isolated demands to the status of agitation
      for the sum total of Social-Democratic demands. Today, when
      Social-Democratic activity has aroused a fairly wide circle of social 1st
      intellectuals and class-conscious workers, it is urgently necessary to
      strengthen connections between them by a programme and in this way give
      all of them a sound basis for further, more extensive, activity. Lastly, a
      programme is urgently necessary because Russian public opinion is very
      often most profoundly mistaken in respect of the real tasks and methods of
      action of the Russian Social-Democrats: these mistaken views in some cases
      grow naturally in the morass of political putrefaction that is our real
      life, in others they are artificially nurtured by the opponents of
      Social-Democracy. In any case, this is a fact that has to be taken into
      account. The working-class movement, merging with socialism and with the
      political struggle, must establish a party that will have to dispel all
      these misunderstandings, if it is to stand at the head of all the
      democratic elements in Russian society. The objection may be raised,
      further, that the present moment is inopportune for the elaboration of a
      programme because there are differences of opinion that give rise to
      polemics among the Social-Democrats themselves. I believe the contrary to
      be true—this is another argument in favour of the necessity
      for a programme. On the one hand, since the polemic has begun, it is to be
      hoped that in the discussion of the draft programme all views and all
      shades of views will be afforded expression, that the discussion will be
      comprehensive. The polemic indicates that the Russian Social-Democrats are
      showing a revived interest in extensive questions pertaining to the aims
      of our movement and to its immediate tasks and tactics; precisely such a
      revival is essential to a discussion of the draft programme.

    

      On the other hand, if the polemic is not to be fruitless, if it is not to
      degenerate into personal rivalry, if it is not to lead to a confusion of
      views, to a confounding of enemies and friends, it is absolutely essential
      that the question of the programme be introduced into the polemic. The
      polemic will be of benefit only if it makes clear in what the differences
      actually consist, how profound they are, whether they are
      differences of substance or differences on partial questions, whether or
      not these differences interfere with common work in the ranks of one and
      the same party. Only the introduction of the programme question
      into the polemic, only a definite statement by the two polemising parties
      on their programmatic views, can provide an answer to all these
      questions, questions that insistently demand an answer. The elaboration of
      a common programme for the Party should not, of course, put an end to all
      polemics; it will firmly establish those basic views on the character, the
      aims, and the tasks of our movement which must serve as the banner of a
      fighting party, a party that remains consolidated and united despite
      partial differences of opinion among its members on partial questions.
    

      And now, to the matter.
    

      When a programme of the Russian Social-Democrats is spoken of, all eyes
      naturally turn towards the members of the Emancipation of Labour group who
      founded Russian Social-Democracy and have done so much for its theoretical
      and practical development. Our older comrades were not slow in responding
      to the demands of the Russian Social-Democratic movement. Almost at the
      very same time— in the spring of 1898—when preparations were
      being made for the congress of Russian Social-Democrats which laid the
      foundations for the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party, P. B. Axelrod
      published his pamphlet, Present Tasks and Tactics of the Russian
      Social-Democrats (Geneva, 1898; the foreword being dated March 1898),
      and reprinted as an appendix to it “A Draft Programme of the Russian
      Social-Democrats,” published by the Emancipation of Labour group as early
      as 1885.
    

      We shall begin with a discussion of this draft. Despite the fact that it
      was published almost 15 years ago, it is our opinion that, by and large,
      it adequately serves its

    

      purpose and is on the level of present-day Social-Democratic theory. The
      draft designates precisely that class which alone, in Russia as in other
      countries, is capable of being an in dependent fighter for
      socialism—the working class, the “industrial
      proletariat”; it states the aim which this class must set
      itself—“the conversion of all means and objects of production into
      social property,” “the abolition of commodity production” and
      “its replacement by a new system of social production”—“the
      communist revolution”; it indicates the “inevitable
      preliminary condition” for “the reconstruction of social
      relations”—“the seizure of political power by the working
      class”; it affirms the international solidarity of the proletariat
      and the necessity for an “element of variety in the programmes of
      the Social-Democrats of different states in accordance with the social
      conditions in each of them taken separately”; it points to the
      specific feature of Russia “where the masses of working people
      suffer under the double yoke of developing capitalism and moribund
      patriarchal economy”; it shows the connection between the Russian
      revolutionary movement and the process of the creation (by the forces of
      developing capitalism) of “a new class, the industrial
      proletariat—the most responsive,mobile,and developed”; it
      indicates the necessity for the formation of “a revolutionary
      working-class party” and specifies “its first political
      task”—“the overthrow of absolutism”; it shows the “means
      of political struggle” and formulates its basic demands.
    

      All these elements are, in our opinion, absolutely essential to a
      programme of the Social-Democratic working-class party; they all enunciate
      theses that have, until now, been again and again confirmed both in the
      development of socialist theory and in the development of the
      working-class movement of all countries, specifically, in the development
      of Russian social thought and the Russian working-class movement. In view
      of this, the Russian Social-Democrats can and should, in our opinion, make
      the draft of the Emancipation of Labour group—a draft requiring
      editorial changes, corrections, and additions only in respect of
      details— the basis of the programme of the Russian Social-Democratic
      working-class party.
    

      Let us try to note which of these changes of detail we deem advisable and in
      regard to which it would be desirable

    

      to have an exchange of opinions among all Russian Social-Democrats and
      class-conscious workers.
    

      In the first place, there must, of course, be some slight changes in the
      structural character of the programme; in 1885 it was the programme of a
      group of revolutionaries abroad who had proved able to define the only
      path of development for the movement that offered success, but who, at
      that time, still did not see before them anything like an extensive and
      independent working-class movement in Russia. In 1900 it has become a
      question of a programme for a working-class party founded by a large
      number of Russian Social-Democratic organisations. In addition to the
      editorial changes that are in consequence essential (and that need not be
      dealt with in detail, since they are self-evident), this difference makes
      it necessary to bring into the fore ground and emphasise more strongly the
      process of economic development that is engendering the material and
      spiritual conditions for the Social-Democratic working-class movement, and
      the class struggle of the proletariat which the Social-Democratic Party
      sets itself the aim of organising. The cardinal point of the programme
      should be the characterisation of the basic features of the present-day
      economic system of Russia and its development (cf. in the programme of the
      Emancipation of Labour group: “Capitalism has achieved tremendous
      success in Russia since the abolition of serfdom. The old system of
      natural economy is giving way to commodity production...”). This should be
      followed by an outline of the fundamental tendency of capitalism—the
      splitting of the people into a bourgeoisie and a proletariat, the growth
      of “the mass of misery, oppression, slavery, degradation,

      exploitation.”[3]
      These famous words of Marx are repeated in the second paragraph of the
      Erfurt Programme of the German Social-Democratic

      Party,[4]
      and the critics that are grouped about Bernstein have recently made
      particularly violent attacks precisely against this point, repeating the
      old objections raised by bourgeois liberals and social-politicians against
      the “theory of impoverishment.” In our opinion the polemic that has
      raged round this question has demonstrated the utter
      groundlessness of such “criticism.” Bernstein himself admitted
      that the above words of Marx were true as a characterisation of the
      tendency of

    

      capitalism—a tendency that becomes a reality in the absence of the
      class struggle of the proletariat against it, in the absence of labour
      protection laws achieved by the working class. It is precisely In Russia
      today that we see the above tendency manifesting its effect with
      tremendous force on the peasantry and the workers. Further, Kautsky has
      shown that these words on the growth of “the mass of misery, etc.,”
      are true in the sense, not only of characterising a tendency, but of
      indicating the growth of “social poverty,” i.e., the growth of the
      disparity between the condition of the proletariat and the living standard
      of the bourgeoisie—the standard of social consumption that continues
      to rise parallel with the gigantic growth in the productivity of
      labour. Lastly, these words are true also in the sense that in “the
      border regions” of capitalism (i.e., those countries and those
      branches of the national economy in which capitalism is only just emerging
      and clashing with pre-capitalist conditions) the growth of
      poverty—not only “social,” but also the most horrible physical
      poverty, to the extent of starvation and death from
      starvation—assumes a mass scale. Everybody knows that this is ten
      times mere applicable to Russia than to any other European country. And
      so, the words about the growth of “the mass of misery, oppression,
      slavery, degradation, exploitation” must, in our opinion,
      imperatively be included in our

      programme— first, 

      because they
      faithfully describe the basic and essential features of capitalism, they
      characterise precisely the process that unrolls before our eyes and that
      is one of the chief reasons for the emergence of the working-class
      movement and socialism in Russia; secondly, because these words provide a
      fund of material for agitation, because they summarise a whole series of
      phenomena that most oppress the masses of the workers, but, at the same
      time, most arouse their indignation (unemployment, low wages, under
      nourishment, famine, the Draconian discipline of capital, prostitution,
      the growth in the number of domestics, etc., etc.); and, thirdly, because
      by this precise characterisation of the ruinous effect of capitalism and
      of the necessary, inevitable indignation of the workers we draw a line
      between ourselves and the indecisive elements who “sympathise” with
      the proletariat and demand “reforms” for its

    

        

      benefit, while trying to occupy the “golden mean” between the
      proletariat and the bourgeoisie, between the autocratic government and the
      revolutionaries. It is particularly necessary today to dissociate
      ourselves from such people, if we are to strive for a united and
      consolidated working-class party that conducts a determined and unswerving
      struggle for political liberty and socialism.
    

      Here a few words are in order on our attitude to the Erfurt
      Programme. From what has been said above it is clear to everyone that we
      consider it necessary to make changes in the draft of the Emancipation of
      Labour group that will bring the programme of the Russian Social-Democrats
      closer to that of the German. We are not in the least afraid to say that
      we want to imitate the Erfurt Programme: there is nothing bad in imitating
      what is good, and precisely to day, when we so often hear opportunist and
      equivocal criticism of that programme, we consider it our duty to speak
      openly in its favour. Imitating, however, must under no circumstances be
      simply copying. Imitation and borrowing are quite legitimate insofar as in
      Russia we see the same basic processes of the development of
      capitalism, the same basic tasks for the socialists and the
      working class; but they must not, under any circumstances, lead to our
      forgetting the specific features of Russia which must find
      full expression in the specific features of our
      programme. Running ahead somewhat, let us say here that among these
      specific features are, first, our political tasks and means of struggle;
      and, secondly, our struggle against all remnants of the patriarchal,
      pre-capitalist regime and the specific posing of the peasant
      question arising out of that struggle.
    

      Having made this necessary reservation, let us continue. The statement on
      the growth of “the mass of misery” must be followed by a
      characterisation of the class struggle of the proletariat—a
      declaration of the aim of this struggle (the conversion of all means of
      production into social property and the replacement of capitalist
      production by socialist production), a declaration of the international
      character of the working-class movement, a declaration of the
      political character of the class struggle and its
      immediate objective (the winning of political liberty). It is
      particularly necessary to recognise the struggle against the autocracy for
      political

    

      liberties as the first political task of the working-class party; this
      task should, in our opinion, be explained by an exposition of the class
      nature of the present-day Russian autocracy and of the need to overthrow
      it, not only in the interests of the working class, but also in the
      interests of social development as a whole. Such a description is
      essential both in regard to theory, because, from the standpoint of the
      basic ideas of Marxism, the interests of social development are higher
      than the interests of the proletariat—the interests of the
      working-class movement as a whole are higher than the interests of a
      separate section of the workers or of separate phases of the movement; and
      in regard to practice, the elucidation is essential because of the need to
      characterise the focal point to which all the variety of Social-Democratic
      activity—propaganda, agitation, and organisation—must be
      directed and round which it must be concentrated. In addition, we
      think a special paragraph of the programme should be devoted to the
      provision that the Social-Democratic working-class party set itself the
      aim of supporting every revolutionary movement against the
      autocracy and the struggle against all attempts on the part of the
      autocratic government to corrupt and befog the political consciousness of
      the people by means of bureaucratic guardianship and sham doles, by means
      of that demagogic policy which our German comrades have called the
      “Peitsche und Zuckerbrot” policy (whip and biscuit
      policy). The biscuit=the doles to those who, for the sake of partial and
      individual improvements in their material conditions, renounce their
      political demands and remain the humble slaves of police violence (hostels
      for students, etc., and for workers—one has only to recall the
      proclamations of Minister of Finance Witte at the time of the
      St. Petersburg strikes in 1896 and

      1897,[5]
      or the speeches in defence of the workers delivered by representatives of
      the Ministry of Internal Affairs at the commission on the promulgation of
      the law of June 2, 1897). The whip=the in creased persecution of those who,
      despite the doles, remain fighters for political liberty (the drafting of
      students into the

      army[6];
      the circular of August 12, 1897, on the transportation of workers to
      Siberia; increased persecution of Social-Democracy, etc.). The biscuit is
      to decoy the weak, to bribe and corrupt them; the whip is to overawe and
      “render

    

      harmless” honest and class-conscious fighters for the working-class
      cause and for the cause of the people. As long as the autocracy exists
      (and we must now in drawing up our programme take into account the
      existence of the autocracy, since its collapse would inevitably call forth
      such huge changes in political conditions that they would compel the
      working-class party to make essential changes in the formulation of its
      immediate political tasks)—as long as the autocracy exists, we must
      expect a continued renewal and increase of the government’s demagogic
      measures. Consequently, we must conduct against them a systematic
      struggle, exposing the falseness of the police benefactors of the people,
      showing the connection between government reforms and the struggle of the
      workers, teaching the proletariat to make use of every reform to
      strengthen its fighting position and extend and deepen the working-class
      movement. The point on the support for all fighters against the
      autocracy is necessary in the programme, because Russian Social-Democracy,
      indissolubly fused with the advanced elements of the Russian working
      class, must raise the general-democratic banner, in order to
      group about itself all sections and all elements capable of fighting for
      political liberty or at least of supporting that fight in some way or
      another.
    

      Such is our view on the demands that must be met by the section of our
      programme dealing with principles and on the basic postulates
      that must be expressed in it with the maximum precision and clarity. In
      our opinion the following should be deleted from the draft programme of
      the Emancipation of Labour group (from the part dealing with principles):
      1) statements on the form of peasant land tenure (we shall
      discuss the peasant question later); 2) statements on the causes of
      “instability,” etc., of the intelligentsia; 3) the point on the
      “abolition of the present system of political representation and its
      replacement by direct people’s legislation”; 4) the point on the
      “means of political struggle.” True, we do not see anything obsolete
      or erroneous in the last point, but, on the contrary, believe that the
      means of struggle should be precisely those indicated by the Emancipation
      of Labour group (agitation, revolutionary organisation, transition at
      “a suitable moment” to determined attack, not rejecting,
      in principle, even terror);

    

      but we believe that the programme of a working-class party is no
      place for indications of the means of activity that were necessary in the
      programme of a group of revolutionaries abroad in 1885. The programme
      should leave the question of means open, allowing the choice of means to
      the militant organisations and to Party congresses that determine the
      tactics of the Party. Questions of tactics, however, can hardly
      be introduced into the programme (with the exception of the most important
      questions, questions of principle, such as our attitude to other
      fighters against the autocracy). Questions of tactics will be discussed by
      the Party newspaper as they arise and will be eventually decided at Party
      congresses. The same applies, in our opinion, to the question of
      terror. The Social-Democrats must imperatively under take the discussion
      of this question—of course, from the standpoint of tactics and not
      of principle—because the growth of the movement leads of its own
      accord, spontaneously, to more frequent cases of the killing of spies and
      to greater, more impassioned indignation in the ranks of the workers and
      socialists who see ever greater numbers of their comrades being tortured
      to death in solitary confinement and at places of exile. In order to leave
      nothing unsaid, we will make the reservation that, in our own personal
      opinion, terror is not advisable as a means of struggle at
      the present moment, that the Party (as a party)
      must renounce it (until there occurs a change of circumstances that might
      lead to a change of tactics) and concentrate all its energy on
      organisation and the regular delivery of literature. This is not the place
      to speak in greater detail on the question.
    

      As far as the issue of direct people’s legislation is concerned, it seems
      to us that at the present moment it should not be included in the
      programme. The victory of socialism must not be connected, in principle,
      with the substitution of direct people’s legislation for
      parliamentarism. This was proved, in our view, by the discussion on the
      Erfurt Programme and by Kautsky’s book on people’s legislation. Kautsky
      admits (on the basis of an historical and political analysis) that a
      certain benefit accrues from people’s legislation under the following
      conditions: 1) the absence of an antithesis between town and village or
      the preponderance of the towns, 2) the existence of highly developed
      political

    

      parties; 3) “the absence of excessively centralised state power,
      independently opposed to people’s legislation.” In Russia we see
      exactly the opposite conditions, and the danger of
      “people’s legislation” degenerating into an imperialist
      “plebiscite” would be particularly great in our country. If
      Kautsky could say, in 1893, speaking of Germany and Austria, that
      “for us, East-Europeans, direct people’s legislation belongs to the
      sphere of the ‘state of the future,’” what is there to be said of Russia?
      We, therefore, believe that at present, when the autocracy is dominant in
      Russia, we should limit ourselves to the demand for a “democratic
      constitution” and prefer the first two points of the practical part
      of the programme of the Emancipation of Labour group to the first two
      points of the practical part of the “Erfurt Programme.”
    

      Now let us look at the practical part of the programme. This part
      consists, in our opinion, of three sections, in substance if not in
      arrangement: 1) the demands for general democratic reforms; 2) the demands
      for measures of protection for the workers; and 3) the demands for
      measures in the Interests of the peasants. There is hardly any need to
      make substantial changes in the “draft programme” of the
      Emancipation of Labour group as regards the first section, which demands:
      1) universal franchise; 2) salaries for deputies; 3) general, secular,
      free, and compulsory education, etc.; 4) inviolability of the person and
      domicile of citizens; 5) uncurtailed freedom of conscience, speech,
      assembly, etc. (here it should perhaps be added specifically: the right to
      strike); 6) freedom of movement and occupation (here it would probably be
      correct to add: “freedom of migration” and “the complete
      abolition of passports”); 7) full equality of all citizens, etc.; 8)
      replacement of the permanent army by the general arming of the people; 9)
      “the revision of our entire civil and criminal legislation, the
      abolition of social estate divisions and of punishments incompatible with
      the dignity of man.” Here it would be well to add: “complete
      equality of rights for men and women.” To this section should be added the
      demand for fiscal reforms formulated in the programme of the Emancipation
      of Labour group as one of the demands to “be put forward by the
      working-class party, basing itself on these fundamental political
      rights”—“the

    

       

      abolition of the present system of taxation and the institution of a
      progressive income tax.” Lastly, there should also be here a demand for
      “the election of civil servants by the people; for every citizen to
      be granted the right to prosecute in court any government official without
      first having to make a complaint to superiors.”
    

      In the second section of the practical demands we find in the programme of
      the Emancipation of Labour group a general demand for “the
      legislative regulation of relations between workers (urban and rural) and
      employers, and the organisation of a relevant inspectorate with workers’
      representation.” We think that the working-class party should
      define the demands made on this point more thoroughly and in greater
      detail; the party should demand:

      1) an eight-hour working day; 2) prohibition of night-work and prohibition
      of the employment of children under 14 years of age; 3) uninterrupted rest
      periods, for every worker, of no less than 36 hours a week; 4) extension
      of factory legislation and the Factory Inspectorate to all branches of
      industry and agriculture, to government factories, to artisan
      establishments, and to handicraftsmen working at home; election, by the
      workers, of assistant inspectors having the same rights as the inspectors;
      5) establishment of factory and rural courts for all branches of industry
      and agriculture, with judges elected from the employers and the workers in
      equal numbers; 6) unconditional prohibition everywhere of payment in kind;
      7) legislation fixing the responsibility of factory owners for all
      accidents and maiming of workers, both industrial and agricultural; 8)
      legislation fixing payment of wages at least once a week in all cases of
      the hire of workers of all kinds; 9) repeal of all laws violating the
      equality of employers and employees (for example, the laws making factory
      and farm workers criminally responsible for leaving their work, the laws
      giving employers greater freedom to cancel hiring agreements than their
      employees, etc.). (It goes without saying that we are only outlining
      desirable demands without giving them the final formulation required for
      the draft.) This section of the programme must (in conjunction with the
      preceding section) provide the basic, guiding principles for agitation,
      without in any way, of course, hindering agitators in this or that
      locality, branch

    

      of production, factory, etc., from putting forward demands in a somewhat
      modified form, demands that are more concrete or more specific. In drawing
      up this section of the programme, we should strive, therefore, to avoid
      two extremes— on the one hand, we must not omit any one of the main,
      basic demands that hold great significance for the entire working
      class; on the other, we must not go into minute particulars with which it
      would hardly be rational to load the programme.
    

      The demand for “state assistance for producers’ associations”
      in the programme of the Emancipation of Labour group should, in our
      opinion, be completely eliminated. The experience of other countries, as
      well as theoretical considerations, and the specific features of Russian
      life (the tendency of the bourgeois liberals and the police government to
      flirt with “artels” and with “the patronage ... of
      people’s industry,” etc.)—all this should counsel against our
      putting forward this demand. (Fifteen years ago, of course, matters were
      quite different in many respects; then it was quite natural for
      Social-Democrats to include such a demand in their programme.)
    

      There remains the third and last section of the practical part of the
      programme—the demands related to the peas ant question. In the
      programme of the Emancipation of Labour group we find only one demand
      pertaining to this question—the demand for a “radical revision
      of our agrarian relations, i.e., a revision of the conditions of land
      redemption and the allotment of the land to the village communes; the
      granting of the right to refuse an allotment and to leave the village
      commune to those peasants who find it convenient to do so, etc.”
    

      It seems to me that the basic idea here expressed is perfectly correct and
      that the Social-Democratic working-class party should, in point of fact,
      include a relevant demand in its programme (I say “a relevant
      demand” because I think certain amendments are desirable).
    

      I understand this problem in the following way. The peasant question in
      Russia differs substantially from the peasant question in the West, the
      sole difference being that in the West the question is almost
      exclusively one of a peasant in a capitalist, bourgeois society, whereas
      in Russia

    

      it is one of a peasant who suffers no less (if not more) from
      pre-capitalist institutions and relations, from the survivals
      of serfdom. The role of the peasantry as a class that provides fighters
      against the autocracy and against the survivals of serfdom is by now
      played out in the West, but not yet in Russia. In the West the industrial
      proletariat has long since become completely alienated from the
      countryside; this alienation has been made final by relevant legal
      institutions. In Russia “the industrial proletariat, both by its
      composition and by the conditions of its existence, is to a very great ex
      tent still connected with the countryside” (P. B. Axelrod, op. cit.,
      p. 11). True enough, the differentiation of the peasantry into a petty
      bourgeoisie and into wage-workers is proceeding with great power and
      astounding rapidity in Russia, but it is a process that has not yet come
      to an end, and—what is most important—this process is still
      evolving within the framework of the old institutions of serfdom that
      fetter all the peasants with the heavy chains of collective liability and
      the tax-assessed community. The Russian Social-Democrat, therefore, even
      if he (like the writer of these lines) belongs to the determined opponents
      of the protection or support of small proprietorship or small agricultural
      economy in capitalist society, i.e., even if, on the agrarian question, he
      (like the writer of these lines) is on the side of those Marxists whom the
      bourgeois and opportunists of all stripes love to deride as
      “dogmatists” and “orthodox”—the Russian
      Social-Democrat can and must, without betraying his convictions in the
      slightest, but, rather, because of those convictions, insist that the
      working-class party should in scribe on its banner support for
      the peasantry (not by any means as a class of small proprietors
      or small farmers), insofar as the peasantry is capable of a
      revolutionary struggle against the survivals of serfdom in general and
      against the autocracy in particular. Do not all of us
      Social-Democrats declare that we are ready to support even the big
      bourgeoisie insofar as it is capable of a revolutionary
      struggle against the above manifestations—how then can we refuse to
      support the petty-bourgeois class, many millions strong, that is
      gradually, step by step, merging with the proletariat? If support for the
      liberal demands of the big bourgeoisie does not mean support of the big
      bourgeoisie, then support for the democratic

    

      demands of the petty bourgeoisie certainly does not mean support of the
      petty bourgeoisie; on the contrary, it is precisely this development which
      political liberty will make possible in Russia that will, with particular
      force, lead to the destruction of small economy under the blows of
      capital. I do not think there will be any arguments among the Social-
      Democrats on this point. The question, therefore, is: 1) how to elaborate
      demands in such a way that they do not degenerate into support of
      small property-owners in a capitalist society? and 2) is our peasantry
      capable, at least in part, of a revolutionary struggle against
      the remnants of serfdom and against absolutism?
    

      Let us begin with the second question. It is doubtful whether anyone will
      deny the existence of revolutionary elements among the Russian
      peasantry. In the post-Reform period, too, we know, there have been
      peasant revolts against the landlords, their stewards, and the government
      officials who support them. Well known are the agrarian killings, revolts,
      etc. Well known is the growing indignation of the peasantry (in whom even
      pitiful fragments of education have already begun to arouse a sense of
      human dignity) against the savage lawlessness of the gang of aristocratic
      wastrels that has been let loose against the peasantry under the title of
      Rural

      Superintendents.[7]
      Well known is the fact that famines of
      growing frequency involve millions of people who cannot remain passive
      spectators of such “food difficulties.” Well known is the fact of
      the growth of religious sects and rationalism among the peasantry;
      political protests in religious guise are common to all nations at a
      certain stage of their development, and not to Russia alone. The existence
      of revolutionary elements among the peasantry, therefore, is not open to
      the slightest doubt. We do not in the least exaggerate the strength of
      these elements; we do not forget the political backwardness and ignorance
      of the peasants, nor in the least wipe out the difference between
      “the Russian revolt, senseless and ruthless,” and the revolutionary
      struggle; we do not in the least forget the endless means which the
      government has at its disposal for the political deception and
      demoralisation of the peasantry. But from all this there follows only one
      thing, that it would be senseless to make the peasantry the
      vehicle of the revolutionary movement, that

    

      a party would be insane to condition the revolutionary character
      of its movement upon the revolutionary mood of the peasantry. There can be
      no thought of proposing anything of the sort to the Russian
      Social-Democrats. We say only that a working-class party cannot, without
      violating the basic tenets of Marxism and without committing a tremendous
      political mistake, overlook the revolutionary elements that exist
      among the peasantry and not afford those elements support. Whether or not
      the revolutionary elements among the Russian peasantry will be able to
      behave at least in the way the West-European peasants behaved at the time
      of the overthrow of the autocracy is a question to which history has not
      yet provided an answer. If they prove themselves incapable, the
      Social-Democrats will have lost nothing as far as their good name or their
      movement is concerned, since it will not be their fault if the peasantry
      does not respond (may not have the strength to respond) to their
      revolutionary appeal. The working-class movement is going its own way and
      will continue to do so, despite all the betrayals of the big bourgeoisie
      or the petty bourgeoisie. If the peasantry should prove itself
      capable—then that Social-Democracy which did not afford it support
      under these circumstances would for ever lose its good name and the right
      to be regarded as the leading fighter for democracy.
    

      Returning to the first question presented above, we must say that the
      demand for a “radical revision of agrarian relations” seems
      unclear to us: it may have been sufficient fifteen years ago, but we can
      hardly be satisfied with it today when we must provide guidance for
      agitation and, at the same time, guard ourselves against the defenders of
      small economy, all too numerous in present-day Russian society, who have
      such “influential” supporters as Messrs. Pobedonostsev, Witte,
      and very many officials in the Ministry of Internal Affairs. We take the
      liberty of offering our comrades for discussion the following approximate
      formulation of the third section of the practical part of our programme:
    

      “The Russian Social-Democratic working-class party, giving its support to
      every revolutionary movement against

    

      the present state and social system, declares that it will support the
      peasantry, insofar as it is capable of revolutionary struggle against the
      autocracy, as the class that suffers most from the Russian people’s lack
      of rights and from the survivals of serfdom in Russian society.
    

      “Proceeding from this principle, the Russian Social-Democratic
      working-class party demands:
    

      “1) The abrogation of land

      redemption[8]
      and quit-rent payments and of all duties at present obligatory for the
      peasantry as a tax-paying social-estate.
    

      “2) The return to the people of the sums of which the government and the
      landed proprietors have robbed the peasants in the form of redemption payments.
    

      “3) The abolition of collective liability and of all laws that hamper the
      peasant in disposing of his land.
    

      “4) The abolition of all remnants of the peasant’s feudal dependence
      on the landlord, whether they are due to special laws and institutions
      (e.g., the position of the peasants and workers in the iron-foundry
      districts of the Urals) or to the fact that the land of the peasants and
      the landlords has not yet been demarcated (e.g., survivals of the law of
      easement in the Western

      territory),[9]
      or to the fact that the cutting-off of the peasant land by the landlords
      has left the peasants in what is in actual fact the hopeless position of
      former corvée peasants.
    

      “5) That peasants be granted the right to demand, in court, the
      reduction of excessively high rents and to prosecute for usury landlords
      and, in general, all persons who take advantage of the necessitous
      condition of the peas ants to conclude with them shackling agreements.”
    

      We shall have to deal in particular detail with the motives for such a
      proposal—not because this is the most important part of the
      programme, but because it is the most disputed and has a more remote
      connection with the generally established truths that are accepted by all
      Social-Democrats. The introductory proposition on (conditional)
      “support” for the peasantry seems to us to be necessary,
      because the proletariat cannot and must not, in general, take upon itself
      the defence of the interests of a class of small property-owners; it can
      support it only to the extent to which that class is
      revolutionary. And since it is

    

      the autocracy that is today the embodiment of all that is backward in
      Russia, all the survivals of serfdom, lack of rights, and
      “patriarchal” oppression, it is essential to point out that
      the working-class party supports the peasantry only to the extent that the
      latter is capable of revolutionary struggle against the
      autocracy. Such a proposition is apparently excluded by the
      following proposition in the draft of the Emancipation of Labour group:
      “The main bulwark of the autocracy resides precisely in the
      political apathy and intellectual backwardness of the peasantry.” But this
      is not a contradiction of theory alone; it is a contradiction of reality,
      because the peasantry (like the class of small property-owners in general)
      is distinguished by the duality of its character. We do not wish to repeat
      well-known political-economic arguments showing the internal
      contradictions of the condition of the peasantry, but we shall call to
      mind the following characterisation by Marx of the French peasantry of the
      early fifties:
    

      “The Bonaparte dynasty represents not the revolutionary, but the
      conservative peasant; not the peasant that strikes out beyond the
      condition of his social existence, the small holding, but rather the
      peasant who wants to consolidate this holding, not the country folk who,
      linked up with the towns, want to overthrow the old order through their
      own energies, but on the contrary those who, in stupefied seclusion within
      this old order, want to see them selves and their small holdings saved and
      favoured by the ghost of the Empire. It represents not the enlightenment,
      but the superstition of the peasant; not his judgement, but his prejudice;
      not his future, but his past; not his modern Cevennes, but his modern
      Vendée” (Der 18. Brumaire.

S. 99[10]).
      The working-class party needs precisely to support the peasantry which is
      striving to overthrow “the old order,” i.e., in Russia, first and
      foremost the autocracy. The Russian Social-Democrats have always
      recognised the necessity to extract and absorb the revolutionary side of
      the Narodnik doctrine and trend. In the programme of the Emancipation of
      Labour group this is expressed not only in the above-quoted demand for
      “a radical revision,” etc., but also in the following words:
      “It goes without saying, incidentally, that even today, people

    

      who are indirect contact with the peasantry could, by their activities
      among them, render important service to the socialist movement in
      Russia. Far from repelling such people, the Social-Democrats will make
      every effort to come to an agreement with them on the basic principles and
      methods of their work.” Fifteen years ago, when the traditions of
      revolutionary Narodism were still alive, such a declaration was
      sufficient; but today we must ourselves begin to discuss “basic
      principles of work” among the peasantry if we want the
      Social-Democratic working-class party to become a vanguard fighter for
      democracy.
    

      But do not the demands we propose lead to the support, not of the peasants
      themselves, but of their property, to the consolidation of small economy,
      and do they correspond to the entire course of capitalist development? Let
      us examine these questions that are of the highest importance to the
      Marxist.
    

      There can scarcely be any differences of opinion among Social-Democrats
      with regard to the substance of the first and third demands. The
      second demand, by its essence, will probably give rise to differences of
      opinion. The following considerations, to our view, speak in its favour:

      1) it is a fact that the redemption payments represented direct plunder of
      the peasants on the part of the landlords, that the payments were not only
      for peasant land but for serf-holding rights, and that the government
      gathered more from the peasants than it paid to the landlords; 2)
      we have no grounds for regarding this fact as something ended and filed
      away in the archives of history, for the aristocratic exploiters
      themselves do not so regard the peasant Reform when they lament over the
      “sacrifices” they made at the time; 3) precisely today, when
      the starvation of millions of peasants is becoming chronic, when the
      government that wastes millions on gifts to the landlords hind
      capitalists, and on an adventurist foreign policy, is haggling for pennies
      off the grants to the starving—precisely today it is appropriate and
      essential to recall what the rule of the autocratic government that serves
      the interests of the privileged classes has cost the people; 4) the
      Social-Democrats cannot remain indifferent spectators of peasant

    

      hunger and the death of peasants from starvation; there have never been
      two opinions among Russian Social-Democrats as to the need for the most
      extensive help to the starving, and hardly anyone will claim that serious
      help is possible without revolutionary measures; 5) the expropriation of
      the royal

      demesne[11]
      and greater mobilisation of lands belonging to the aristocracy, i.e., that
      which would result from the implementation of the proposed demand, would
      bring only benefit to the entire social development of
      Russia. Against the proposed demand we shall probably be told,
      mostly, that it is “impracticable.” If such an objection is
      supported only by phrases against “revolutionism” and
      “utopianism,” we can say in advance that such opportunist
      phrases do not frighten us in the least and that we do not attach any
      significance to them. If, however, the objection is supported. by an
      analysis of the economic and political conditions of our movement, we
      fully admit the necessity for a more detailed discussion of the question
      and the benefit accruing from a polemic in regard to it. We would only
      mention that this demand does not stand alone but forms part of the demand
      to support the peasantry to the extent that the latter is
      revolutionary. History will decide precisely how and with what strength
      these elements in the peasantry will manifest themselves. If we understand
      by the “practicability” of a demand its general
      correspondence, not to the interests of social development, but to a
      specific state of economic and political conditions, it will be a totally
      fallacious criterion, as Kautsky showed convincingly in his polemic with
      Rosa Luxemburg when the latter spoke of the “impracticability”
      (for the Polish working-class party) of the demand for Polish
      independence. Kautsky, at that time, pointed out as an example (if our
      memory serves us) the demand made by the Erfurt Programme on the election
      of civil servants by the people. The “practicability” of this
      demand is mere than doubtful in present-day Germany, but none of the
      Social-Democrats proposed limiting the demands to the narrow bounds of
      what is possible at a given moment or under given conditions.
    

      Further, as far as the fourth point is concerned, probably no one will object,
      in principle, to the necessity for

    

      Social-Democrats to advance the demand for the abolition of all remnants
      of feudal dependence. What will need clarification will probably be only
      the formulation of that demand, as well as its extent, i.e., whether it
      should include, for example, measures for abolishing the factual
      corvée dependence of the peasants that was created by the
      cutting-off of peasant lands in

      1861.[12]
      In our opinion this question should be decided in the affirmative. The
      tremendous significance of the actual survival of corvée
      (labour-service) economy has been fully established in literature, as has
      also the tremendous retardation of social development (and the development
      of capitalism) caused by this survival. The development of capitalism, of
      course, is leading up to, and will in the end result in, the elimination
      of these survivals “of their own accord, in a natural way.” But,
      first, these survivals are extraordinarily tenacious, so that their rapid
      elimination is not to be expected; secondly—and mainly—the
      “natural way” means nothing other than the dying-out of the
      peasants who, in point of fact (due to labour-service, etc.), are
      tied to the soil and enslaved by the landlords. It stands to reason that
      under these circumstances the Social-Democrats cannot allow their
      programme to be silent on this question. It may be asked: How could this
      demand be implemented? We think it unnecessary to deal with this in the
      programme. The implementation of this demand (as of almost all others in
      this section, depending on the strength of the revolutionary elements
      among the peasantry) will, of course, necessitate a detailed examination
      of local conditions by local, elective, peasant committees as a
      counterweight to the Committees of

      Nobles[13]
      that accomplished their “legal” plunder in the sixties; the
      democratic demands of the programme adequately define the democratic
      institutions required for this purpose. This would be precisely the
      “radical revision of agrarian relations” of which the
      programme of the Emancipation of Labour group speaks. As we said above, we
      agree in principle with this point of the Emancipation of Labour group’s
      draft and would only: 1) specify the conditions under which the
      proletariat can struggle for the class interests of the peasantry; 2)
      define the character of the revision—the abolition

    

      of the remnants of feudal dependence; 3) express the demands more
      precisely.
    

      We foresee another objection: a re-examination of the question of cut-off
      lands, etc., should lead to the return of those lands to the
      peasantry. This is obvious. But will this not strengthen small property,
      small holdings? Can the Social-Democrats desire the replacement of the big
      capitalist economy, which is perhaps being conducted on the lands
      plundered from the peasantry, by small economy? This would, indeed, be a
      reactionary measure!
    

      We answer: undoubtedly the substitution of small-scale for large-scale
      economy is reactionary, and we must not favour it. But the demand we are
      discussing is conditioned by the aim of “abolishing the
      remnants of feudal dependence”; consequently, it cannot lead to the
      fragmentation of big holdings; it applies only to old holdings that are,
      in essence, based purely on the corvée system; in relation to
      them a peasant holding, free of all medieval impediments (cf. point
      3) is progressive, not reactionary. It is, of course, not easy to
      draw a line of demarcation here, but we do not believe that any one demand
      in our programme can be “easily” realised. Our role is to
      outline the basic principles and basic tasks; those who will be called
      upon to decide these problems in practice will know how to consider the
      details.
    

      The purpose of last point is identical with that of the preceding: the
      struggle against all remnants of the pre-capitalist mode of
      production (so abundant in the Russian countryside). It will be
      remembered that the renting of land by peasants in Russia very often
      serves to conceal survivals of corvé relations. The idea for this
      last point was borrowed from Kautsky, who pointed out that, in relation to
      Ireland, even Gladstone’s liberal administration had enacted a law in 1881
      granting the courts the right to reduce excessively high rents, and
      included in the number of desirable demands: “The reduction of
      exorbitant rents by courts especially set up for this purpose”
      (Reduzierung übermässiger Pachtzinsen durch dazu eingesetzte
      Gerichtshöfe). This would be particularly useful in Russia
      (given the condition, of course, of the courts being democratically
      organised) in the sense that it would eliminate corvée
      relations. We think that to this we could also add the

    

      demand for the extension of the laws on usury to cover enslaving
      agreements; in the Russian village, bondage is so widespread, so heavily
      oppressive to the peasant in his capacity as a worker, so
      exceedingly obstructive to social progress, that the struggle against it
      is particularly necessary. And it would not be more difficult for a court
      to establish the enslaving, usurious character of an agreement, than to
      establish the excessive nature of rent.
    

      In general, the demands we propose reduce themselves, in our opinion, to
      two main objectives: 1) to abolish all pre-capitalist, feudal
      institutions and relations in the countryside (the complement to these
      demands being contained in the first section of the practical part of the
      programme); 2) to give the class struggle in the countryside a more open
      and conscious character. We believe that precisely these principles should
      serve as a guide for the Social-Democratic “agrarian
      programme” in Russia. It is necessary to dissociate ourselves
      resolutely from the attempts, so numerous in Russia, to smooth
      down the class struggle in the countryside. The dominant
      liberal-Narodnik tendency is distinguished precisely by this feature, but,
      in resolutely rejecting it (as was done in the “Appendix to the
      Report of the Russian Social-Democrats at the International Congress in
      London”), we should not forget that we must take particular note of the
      revolutionary content of Narodism. “To the extent that Narodism was
      revolutionary, i.e., came out against the social-estate, bureaucratic rule
      and against the barbarous forms of exploitation and oppression of the
      people which the state supported, to that extent Narodism had to be
      included, with relevant amendments, as a component part of the programme
      of Russian Social-Democracy” (Axelrod, Present Tasks and
      Tactics, p. 7). Two basic forms of the class struggle are today
      intertwined in the Russian countryside: 1) the struggle of the peasantry
      against the privileged landed proprietors and against the remnants of
      serfdom; 2) the struggle of the emergent rural proletariat against the
      rural bourgeoisie. For Social-Democrats the second struggle, of course, is
      of greater importance; but they must also indispensably support the first
      struggle to the extent that it does not contradict the interests
      of social development.

    

      It is no accident that the peasant question has always occupied and
      continues to occupy such a prominent place in Russian society and in the
      Russian revolutionary movement: this fact is a reflection of the great
      significance still retained by the first of the two forms of struggle.

    

      In conclusion, there is one possible misunderstanding against which we
      should be on guard. We spoke of Social-Democracy’s “revolutionary
      appeal” to the peasants. Does this not mean diffusion, is it not
      harmful to the essential concentration of forces for work among the
      industrial proletariat? Not in the least; the necessity for such a
      concentration is recognised by all Russian Social-Democrats; it
      figures in the draft of the Emancipation of Labour group (1885) and again
      in the pamphlet, The Tasks of the Russian Social-Democrats
      (1898). Consequently, there are absolutely no grounds at all to fear that
      the Social-Democrats will split their forces. A programme is not an
      instruction; a programme must embrace the whole movement, and in
      practice, of course, first one and then another aspect of the movement has
      to be brought into the foreground. No one will dispute the necessity to
      speak in the programme of rural, as well as industrial, workers, although
      in the present situation there is not a single Russian Social-Democrat who
      would think of calling upon the comrades to go to the village. The
      working-class movement, however, even apart from our efforts, will
      inevitably lead to the spread of democratic ideas in the
      countryside. “Agitation based on economic interests will inevitably
      lead Social-Democratic circles directly up against facts that show clearly
      the closest solidarity of interests between our industrial proletariat and
      the peasant masses” (Axelrod, ibid., p. 13). For this
      reason an “Agrarprogramm” (in the sense
      indicated; strictly speaking, of course, it is not an “agrarian
      programme” at all) is an absolute necessity for Russian
      Social-Democrats. In our propaganda and agitation we constantly come upon
      peasant-workers, that is, factory workers who retain their connections
      with the village, who have relatives or a family in the village and who
      travel back and forth. Questions of land redemption payments, collective
      liability, and rent are of vital interest even to large numbers of
      metropolitan

    

      workers (to say nothing of the workers in the Urals, for example, amongst
      whom Social-Democratic propaganda and agitation has begun to find its
      way). We should be remiss in performing our duty, if we did not take care
      to give precise guidance to Social-Democrats and class-conscious workers
      who go to the village. Nor should we forget the rural intelligentsia,
      elementary school teachers, for instance. The latter are so humiliated,
      materially and spiritually, they observe so closely and know from their
      own experience the lack of rights and the oppression of the people, that
      there can be no doubt at all of the sympathetic reception among them of
      Social-Democratic ideas (given the further growth of the movement).
    

      These then, in our opinion, should be the component parts of a programme
      of the Russian Social-Democratic working-class party: 1) a statement on
      the basic character of the economic development of Russia; 2) a statement
      on the inevitable result of capitalism: the growth of poverty and the
      increasing indignation of the workers; 3) a statement on the class
      struggle of the proletariat as the basis of our movement; 4) a statement
      on the final aims of the Social-Democratic working-class movement—on
      its striving to win political power for the accomplishment of these
      aims—and on the international character of the movement; 5) a
      statement on the essentially political nature of the class struggle; 6) a
      statement to the effect that the Russian absolutism, which conditions the
      lack of rights and the oppression of the people and patronises the
      exploiters, is the chief hindrance to the working-class movement, and that
      the winning of political liberty, essential in the interests of the entire
      social development, is, therefore, the most urgent political task of the
      Party; 7) a statement to the effect that the Party will support all
      parties and sections of the population that struggle against the autocracy
      and will combat the demagogic intrigues of our government; 8) the
      enumeration of the basic democratic demands; then,
      9) demands for the benefit of the working class; and 10) demands for the
      benefit of the peasantry, with an explanation of the general character of
      these demands.
    

      We are fully conscious of the difficulty of providing a completely
      satisfactory formulation of the programme

    

      without a number of conferences with comrades; but we consider it
      essential to set about this task, believing (for the reasons indicated
      above) that postponement is impermissible. We hope to receive the aid of
      all the theoreticians of the Party (headed by the members of the
      Emancipation of Labour group), as well as of all socialists doing
      practical work in Russia (not only of Social-Democrats: it would be very
      desirable to hear the opinion of socialists of other groups and we would
      not refuse to publish their opinion), and the aid of all class-conscious
      workers.
    

 
Notes
 
 



[1]

      Lenin wrote “A Draft Programme of Our Party” when he
      was still in exile, as can be seen from the date "1899” which he
      inscribed on the manuscript and from the letter to the editorial group
      of Rabochaya Gazeta (see p. 207 of this volume). The mention o
      the year 1900 in the text is evidently due to the fact that the issue of
      Rabochaya Gazeta for which it was intended was to have appeared
      that year.
    

      “A Draft Programme of Our Party” represented a continuation of
      Lenin’s work on programmatic questions which he had begun in prison in
      1895-96 (see present edition, Vol. 2, “Draft and Explanation of a
      Programme of the Social-Democratic Party,” pp.  93-121).
    



[2]

      Karl Marx, Critique of the Gotha Programme (Marx and Engels,
      Selected Works, Vol. II, Moscow, 1958, p. 16).
    



[3]

      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. I, Moscow, 1958, p. 763.
    



[4]

The Erfurt Programme of German Social-Democracy was adopted in
      October 1891 at a congress in Erfurt in place of the Gotha Programme of
      1875; the errors in the latter were exposed by Marx in his Critique of
      the Gotha Programme.
    



[5]

      Lenin refers to the leaflets distributed by the government during the
      strikes of 1896 and 1897. In the leaflet issued on June 15, 1896,
      S. Y. Witte, Minister of Finance, appealed to the workers not to listen to
      “agitators” (socialists) and to await better living conditions
      and improved working conditions from the government to whom “the
      affairs of the factory owners and the workers are alike dear.” Witte
      threatened to punish the workers for the unauthorised cessation of work as
      “an illegal act.”
    



[6]

      Lenin refers to the “Provisional Regulations Governing the Military
      Service of Students of Higher Educational Institutions Expelled from Those
      Institutions for the Joint Organisation of Disorders.” Under those
      regulations, approved on July 29 (August 10). 1899, students who
      participated in actions directed against the police

   

      regime obtaining in institutions of higher learning would be expelled from
      universities and drafted into the tsarist army as privates for a term
      ranging from one to three years. The students of all higher educational
      institutions demanded the repeal of the “Provisional
      Regulations” (“The Drafting of 183 Students into the
      Army” in the present volume, pp. 414-19).
    



[7]

Rural Superintendent (Zemsky Nachalnik in
      Russian)—an administrative post instituted by the tsarist government
      in 1889 to strengthen the authority of the landlords over the
      peasants. The Rural Superintendents were appointed from among the local
      landed nobility and were granted very great powers, not merely
      administrative, but also judicial, which included the right to arrest
      peasants and administer corporal punishment.
    



[8]

Land redemption payments were established by the
      “Regulation Governing Redemption by Peasant Who Have Emerged from
      Serf Dependence...” adopted on February 19, 1861. The tsarist government
      compelled the peasants, in return for the allotments assigned to them, to
      pay redemption to the landlords amounting to several times the real price
      of the land. When the deal was concluded, the government paid the landlord
      the purchase price, which was considered a debt owed by the peasant to be
      repaid over a period of 49 years. The instalments to be paid annually by
      the peasants were called land redemption payments. These were an
      intolerable burden on the peasants and caused their impoverishment and
      ruin. The peasants formerly belonging to landlords alone paid nearly 2,000
      million rubles to the tsarist government, whereas the market price of the
      land that the peasants received did not exceed 544 million rubles. In view
      of the fact that the adoption of the redemption scheme by the peasants did
      not take place at once, but dragged on until 1883, the redemption payments
      were not to have ended before 1932. The peasant movement during the first
      Russian revolution (1905-07), however, compelled the tsarist government to
      abolish the redemption payments as from January 1907.
    



[9]

Law of easement—the right to make use of the property of
      others. In the present case Lenin refers to survivals of feudal relations
      in the Western Territory. After the Reform of 1861 the peasants were
      compelled to render supplementary services for the benefit of the
      landlords for the right to use common roads, meadows, pastures, water,
      etc.
    



[10]

      Karl Marx, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte (Marx and
Engels, Selected Works, Vol. I, Moscow, 1958, p. 335).
    



[11]

Royal demesne—lands belonging to members of the
      tsar’s family.
    



[12]

Cut-off lands (otrezki)—the pasture lands, woods,
      etc., which the landlords “cut off,” i.e., of which they
      deprived the peasants when serfdom was abolished in Russia.
    



[13]

Gubernia Committees of Nobles were set up by the tsarist
      authorities in 1857-58 to draw up plans for the “Peasant Reform,”
      for the “emancipation” of the peasants.
    

      The plans put forward by the Committees of Nobles envisaged an
      “emancipation” that would benefit only the landlords; the
      committees effected the “legal” plunder of the peasants in the
      sixties.
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 4

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## A Retrograde Trend in Russian Social-Democracy









Lenin: A Retrograde Trend in Russian Social-Democracy







V. I.  

      Lenin
A Retrograde Trend in Russian Social-Democracy




Written: Written at the end of 1899 

Published:

      First published in 1924 in the magazine Proletarskaya Revolyutsiya (Proletarian Revolution), No. 8-9.

      Published according to a manuscript copied by an unknown hand and looked over by Lenin.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 4,

      pages 255-285.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



      The Editorial Board of Rabochaya Mysl has published a
Separate Supplement to “Rabochaya Mysl”
      (September 1899), for the purpose of “dispelling the mass of
      misunderstanding and indefiniteness that exists with regard to the
      trend of Rabochaya Mysl (such as our ’renunciation of
      politics’).” (From the Editorial Board.) We are very glad that
      Rabochaya Mysl is at last raising programmatic questions
      which, until now, it sought to ignore, but we emphatically protest
      against the statement that the “trend of Rabochaya Mysl
      is that of progressive Russian workers” (as the Editorial Board
      declares in the cited text). In fact, if the Editorial Board of
      Rabochaya Mysl wants to follow the path indicated (so far
      only indicated) in that publication, this means that it has
      falsely understood the programme elaborated by the founders of Russian
      Social-Democracy, a programme that has to-date had the adherence of
      all Russian Social-Democrats working in Russia; it means that it is
      taking a step backwards with respect to the level of
      theoretical and practical development already attained by Russian
      Social-Democracy.
    

      The Rabochaya Mysl trend is expounded in the leading article of
      the Separate Supplement entitled “Our Reality”
      (signed: R. M.), which article we must now analyse in the
      greatest detail.
    

      From the very beginning of the article we see that R. M. gives
      a false description of “our reality” in general,
      and of our working-class movement in particular, that he reveals an
      extremely narrow conception of the working-class

    

      movement and a desire to close his eyes to the higher forms of that
      movement which have evolved under the leadership of the Russian
      Social-Democrats. “Our working-class movement,” says R. M.,
      indeed, at the outset of the article, “contains the germs of the
      most diverse forms of organisation” ranging from strike associations
      to legal societies (permitted by law).
    

      “And is that all?” asks the reader, in perplexity. Surely
      R. M. must have noticed some higher, more advanced forms
      of organisation in the working-class movement in Russia! Apparently he is
      unwilling to notice them because, on the next page, he repeats his
      assertion in a still more emphatic manner: “The tasks of the
      movement at the present moment, the real working-class cause of the
      Russian workers,” he says, “reduce themselves to the workers’
      amelioration of their condition by all possible means,” and yet
      the only means enumerated are strike organisations and legal
      societies! Thus, the Russian working-class movement reduces
      itself, it would seem, to strikes and legal societies! But this is an
      absolute untruth! As far back as twenty years ago, the Russian
      working-class movement founded a much broader organisation, put forward
      much more extensive aims (of which in detail below). The Russian working-
      class movement founded such organisations as the

St. Petersburg[3]
      and

      Kiev[4]
      Leagues of Struggle, the Jewish Workers’

      League,[5]
      and others. R. M. does indeed say that the Jewish working-class
      movement has a “specific political character” and is an
      exception. But this, again, is an untruth; for if the Jewish Workers’
      League were some thing “specific,” it would not have
      amalgamated with a number of Russian organisations to form the
      Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party. The foundation of this Party is
      the biggest step taken by the Russian working-class movement in its
      fusion with the Russian revolutionary movement. This step shows
      clearly that the Russian working-class movement does not reduce
      itself to strikes and legal societies. How could it have happened
      that the Russian socialists writing in Rabochaya Mysl are
      unwilling to recognise this step and to grasp its significance?
    

      It happened because R. M. does not understand the relation of the
      Russian working-class movement to socialism

    

      and to the revolutionary movement in Russia, because he does not
      understand the political aims of the Russian working class. “The
      most characteristic index of the trend of our movement,” writes
      R. M., “is, of course, the demands put forward by the
      workers.” We ask: why are the demands of the Social-Democrats and
      Social-Democratic organisations not included among the indices of our
      movement? On what grounds does R. M. separate the demands of
      the workers from the demands of the Russian Social-Democrats?
      R. M. makes this division throughout his article in the same way
      as the editors of Rabochaya Mysl make it, in general, in every
      issue of their paper. In order to explain this error of Rabochaya
      Mysl we must clarify the general question of the relation of
      socialism to the working-class movement. At first
      socialism and the working-class movement existed separately in all the
      European countries. The workers struggled against the capitalists, they
      organised strikes and unions, while the socialists stood aside from the
      working-class movement, formulated doctrines criticising the contemporary
      capitalist, bourgeois system of society and demanding its replacement by
      another system, the higher, socialist system. The separation of the
      working-class movement and socialism gave rise to weakness and
      underdevelopment in each: the theories of the socialists, unfused with the
      workers’ struggle, remained nothing more than utopias, good wishes that
      had no effect on real life; the working-class movement remained petty,
      fragmented, and did not acquire political significance, was not
      enlightened by the advanced science of its time. For this reason we see in
      all European countries a constantly growing urge to fuse
      socialism with the working-class movement in a single
      Social-Democratic movement. When this fusion takes place the
      class struggle of the workers becomes the conscious struggle of the
      proletariat to emancipate itself from exploitation by the propertied
      classes, it is evolved into a higher form of the socialist workers’
      movement—the independent working-class Social-Democratic
      party. By directing socialism towards a fusion with the working-class
      movement, Karl Marx and Frederick Engels did their greatest service: they
      created a revolutionary theory that explained the necessity for this
      fusion and gave socialists

    

      the task of organising the class struggle of the proletariat.
    

      Precisely this is what happened in Russia. In Russia, too, socialism has
      been in existence for a long time, for many decades, standing
      aside from the struggle of the workers against the capitalists, aside
      from the workers’ strikes, etc. On the one hand, the socialists did not
      understand Marx’s theory, they thought it inapplicable to Russia; on the
      other, the Russian working-class movement remained in a purely embryonic
      form. When the South-Russian Workers’ Union was founded in 1875 and the
      North-Russian Workers’ Union in 1878, those workers’ organisations did not
      take the road chosen by the Russian socialists; they demanded political
      rights for the people, they wanted to wage a struggle for those rights,
      but at that time the Russian socialists mistakenly considered the
      political struggle a deviation from socialism. However, the Russian
      socialists did not hold to their undeveloped, fallacious theory. They went
      forward, accepted Marx’s teaching, and evolved a theory of workers’
      socialism applicable to Russia—the theory of the Russian
      Social-Democrats. The foundation of Russian Social-Democracy was the great
      service rendered by the Emancipation of Labour group, Plekhanov, Axelrod,
      and their

      friends.[1]

      Since the foundation of Russian Social-Democracy (1883) the Russian
      working-class movement—in each of its broader
      manifestations—has been drawing closer to the Russian
      Social-Democrats in an effort to merge with them. The founding of the
      Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party (in the spring of 1898) marked the
      biggest step forward towards this fusion. At the present time the
      principal task for all Russian socialists and all class-conscious
      Russian workers is to strengthen this fusion, consolidate and organise the
      Social-Democratic Labour Party. He who does not wish to recognise this
      fusion, he who tries to draw some sort of artificial line of demarcation
      between the working-class movement and Social-Democracy in Russia renders
      no service

    

      but does harm to workers’ socialism and the working-class
      movement in Russia.
    

      To continue. “As far as extensive demands, political demands, are
      concerned,” writes R. M., “it is only in those of the
      St. Petersburg weavers ... in 1897 that we see the first and still weakly
      conscious case of our workers putting forward such broad political
      demands.” We must again say that this is beyond all doubt untrue.
      In publishing such utterances, Editorial Board of Rabochaya Mysl
      displays, first, a forgetfulness of the history of the Russian
      revolutionary and working-class movement that is unpardonable in a
      Social-Democrat, and, secondly, an unpardonably narrow conception of the
      workers’ cause. The Russian workers put forward extensive political
      demands in the May, 1898, leaflet of the St. Petersburg League of Struggle
      and in the newspapers S. Peterburgsky Rabochy Listok and
      Rabochaya Gazeta, the latter having been recognised, in 1898, by
      leading Russian Social-Democratic organisations as the official organ of
      the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party. Rabochaya Mysl, by
      ignoring these facts, is moving backwards and fully justifies the opinion
      that it is not representative of advanced workers, but of the lower,
      undeveloped strata of the proletariat
      (R. M. himself says in his article that this has already been
      pointed out to Rabochaya Mysl). The lower strata of the
      proletariat do not know the history of the Russian revolutionary movement,
      nor does R. M. know it. The lower strata of the proletariat do
      not understand the relationship between the working-class movement and
      Social-Democracy, nor does R. M. understand that
      relationship. Why was it that in the nineties the Russian workers did not
      form their special organisations separate and apart from the socialists as
      they had done in the seventies? Why did they not put forward their own
      political demands separate and apart from the socialists? R. M.
      apparently understands this to mean that “the Russian workers are
      still little prepared for this” (p. 5 of his article), but this
      explanation is only further proof that he has the right to speak only on
      behalf of the lower strata of the proletariat. The lower strata of the
      workers, during the movement of the nineties, were not conscious of its
      political character. Nevertheless,

    

      everyone knows (and R. M. himself speaks of it) that the
      working-class movement of the nineties acquired an extensive political
      significance. This was due to the fact that the advanced workers, as
      always and everywhere, determined the character of the movement, and they
      were followed by the working masses because they showed their readiness
      and their ability to serve the cause of the working class, because they
      proved able to win the full confidence of the masses. Those advanced
      workers were Social-Democrats; many of them even took a personal part in
      the disputes between the Narodnaya Volya adherents and the
      Social-Democrats that typified the transition of the Russian revolutionary
      movement from peasant and conspiratorial socialism to working-class
      socialism. It can, therefore, be understood why these advanced workers
      have not alienated themselves from the socialists and revolutionaries in a
      separate organisation. Such an alienation had a meaning and was necessary
      at the time when socialism alienated itself from the working-class
      movement. Such alienation would have been impossible and meaningless once
      the advanced workers had seen before them working-class socialism and the
      Social-Democratic organisations. The fusion of the
      advanced workers and the Social-Democratic organisations was altogether
      natural and inevitable. It was the result of the great historical fact
      that in the nineties two profound social movements converged in Russia:
      one, a spontaneous movement, a popular movement within the working class,
      the other, the movement of social thought in the direction of the theory
      of Marx and Engels, towards the theory of Social-Democracy.
    

      From the following it can be seen how extremely narrow is Rabochaya
Mysl’s conception of the political struggle. Speaking of the breadth of
      political demands, R. M. states:

      “For the workers to conduct such a political struggle consciously and
      independently, it is essential that it be waged by the working-class
      organisations themselves, that the workers’ political demands should find
      support in the workers consciousness of their common political
      requirements and the interests of the moment [note well!], that they
      should be the demands of the workers’ [craft] organisations themselves,
      that they should really be drawn up by them

    

      jointly and also put forward jointly by those working-class organisations
      on their own initiative....” It is further explained that the immediate
      common political demands of the workers are, for the time being (!!),
      still the ten-hour working day and the restoration of holidays abolished
      by the law of June 2, 1897.
    

      And after this the editors of Rabochaya Mysl are still surprised
      that they are accused of renouncing politics! Indeed, is not this
      reduction of politics to the struggle of craft unions for individual
      reforms the renunciation of politics? Is this not the rejection of the
      basic tenet of world Social-Democracy that the Social-Democrats must
      strive to organise the class struggle of the proletariat into independent
      political working-class parties that fight for democracy as a
      means for the proletariat to win political power and organise a
      socialist society? With a strangely unbounded thoughtlessness our latest
      distorters of Social-Democracy cast overboard everything dear to the
      Social-Democrats, everything that gives us the right to regard the
      working-class movement as a world-historical movement. It matters little
      to them that the long experience of European socialism and European
      democracy teaches the lesson that it is essential to strive for the
      formation of independent working-class political parties. It matters
      little to them that in the course of a long and arduous historical path
      the Russian revolutionary movement has evolved the union of socialism and
      the working-class movement, the union of the great social and political
      ideals and the class struggle of the proletariat. It matters little to
      them that the advanced Russian workers have laid the foundation of the
      Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party. Down with all that! Let us
      liberate ourselves from a too extensive ideological equipment and from a
      too difficult and exacting historical experience—and let
      “there remain for the time being” only craft unions (the
      possibility of organising which in Russia has not yet been proved at all,
      if we leave legal societies out of the reckoning), let these craft unions,
      “on their own initiative,” elaborate demands, the demands of the
      “moment,” demands for tiny, petty reforms!! What is this, if not the
      preachment of a retrograde trend?  What, indeed, if not propaganda for the
      destruction of socialism!
    
 

      And please note that Rabochaya Mysl does not merely outline the
      idea that local organisations should elaborate their own local forms of
      struggle and specific motives for agitation, methods of agitation,
      etc.—nobody would object to this idea. Russian Social-Democrats have
      never laid claim to anything hampering the independence of the workers in
      this respect. But Rabochaya Mysl wants to push aside the
      great political aims of the Russian proletariat altogether and “for
      the time being” confine itself “exclusively” to
      “the interests of the moment.” Until now the Russian
      Social-Democrats have always wanted to make use of every demand of the
      moment and, by agitating for that demand, to organise the proletariat for
      the struggle against the autocracy as the immediate objective. Now
      Rabochaya Mysl wants to limit the struggle of the
      proletariat to a petty struggle for petty demands. R. M.,
      knowing very well that he is retreating from the views of the entire
      Russian Social-Democracy, makes the following reply to those who accuse
      Rabochaya Mysl: It is said that the overthrow of tsarism is the
      immediate objective of the Russian working-dais movement. But of which
      working-class movement, asks
      R. M., “ the strike movement? the mutual benefit societies? the
workers’ circles?" (page 5 of the article). To this we reply: Speak
      for yourself alone, for your group, for the lower strata of the
      proletariat of a given locality which it represents, but do not presume
      to speak on behalf of the advanced Russian workers! The representatives
      of the lower strata of the proletariat often do not realise that the
      struggle for the overthrow of the autocracy can only be conducted by a
      revolutionary party. Nor does R. M. know this.The advanced
      workers, however, do. The less advanced representatives of the
      proletariat often do not know that the Russian working-class movement
      is not limited to the strike struggle, to mutual benefit societies and
      workers’ circles; that the Russian working-class movement has long been
      striving to organise itself into a revolutionary party and has
      demonstrated this striving by action. R. M. does not know this,
      either. But the advanced Russian workers know it.
    

R. M. tries to represent his complete misunderstanding of
      Social-Democracy as a sort of specific understanding

    

      of “our reality.” Let us look more closely at his ideas on this
      subject.
    

      “As far as the concept of the autocracy itself is concerned,” writes
      R. M., "...we shall not deal with that at length,
      assuming that all to whom we speak have the most precise and clear
      conception of such things.”  We shall soon see that R. M. himself
      has an extremely imprecise and unclear conception of such things; but
      first let us mention one other circumstance. Are there workers among those
      to whom R. M. is speaking?  Of course, there are. And if so,
      where are they to get a precise and clear conception of the autocracy?
      Obviously this requires the broadest and most systematic propaganda of the
      ideas of political liberty in general; agitation is required to connect
      every individual manifestation of police violence and of oppression by
      officialdom with a “precise conception” (in the minds of the
      workers) of the autocracy. This, it would seem, is elementary. But if it
      is, then can purely local propaganda and agitation against the autocracy
      be successful? Is it not absolutely essential to organise such
      propaganda and agitation throughout Russia into a single planned activity,
      i.e., into the activity of a single party? Why then does R. M.
      not indicate that the task of organising systematic propaganda and
      agitation against the autocracy is one of the immediate objectives of the
      Russian working-class movement? Only because he has the most imprecise and
      unclear conception of the tasks of the Russian working-class movement and
      of Russian Social-Democracy.
    

R. M. proceeds to explain that the autocracy is a tremendous
      “personal power” (a bureaucracy drilled like soldiers) and a
      tremendous “economic power” (financial resources). We shall
      not dwell on the “imprecise” aspects of his explanation (and
      there is much that is “imprecise” here), but shall pass over directly
      to the main point:
    

      “And so,” R. M. asks of Russian Social-Democracy, “is
      it not the overthrow of this personal power and the seizure of this
      economic power that the Russian workers are at this very moment advised to
      project as the first and immediate task of their present (embryonic)
      organisations? (we shall not even mention the revolutionaries, who say
      that

    

      this task must be undertaken by the circles of advanced workers).”
    

      In amazement we rub our eyes and read this monstrous passage over two or
      three times. Surely we must be mistaken! But no, we are not. R
      M. actually does not know what is meant by the overthrow of the
      autocracy. Hard to believe as this is, it is a fact. But after the
      confusion of ideas that R. M. has displayed, is it hard to
      believe after all?
    

R. M. confuses the seizure of power by revolutionaries with the
      overthrow of the autocracy by revolutionaries.
    

      Old Russian revolutionaries (of the Narodnaya Volya) strove for the
      seizure of power by a revolutionary party. They thought that by the
      seizure of power the “party would overthrow the personal
      power” of the autocracy, i.e., appoint its agents in place of the
      government officials, “seize economic power,” i.e., all the
      financial means of the state and carry out the social revolution. The
      Narodnaya Volya members (the old ones) actually did strive to
      “overthrow the personal power and seize the economic power” of
      the autocracy, to employ R. M.’s clumsy expression. The Russian
      Social-Democrats have decidedly set themselves against this revolutionary
      theory. Plekhanov subjected it to trenchant criticism in his essays,
      Socialism and the Political Struggle (1883) and Our
      Differences (1885), pointing out the task of the Russian
      revolutionaries—the foundation of a revolutionary working-class
      party whose immediate aim should be the overthrow of the autocracy. What
      is meant by the overthrow of the autocracy? To explain this to
      R. M. we must answer the question: what is the autocracy? The
      autocracy (absolutism, unlimited monarchy) is a form of rule under which
      all supreme power is wielded wholly and indivisibly by an absolute
      monarch, the tsar. The tsar issues laws, appoints officials, collects and
      disburses the national revenues without any participation by the
      people in legislation or in control over the administration. The
      autocracy, therefore, means the absolute power of government officials and
      the police and the absence of rights for the people. The entire people
      suffers from this absence of rights, but the propertied classes
      (especially the rich landed proprietors and capitalists) exercise a
      powerful

    

      influence over the bureaucracy. The working class suffers doubly: both
      from the lack of rights to which the entire Russian people is subjected
      and from the oppression of the workers by the capitalists, who compel the
      government to serve their interests.
    

      What is meant by the overthrow of the autocracy? It implies the tsar’s
      renunciation of absolute power; the granting to the people of the right to
      elect their own representatives for legislation, for supervision over the
      actions of the government officials, for supervision over the collection
      and disbursement of state revenues. This type of government in which the
      people participate in legislation and administration is called the
      constitutional form of government (constitution law on the
      participation of people’s representatives in legislation and the
      administration of the state). Thus, the overthrow of the autocracy means
      the replacement of the autocratic form of government by the constitutional
      form of government. For the overthrow of the autocracy, therefore, no
      “overthrow of personal power or seizure of economic power” is
      necessary, but it is necessary to compel the tsarist government to
      renounce its unlimited power and convene a Zemsky

      Sobor[2]

      of representatives of the people for the elaboration of a constitution
      (“to win a democratic constitution” [people’s constitution,
      drawn up in the interests of the people], as it is put in the draft
      programme of the Russian Social-Democrats published in 1885 by the
      Emancipation of Labour group).
    

      Why must the overthrow of the autocracy be the first task of the Russian
      working class? Because under the autocracy the working class is not able
      to develop its struggle extensively, to gain for itself any stable
      positions in either the economic or political fields, to establish sound
      mass organisations and unfurl the banner of the social revolution before
      the masses of the working people and teach them to struggle for it. The
      decisive struggle of the entire working class against the bourgeois class
      is possible only under conditions of political liberty, and the final aim
      of that struggle is for the proletariat to win political power and
      organise a socialist society. The conquest of

    

      political power by an organised proletariat that has gone through a
      lengthy schooling in struggle will really be “the overthrow of the
      personal power and the seizure of the economic power” of the
      bourgeois government; but the Russian Social-Democrats have never put
      forward this seizure of power as the immediate task of the
      Russian workers. Russian Social-Democrats have always maintained that only
      under conditions of political liberty, when there is an extensive mass
      struggle, can the Russian working class develop organisations for the
      final victory of socialism.
    

      But how can the Russian working class overthrow the autocracy? The editors
      of Rabochaya Mysl make mock even of the Emancipation of Labour
      group which founded Russian Social-Democracy and stated in its programme
      that “the struggle against the autocracy is obligatory even for
      those workers’ circles that now constitute the germs of the future Russian
      working-class party.” It seems ridiculous to Rabochaya Mysl (see
      No. 7 and the article under review): the overthrow of the
      autocracy—by workers’ circles! In reply, we say to the editors of
      Rabochaya Mysl: Whom are you mocking? It is yourselves you are
      mocking! The editors of Rabochaya Mysl complain that the Russian
      Social-Democrats are not comradely in their polemic with
      them. Let the readers judge on whose side the polemic is uncomradely: on
      the side of the old Russian Social-Democrats who have set forth their
      views clearly and who say out right which views of the “young” they
      consider mistaken and why; or on the side of the “young” who
      do not name their opponents but jab from behind cover, first at
      “the author of a German book on Chernyshevsky” (Plekhanov,
      whom, moreover, they groundlessly confuse with certain legal writers),
      then at the Emancipation of Labour group, citing with distortions
      passages from its programme without putting forward anything like a
      definite programme of their own. Yes, we recognise the duty of
      comradeship, the duty to support all comrades, the duty to tolerate the
      opinions of comrades but as far as we are concerned, the duty
      of comradeship derives from our duty to Russian and international
      Social-Democracy, and not vice versa. We recognise our comradely
      obligations to Rabochaya Mysl, not because its editors are our
      comrades; we consider the editors of Rabochaya
    

      Mysl our comrades only because and to the extent that they work in
      the ranks of Russian (and, consequently, of international)
      Social-Democracy. Therefore, if we are certain that the
      “comrades” are moving backwards, away from the
      Social-Democratic programme, that the “comrades” are hemming
      in and distorting the aims of the working-class movement, we consider it
      our duty to give expression to our convictions with a complete
      certainty that leaves nothing unsaid!
    

      We have just stated that the editors of Rabochaya Mysl distort
      the views of the Emancipation of Labour group. Let the reader judge for
      himself. “We are prepared not to understand those of our comrades,”
      writes R. M., “who consider their programme for ’the
      emancipation of labour’ a simple answer to the question: ’Where are we to
      get the forces for the struggle against the autocracy?"’ (elsewhere:

      “Our revolutionaries regard the workers’ movement as the best means
      of overthrowing the autocracy”). Open the draft programme of the Russian
      Social-Democrats published by the Emancipation of Labour group in 1885 and
      reprinted by
      P. B. Axelrod in his booklet, Present Tasks and Tactics of Russian
Social-Democracy (Geneva, 1898), and you will see that the
programme is based on the emancipation of labour from the
oppression of capital, the transfer of all means of production to social
ownership, the seizure of political power by the working class, and the
founding of a revolutionary working-class party. It is clear
that R. M. distorts that programme and is unwilling to
understand it. He has seized upon P. B. Axelrod’s words at the beginning
of his booklet wherein it is stated that the programme of the
Emancipation of Labour group “was an answer” to the
question: Where are we to get the forces for the struggle against
absolutism? It is, however, an historical fact that the
programme of the Emancipation of Labour group was the answer to the
question posed by the Russian revolutionaries and by the Russian
revolutionary movement as a whole. However, because the programme
answered that question, does it mean that the working-class movement was
only the means to an end for the Emancipation of Labour group? Such a
“misunderstanding” on the part of R. M.
merely shows that he is unacquainted with the

    

      generally-known facts of the activities of the Emancipation of Labour group.
    

      To continue. How can the “overthrow of the autocracy” be a
      task for workers’ circles? R. M. does not understand. Open the
      programme of the Emancipation of Labour group:

      “Russian Social-Democrats consider that for the workers’ circles the
      chief means of political struggle against the autocracy,” we read,
      “is agitation amongst the working class and the further spreading of
      socialist ideas and revolutionary organisations amongst the workers. These
      organisations, closely bound together in an integral whole and not content
      with individual clashes with the government, will lose no time in going
      over, at a suitable moment, to a general, decisive offensive against the
      government.” These were precisely the tactics followed by the Russian
      organisations that established the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party
      in the spring of 1898. And they proved that such organisations are a
      powerful political force in Russia. If these organisations form one single
      party and carry on wide spread agitation against the autocratic
      government, using for this purpose all elements of the liberal opposition,
      the objective of winning political liberty will undoubtedly be one that
      can be attained by such a party. If the editors of Rabochaya Mysl
      are “prepared not to understand” this, we are
      “prepared” to advise them: learn, gentlemen, for these things
      are not in themselves very difficult to understand.
    

      Let us, however, get back to R. M., whom we left arguing about
      the struggle against the autocracy. R. M.’s own views on this
      subject illustrate still more clearly the new, retrograde, trend of
      Rabochaya Mysl.
    

      “The end of the autocracy is clear,” writes R. M.
      "... The struggle against the autocracy is one of the conditions for
      the sound development of all vital social elements.” From this the reader
      will probably think that the struggle against the autocracy is essential
      to the working class. But wait.
      R. M. has his own logic and his own terminology. By the word
      “struggle,” through the addition of the word “social”
      (struggle), he understands something very specific. R. M.
      describes the legal opposition of many sections of the Russian
      population to the government, and he draws the conclusion: “Indeed,
      the struggles for Zemstvo and urban

    

      public self-government, for public schools, and for public aid to the
      starving population, etc., constitute a struggle against the autocracy.”
      “The necessity to wage a social struggle against the bureaucratic
      autocracy is obvious to all class-conscious, progressive sections and
      groups of the population. More than this. This social struggle, which
      through some strange misunderstanding has not attracted the favourable
      attention of many Russian revolutionary writers, is, as we have seen,
      being conducted by Russian society; nor did it begin yesterday.”
      “The real question is how these separate social strata ... are to
      conduct this [note this!] struggle against the autocracy with the maximum
      success.... The main question for us is to know how our workers should
      conduct this social [!] struggle against the autocracy.”...
    

      These arguments of R. M. are again cluttered with an unbelievable
      amount of confusion and errors.
    

      First, R. M. confuses legal opposition with the struggle
      against the autocracy, with the struggle to overthrow the autocracy. This
      confusion, unpardonable in a socialist, results from his employing the
      expression “struggle against the autocracy” without an
      explanation: this expression may mean (with a reservation) struggle
      against the autocracy, but also struggle against individual
      measures of the autocracy within the framework of that same autocratic
      system.
    

      Secondly, by regarding legal opposition as the social struggle against the
      autocracy and affirming that our workers should wage “this social
      struggle,” R. M. virtually says that our workers should carry on
      legal opposition, not a revolutionary struggle, against the autocracy; in
      other words, he sinks into a hideous debasement of Social-Democracy, which
      he confuses with the most commonplace and beggarly Russian liberalism.
    

      Thirdly, R. M. declares a flagrant untruth regarding
      Russian Social-Democratic writers (true, he prefers making his reproaches
      in “all comradeship,” without naming names; but if it is not
      Social-Democrats whom he has in mind, his words have no sense), when he
      states that they do not pay attention to legal opposition. On the
      contrary, the Emancipation of Labour group, and P. B. Axelrod in
      particular, as well as the Manifesto of the Russian
Social-Democratic
    

      Labour Party and the pamphlet, The Tasks of the
Russian Social-Democrats (published by the Russian
      Social-Democratic Labour Party and designated by Axelrod as a
      commentary to the Manifesto)—all, not only paid
attention to legal opposition, but even elucidated with precision its
relation to Social-Democracy.
    

      Let us clarify the issue. What sort of “struggle against the
      autocracy” is being conducted by our Zemstvos, by our liberal
      societies in general, and by the liberal press? Are they carrying on a
      struggle against the autocracy, for the overthrow of the autocracy?
      No, they never have engaged and still do not engage in such a
      struggle. This is a struggle that is waged only by the
      revolutionaries, who frequently come from the liberal society and rely on
      its sympathy. But waging a revolutionary struggle is in no sense the same
      thing as sympathising with the revolutionaries and supporting them; the
      struggle against the autocracy is in no sense the same thing as legal
      opposition to the autocracy. The Russian liberals express their
      dissatisfaction with the autocracy only in the form sanctioned by
      the autocracy itself, i.e., the form that the autocracy does not consider
      dangerous to the autocracy. The grandest showing of liberal opposition has
      been nothing more than the petitions of the liberals to the
      tsarist government to draw the people into the administration. And each
      time the liberals patiently accepted the brutal police rejections of their
      petitions; they put up with the lawless and savage repressions with which
      the government of gendarmes repaid even legal attempts to make known
      their opinion. Simply to present the liberal opposition as a social
      struggle against the autocracy is a pure distortion of the issue,
      because the Russian liberals have never organised a revolutionary
      party to struggle for the overthrow of the autocracy, although they could
      have found and can still find for this purpose both the material means and
      representatives of Russian liberalism abroad. R. M. not only
      distorts the issue, but he drags in the name of the great Russian
      socialist N.G. Chernyshevsky."The workers’ allies in this struggle," says
      R. M., “are all the advanced strata of Russian society, who
      are defending their social interests and institutions, who have a clear
      conception of the common good, who ’never forget’ [R. M. quotes

    

      Chernyshevsky] that there is ’a great difference as to whether changes are
      brought about by an independent decision of the government or by the
      formal demand of society."’ If this comment is applied to all
      representatives of the “social struggle” in the way
      R. M. understands it, i.e., to all Russian liberals, then it is a
      falsification pure and simple. The Russian liberals have never
      presented any formal demands to the government, and precisely for this
      reason the Russian liberals have never played and now certainly cannot
      play an independent revolutionary role. Not “all the
      advanced strata of society” can be allies of the working class and
      Social-Democracy, but only revolutionary parties founded by members of
      that society. In general, the liberals can and should serve merely as
      one of the sources of additional forces and means for the
      revolutionary working-class party (as P. B. Axelrod so clearly stated in
      the above-mentioned pamphlet). N. G. Chernyshevsky ridiculed “the
      progressive strata of Russian society” for the very fact that they
      did not understand the necessity for formal demands to the government and
      indifferently watched revolutionaries from their own midst perish under
      the blows of the autocratic government. In this case R. M.’s
      quotations from Chernyshevsky are as senseless as his quotations from the
      same author, torn piecemeal out of context, in the second article of the
      Separate Supplement, which are meant to show that Chernyshevsky
      was not a utopian and that Russian Social-Democrats do not appreciate the
      full significance of the “great Russian socialist." In his book on
      Chernyshevsky (articles in the collection
      Sotsial-Demokrat,"[6]
      issued as a separate volume in
      German) Plekhanov fully appreciated the significance of Chernyshevsky and
      explained his attitude to the theory of Marx and Engels. The editors of
      Rabochaya Mysl have merely revealed their own inability to give
      anything like a connected and comprehensive assessment of Chernyshevsky,
      of his strong and weak sides.
    

      “The real question” for Russian Social-Democracy is by no means
      that of determining how the liberals are to conduct the “social
      struggle” (by “social struggle” R. M., as we
      have seen, means legal opposition), but how to organise a revolutionary
      working-class party devoted to the struggle for the

    

      overthrow of the autocracy, a party that could gain the backing of
      all opposition elements in Russia, a party that could
      utilise all manifestations of opposition in its revolutionary
      struggle. It is precisely a revolutionary working-class party that is
      needed for this purpose, because in Russia only the working class can be a
      determined and consistent fighter for democracy, because without the
      vigorous influence of such a party the liberal elements “could
      remain a sluggish, inactive, dormant force” (P. B. Axelrod,
      op. cit., p. 23). In saying that our “more advanced strata”
      are conducting “a real [!!] social struggle against the
      autocracy” (p. 12 of R. M.’s article), that “the main
      question for us is how our workers should conduct this social
      struggle against the autocracy"—in saying such things,
      R. M. is, in fact, retreating completely from
      Social-Democracy. We can only offer serious advice to the editors of
      Rabochaya Mysl to ponder well the question of where they want to
      go and where their real place is: among the revolutionaries, who carry the
      banner of the social revolution to the working classes and want to
      organise them into a political revolutionary party, or among the liberals,
      who are conducting their ’own “social struggle” (i.e., the
      legal opposition)? There is nothing at all socialist in the theory of the
      “independent social activity” of the workers; in the theory of
      “social mutual aid” and of the craft unions that “so
      far” confine themselves to the 10-hour working day; in the theory of
      the “social struggle” of the Zemstvos, liberal societies, and
      others against the autocracy—there is nothing in this theory that
      the liberals would not accept! Indeed, the entire programme of
      Rabochaya Mysl (to the extent that one can call it a programme)
      tends, in essence, to leave the Russian workers undeveloped and split, and
      to make them the tail-end of the liberals!
    

      Some of

      R. M. ’s 

      phrases are particularly strange. “The
      whole trouble is merely that our revolutionary intelligentsia,” he
      proclaims, “mercilessly persecuted by the political police, mistake
      the struggle against the political police for the political struggle
      against the autocracy.”  What sense can there be in such a statement? The
      political police are called political because they persecute enemies of
      the autocracy and those who struggle against the autocracy. For

    

      this reason, Rabochaya Mysl, so long as its metamorphosis into a
      liberal is not completed, fights against the political police as do all
      Russian revolutionaries and socialists and all class-conscious
      workers. From the fact that the political police mercilessly persecute
      socialists and workers, that the autocracy maintains a “well-ordered
      organisation,” “competent and resourceful statesmen” (p. 7 of
      R. M.’s article), only two conclusions are to be drawn: the
      cowardly and wretched liberal will pass judgement that our people in
      general and our workers in particular are still ill-prepared for the
      struggle and that all hopes must be placed in the “struggle”
      of the Zemstvos, the liberal press, etc., since this is the “real
      struggle against the autocracy” and not only a struggle against the
      political police. The socialist and every class-conscious worker will
      conclude that the working-class party must bend all its efforts to the
      formation of a “well-ordered organisation,” to the training of
      “competent and resourceful revolutionaries” from among the
      advanced workers and socialists, people who will raise the working-class
      party to the high level of the leading fighter for democracy and who will
      be able to win over to its side all opposition elements.
    

      The editors of Rabochaya Mysl do not realise that they are standing on
      an inclined plane down which they will roll to the first of these two
      conclusions!
    

      Or, again: “What amazes us further in these programmes [i.e., in the
      programmes of the Social-Democrats],” writes
      R. M., “is that they incessantly give first place to the
      advantages of workers’ activities in a parliament [non-existent in
      Russia], while completely ignoring ... the importance of workers’
      participation” in the employers’ legislative assemblies, on factory
      boards, and in municipal self-government (p. 15). If the advantages of
      parliament are not brought into the forefront, how will the workers learn
      about political rights and political liberty? If we keep silent on these
      questions—as does Rabochaya Mysl—does this not mean
      perpetuating the political ignorance of the lower strata of the workers?
      As to workers’ participation in municipal self-government, no
      Social-Democrat has ever denied anywhere the advantages and the importance
      of the activities of socialist workers in municipal
      self-government;

    

      but it is ridiculous to speak of this in Russia, where no open
      manifestation of socialism is possible and where firing the workers with
      enthusiasm for municipal self-government (even were this possible) would
      actually mean distracting advanced workers from the socialist
      working-class cause towards liberalism.
    

      “The attitude of the advanced strata of the workers towards this
      [autocratic] government,” says R. M., “is
      as understandable as their attitude towards the factory owners.” The
      common-sense view of this, therefore, is that the advanced strata of the
      workers are no less class-conscious Social-Democrats than the socialists
      from among the intelligentsia, so that Rabochaya Mysl’s attempt
      to separate the one from the other is absurd and harmful. The Russian
      working class, accordingly, has produced the elements necessary for the
      formation of an independent working-class political party. But the editors
      of Rabochaya Mysl draw from the fact of the political
      consciousness of the advanced strata of the workers the conclusion
      ... that it is necessary to hold these advanced elements back, so as to
      keep them marking time! “Which struggle is it most desirable for the
      workers to wage?” asks R. M., and he answers:

      Desirable is the struggle that is possible, and possible is the struggle
      which the workers are “waging at the given moment”!!! It would be
      difficult to express more glaringly the senseless and unprincipled
      opportunism with which the editors of Rabochaya Mysl, allured by
      fashionable “Bernsteinism,” have become infected! What is possible
      is desirable, and what we have at the given moment is possible! It is as
      though a man setting out on a long and difficult road on which numerous
      obstacles and numerous enemies await him were told in answer to his
      question “Where shall I go?”:

      “It is desirable to go where it is possible to go, and it is possible
      to go where you are going at the given moment”! This is the sheerest
      nihilism, not revolutionary, however, but opportunist nihilism, manifested
      either by anarchists or bourgeois liberals! By “calling upon”
      the Russian workers to engage in a “partial” and
      “political” struggle (with political struggle understood, not
      as the struggle against the autocracy, but only as “the struggle to
      improve the condition of all workers”), R. M. is
      actually calling upon the Russian

    

      working-class movement and Russian Social-Democracy to take a step
backward, he is actually calling upon the workers to separate from
the Social-Democrats and thus throw over board everything that has been
acquired by European and Russian experience! The workers have no need
for socialists in their struggle to improve their condition, if that is
their only struggle. In all countries there are workers who wage the
struggle for the improvement of their condition, but know nothing of
socialism or are even hostile to it.
    

      “In conclusion,” writes R. M., “a few
      words on our conception of working-class socialism.” After what has been
      said above the reader will have no difficulty in imagining the sort of
      “conception” it is. It is simply a copy of Bernstein’s
      “fashionable” book. Our “young” Social-Democrats
      substitute the “independent social and political activity of the
      workers” for the class struggle of the proletariat. If we recall how
      R. M. understands social
      “struggle” and “politics,” it will be clear that this is
      a direct return to the “formula” of certain Russian legal
      writers. Instead of indicating precisely the aim (and essence) of
      socialism—the transfer of the land, factories, etc., in general, of
      all the means of production, to the ownership of the whole of society and
      the replacement of the capitalist mode of production by production
      according to a common plan in the interests of all members of
      society—instead of all this, R. M.
      indicates first of all the development of craft unions and consumers’
      co-operatives, and says only in passing that socialism leads to the
      complete socialisation of all the means of production. On the other hand,
      he prints in the heaviest type: “Socialism is merely a further and
      higher development of the modern community”—a phrase borrowed from
      Bernstein, which not only does not explain but even obscures the
      significance and substance of socialism. All the liberals and the entire
      bourgeoisie undoubtedly favour the “development of the modern
      community,” so that they will all rejoice at
      R. M.’s declaration. Nevertheless, the
      bourgeois are the enemies of socialism. The point is that
      “the modern community” has many varied aspects, and of those
      who employ this general expression, some have one aspect in view, others
      another. And so, instead of

    

      explaining the concept of the class struggle and socialism to the workers,
      R. M. offers them only nebulous and misleading phrases. Lastly,
      instead of indicating the means modern socialism advances for the
      achievement of socialism—the winning of political power by
      the organised proletariat—instead of this, R. M. speaks
      only of placing production under their (the workers’) social management or
      under the management of democratised social power, democratised “by
      their (the workers’) active participation on boards examining all kinds of
      factory affairs, in courts of arbitration, in all possible assemblies,
      commissions, and conferences for the elaboration of labour laws; by the
      workers’ participation in public self-government, and, lastly, in the
      country’s general representative institution." In this way the editors of
      Rabochaya Mysl include in working-class socialism only that which
      is to be obtained along the peaceful path and exclude the
      revolutionary path. This narrowing-down of socialism and its reduction to
      common bourgeois liberalism represents again a tremendous step backwards
      as compared with the views of all Russian Social-Democrats and of the
      overwhelming majority of European Social-Democrats. The working class
      would, of course, prefer to take power peacefully (we have
      already stated that this seizure of power can be carried out only by the
      organised working class which has passed through the school of the class
      struggle), but to renounce the revolutionary seizure of power
      would be madness on the part of the proletariat, both from the
      theoretical and the practical-political points of view; it would mean
      nothing but a disgraceful retreat in face of the bourgeoisie and all other
      propertied classes. It is very probable—even most
      probable—that the bourgeoisie will not make peaceful concessions to
      the proletariat and at the decisive moment will resort to violence for the
      defence of its privileges. In that case, no other way will be left to the
      proletariat for the achievement of its aim but that of revolution. This is
      the reason the programme of “working-class socialism” speaks
      of the winning of political power in general without defining the
      method, for the choice of method depends on a future which we can not
      precisely determine. But, we repeat, to limit the activities of the
      proletariat under any circumstances to peaceful

    

      "democratisation” alone is arbitrarily to narrow and vulgarise the
      concept of working-class socialism.
    

      We shall not analyse the other articles in the Separate
      Supplement in such great detail. We have spoken of the article on the
      tenth anniversary of Chernyshevsky’s death. As to the pro-Bernsteinian
      propaganda of the Rabochaya Mysl Editorial Board, which the
      enemies of socialism throughout the world, especially the bourgeois
      liberals, have seized on, and against which the vast majority of the
      German Social-Democrats and class-conscious German workers spoke out so
      decisively (at their Hannover Congress)—as to Bernsteinism, this is
      not the place to speak of it in detail. We are interested in our
      Russian Bernsteinism, and we have shown the limitless confusion
      of ideas, the absence of anything like independent views, the tremendous
      step backwards as compared with the views of Russian Social-Democracy
      which “our” Bernsteinism represents. As far as German
      Bernsteinism is concerned, we would rather leave it to the Germans
      themselves to handle. We would remark only that Russian Bernsteinism is
      infinitely lower than the German. Bernstein, despite his errors, despite
      his obvious striving to retrogress both theoretically and politically,
      still has sufficient intelligence and sufficient conscientiousness not
      to propose changes in the programme of German Social-Democracy
      without himself having arrived at any new theory or programme; in the
      final and decisive moment, he declared his acceptance of Bebel’s
      resolution, a resolution that announced solemnly to the world that German
      Social-Democracy would stand by its old programme and its old tactics. And
      our Russian Bernsteinians? Without having done a hundredth of what
      Bernstein has done, they even go so far as to refuse to recognise the
      fact that all Russian Social-Democratic organisations laid the foundations
      of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party in 1898, published its
      Manifesto, and announced Rabochaya Gazeta to be its
      official organ, and that these publications stand by the “old”
      programme of the Russian Social-Democrats in its entirety. Our
      Bernsteinians do not seem to be aware of the fact that, if they have
      rejected the old views and adopted new ones, it is their moral
      duty—to Russian Social-Democracy and

    

      to the Russian socialists and workers who devoted all their efforts to the
      preparations for, and the founding of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour
      Party and who in their majority now fill Russian prisons—that it is
      the duty of those who profess the new views, not to confine themselves to
      jabbing from holes and corners at “our revolutionaries” in
      general, but to announce directly and publicly with whom and with what
      they are in disagreement, what new views and what new programme they
      advance in place of the old.
    

      There is still one other question left for us to examine, probably the
      most important one, namely, how such a retrograde trend in Russian
      Social-Democracy is to be explained. In our opinion it is not to
      be explained solely by the personal qualities of the Rabochaya
      Mysl editors or by the influence of the fashionable Bernsteinism
      alone. We hold that it is to be explained mainly by the peculiarities in
      the historical development of Russian Social-Democracy, which gave rise
      to—and had temporarily to give rise to—a narrow
      understanding of working-class socialism.
    

      In the eighties and at the beginning of the nineties, when
      Social-Democrats initiated their practical work in Russia, they were
      confronted firstly with the Narodnaya Volya, which charged them with
      departing from the political struggle that had been inherited from the
      Russian revolutionary movement, and with which the Social-Democrats
      carried on a persistent polemic. Secondly, they were confronted with the
      Russian liberal circles, which were also dissatisfied with the turn taken
      by the revolutionary movement—from the Narodnaya Volya trend to
      Social-Democracy. The two fold polemic centred round the question of
      politics. In their struggle against the narrow conceptions of the
      Narodnaya Volya adherents, who reduced politics to conspiracy-making, the
      Social-Democrats could be led to, and did at times, declare themselves
      against politics in general (in view of the then prevailing narrow
      conception of politics). On the other hand, the Social-Democrats often
      heard, in the liberal and radical salons of bourgeois
      “society,” regrets that the revolutionaries had abandoned terror;
      people who were mortally afraid for their own skins and at a decisive
      moment failed to give support to the heroes who struck blows at the
      autocracy, these people hypocritically accused

    

      the Social-Democrats of political indifferentism and yearned for the
      rebirth of a party that would pull the chestnuts out of the fire for
      them. Naturally, the Social-Democrats conceived a hatred for such people
      and their phrases, and they turned to the more mundane but more serious
      work of propaganda among the factory proletariat. At first it was
      inevitable that this work should have a narrow character and should be
      embodied in the narrow declarations of some Social-Democrats. This
      narrowness, however, did not frighten those Social-Democrats who had not
      in the least forgotten the broad historical aims of the Russian
      working-class movement. What matters it if the words of the
      Social-Democrats sometimes have a narrow meaning when their deeds
      cover a broad field. They do not give themselves up to use less
      conspiracies, they do not hob-nob with the

      Balalaikins[7]
      of bourgeois liberalism, but they go to that class which alone is the real
      revolutionary class and assist in the development of its forces! They
      believed that this narrowness would disappear of its own accord with each
      step that broadened Social-Democratic propaganda. And this, to a
      considerable degree, is what has happened. From propaganda they began to
      go over to widespread agitation. Widespread agitation, naturally, brought
      to the forefront a growing number of class-conscious advanced workers;
      revolutionary organisations began to take form (the St. Petersburg, Kiev,
      and other Leagues of Struggle, the Jewish Workers’ Union). These
      organisations naturally tended to merge and, eventually, they succeeded:
      they united and laid the foundations of the Russian Social-Democratic
      Labour Party. It would seem that the old narrowness would then have been
      left without any basis and that it would be completely cast aside. But
      things turned out differently: the spread of their agitation brought the
      Social-Democrats into contact with the lower, less developed strata of the
      proletariat; to attract these strata it was necessary for the agitator to
      be able to adapt himself to the lowest level of understanding, he was
      taught to put the “demands and interests of the given moment”
      in the foreground and to push back the broad ideals of socialism and the
      political struggle. The fragmentary, amateur nature of Social-Democratic
      work, the extremely weak connections between the study circles in

    

      the different cities, between the Russian Social-Democrats and their
      comrades abroad who possessed a profounder knowledge and a richer
      revolutionary experience, as well as a wider political horizon, naturally
      led to a gross exaggeration of this (absolutely essential) aspect
      of Social-Democratic activity, which could bring some individuals to lose
      sight of the other aspects, especially since with every reverse the most
      developed workers and intellectuals were wrenched from the ranks of the
      struggling army, so that sound revolutionary traditions and continuity
      could not as yet be evolved. It is in this extreme exaggeration of one
      aspect of Social-Democratic work that we see the chief cause of the sad
      retreat from the ideals of Russian Social-Democracy. Add to this
      enthusiasm over a fashionable book, ignorance of the history of the
      Russian revolutionary movement, and a childish claim to originality, and
      you have all the elements that go to make up “the retrograde trend
      in Russian Social-Democracy.”
    

      We shall, therefore, have to deal in greater detail with the question of
      the relation of the advanced strata of the proletariat to the less
      advanced, and the significance of Social-Democratic work among these two
      sections.
    

      The history of the working-class movement in all countries shows that the
      better-situated strata of the working class respond to the ideas of
      socialism, more rapidly and more easily. From among these come, in the
      main, the advanced workers that every working-class movement brings to the
      fore, those who can win the confidence of the labouring masses, who devote
      themselves entirely to the education and organisation of the proletariat,
      who accept socialism consciously, and who even elaborate independent
      socialist theories. Every viable working-class movement has brought to the
      fore such working-class leaders, its own Proudhons, Vaillants, Weitlings,
      and Bebels. And our Russian working-class movement promises not to lag
      behind the European movement in this respect. At a time when educated
      society is losing interest in honest, illegal literature, an impassioned
      desire for knowledge and for socialism is growing among the workers, real
      heroes are coming to the fore from amongst the workers, who, despite their
      wretched living conditions, despite the stultifying penal

    

      servitude of factory labour, possess so much character and will-power that
      they study, study, study, and turn them selves into conscious
      Social-Democrats—“the working-class intelligentsia.” This
      “working-class intelligentsia” already exists in Russia, and
      we must make every effort to ensure that its ranks are regularly
      reinforced, that its lofty mental requirements are met and that leaders of
      the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party come from its ranks. The
      newspaper that wants to become the organ of all Russian Social-Democrats
      must, therefore, be at the level of the advanced workers; not only must it
      not lower its level artificially, but, on the contrary, it must raise it
      constantly, it must follow up all the tactical, political, and theoretical
      problems of world Social-Democracy. Only then will the demands of the
      working-class intelligentsia be met, and it itself will take the cause of
      the Russian workers and, consequently, the cause of the Russian
      revolution, into its own hands.
    

      After the numerically small stratum of advanced workers comes the broad
      stratum of average workers. These workers, too, strive ardently for
      socialism, participate in workers’ study circles, read socialist
      newspapers and books, participate in agitation, and differ from the
      preceding stratum only in that they cannot become fully independent
      leaders of the Social-Democratic working-class movement. The average
      worker will not understand some of the articles in a newspaper that aims
      to be the organ of the Party, he will not be able to get a full grasp of
      an intricate theoretical or practical problem. This does not at all mean
      that the newspaper must lower itself to the level of the mass of its
      readers. The newspaper, on the contrary, must raise their level and help
      promote advanced workers from the middle stratum of workers. Such workers,
      absorbed by local practical work and interested mainly in the
      events of the working-class movement and the immediate problems of
      agitation, should connect their every act with thoughts of the entire
      Russian working-class movement, its historical task, and the ultimate goal
      of socialism, so that the newspaper, the mass of whose readers are average
      workers, must connect socialism and the political struggle with every
      local and narrow question.
    
 

      Lastly, behind the stratum of average workers comes the mass that
      constitutes the lower strata of the proletariat. It is quite possible that
      a socialist newspaper will be completely or well-nigh incomprehensible to
      them (even in Western Europe the number of Social-Democratic voters is
      much larger than the number of readers of Social-Democratic newspapers),
      but it would be absurd to conclude from this that the newspaper of the
      Social-Democrats should adapt itself to the lowest possible level of the
      workers. The only thing that follows from this is that different forms of
      agitation and propaganda must be brought to bear on these
      strata—pamphlets written in more popular language, oral agitation,
      and chiefly—leaflets on local events. The Social-Democrats should
      not confine themselves even to this; it is quite possible that the first
      steps towards arousing the consciousness of the lower strata of the
      workers will have to take the form of legal educational activities. It is
      very important for the Party to make use of this activity, guide
      it in the direction in which it is most needed, send out legal workers to
      plough up virgin fields that can later be planted by Social-Democratic
      agitators. Agitation among the lower strata of the workers should, of
      course, provide the widest field for the personal qualities of the
      agitator and the peculiarities of the locality, the trade concerned,
      etc. “Tactics and agitation must not be confused,” says Kautsky in
      his book against Bernstein. “Agitational methods must be adapted to
      individual and local conditions. Every agitator must be allowed to select
      those methods of agitation that he has at his disposal. One agitator may
      create the greatest impression by his enthusiasm, another by his biting
      sarcasm, a third by his ability to adduce a large number of instances,
      etc. While being adapted to the agitator, agitation must also be adapted
      to the public. The agitator must speak so that he will be understood; he
      must take as a starting-point something well known to his listeners. All
      this is self-evident and is not merely applicable to agitation conducted
      among the peasantry. One has to talk to cabmen differently than to
      sailors, and to sailors differently than to printers. Agitation
      must be individualised, but our tactics, our political
      activity must be uniform” (S. 2-3). These words from a
      leading representative of

    

      Social-Democratic theory contain a superb assessment of agitation as part
      of the general activity of the party. These words show how unfounded are
      the fears of those who think that the formation of a revolutionary party
      conducting a political struggle will interfere with agitation, will push
      it into the background and curtail the freedom of the agitators. On the
      contrary, only an organised party can carry out widespread agitation,
      provide the necessary guidance (and material) for agitators on all
      economic and political questions, make use of every local agitational
      success for the instruction of all Russian workers, and send agitators to
      those places and into that milieu where they can work with the
      greatest success. It is only in an organised party that people possessing
      the capacities for work as agitators will be able to dedicate themselves
      wholly to this task—to the advantage both of agitation and of the
      other aspects of Social-Democratic work. From this it can be seen that
      whoever forgets political agitation and propaganda on account of the
      economic struggle, whoever forgets the necessity of organising the
      working-class movement into the struggle of a political party, will, aside
      from everything else, deprive himself of even an opportunity of
      successfully and steadily attracting the lower strata of the proletariat
      to the working-class cause.
    

      However, such an exaggeration of one side of our activities to the
      detriment of the others, even the urge to throw overboard the other
      aspects, is fraught with still graver consequences for the Russian
      working-class movement. The lower strata of the proletariat may even
      become demoralised by such calumnies as that the founders of Russian
      Social-Democracy only want to use the workers to overthrow the autocracy,
      by invitations to confine themselves to the restoration of holidays and to
      craft unions, with no concern for the final aims of socialism and the
      immediate tasks of the political struggle. Such workers may (and will)
      always be ensnared by the bait of any sops offered by the government or
      the bourgeoisie. The lower strata of the proletariat, the very undeveloped
      workers, might, under the influence of the preaching of Rabochaya
      Mysl, fall victim to the bourgeois and profoundly reactionary idea
      that the worker cannot and should not interest himself in anything but
      increased

    

      wages and the restoration of holidays (“the interests of the
      moment”); that the working people can and should conduct the workers’
      struggle by their own efforts alone, by their own “private
      initiative,” and not attempt to combine it with socialism; that they
      should not strive to turn the working-class movement into the essential,
      advanced cause of all mankind. We repeat, the most undeveloped workers
      might be demoralised by such an idea, but we are confident that the
      advanced Russian workers, those who guide the workers’ study circles and
      all Social-Democratic activity, those who today fill our prisons and
      places of exile—from Archangel Gubernia to Eastern
      Siberia—that those workers will reject such a theory with
      indignation. To reduce the entire movement to the interests of the moment
      means to speculate on the backward condition of the workers, means to
      cater to their worst inclinations. It means artificially to break the link
      between the working-class movement and socialism, between the fully
      defined political strivings of the advanced workers and the spontaneous
      manifestations of protest on the part of the masses. Hence, the attempt of
      Rabochaya Mysl to introduce a special trend merits particular
      attention and calls for a vigorous protest. As long as Rabochaya
      Mysl, adapting itself, apparently, to the lower strata of the
      proletariat, assiduously avoided the question of the ultimate goal of
      socialism and the political struggle, with no declaration of its special
      trend, many Social-Democrats only shook their heads, hoping that with the
      development and extension of their work the members of the Rabochaya
      Mysl group would come to rid themselves of their narrowness. However,
      when people who, until now, have performed the useful work of a
      preparatory class clutch at fashionable opportunist theories and begin to
      deafen the ears of Europe with announcements about intending to put the
      whole of Russian Social-Democracy into the preparatory class for many
      years (if not for ever), when, in other words, people who have, until now,
      been labouring usefully over a barrel of honey begin “in full view
      of the public” to pour ladles of tar into it, then it is time for us
      to set ourselves decisively against this retrograde trend!
    

      Russian Social-Democracy, both through its founders, the members of the
      Emancipation of Labour group, and

    

      through the Russian Social-Democratic organisations that founded the
      Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party, has always recognised the
      following two principles: 1) The essence of Social-Democracy is the
      organisation of the class struggle of the proletariat for the purpose of
      winning political power, of transferring all means of production to
      society as a whole, and of replacing capitalist by socialist economy; 2)
      the task of Russian Social-Democracy is to organise the Russian
      revolutionary working-class party which has as its immediate aim the
      overthrow of the autocracy and the winning of political liberty. Whoever
      departs from these basic principles (formulated precisely in the programme
      of the Emancipation of Labour group and expressed in the Manifesto of
      the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party) departs from
      Social-Democracy.
    

 
Notes
 

[1]

      The fusion of Russian socialism with the Russian working-class movement
      has been analysed historically in a pamphlet by one of our comrades,
      The Red Flag in Russia. A Brief History of the Russian Working-Class
      Movement. The pamphlet will shortly be off the

      press.[8]
    —Lenin

[2]

      A central representative assembly.—Ed.
    
 



[3]

The League of Struggle for the Emancipation of the Working Class,
      organised by Lenin in the autumn of 1895, united about twenty Marxist
      workers’ circles in St. Petersburg. The work of the League was based on
      the principles of centralism and strict discipline. The League was headed
      by a central group consisting of V. I. Lenin, A. A. Vaneyev,
      P. K. Zaporozhets, 0. M. Krzhizhanovsky, N. K. Krupskaya, L. Martov
      (Y. 0. Zederbaum), M. A. Silvin, V. V. Starkov, and others. The entire
      work of the League, however, was under the direct leadership of five
      members of the group headed by Lenin. The League was divided into several
      district organisations. Such leading class-conscious workers as
      I. V. Babushkin and V. A. Shelgunov connected the groups with the
      factories where there were organisers in charge of gathering information
      and distributing literature. Workers’ circles were established in the big
      factories.
    

      For the first time in Russia the League set about introducing socialism
      into the working-class movement, effecting a transition from the
      propagation of Marxism among small numbers of advanced workers attending
      circles to political agitation among broad masses of the proletariat. It
      directed the working-class movement and connected the workers’ struggle
      for economic demands with the political struggle against tsarism. It
      organised a strike in November 1895 at the Thornton Woollen Mill. In the
      summer of 1896 the famous St. Petersburg textile workers’ strike,
      involving over 30,000 workers, took place under the leadership of the
      League. The League issued leaflets and pamphlets for the workers and
      prepared the ground for the issuance of the newspaper Rabocheye
      Dyelo. Its publications were edited by Lenin.
    

      The League’s influence spread far beyond St. Petersburg, and workers’
      circles in Moscow, Kiev, Ekaterinoslav, and other cities, and other parts
      of Russia followed its example and united to form Leagues of Struggle.
    

      Late in the night of December 8 (20), 1895, the tsarist government dealt
      the League a severe blow by arresting a large number of its leading
      members, including Lenin. An issue of Rabocheye Dyelo ready for
      the press was seized. The League replied to the arrest of Lenin and the
      other members by issuing a leaflet containing political demands in which
      reference was made, for the first time, to the existence of the League of
      Struggle.
    

      While in prison, Lenin continued to guide the League, helped it with his
      advice, smuggled coded letters and leaflets out of prison, and wrote the
      pamphlet, On Strikes (the original of which has

   

      not yet been found), and the “Draft and Explanation of a Programme of the
      Social-Democratic Party.”
    

      The League was significant, as Lenin put it, because it was the first real
      beginning of a revolutionary party based on the working-class movement to
      guide the class struggle of the proletariat.
    



[4]

The Kiev League of Struggle for the Emancipation of the Working
Class was formed in March 1897, under the influence of the
St. Petersburg League of Struggle, by a resolution adopted at the Kiev
conference which proposed that all Russian Social-Democratic
organisations call themselves Leagues of Struggle for the Emancipation
of the Working Class, following the example of the St. Petersburg
Social-Democratic organisation. The League united Russian and Polish
Social-Democratic groups and a group of the Polish Socialist Party,
altogether more than 30 members. The Kiev League of Struggle maintained
connections with the St. Petersburg League (through personal contacts
and through acquaintance with the St. Petersburg proclamations and
Lenin’s writings on programmatic questions; Lenin’s “Tasks of the
Russian Social-Democrats” was sent to Kiev in manuscript and was
known to the leaders of Kiev Social-Democratic organisations).
    

      The activities of the Kiev League of Struggle began with the May Day
      proclamation of 1897 which was widely distributed in the southern cities
      of Russia. ’In that year the Kiev League distributed 6,500 copies of
      proclamations at more than 25 Kiev factories. That same year a special
      group of the League published two issues of Rabochaya Gazeta as
      an all-Russian Social-Democratic newspaper. The First Congress of the
      R.S.D.L.P., in March 1898, adopted Rabochaya Gazeta as the
      Party’s official organ. The League’s illegal literature was distributed
      mainly in the South-Russian towns. In addition to its agitational work the
      League carried on propaganda in workers’ circles and at factory meetings.
    

      The Kiev League of Struggle carried on active preparations for the
      convening of the First Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. Shortly after the
      Congress the League was suppressed by the police (the Rabochaya
      Gazeta printing-press that had been transferred from Kiev to
      Ekaterinoslav and a large quantity of illegal literature was
      seized). Arrests were carried out in Kiev and in many big Russian cities.
    

      The Kiev League of Struggle played an important role in the development
      and organisation of the working class in Russia for the formation of a
      Marxist revolutionary party. The members of the Social-Democratic groups
      that remained at liberty soon re established the underground organisation
      which took the name of the Kiev Committee of the R.S.D.L.P.
    



[5]

The General Jewish Workers’ Union of Lithuania, Poland, and
Russia (The Bund) was formed by a founding congress of
Jewish Social-Democratic groups held in Vilno in 1897; it was an
association mainly of semi-proletarian Jewish artisans in the Western

   

regions of Russia. The Bund joined the R.S.D.L.P. at the First Congress
(1898) “as an autonomous organisation, independent only as far as
questions affecting the Jewish proletariat are concerned ."
    

      The Bund brought nationalism and separatism into the working-class
      movement of Russia. After the Second Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. rejected
      its demand that it be recognised as the only representative of the Jewish
      proletariat, the Bund left the Party. In 1906 the Bund again entered the
      R.S.D.L.P. on the basis of a resolution of the Fourth (Unity) Congress.
    

      Within the R.S.D.L.P. the Bundists persistently supported the opportunist
      wing of the Party (the “economists,” the Mensheviks, the
      liquidators) and struggled against the Bolsheviks and Bolshevism. The Bund
      countered the Bolsheviks’ programmatic demand for the right of nations to
      self-determination by a demand for cultural-national autonomy. During the
      period of the Stolypin reaction, it adopted a liquidationist position and
      was active in forming the August anti-Party bloc. During the First World
      War (1914-18) it adopted the position of the social-chauvinists. In 1917
      it supported the counter-revolutionary Provisional Government and fought
      on the side of the enemies of the Great October Socialist Revolution. In
      the years of foreign military intervention and civil war the Bund
      leadership joined forces with the counter revolution. At the same time, a
      change was taking place among the rank and file of the Bund in favour of
      collaboration with Soviet power. In 1921 the Bund decided to dissolve
      itself and part of its membership entered the Russian Communist Party
      (Bolsheviks) on the basis of the rules of admission.
    



[8]

      The pamphlet referred to is L. Martov’s Red Flag in Russia,
published abroad in October 1900.
    



[6]

Sotsial-Demokrat (The Social-Democrat)—a literary and
      political review, published by the Emancipation of Labour group in London
      and Geneva between 1890 and 1892. Four issues
      appeared. Sotsial-Demokrat played an important part in spreading
      Marxist ideas in Russia. G. V. Plekhanov, P. B. Axelrod, and
      V. I. Zasulich were the chief figures associated with its publication.
    



[7]

Balalaikin—a character from M. Y. Saltykov-Shchedrin’s
      Modern Idyll; a liberal windbag, adventurer, and liar.
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 4

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Apropos of the Profession de Foi









Lenin: Apropos of the Profession de Foi







V. I.  

      Lenin
Apropos of the Profession de Foi[1]





Written: Written at the end of 1899 

Published:

      First published in 1928 in Lenin Miscellany VII.

      Published according to a manuscript copied by an unknown hand.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 4,

      pages 286-296.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



    

    

      Although the Profession de foi, composed by the Kiev Committee,
      is only a rough draft, for the elaboration and polishing of which,
      according to the Committee, there was an insufficiency of time, it
      nevertheless allows one to obtain quite a clear idea of the views of the
      Kiev Committee. These views must certainly call forth an emphatic protest
      from those Russian Social-Democrats who abide by the viewpoint of the old
      principles of Social-Democracy proclaimed in Russia by the Emancipation of
      Labour group, enunciated repeatedly in the publications of the
      R.S.D.L.P. and reaffirmed in its manifesto. There is no doubt that the
      views of the Kiev Committee reflect the very considerable
      influence of the new trend of the “young Russian Social-Democrats,”
      which, when developed to the extreme, has merged with Bernsteinism and
      yielded such products as the famous Separate Supplement to
      “Rabochaya Mysl” (September 1899) and the no less famous
      Credo.
      

It cannot be said that the Profession de foi has gone all the
way towards this opportunist and reactionary trend, hut it has taken
such serious steps in that direction arid denotes such confusion in the
basic ideas of Social-Democracy, such a vacillation in revolutionary
thinking, that we consider it our duty to give warning to the comrades
in Kiev and to analyse in detail their deviation from principles long
established both in international and in Russian Social-Democracy.
      
 

      The very first sentence of the Profession de foi gives rise to
      the most serious bewilderment: “While admitting that the struggle
      for the political rights of the proletariat is the immediate general task
      of the working-class movement in Russia, the Kiev Committee nevertheless
      does not believe it possible at the present time to turn to the mass of
      the workers and call on them to take political action, in other words, it
      does not believe it possible to carry on political agitation,
      because the Russian workers have not, in the mass, attained the maturity
      for political struggle." We shall not discuss the formulation of this
      passage; of importance to us only are the ideas contained in it and
      reiterated (note this) in many other places in the Profession de
      foi, ideas of such a nature that they simply leave us wondering: Can
      those who wrote this really be Social-Democrats?
    

      “The Russian workers have not, in the mass, attained the maturity for
      political struggle”! If this is true, it is tantamount to a death sentence
      for Social-Democracy as a whole; for it means that the Russian workers
      have not, in the mass, reached the maturity necessary for
      Social-Democracy. In actual fact, there is not and never has been a
      Social-Democracy anywhere in the world that is not inseparably and
      indivisibly bound up with the political struggle. Social-Democracy without
      the political struggle is a river without water, it is a howling
      contradiction, it is either something in the nature of a return to the
      utopian socialism of our forefathers who despised “politics,” or to
      anarchism, or to trade-unionism.
    

      The first profession de foi of world socialism, the Communist
Manifesto, established a truth that has since become an elementary
      verity—that every class struggle is a political struggle, that the
      working-class movement only then grows out of its embryonic state, its
      infancy, and becomes a class movement when it makes the
      transition to the political struggle. The first profession de
foi of Russian socialism, Plekhanov’s booklet, Socialism and
the Political Struggle, which appeared in 1883, reaffirmed this
      elementary truth in its application to Russia and showed precisely how
      and why the Russian revolutionary movement must bring about a fusion of
      socialism and the political struggle, a fusion of the spontaneous
      movement of the masses of

    

      workers and the revolutionary movement, a fusion of the class struggle and
      the political struggle. By adopting the standpoint of socialism and the
      class struggle and simultaneously rejecting the possibility of
      “calling at the present moment on the masses to take political
      action,” the Kiev Committee is, in essence, departing completely from the
      principles of Social-Democracy, and the desire to remain true to these
      principles has led the Committee into a number of glaring contradictions.
    

      Indeed, how can one speak of the “political education” of the
      workers, if one does not recognise the possibility of conducting political
      agitation and political struggle? Surely there is no need to prove to
      Social-Democrats that there can be no political education except through
      political struggle and political action. Surely it cannot be imagined that
      any sort of study circles or books, etc., can politically educate the
      masses of workers if they are kept away from political activity and
      political struggle. Surely Russian Social-Democracy does not have to go
      back to the viewpoint of the serf-owners who declared that it was first
      necessary to educate the peasants and then to emancipate them, or to the
      viewpoint of those ink-slingers who grovel before the government and say
      that the people must first be educated and then granted political
      rights. How can one undertake to bring the workers to recognition of the
      need to struggle for political rights and at the same time not believe in
      the possibility of calling on them to take political action, in the
      possibility of conducting political agitation? Arouse the consciousness of
      the need for political struggle and at the same time not call for
      political struggle?! What falderal is this? What does it mean? This kind
      of tangle is not the result of something left unsaid or of the unfinished
      nature of a rough draft; it is the natural, inevitable result of the
      dualism and equivocation that permeate all the views of the Kiev
      Committee. The Committee wants, on the one hand, to remain true to the
      basic principles long established in international and Russian
      Social-Democracy and, on the other, is infatuated with the fashionable
      Bernsteinian catchwords, “necessity,” “gradualness” (end
      of Section 1 of the Kiev Committee’s Profession de foi),
      “the directly economic character of the

    

      movement,” the impossibility of political agitation and struggle, the
      necessity of adhering to the solid ground of real demands and needs (as
      though the struggle for political liberty is not called forth by the most
      real demand and need!); in a word, it is infatuated with the fashionable
      catchwords out of which such writings à la mode as the
      Credo and the Separate Supplement to “Rabochaya
      Mysl” are spun. Let us examine in its essence the thesis in
      which all the weak aspects of the Profession de foi now under
      discussion are focused, the thesis that it is “impossible at the
      present time to turn to the mass of the workers with the call to take
      political action”; that it is impossible, in other words, to conduct
      political agitation, because the Russian workers have not yet attained the
      maturity for political struggle. This last assertion is, fortunately,
      untrue (we say “fortunately,” for were it true, it would inevitably
      lead Russian Marxists and Russian Social-Democrats into the quagmire of
      trade-unionist and bourgeois-liberal vulgarisation into which the authors
      of Credo, Rabochaya Mysl, and their numerous hangers-on
      in our legal literature are trying to push them). The Russian workers
      have, in the mass, not only attained maturity for political struggle, but
      they have on many occasions demonstrated it by engaging in acts of
      political struggle, often even spontaneously.
    

      Is not the mass distribution of manifestos in which the government is
      condemned and castigated really an act of political struggle? Have not the
      Russian workers in the mass “used their own means” to deal with the
      police and the soldiery when these became excessively arrogant; have they
      not liberated arrested comrades by force? Have they not in many places
      fought in real street battles against troops and police? Have not the
      Russian workers in the mass, for more than twenty years, sent the best,
      most developed, most honest, and most courageous of their comrades into
      the revolutionary circles and organisations?  But for the sake of a
      fashionable doctrine of bourgeois vulgarisation we, representatives of the
      revolutionary Social-Democratic Party, are supposed to forget all that
      and admit the impossibility of calling on the working masses to take
      political action! The objection will probably be raised that the

    

      cited instances are more often spontaneous outbursts rather than political
      struggles. To which we answer: Were not our strikes mere spontaneous
      outbursts until the revolutionary circles of socialists undertook
      extensive agitation and summoned the working masses to the class struggle,
      to the conscious struggle against their oppressors? Can one find in
      history a single case of a popular movement, of a class movement, that did
      not begin with spontaneous, unorganised outbursts, that would have assumed
      an organised form and created political parties without the conscious
      intervention of enlightened representatives of the given class? If the
      working-class urge, spontaneous and indomitable, to engage in political
      struggle has so far taken mainly the form of unorganised outbursts, only
      Moskovskiye

Vedomosti[2] and

      Grazhdanin[3]
      can draw from this the conclusion that the Russian workers have not yet,
      in the mass, attained the maturity for political agitation. A socialist,
      on the contrary, will draw from it the conclusion that the time has long
      been ripe for political agitation, for the broadest possible appeal to the
      working masses to engage in political action and political struggle. If we
      do not make this appeal, we fail in our duty and, in actual fact, cease to
      be Social-Democrats, since economic and trade-union organisations without
      political struggle have always and everywhere been advocated by zealous
      champions of the bourgeoisie. For this reason the persistent ignoring of
      the political struggle and the political tasks of the Russian working
      class, such as we see, for instance, in Rabochaya Mysl, cannot be
      called anything but criminal and disgraceful. This hushing-up is
      tantamount to demoralising the political consciousness of the workers, who
      see and feel political oppression, who revolt spontaneously against it,
      but who meet with indifference on the part of their socialist leaders or
      even with polemics against the ideas of political struggle. When we are
      told that the ideas of political liberty must be brought
      “gradually” to the masses, what can we call this but
      indifference and extreme narrowness?  One might think that hitherto we
      have been too hasty in bringing these ideas to the masses, so that we need
      to curb and moderate ourselves!!! Or, when we are told that “a
      political clarification of the condition of the working class” is
      necessary only “to the

    

      extent that there is reason for it in each individual case,” as though
      “reasons” for political agitation are not furnished by a
      multitude of the most widespread, day-to-day facts of working-class life!
    

      The effort to limit political agitation to the existence of reasons in
      each individual case is either senseless or it reflects a desire to take a
      step backwards in the direction of Credo and Rabochaya
      Mysl, a desire to narrow the scope of our already far-too-narrow
      propaganda and agitation. The objection will also probably be raised that
      the working-class masses are not yet able to understand the idea
      of the political struggle, an idea that is comprehensible only to certain,
      more developed workers. To this objection, which we hear so frequently
      from “young” Russian Social-Democrats, our answer is that,
      firstly, Social-Democracy has everywhere and always been, and cannot
      but be the representative of the class-conscious, and not of the
      non-class-conscious, workers and that there cannot be anything more
      dangerous and more criminal than the demagogic speculation on the
      underdevelopment of the workers. If the criterion of activity were that
      which is immediately, directly, and to the greatest degree accessible to
      the broadest masses, we should have to preach anti-Semitism or to agitate,
      let us say, on the basis of an appeal to Father Johann of

      Kronstadt.[4]


      It is the task of Social-Democracy to develop the political consciousness
      of the masses and not to drag along at the tail-end of the masses that
      have no political rights; secondly, and this is most important, it is
      untrue that the masses will not understand the idea of political
      struggle. Even the most backward worker will understand the idea,
      provided, of course, the agitator or propagandist is able to approach him
      in such a way as to communicate the idea to him, to explain it in
      understandable language on the basis of facts the worker knows from
      everyday experience. But this condition is just as indispensable for
      clarifying the economic struggle: in this field, too, the backward worker
      from the lower or middle strata of the masses will not be able to
      assimilate the general idea of economic struggle; it is an idea that can
      be absorbed by a few educated workers whom the masses will follow,

    

      guided by their instincts and their direct, immediate interests.
    

      This is likewise true of the political sphere; of course, only the
      developed worker will comprehend the general idea of the political
      struggle, and the masses will follow him because they have a very good
      sense of their lack of political rights (as the Kiev Committee’s
      Profession de foi admits in one place), and because their most
      immediate, everyday interests regularly bring them into contact with every
      kind of manifestation of political oppression. In no political or social
      movement, in no country has there ever been, or could there ever have
      been, any other relation between the mass of the given class or people and
      its numerically few educated representatives than the following: every
      where and at all times the leaders of a certain class have always been its
      advanced, most cultivated representatives. Nor can there be any other
      situation in the Russian working-class movement. The ignoring of the
      interests and requirements of this advanced section of the workers, and
      the desire to descend to the level of understanding of the lower
      strata (instead of constantly raising the level of the workers’
      class-consciousness) must, therefore, necessarily have a profoundly
      harmful effect and prepare the ground for the infiltration of all sorts of
      non-socialist and non-revolutionary ideas into the workers’ midst.
    

      To conclude the analysis of the Kiev Committee’s views on the political
      struggle [I add the following]. The Committee, in a manner that is highly
      strange and, at the same time, highly typical of the entire Profession
      de foi, not considering it possible at the present time to call on
      the masses of the workers to take political action, recognises the
      desirability of organising partial demonstrations for purely
      agitational purposes (and not for the purpose of bringing pressure upon
      the government) on issues that are comprehensible to the broad masses
      Socialists calling on the workers not to bring pressure to bear
      on the government!!! That is about the limit.... Only it is beyond our ken
      how demonstrations that do not bring pressure to bear on the
      government are possible. Should we perhaps recommend to the workers that
      they demonstrate within the four walls of their hovels and lock the doors
      before they begin? Or perhaps

    

      they should demonstrate by making the gesture of the fig with their hands
      in their pockets? That would probably not bring such harmful and ruinous
      “pressure upon the government”! And we also despair of understanding
      what is meant by a “partial demonstration.” Does it, perhaps, mean
      of one trade, on issues of that trade alone (again: what has this to do
      with socialism?), or, perhaps, on partial political issues and not against
      the entire political system, the autocracy in its entirety? But if this is
      so, are these not purely and simply the ideas of Credo and of the
      sheerest opportunism, ideas that extremely lower and obscure the political
      consciousness and the political tasks of the working class? If this is so,
      hadn’t we better repeat the “winged phrase” of a
      “young” metropolitan Social-Democrat: “It is premature to
      discredit the autocracy among the workers”?...
    

      The Profession de foi displays an extreme narrowness of views not
      only in regard to the question of “politics.” “At the present
      time,” we read, “agitational influence brought to bear on the masses
      can only take the form of, firstly, assistance in the economic struggle of
      the proletariat. The Committee, therefore, takes advantage of every clash
      between the workers and the employers, or every important fact of abuse on
      the part of the employers, to address a manifesto to the workers
      explaining to them their situation and calling on them to protest; it
      takes a leading part in strikes, formulates the workers’ demands, shows
      the best way to win the demands, and by all these means develops
      class-consciousness in the workers." That is all; nothing more is told us
      on the economic struggle. And this is a profession de foi! Read
      these passages over again carefully: Again we have here the language of
      the Credo and the ideas of the Credo (which illustrates
      once more the abysmal blundering of the Rabocheye Dyelo editors
      who stubbornly desire to conceal the views of the “young
      economists” and to see in them nothing but the deviations of
      individuals).
    

      For the socialist, the economic struggle serves as a basis for the
      organisation of the workers into a revolutionary party, for the
      strengthening and development of their class struggle against the whole
      capitalist system. If the economic struggle is taken as something complete
      in itself there will be nothing socialist in it; the experience of all
      European

    

      countries shows us many examples, not only of socialist, but also of
      anti-socialist trade unions.
    

      It is the task of the bourgeois politician “to assist the economic
      struggle of the proletariat”; the task of the socialist is to bring
      the economic struggle to further the socialist movement and the successes
      of the revolutionary working-class party. The task of the socialist is to
      further the indissoluble fusion of the economic and the political struggle
      into the single class struggle of the socialist working-class masses. The
      diffuse expressions of the Kiev Committee’s Profession de foi,
      therefore, open wide the doors to Bernsteinian ideas and legalise an
      impermissibly narrow attitude to the economic struggle.
    

      Agitational activity among the masses must be of the broadest nature, both
      economic and political, on all possible issues and in regard to all
      manifestations of oppression whatever their form. We must utilise this
      agitation to attract growing numbers of workers into the ranks of the
      revolutionary Social-Democratic party, to encourage the political struggle
      in all conceivable manifestations, to organise this struggle and transform
      it from its spontaneous forms into the struggle of a single political
      party. Agitation, therefore, must serve as a means of widely
      expanding the political protest and the more organised forms of political
      struggle. Today our agitation is too hemmed in; the range of questions it
      touches upon is too

      limited. 

      It is our duty therefore not to legitimise
      this narrowness but to try to liberate ourselves from it, to deepen and
      expand our agitational work.
    

      In the Profession de foi now under discussion this narrowness
      leads, not only to the theoretical errors above analysed, but to the
      narrowing of the practical tasks. This narrowing can be seen in the desire
      “to make the investigation of the workers’ conditions at local
      factories and works, through questionnaires and other means, the immediate
      pressing task." We, of course, can have nothing against questionnaires in
      general, since they constitute an essential accessory to agitation, but to
      occupy ourselves with investigations means to expend unproductively
      revolutionary forces that are sparse enough as it is.
    

      In fact, much can be gathered from our legal inquiries. We must make it
      our immediate and urgent task to

    

      extend agitation and propaganda (especially on the political level), all
      the more so, since the very good habit, now becoming widespread among our
      workers, of sending reports of their own to the socialist newspapers
      guarantees an abundance of material.
    

      A still greater narrowing is to be seen in the fact that on the question
      of funds only “trade-union strike” funds are recognised as
      desirable, while not a word is said to the effect that these funds must
      become integrated in the Social-Democratic Party to be used for the
      political struggle.
    

      To limit our secret funds to purely economic activity is a desire natural
      to the authors of the Credo; but it is incomprehensible in the
      Profession de foi of a committee of the Russian Social-Democratic
      Labour Party.
    

      On the question of legal societies the Profession de foi is no
      less narrow, displaying the same effort to make concessions to the
      notorious Bernsteinism. For a committee of the Social-Democratic Party to
      assist in the founding of funds means again to scatter forces and to wipe
      out the distinction between purely cultural activity and revolutionary
      work; a revolutionary party can and must make use of legal societies for
      the strengthening and consolidation of its own work, as centres
      of agitation, as a convenient cover for establishing connections, etc.,
      etc.— but only for this. To expend socialist forces on rendering
      assistance to the founding of societies is in the highest degree
      irrational; it is incorrect to accord these societies an independent
      significance and it is simply ridiculous to believe that legal societies
      can be “fully independent of the participation and pressure of the
      employers.”
    

      Lastly, the narrowness and specific character of the Kiev Committee’s
      views are reflected in its organisational plans. It is true we agree fully
      with the Kiev Committee that this is not the time to announce the
      re-establishment of the Party and to elect a new Central Committee; but we
      view as utterly erroneous the opinion concerning the “directly
      economic character of the movement,” the opinion that the Russian
      proletariat “is not prepared for political agitation.” It would also
      be an error to wait until “local groups grow stronger, increase
      their membership, and strengthen

    

      their connections with the working-class milieu”—such
      reinforcement often leads to immediate collapse.
    

      On the contrary, we must immediately set about the work of unification and
      begin it with literary unity, with the establishment of a common Russian
      newspaper that must make an effort to prepare for the re-establishment of
      the Party by serving as an organ for the whole of Russia; by gathering
      correspondence and news items from the circles in all localities; by
      providing space for the discussion of disputed questions; by extending the
      scope of our agitation and propaganda; by devoting special attention to
      organisational questions, to tactical and technical methods of conducting
      the work; by satisfying all the demands of the most developed workers, and
      by constantly raising the level of the lower strata of the proletariat
      (attracted by workers’ correspondence, etc.) to an ever greater conscious
      participation in the socialist movement and in the political struggle.
    

      Only in this way, we are convinced, can real conditions be provided for
      the unification and re-establishment of the Party, and only a direct and
      frank polemic against narrow “economism” and the growing
      spread of Bernsteinian ideas can ensure the correct development of the
      Russian working-class movement and Russian Social-Democracy.
    

 
Notes
 

[1]

 Profession of faith, a programme, the exposition of a world out look.—Ed. 
 



[2]

Moskovskiye Vedomosti (Moscow Recorder)— one of
      the oldest Russian newspapers, originally issued (in 1756) as a small
      sheet by Moscow University. In 1863 it was taken over by M. N. Katkov and
      became a monarchist-nationalist organ, reflecting the views of the most
      reactionary sections of the landlords and the clergy. In 1905 it became
      one of the leading organs of the Black Hundreds and continued to appear
      until the October Revolution in 1917.
    



[3]

Grazhdanin (The Citizen)—a reactionary magazine
      published in St. Petersburg from 1872 to 1914. From the eighties of the
      last

   

century it was the organ of the extreme monarchists and was edit ed
      by Prince Meshchersky and financed by the government. It had a small
      circulation, but it was influential in bureaucratic circles.
    



[4]

Johann of Kronstadt (I. I. Sergeyev)—the priest of
      Kronstadt Cathedral, an obscurantist notorious for his pogrom incitements
      directed against non-Russian nationalities.
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 4

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Factory Courts









Lenin: Factory Courts







V. I.  

      Lenin
Factory Courts




Written: Written at the end of 1899 

Published:

      First published in 1924 in the magazine Proletarskaya Revolyutsiya, No. 8-9.

      Published according to a manuscript copied by an unknown hand.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 4,

      pages 297-309.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



    

    

      Factory courts is the name given to courts consisting of elected
      representatives of workers and employers (factory owners in the case of
      industry) that examine cases and disputes arising in connection with the
      terms of hire, with the fixing of rates of pay for ordinary work and
      overtime, with the discharge of workers in violation of rules, with
      payments for damage to material, with unfair imposition of fines, etc.,
      etc. Courts of this kind exist in the majority of the West-European
      countries, but not in Russia, and we propose to examine what advantages
      they bring the workers and why the institution of factory courts is
      desirable in addition to the ordinary courts, where cases are heard by a
      sole judge appointed by the government or elected by the propertied
      classes, with no elected representatives of the employers and the workers.
    

      The first advantage of the factory court is that it is much more
      accessible to the workers. To present a petition to an ordinary court, one
      has to submit it in writing (which often requires the employment of a
      solicitor); stamp duty has to be paid; there are long waiting periods; the
      plaintiff has to appear in court, which takes him and the witnesses away
      from their work; then comes a further period of waiting until the case
      goes to a higher court to be retried after an appeal by dissatisfied
      litigants. Is it any wonder that workers do not willingly resort to the
      ordinary courts? Factory courts, on the contrary, consist of employers and
      workers elected as judges. It is not at all difficult for a worker to make
      a verbal complaint to one of his fellow workers whom he has himself
      elected. Sessions of factory courts are usually

    

      held on holidays or, in general, at times when the workers are free and do
      not have to interrupt their work. Cases are handled much more
      expeditiously by factory courts.
    

      The second advantage that the workers gain from factory courts is that the
      judges have a far better understanding of factory affairs and,
      furthermore, are not outside officials but local people who have a
      knowledge of the workers’ living conditions and local industrial
      conditions; half of them are workers, who will always be just to a worker
      and will not regard him as a drunkard, an insolent and ignorant fellow (as
      he is regarded by the majority of official judges, who come from the
      bourgeois class, the class of property owners, and who almost always
      retain their connections with bourgeois society, with the factory owners,
      directors, and engineers, but are separated from the workers as by a
      Chinese Wall). Official judges are mostly concerned that matters should go
      smoothly on paper; as long as things look all right on paper, the
      government official does not worry about anything else—he is merely
      concerned with receiving his salary and pleasing those in higher
      authority. This accounts for the disgusting amount of red tape, protracted
      litigation, and pettifoggery—something has been incorrectly
      recorded, something did not get properly entered in the court record, and
      the case is lost, however just it may have been. When the judges are
      elected from among the employers and from among the workers, they have no
      need to pile up red tape, because they are not working for a salary and
      are not dependent on parasitic government officials. They are not
      concerned with getting a still better post, but with settling disputes
      that prevent the factory owners from continuing production uninterruptedly
      and workers from continuing their work in peace and with less fear of
      chicaneries and unjust vexations on the part of the
      employers. Furthermore, one has to know factory life well and from
      personal experience in order to be able to settle disputes between
      employers and workers. The official judge glances at the worker’s
      pay-book, reads the rules, and refuses to listen to anything
      else—you have broken the rules, he says, so you bear the
      responsibility, and the rest does not concern me. But judges elected from
      among the employers and from among the workers do not merely look at
      papers

      but at what happens in real life. It sometimes happens that a rule remains
      unchanged on paper, while in practice things proceed differently. Very
      often the official judge, even if he wants to, even if he examines cases
      with the greatest attention, cannot understand the point at issue, because
      he does not know the customs, he does not know the methods of fixing
      rates, he does not know the methods by which a master often cheats the
      worker without infringing the rules and the rates (as by transferring the
      worker to another job, by giving him different material, etc.). Elected
      judges who themselves work or who manage factory affairs have an immediate
      understanding of such issues, they can easily understand what exactly the
      worker wants, they are not concerned merely with observing the rules but
      with ensuring that the worker cannot be cheated by the bypassing of the
      rules, with ensuring that there can be no pretexts for deception and
      arbitrariness. There was a recent report in the newspapers that hat-makers
      had almost been convicted of theft, on a complaint from the employers, for
      making use of the waste trimmings from hats. Fortunately honest barristers
      were found who gathered information to prove that this was the custom in
      the industry and that the workers, far from being thieves, had not
      violated a single regulation. The ordinary, simple worker who earns very
      small wages can hardly ever get to a good barrister, and for this reason,
      as every worker knows, official judges often pass cruel, senselessly
      cruel, sentences in cases affecting workers. Absolute justice is never to
      be expected from official judges: we have said above that these judges
      belong to the bourgeois class and are prejudiced in advance to give
      credence to whatever the factory owner says and to disbelieve the words of
      the worker. The judge consults the law:

      a master and servant contract (one man hires himself out for wages to do
      something for another or to serve him). As far as he is concerned, it is
      all the same whether an engineer, a doctor, a factory director, or an
      unskilled labourer hires himself out to the factory owner; the judge
      thinks (by the dictates of his bureaucratic soul and his bourgeois
      stupidity) that the unskilled labourer should know his rights and be able,
      as well as a director, engineer, or doctor, to make stipulations in his
      contract for everything needed.

    

      But the judges in a factory court (half of the panel) are elected from
      among the workers, who know very well that a new worker, or a young
      worker, often feels in the factory or in the office as though he were in a
      dark forest and has not even the ghost of an idea that he is concluding a
      “free contract” and that he can “foresee” terms in
      that contract that are to his advantage. Let us take the following
      instance:

      a worker wants to register a complaint against unjust rejection of work or
      against fines. It is useless for him even to think of complaining to a
      judge or to a factory inspector, both of whom are government officials. An
      official will keep insisting on one thing: the law gives the
      factory owner the right to fine workers and to reject bad work, so that it
      is for the factory owner to decide whether the work is bad and whether
      blame rests with the worker.That is why workers so rarely seek recourse to
      the courts: they put up with abuses, put up with them until finally they
      strike when their cup of patience runs over. With judges elected from
      their midst, the workers would find it incomparably easier to secure
      equity and protection in such cases and in regard to all petty factory
      disputes and insults. The wealthy official judge does not regard such
      petty matters as worthy of his attention (like having hot water for tea,
      or an extra cleaning of a machine, or similar items); but to the worker
      these things are by no means petty. Only the workers themselves can judge
      what a huge amount of gross ill-treatment, of insults, and of humiliation
      can be caused by what at first sight appear trifling, innocuous,
      inoffensive rules and regulations in the factory.
    

      The third advantage workers stand to gain from factory courts is that in
      and through them workers learn to know the laws. As a rule the workers (in
      their mass) do not know and cannot get to know the laws, although
      government officials and official judges often punish them for not knowing
      the laws. When an official confronts a worker with the law and the worker
      pleads ignorance of its very existence, the official (or the judge) either
      laughs at him or rebukes him with the statement: “Ignorance of the
      law is no excuse,” as basic Russian legislation puts it. Any official and
      judge, therefore, assumes that every worker knows the laws. But
      this assumption is a bourgeois lie, a lie invented by propertied

      people and by capitalists against the propertyless, the same sort of lie
      as the assumption that a worker concludes a “free contract”
      with the master. In actual fact, the worker who starts in at the factory
      at a tender age, when he has learned no more than to read and write (and
      very, very many have not even been able to learn to read and write!), has
      never had time to learn anything about laws, has had nobody to learn from,
      and, no doubt, has had no reason to learn—because if bourgeois
      officials apply the laws without asking him, the laws will not be of much
      benefit to the worker! The bourgeois classes that accuse the workers of
      ignorance of the laws have done absolutely nothing to help them acquire
      the knowledge, so that it is not so much the workers themselves who are
      to blame for their ignorance of the law as their exploiters (=those who
      plunder them), who own all the property, live by the labour of others and
      want to he the only ones to take advantage of education and
      knowledge. There is no school and there are no hooks that will give the
      workers a knowledge of the laws, because only very few workers can read
      books—very, very few among the millions of working people oppressed
      by capital. For the same reason there are very few who attend school, and
      even those who have had some schooling can, in most cases, only read,
      write, and count; this is too little for the understanding of a branch of
      knowledge as complicated and difficult as are the Russian laws. The
      workers will gain a knowledge of the laws only when they have to apply
      them themselves and hear and see justice done according to those
      laws. Workers could learn to know the laws better if, for instance, they
      were appointed to juries (with the factory owners required to pay them
      their regular wages for the days spent in court); but bourgeois society is
      so constructed that only people from the propertied classes may serve as
      jurymen (and also peasants who have been schooled in “social
      service,” i. e., in the lower ranks of the police); the propertyless, the
      proletarians, must submit to a court that is not theirs, while they
      themselves have no right to judge!  When factory courts are set up, the
      workers elect their own comrades as judges and the elections take place at
      regular intervals; in this way those elected from among the workers
      acquaint themselves with the laws by applying them in practice,

    

      that is, they not only read the laws as they are written in a book (for
      that does not by any means ensure a knowledge of the laws), but see for
      themselves in practice what particular laws are applicable to what cases
      and what their effect on the workers is. It is much easier for other
      workers, apart from the elected judges, to acquaint themselves with the
      laws through factory courts, because it is easy for a worker to speak to a
      judge elected from among his mates and obtain from him any necessary
      information Workers will visit a factory court more often than a court
      conducted by civil servants, because it is more accessible; they will
      listen to cases in which their relatives and friends are participating and
      in this way acquaint themselves with the laws. For a working man to
      understand in whose interests the laws are drawn up and in whose interests
      those who apply them act, it is important that he should become acquainted
      with the
      laws in practice and not merely from books. Once the worker is acquainted
      with the laws he will see quite clearly that the interests are those of
      the propertied class, the men of property, the capitalists, the
      bourgeoisie and that the working class will never win a sound and radical
      improvement n its conditions, so long as it does not win the right to
      elect its representatives to participate in the formulation of laws and in
      supervision over their fulfilment.
    

      Furthermore (fourthly), a good aspect of factory courts is that they teach
      the workers to take an independent part in public, state affairs (because
      the court is a state institution and the activity of the court is a part
      of state activity), they teach the workers to elect the most intelligent
      and honest of their comrades, those who firmly support the workers’ cause,
      to post where their activities can be seen by the whole working class,
      where workers’ representatives can declare the needs and demands of all
      the workers. It is to the interest of the capitalist class, of the entire
      bourgeoisie, to keep the workers ignorant and isolated, to remove as
      quickly as possible those among them who are more intelligent and who
      make use of their intellect and knowledge, not to become traitors to their
      class and to fawn on the foremen, masters, and police, but to help other
      workers acquire greater knowledge and to learn to stand up jointly for the
      working-class cause. But in order that such advanced representatives,

    

      of whom that cause has great need, should come to be known by all workers
      and win their trust, it is important that all should witness their
      activities, that all should know whether they are capable of expressing
      and upholding the real needs and desires of the workers. If the workers
      could elect such people as judges, the best of them would be known to
      all, they would gain wider trust, and the proletarian cause would win by
      it greatly. If we look at our landowners, industrialists, and merchants,
      we see that they are not content with the fact that each of them is able
      to go to a governor or to a minister and present his requests; they also
      make sure of having their representatives in the courts (the courts with
      representatives from the social-estates) and that these participate
      directly in the administration (e.g., Marshals of the

      Nobility,[2] school inspectors, etc., are elected by the
      nobility; members of factory affairs

      boards,[3] of stock-exchange and fair committees are elected by
      the merchants, etc.). The working class in Russia is without any
      rights at all; workers are regarded as draught animals that have to
      toil for others and hold their tongues, that never dare to state
      their needs and desires. If the workers were to elect their comrades
      to factory courts constantly, they would have at least some
      possibility of participating in public affairs and of stating, not
      only the opinions of individual

      workers—of Pyotr, Sidor, or Ivan—but

      also of stating the opinions and demands of all the workers. In that case
      the workers would not be so mistrustful of the courts as they are of those
      conducted by government officials; they would see their comrades there,
      those who would intercede for them.
    

      Further (fifthly), the factory courts are of benefit to the workers
      because they would give greater publicity to factory affairs and to all
      incidents in factory life. We see today that the factory owners and the
      government are doing every thing in their power to conceal what is
      happening in the factory world from the general public; it is forbidden to
      publish anything about strikes, the reports of factory inspectors on the
      condition of the workers are no longer being printed, an effort is being
      made to have all abuses passed in silence and get matters settled as
      quickly as possible “in camera,” by government officials,
      and all workers’

    

      meetings are prohibited. It is not surprising that the mass of the workers
      frequently has very little knowledge of what is going on in other
      factories or even in other departments of the same factory. Factory
      courts, to which workers could frequently appeal, which would be held in
      public, i.e., in the presence of a working—class public, in
      non-working hours, would benefit the workers by helping to make known all
      abuses and would thus facilitate their struggle against various factory
      outrages and accustom them to think, not only of the regime at their own
      factory, but of the regime at all factories, of the conditions of all

      workers.[1]


      Finally, there is one other benefit accruing from factory courts that must
      be mentioned: they get factory owners, directors, and foremen into the
      habit of treating workers decently, of treating them as equal citizens and
      not as slaves. Every worker knows that factory owners and foremen all too
      often permit themselves to treat workers in a disgracefully insulting
      manner, to rail at them, etc. It is difficult for a worker to complain
      against this attitude; it can be rebuffed only when the workers are
      sufficiently developed and are able to give support to their comrade. The
      factory owners and foremen say that our workers are very ignorant and
      coarse, for which reason they have to be treated roughly. There are still
      many survivals, actually, of serfdom among our workers, there is little
      education and much uncouthness—this cannot be denied. But who is
      mostly to blame for this? It is precisely the factory owners, foremen, and
      government officials who are to blame, they, whose attitude to the workers
      is that of feudal lords towards serfs,

    

      they, who do not want to consider the worker as an equal. If workers make
      a request or ask a question civilly, they are everywhere met with
      rudeness, with oaths and threats. Is it not obvious that when factory
      owners blame the workers for their rudeness under these circumstances they
      are placing the blame on the wrong shoulders? Factory courts would
      speedily wean our exploiters of their insulting manner: there would be
      worker judges in the court side by side with the factory owners, and they
      would discuss cases and vote together. The factory-owner judges would have
      to regard the worker judges as their equals and not as their hired
      servants. The contestants and witnesses in court would come from the
      factory owners and the workers, and the former would get their training
      in addressing workers civilly. This is very important to the workers, in
      view of the fact that at present discussions of this sort are extremely
      rare:

      the factory owner refuses to recognise delegates elected by the workers,
      so that the latter have only one way open to them—to strike, a
      difficult and often a very burdensome way. Further, if there were also
      workers among the judges, workers would be able to appeal freely to the
      court against rough treatment. Worker judges would always be on their
      side, and if a factory owner or a master were summoned to court for
      insulting behaviour, he would lose all desire to display his arrogance and
      insolence.
    

      Factory courts consisting of representatives of masters and workers in
      equal numbers, therefore, would have great significance for the workers
      and would bring them many benefits. They would be more accessible to the
      workers than the ordinary courts, there would be less pettifoggery and red
      tape, the judges would have a better knowledge of the factory conditions,
      and would judge more fairly; they would acquaint the workers with the
      laws, they would teach the workers to elect their representatives and to
      participate in state affairs, they would give greater publicity to factory
      life and to the working-class movement, and they would accustom the
      factory owners to treat the workers decently, to have polite dealings with
      them as equals with equals. It is no matter for wonder, therefore, that
      the workers in all European countries demand the establishment of factory
      courts, that they demand that these courts should be

    

      set up, not only for factory workers (which the Germans and the French
      already have), but also for workers engaged in home-work for capitalists
      (for handicraftsmen), as well as for agricultural labourers. No officials
      appointed by the government (no judges and no factory inspectors)
      can ever replace institutions in which the workers
      themselves participate: after what has been said above, this requires
      no further explanation. Every worker, furthermore, knows from his own
      experience what he has to expect from government officials; if he is told
      that government officials can he concerned with the workers’ welfare
      equally with people elected from among the workers themselves, he knows
      it to be a lie and a deception. Deception of this sort is of great
      advantage to the government that wants the workers to remain the ignorant,
      rightless, and inarticulate slaves of the capitalists, and for this reason
      one often hears these lying assertions from government officials or from
      writers who defend the interests of the factory owners and the government.
    

      The need for factory courts and the benefits they could bring the workers
      are so obvious that they were long ago recognised even by Russian
      government officials. True, it was so long ago that many have
      forgotten it! It was at the time when our peasants were liberated from
      serf dependence (in 1861, over 38 years ago). About that time the Russian
      Government decided also to replace the laws governing artisans and factory
      workers with new ones; it was all too obvious then that the old laws for
      workers could not remain when the peasants had been liberated, since many
      of the workers had been serfs when the old laws were drawn up. And so the
      government appointed a commission of several officials to study the
      factory laws of France and Germany (and of other countries) and to draft a
      bill to change the Russian laws for artisans and factory workers. The
      commission included some very important people. Nevertheless, they got
      down to the task and printed five tomes in which they outlined foreign
      laws and proposed a new law for Russia. This new law, proposed by the
      commission, was to institute factory courts with the judges elected
      from among the factory owners and the workers in equal numbers. The
      draft was print ed in 1865, that is, thirty-four years ago. But what, the

    

      worker will ask, happened to this draft law? Why did not the government,
      which had itself instructed the officials to draft a law on the necessary
      changes, introduce factory courts in Russia?.
    

      Our government dealt with the commission’s draft in the same manner in
      which it deals with any draft laws that are in any way of benefit to the
      people and to the workers. The officials were rewarded for their labours
      for the good of the tsar and the fatherland; they were given decorations
      to hang from ribbons round their necks and accorded higher ranks and more
      lucrative posts. And the draft law they had prepared was quietly
      “pigeon-holed,” as they say in offices. And so this draft law is
      still stacked away in its pigeon-hole. The government has even stopped
      thinking of according the workers the right to elect comrades from their
      midst to factory courts.
    

      It cannot, however, be said that the government has not once thought about
      the workers since that time. True, it has not thought of them of its own
      free will, but only when forced to do so by menacing workers’ unrest and
      strikes; nevertheless, it has thought of them. It has published laws
      prohibiting child labour in factories, prohibiting night-work for women in
      certain industries, reducing the working day, and appointing factory
      inspectors. Despite all the pettifoggery employed in drafting them,
      despite the numerous loopholes left open for the factory owners to violate
      and get round them, these laws have still been of some benefit. Why, then,
      does the government prefer introducing new laws and new
      officials—factory inspectors—instead of introducing factory
      courts, provided for by a law that has been fully elaborated? The reason
      for this is very obvious and the workers must fully understand it, for
      this example will make clear the entire policy of the Russian Government
      with respect to the working class.
    

      The government has appointed new officials instead of factory courts,
      because factory courts would raise the level of the workers’
      class-consciousness; make them more conscious of their rights, of their
      human and civic dignity; teach them to think independently about state
      affairs and about the interests of the entire working class; teach them to
      elect their more developed comrades to represent them,

    

      and in this way undermine, if only in part, the undivided authority
      assumed by government officials. This is what the government fears more
      than anything else. It is even prepared to dispense a few hand-outs to the
      workers (only mites, of course, and only with one hand that does the
      giving ceremonially in full view of the public, so that it may pose as a
      benefactor, while taking them away slyly and gradually with the other
      hand! The workers now know this trick, having had a sample of it in the
      factory law of June 2, 18971)—it is prepared to dole out crumbs as
      long as the autocratic power of the bureaucracy is left untouched and
      there is no awakening of the workers’ class-consciousness, no development
      of their independence. The government can easily avoid this terrible
      danger by appointing new officials, since officials are the humble
      servants of the government. It is no trouble to forbid officials (factory
      inspectors, for instance) to publish their reports, it is no trouble to
      forbid them to talk to the workers regarding their rights and regarding
      the abuses of the masters, it is no trouble to turn them into factory
      police sergeants and to order them to report to the police all
      dissatisfaction and unrest on the part of the workers.
    

      Therefore, so long as the present political system remains in
      Russia—i.e., denial of rights to the people, lawless actions on the
      part of government officials and the police, who are not answerable to the
      people—the workers cannot expect the introduction of factory courts
      which can be of benefit to them. The government understands full well that
      factory courts would very speedily cause the workers to go over to more
      radical demands. Having elected their representatives to the factory
      courts, the workers would soon realise the insufficiency of this step,
      because the factory owners and landlords who exploit them send their
      representatives to very many state institutions at a much higher level;
      the workers would certainly demand a general all-people’s
      representation. Having once secured court publicity for factory affairs
      and the workers’ needs, they would soon see that this is not enough,
      because in our day real publicity can be obtained only through newspapers
      and popular meetings, so that the workers would demand freedom of
      assembly, freedom of speech, and freedom of the press.

    

      This is why the government has buried the draft law to introduce
factory courts in Russia!
    

      On the other hand, let us assume for a moment that the government were
      deliberately, with deception of the workers in mind, to introduce factory
      courts today and to retain the present political system intact. Would this
      be of any benefit to the workers? It would bring them no benefits at all:
      the workers would not even elect to these courts the most class-conscious
      and most loyal of their comrades, those who are most devoted to the cause
      of the working class, knowing that in Russia for every straightforward and
      honest word a man may be seized simply by order of the police and thrown
      into prison or transported to Siberia without trial!
    

      It follows, therefore, that the demand for factory courts with judges
      elected from among the workers is only one small part of a wider and more
      radical demand: the demand for political rights for the people, i.e., the
      right to participate in the administration of the state and the right to
      make known the needs of the people openly, not only in the press, but also
      at popular meetings.
    

 
Notes
 

[1]

      It must, of course, be remembered that factory courts can be only one of
      the ways and means of publicity, and not even the chief means. The life in
      factories, the conditions of the workers and their struggle can be brought
      to public knowledge in a real and comprehensive manner only by a free
      working-class press and by free meetings of the people to discuss all
      state affairs. Similarly, workers’ representation at factory courts is
      only one of the means of representation and is far from being the chief
      means. The real representation of the workers’ needs and interests is
      possible only through a national representative assembly (a parliament)
      that would promulgate laws and supervise their execution. Below we shall
      deal with the question as to whether factory courts are possible under the
      conditions now obtaining in Russia.
    —Lenin
 



[2]

Marshal of the Nobility—in tsarist Russia, the elected
      representative of the nobility of a gubernia or uyezd. The Marshal of the
      Nobility was in charge of all the affairs o the nobility; he occupied an
      influential position in the administration and took the chair at meetings
      of the Zemstvo.
    



[3]

Factory affairs boards—bodies supervising factory affairs
      in tsarist Russia. As a rule, the boards consisted of the provincial
      governor, the public prosecutor, the chief of the police administration,
      the factory inspector, and two factory owners.
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 4

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## On Strikes









Lenin: On Strikes







V. I.  

      Lenin
On Strikes[2]




Written: Written at the end of 1899 

Published:

      First published in 1924 in the magazine Proletarskaya Revolyutsiya, No. 8-9.

      Published according to a manuscript copied by an unknown hand.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 4,

      pages 310-319.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.
Other Formats:  
Text



    

    

      In recent years, workers’ strikes have become extremely frequent in
      Russia. There is no longer a single industrial gubernia in which there
      have not occurred several strikes. And in the big cities strikes never
      cease. It is understand able, therefore, that class-conscious workers and
      socialists should more and more frequently concern themselves with the
      question of the significance of strikes, of methods of conducting them,
      and of the tasks of socialists participating in them.
    

      We wish to attempt to outline some of our ideas on these questions. In our
      first article we plan to deal generally with the significance of strikes
      in the working-class movement; in the second we shall deal with
      anti-strike laws in Russia; and in the third, with the way strikes were
      and are conducted in Russia and with the attitude that class-conscious
      workers should adopt to them.
    
I

      In the first place we must seek an explanation for the outbreak and spread
      of strikes. Everyone who calls to mind strikes from personal experience,
      from reports of others, or from the newspapers will see immediately that
      strikes break out and spread wherever big factories arise and grow in
      number. It would scarcely be possible to find a single one among the
      bigger factories employing hundreds (at times even thousands) of workers
      in which strikes have not occurred. When there were only a few big
      factories in Russia there were few strikes; but ever since big factories
      have been

    

      multiplying rapidly in both the old industrial districts and in new towns
      and villages, strikes have become more frequent.
    

      Why is it that large-scale factory production always leads to strikes? It
      is because capitalism must necessarily lead to a struggle of the workers
      against the employers, and when production is on a large scale the
      struggle of necessity takes on the form of strikes.
    

      Let us explain this.
    

      Capitalism is the name given to that social system under which the land,
      factories, implements, etc., belong to a small number of landed
      proprietors and capitalists, while the mass of the people possesses no
      property, or very little property, and is compelled to hire itself out as
      workers. The landowners and factory owners hire workers and make them
      produce wares of this or that kind which they sell on the market. The
      factory owners, furthermore, pay the workers only such a wage as provides
      a bare subsistence for them and their families, while everything the
      worker produces over and above this amount goes into the factory owner’s
      pocket, as his profit. Under capitalist economy, therefore, the people in
      their mass are the hired workers of others, they do not work for
      themselves but work for employers for wages. It is understandable that the
      employers always try to reduce wages; the less they give the workers, the
      greater their profit. The workers try to get the highest possible wage in
      order to provide their families with sufficient and whole some food, to
      live in good homes, and to dress as other people do and not like
      beggars. A constant struggle is, therefore, going on between employers
      and workers over wages; the employer is free to hire whatever worker he
      thinks fit and, therefore, seeks the cheapest. The worker is free to hire
      himself out to an employer of his choice, so that he seeks the dearest,
      the one that will pay him the most. Whether the worker works in the
      country or in town, whether he hires himself out to a landlord, a rich
      peasant, a contractor, or a factory owner, he always bargains with the
      employer, fights with him over the wages.
    

      But is it possible for a single worker to wage a struggle by himself? The
      number of working people is increasing: peasants are being ruined and flee
      from the countryside to the town or the factory. The landlords and factory
      owners

    

      are introducing machines that rob the workers of their jobs. In the cities
      there are increasing numbers of unemployed and in the villages there are
      more and more beggars; those who are hungry drive wages down lower and
      lower. It becomes impossible for the worker to fight against the employer
      by himself. If the worker demands good wages or tries not to consent to a
      wage cut, the employer tells him to get out, that there are plenty of
      hungry people at the gates who would be glad to work for low wages.
    

      When the people are ruined to such an extent that there is always a large
      number of unemployed in the towns and villages, when the factory owners
      amass huge fortunes and the small proprietors are squeezed out by the
      millionaires, the individual worker becomes absolutely powerless
      in face of the capitalist. It then becomes possible for the capitalist to
      crush the worker completely, to drive him to his death at slave labour
      and, indeed, not him alone, but his wife and children with him. If we
      take, for instance, those occupations in which the workers have not yet
      been able to win the protection of the law and in which they cannot offer
      resistance to the capitalists, we see an inordinately long working day,
      sometimes as long as 17-19 hours; we see children of 5 or 6 years of age
      overstraining themselves at work; we see a generation of permanently
      hungry workers who are gradually dying from starvation. Example: the
      workers who toil in their own homes for capitalists; besides, any worker
      can bring to mind a host of other examples! Even under slavery or serfdom
      there was never any oppression of the working people as terrible as that
      under capitalism when the workers cannot put up a resistance or cannot win
      the protection of laws that restrict the arbitrary actions of the
      employers.
    

      And so, in order to stave off their reduction to such extremities, the
      workers begin a desperate struggle. As they see that each of them,
      individually, is completely powerless and that the oppression of capital
      threatens to crush him, the workers begin to revolt jointly against their
      employers. Workers’ strikes begin. At first the workers often fail to
      realise what they are trying to achieve, lacking consciousness of the
      wherefore of their action; they simply smash the machines and
      destroy the factories. They merely want to display their wrath to the
      factory owners; they are trying

    

      out their joint strength in order to get out of an unbearable situation,
      without yet understanding why their position is so hopeless and what they
      should strive for.
    

      In all countries the wrath of the workers first took the form of isolated
      revolts—the police and factory owners in Russia call them
      “mutinies.” In all countries these isolated revolts gave rise to
      more or less peaceful strikes, on the one hand, and to the all-sided
      struggle of the working class for its emancipation, on the other.
    

      What significance have strikes (or stoppages) for the struggle of the
      working class? To answer this question, we must first have a fuller view
      of strikes. The wages of a worker are determined, as we have seen, by an
      agreement between the employer and the worker, and if, under these
      circumstances, the individual worker is completely powerless, it is
      obvious that workers must fight jointly for their demands, they are
      compelled to organise strikes either to prevent the employers from
      reducing wages or to obtain higher wages. It is a fact that in every
      country with a capitalist system there are strikes of workers. Everywhere,
      in all the European countries and in America, the workers feel themselves
      powerless when they are disunited; they can only offer resistance to the
      employers jointly, either by striking or threatening to strike. As
      capitalism develops, as big factories are more rapidly opened, as the
      petty capitalists are more and more ousted by the big capitalists, the
      more urgent becomes the need for the joint resistance of the workers,
      because unemployment increases, competition sharpens between the
      capitalists who strive to produce their wares at the cheapest (to do which
      they have to pay the workers as little as possible), and the fluctuations
      of industry become more accentuated and

      crises[1]

      more acute. When industry prospers, the factory owners make big profits
      but do not think of sharing them with the

    

      workers; but when a crisis breaks out, the factory owners try to push the
      losses on to the workers. The necessity for strikes in capitalist society
      has been recognised to such an extent by everybody in the European
      countries that the law in those countries does not forbid the organisation
      of strikes; only in Russia barbarous laws against strikes still remain in
      force (we shall speak on another occasion of these laws and their
      application).
    

      However, strikes, which arise out of the very nature of capitalist
      society, signify the beginning of the working-class struggle against that
      system of society. When the rich capitalists are confronted by individual,
      propertyless workers, this signifies the utter enslavement of the
      workers. But when those propertyless workers unite, the situation
      changes. There is no wealth that can be of benefit to the capitalists if
      they cannot find workers willing to apply their labour-power to the
      instruments and materials belonging to the capitalists and produce new
      wealth. As long as workers have to deal with capitalists on an individual
      basis they remain veritable slaves who must work continuously to profit
      another in order to obtain a crust of bread, who must for ever remain
      docile and inarticulate hired servants. But when the workers state their
      demands jointly and refuse to submit to the money-bags, they cease to be
      slaves, they become human beings, they begin to demand that their labour
      should not only serve to enrich a handful of idlers, but should also
      enable those who work to live like human beings. The slaves begin to put
      forward the demand to become masters, not to work and live as the
      landlords and capitalists want them to, but as the working people
      themselves want to. Strikes, therefore, always instil fear into the
      capitalists, because they begin to undermine their supremacy. “All
      wheels stand still, if your mighty arm wills it,” a German workers’ song
      says of the working class. And so it is in reality: the factories, the
      landlords’ land, the machines, the railways, etc., etc., are all like
      wheels in a giant machine—the machine that extracts various
      products, processes them, and delivers them to their destination. The
      whole of this machine is set in motion by the worker who tills
      the soil, extracts ores, makes commodities in the factories, builds
      houses, work shops, and railways. When the workers refuse to work, the

      entire machine threatens to stop. Every strike reminds the capitalists
      that it is the workers and not they who are the real masters—the
      workers who are more and more loudly proclaiming their rights. Every
      strike reminds the workers that their position is not hopeless, that they
      are not alone. See what a tremendous effect strikes have both on the
      strikers themselves and on the workers at neighbouring or nearby factories
      or at factories in the same industry. In normal, peaceful times the worker
      does his job without a murmur, does not contradict the employer, and does
      not discuss his condition. In times of strikes he states his demands in a
      loud voice, he reminds the employers of all their abuses, he claims his
      rights, he does not think of himself and his wages alone, he thinks of all
      his workmates who have downed tools together with him and who stand up for
      the workers’ cause, fearing no privations. Every strike means many
      privations for the working people, terrible privations that can be
      compared only to the calamities of war—hungry families, loss of
      wages, often arrests, banishment from the towns where they have their
      homes and their employment. Despite all these sufferings, the workers
      despise those who desert their fellow workers and make deals with the
      employers. Despite all these sufferings, brought on by strikes, the
      workers of neighbouring factories gain renewed courage when they see that
      their comrades have engaged themselves in struggle. “People who
      endure so much to bend one single bourgeois will be able to break the
      power of the whole

      bourgeoisie,”[3]
      said one great teacher of socialism, Engels, speaking of the strikes of
      the English workers. It is often enough for one factory to strike, for
      strikes to begin immediately in a large number of factories. What a great
      moral influence strikes have, how they affect workers who see that their
      comrades have ceased to be slaves and, if only for the time being, have
      become people on an equal footing with the rich! Every strike brings
      thoughts of socialism very forcibly to the worker’s mind, thoughts of the
      struggle of the entire working class for emancipation from the oppression
      of capital. It has often happened that before a big strike the workers of
      a certain factory or a certain branch of industry or of a certain town
      knew hardly anything and scarcely ever thought about socialism; but after
      the strike, study circles and

    

      associations become much more widespread among them and more and wore
      workers become socialists.
    

      A strike teaches workers to understand what the strength of the employers
      and what the strength of the workers consists in; it teaches them not to
      think of their own employer alone and not of their own immediate workmates
      alone but of all the employers, the whole class of capitalists and the
      whole class of workers. When a factory owner who has amassed millions from
      the toil of several generations of workers refuses to grant a modest
      increase in wages or even tries to reduce wages to a still lower level
      and, if the workers offer resistance, throws thousands of hungry families
      out into the street, it becomes quite clear to the workers that the
      capitalist class as a whole is the enemy of the whole working class and
      that the workers can depend only on themselves and their united action. It
      often happens that a factory owner does his best to deceive the workers,
      to pose as a benefactor, and conceal his exploitation of the workers by
      some petty sops or lying promises. A strike always demolishes this
      deception at one blow by showing the workers that their
      “benefactor” is a wolf in sheep’s clothing.
    

      A strike, moreover, opens the eyes of the workers to the nature, not only
      of the capitalists, but of the government and the laws as well. Just as
      the factory owners try to pose as benefactors of the workers, the
      government officials and their lackeys try to assure the workers that the
      tsar and the tsarist government are equally solicitous of both the factory
      owners and the workers, as justice requires. The worker does not know the
      laws, he has no contact with government officials, especially with those
      in the higher posts, and, as a consequence, often believes all this. Then
      comes a strike. The public prosecutor, the factory inspector, the police,
      and frequently troops, appear at the factory. The workers learn that they
      have violated the law: the employers are permitted by law to assemble and
      openly discuss ways of reducing workers wages, but workers are declared
      criminals if they come to a joint agreement! Workers are driven out of
      their homes; the police close the shops from which the workers might
      obtain food on credit, an effort is made to incite the soldiers against
      the workers even when the workers conduct themselves quietly and
      peacefully. Soldiers are even ordered to fire

    

      on the workers and when they kill unarmed workers by shooting the fleeing
      crowd in the back, the tsar himself sends the troops an expression of his
      gratitude (in this way the tsar thanked the troops who had killed striking
      workers in Yaroslavl in 1895). It becomes clear to every worker that the
      tsarist government is his worst enemy, since it defends the capitalists
      and binds the workers hand and foot. The workers begin to understand that
      laws are made in the interests of the rich alone; that government
      officials protect those interests; that the working people are gagged and
      not allowed to make known their needs; that the working class must win for
      itself the right to strike, the right to publish workers’ newspapers, the
      right to participate in a national assembly that enacts laws and
      supervises their fulfilment. The government itself knows full well that
      strikes open the eyes of the workers and for this reason it has such a
      fear of strikes and does everything to stop them as quickly as
      possible. One German Minister of the Interior, one who was notorious for
      the persistent persecution of socialists and class-conscious workers, not
      without reason, stated before the people’s representatives: “Behind
      every strike lurks the hydra [monster] of

      revolution.”[4]
      Every strike strengthens and develops in the workers the understanding
      that the government is their enemy and that the working class must prepare
      itself to struggle against the government for the people’s rights.
    

      Strikes, therefore, teach the workers to unite; they show them that they
      can struggle against the capitalists only when they are united; strikes
      teach the workers to think of the struggle of the whole working class
      against the whole class of factory owners and against the arbitrary,
      police government. This is the reason that socialists call strikes
      “a school of war,” a school in which the workers learn to make war
      on their enemies for the liberation of the whole people, of all who
      labour, from the yoke of government officials and from the yoke of
      capital.
    

      “A school of war” is, however, not war itself. When strikes are
      widespread among the workers, some of the workers (including some
      socialists) begin to believe that the working class can confine itself to
      strikes, strike funds, or strike associations alone; that by strikes alone
      the working class can achieve a considerable improvement in its conditions

    

      or even its emancipation. When they see what power there is in a united
      working class and even in small strikes, some think that the working class
      has only to organise a general strike throughout the whole country for the
      workers to get everything they want from the capitalists and the
      government. This idea was also expressed by the workers of other countries
      when the working-class movement was in its early stages and the workers
      were still very inexperienced. It is a mistaken idea. Strikes are
      one of the ways in which the working class struggles for its
      emancipation, but they are not the only way; and if the workers do not
      turn their attention to other means of conducting the struggle, they will
      slow down the growth and the successes of the working class. It is true
      that funds are needed to maintain the workers during strikes, if strikes
      are to be successful. Such workers’ funds (usually funds of workers in
      separate branches of industry, separate trades or workshops) are
      maintained in all countries; but here in Russia this is especially
      difficult, because the police keep track of them, seize the money, and
      arrest the workers. The workers, of course, are able to hide from the
      police; naturally, the organisation of such funds is valuable, and we do
      not want to advise workers against setting them up. But it must not be
      supposed that workers’ funds, when prohibited by law, will attract large
      numbers of contributors, and so long as the membership in such
      organisations is small, workers’ funds will not prove of great
      use. Furthermore, even in those countries where workers’ unions exist
      openly and have huge funds at their disposal, the working class can still
      not confine itself to strikes as a means of struggle. All that is
      necessary is a hitch in the affairs of industry (a crisis, such as the one
      that is approaching in Russia today) and the factory owners will even
      deliberately cause strikes, because it is to their advantage to cease work
      for a time and to deplete the workers’ funds. The workers, therefore,
      cannot, under any circumstances, confine themselves to strike actions and
      strike associations. Secondly, strikes can only be successful where
      workers are sufficiently class-conscious, where they are able to select an
      opportune moment for striking, where they know how to put forward their
      demands, and where they have connections with socialists and are able to
      procure

    

      leaflets and pamphlets through them. There are still very few such workers
      in Russia, and every effort must be exerted to increase their number in
      order to make the working-class cause known to the masses of workers and
      to acquaint them with socialism and the working-class struggle. This is a
      task that the socialists and class-conscious workers must undertake
      jointly by organising a socialist working-class party for this
      purpose. Thirdly, strikes, as we have seen, show the workers that the
      government is their enemy and that a struggle against the government must
      be carried on. Actually, it is strikes that have gradually taught the
      working class of all countries to struggle against the governments for
      workers’ rights and for the rights of the people as a whole. As we have
      said, only a socialist workers’ party can carry on this struggle by
      spreading among the workers a true conception of the government and of the
      working-class cause. On another occasion we shall discuss specifically how
      strikes are conducted in Russia and how class-conscious workers should
      avail themselves of them. Here we must point out that strikes are, as we
      said above, “a school of war” and not the war itself, that
      strikes are only one means of struggle, only one aspect of the
      working-class movement. From individual strikes the workers can and must
      go over, as indeed they are actually doing in all countries, to a struggle
      of the entire working class for the emancipation of all who labour. When
      all class-conscious workers become socialists, i.e., when they strive for
      this emancipation, when they unite throughout the whole country in order
      to spread socialism among the workers, in order to teach the workers all
      the means of struggle against their enemies, when they build up a
      socialist workers’ party that struggles for the emancipation of the people
      as a whole from government oppression and for the emancipation of all
      working people from the yoke of capital—only then will the working
      class become an integral part of that great movement of the workers of all
      countries that unites all workers and raises the red banner inscribed with
      the words: “Workers of all countries, unite!”
    

 
Notes
 

[1]

      We shall deal elsewhere in greater detail with crises in industry and
      their significance to the workers. Here we shall merely note that during
      recent years in Russia industrial affairs have been going well, industry
      has been “prospering,” but that now (at the end of 1899) there are
      already clear signs that this “prosperity” will end in a
      crisis: difficulties in marketing goods, bankruptcies of factory owners,
      the ruin of petty proprietors, and terrible calamities for the workers
      (unemployment, reduced wages, etc.).
    —Lenin
 



[2]

      Lenin wrote “On Strikes” for Rabochaya
      Gazeta when he was in exile (see the “Letter to the Editorial
      Group,” p. 207 of this volume). Only the first part of the article is in
      the archives of the Institute of Marxism-Leninism; it is not known whether
      the other parts were written.
    



[3]

      Frederick Engels, The Condition of the Working Class in England
(Marx and Engels, Selected Works, Vol. II, Moscow, 1958,
p. 260).
    



[4]

      Lenin quotes a statement made by the Prussian Minister of
      the Interior, von Puttkamer.
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 4

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Draft of a Declaration of the Editorial Board of Iskra and Zarya









Lenin: Draft of a Declaration of the Editorial Board of Iskra and Zarya







V. I.  

      Lenin
Draft of a Declaration of the Editorial Board of Iskra[2] and Zarya[3]




Written: Written in the spring of 1900 

Published:

      First published in 1925 in Lenin Miscellany IV.

      Published according to a manuscript copied by an unknown hand.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 4,

      pages 320-330.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

      
• README



    

    

      In undertaking the publication of two Social-Democratic organs—a
      scientific and political magazine and an all-Russian working-class
      newspaper—we consider it necessary to say a few words concerning our
      programme, the objects for which we are striving, and the understanding we
      have of our tasks.
    

      We are passing through an extremely important period in the history of the
      Russian working-class movement and Russian Social-Democracy. All evidence
      goes to show that our movement has reached a critical stage. It has spread
      so widely and has brought forth so many strong shoots in the most diverse
      parts of Russia that it is now striving with unrestrained vigour to
      consolidate itself, assume a higher form, and develop a definite shape and
      organisation. Indeed, the past few years have been marked by an
      astonishingly rapid spread of Social-Democratic ideas among our intelligentsia; and meeting this trend in social ideas is the spontaneous,
      completely independent movement of the industrial proletariat, which is
      beginning to unite and struggle against its oppressors and is manifesting
      an eager striving for socialism. Study circles of workers and
      Social-Democratic intellectuals are springing up everywhere, local
      agitation leaflets are beginning to appear, the demand for Social-
      Democratic literature is increasing and is far outstripping the supply,
      and intensified government persecution is powerless to restrain the
      movement.
    

      The prisons and places of exile are filled to overflowing. Hardly a month goes
      by without our hearing of socialists

    

      “caught in dragnets” in all parts of Russia, of the capture of
      underground couriers, of the arrest of agitators, and the confiscation of
      literature and printing-presses; but the movement goes on and is growing,
      it is spreading to ever wider regions, it Is penetrating more and more
      deeply into the working class and is attracting public attention to an
      ever-increasing degree. The entire economic development of Russia and the
      history of social thought and of the revolutionary movement in Russia
      serve as a guarantee that the Social-Democratic working-class movement
      will grow and surmount all the obstacles that confront it.
    

      The principal feature of our movement, which has be come particularly
      marked in recent times, is its state of disunity and its amateur
      character, if one may so express it. Local study circles spring up and
      function in almost complete isolation from circles in other districts
      and—what is particularly important—from circles that have
      functioned and now function simultaneously in the same
      districts. Traditions are not established and continuity is not
      maintained; local publications fully reflect this disunity and the lack of
      contact with what Russian Social-Democracy has already achieved. The
      present period, therefore, seems to us to be critical precisely for the
      reason that the movement is outgrowing this amateur stage and this
      disunity, is insistently demanding a transition to a higher, more united,
      better and more organised form, which we consider it our duty to
      promote. It goes without saying that at a certain stage of the movement,
      at its inception, this disunity is entirely inevitable; the absence of
      continuity is natural in view of the astonishingly rapid and universal
      growth of the movement after a long period of revolutionary
      calm. Undoubtedly, too, there will always be diversity in local
      conditions; there will always be differences in the conditions of the
      working class in one district as compared with those in another; and,
      lastly, there will always be the particular aspect in the points of view
      among the active local workers; this very diversity is evidence of the
      virility of the movement and of its sound growth. All this is true; yet
      disunity and lack of organisation are not a necessary consequence of this
      diversity. The maintenance of continuity and the unity of the movement do
      not by any means exclude diversity, but,

    

      on the contrary, create for it a much broader arena and a freer field of
      action. In the present period of the movement, however, disunity is
      beginning to show a definitely harmful effect and is threatening to divert
      the movement to a false path: narrow practicalism, detached from the
      theoretical clarification of the movement as a whole, may destroy the
      contact between socialism and the revolutionary movement in Russia, on the
      one hand, and the spontaneous working-class movement, on the other. That
      this danger is not merely imaginary is proved by such literary productions
      as the Credo—which has already called forth legitimate
      protest and condemnation—and the Separate Supplement to
      “Rabochaya Mysl” (September 1899). That supplement has
      brought out most markedly, the trend that permeates the whole of
      Rabochaya Mysl; in it a particular trend in Russian
      Social-Democracy has begun to manifest itself, a trend that may cause real
      harm and that must be combated. And the Russian legal publications, with
      their parody of Marxism capable only of corrupting public consciousness,
      still further intensify the confusion and anarchy which have enabled the
      celebrated Bernstein (celebrated for his bankruptcy) to publish before the
      whole world the untruth that the majority of the Social-Democrats active
      in Russia support him.
    

      It is still premature to judge how deep the cleavage is, and how far the
      formation of a special trend is probable (at the moment we are not in the
      least inclined to answer these questions in the affirmative and we have
      not yet lost hope of our being able to work together), but it
      would be more harmful to close our eyes to the gravity of the situation
      than to exaggerate the cleavage, and we heartily welcome the resumption of
      literary activity on the part of the Emancipation of Labour group, and the
      struggle it has begun against the attempts to distort and vulgarise

      Social-Democracy.[4]


      The following practical conclusion is to be drawn from the foregoing:
      we Russian
      Social-Democrats must unite and direct all our efforts towards the formation of
      a single, strong party, which must struggle under the banner of a revolutionary
      Social-Democratic programme, which must maintain the continuity of the movement
      and systematically support its organisation. This conclusion is not

    

      a new one. The Russian Social-Democrats reached it two years ago when the
      representatives of the largest Social-Democratic organisations in Russia
      gathered at a congress in the spring of 1898, formed the Russian
      Social-Democratic Labour Party, published the Manifesto of the
      Party, and recognised Rabochaya Gazeta as the official Party
      organ. Regarding ourselves as members of the Russian Social-Democratic
      Labour Party, we agree entirely with the fundamental ideas contained in
      the Manifesto and attach extreme importance to it as the open and
      public declaration of the aims towards which our Party should
      strive. Consequently, we, as members of the Party, present the question of
      our immediate and direct tasks as follows: What plan of activity must we
      adopt to revive the Party on the firmest possible basis? Some comrades
      (even some groups and organisations) are of the opinion that in order to
      achieve this we must resume the practice of electing the central Party
      body and instruct it to resume the publication of the Party

      organ.[5]
      We consider such a plan to be a false one or, at all events, a hazardous
      one. To establish and consolidate the Party means to establish and
      consolidate unity among all Russian Social-Democrats; such unity cannot be
      decreed, it cannot be brought about by a decision, say, of a meeting of
      representatives; it must be worked for. In the first place, it is
      necessary to develop a common Party literature—common, not only in
      the sense that it must serve the whole of the Russian movement rather than
      separate districts, that it must discuss the questions of the movement as
      a whole and assist the class-conscious proletarians in their struggle
      instead of dealing merely with local questions, but common also in the
      sense that it must unite all the available literary forces, that it must
      express all shades of opinion and views prevailing among Russian
      Social-Democrats, not as isolated workers, but as comrades united in the
      ranks of a single organisation by a common programme and a common
      struggle. Secondly, we must work to achieve an organisation especially for
      the purpose of establishing and maintaining contact among all the centres
      of the movement, of supplying complete and timely information about the
      movement, and of delivering our newspapers and periodicals regularly to
      all parts of Russia. Only when such an organisation has been founded,

    

      only when a Russian socialist post has been established, will the Party
      possess a sound foundation, only then will it be come a real fact and,
      therefore, a mighty political force. We intend to devote our efforts to
      the first half of this task, i.e., to creating a common literature, since
      we regard this as the pressing demand of the movement today, and a
      necessary preliminary measure towards the resumption of Party activity.
    

      The character of our task naturally determines the programme for
      conducting our publications. They must devote considerable space to
      theoretical questions, i.e., to the general theory of Social-Democracy and
      its application to Russian conditions. The urgent need to promote a wide
      discussion of these questions at the present time in particular is beyond
      all doubt and requires no further explanation after what has been said
      above. It goes without saying that questions of general theory are
      inseparably connected with the need to supply information about the
      history and the present state of the working-class movement in the
      West. Furthermore, we propose systematically to discuss all political
      questions—the Social-Democratic Labour Party must respond to all
      questions that arise in all spheres of our daily life, to all questions of
      home and foreign politics, and we must see to it that every
      Social-Democrat and every class-conscious worker has definite views on all
      important questions. Unless this condition is fulfilled, it will be
      impossible to carry on wide and systematic propaganda and agitation. The
      discussion of questions of theory and policy will be connected with the
      drafting of a Party programme, the necessity for which was recognised at
      the congress in 1898. In the near future we intend to publish a draft
      programme; a comprehensive discussion of it should provide sufficient
      material for the forthcoming congress that will have to adopt a

      programme.[6]
      A further vital task, in our opinion, is the discussion of questions of
      organisation and practical methods of conducting our work. The lack of
      continuity and the disunity, to which reference has been made above, have
      a particularly harmful effect upon the present state of Party discipline,
      organisation, and the technique of secrecy. It must be publicly and
      frankly owned that in this respect we Social-Democrats

    

      lag behind the old workers in the Russian revolutionary movement and
      behind other organisations functioning in Russia, and we must exert all
      our efforts to come abreast of the tasks. The attraction of large numbers
      of working-class and intellectual young people to the movement, the
      increasing failures and the cunningness of governmental persecution make
      the propaganda of the principles and methods of Party organisation,
      discipline, and the technique of secrecy an urgent necessity.
    

      Such propaganda, if supported by all the various groups and by all the
      more experienced comrades, can and must result in the training of young
      socialists and workers as able leaders of the revolutionary movement,
      capable of over coming all obstacles placed in the way of our work by the
      tyranny of the autocratic police state and capable of serving all the
      requirements of the working masses, who are spontaneously striving towards
      socialism and political struggle. Finally, one of the principal tasks
      arising out of the above-mentioned issues must be the analysis of this
      spontaneous movement (among the working masses, as well as among our
      intelligentsia). We must try to understand the social movement of the
      intelligentsia which marked the late nineties in Russia and combined
      various, and sometimes conflicting, tendencies. We must carefully study
      the conditions of the working class in all spheres of economic life, study
      the forms and conditions of the workers’ awakening, and of the struggles
      now setting in, in order that we may unite the Russian working-class
      movement and Marxist socialism, which has already begun to take root in
      Russian soil, into one integral whole, in order that we may combine the
      Russian revolutionary movement with the spontaneous upsurge of the masses
      of the people. Only when this contact has been established can a
      Social-Democratic working-class party be formed in Russia; for
      Social-Democracy does not exist merely to serve the spontaneous
      working-class movement (as some of our present-day “practical
      workers” are sometimes inclined to think), but to combine socialism
      with the working-class movement. And it is only this combination that will
      enable the Russian proletariat to fulfil its immediate political
      task—to liberate Russia from the tyranny of the autocracy.
    
 

      The distribution of these themes and questions between the magazine and
      the newspaper will be determined exclusively by differences in the size
      and character of the two publications—the magazine should serve
      mainly for propaganda, the newspaper mainly for agitation. But all aspects
      of the movement should be reflected in both the magazine and the
      newspaper, and we wish particularly to emphasise our opposition to the
      view that a workers’ newspaper should devote its pages exclusively to
      matters that immediately and directly concern the spontaneous
      working-class movement, and leave everything pertaining to the theory of
      socialism, science, politics, questions of Party organisation, etc., to a
      periodical for the intelligentsia. On the contrary, it is necessary to
      combine all the concrete facts and manifestations of the working-class
      movement with the indicated questions; the light of theory must be cast
      upon every separate fact; propaganda on questions of politics and Party
      organisation must be carried on among the broad masses of the working
      class; and these questions must be dealt with in the work of
      agitation. The type of agitation which has hitherto prevailed almost
      without exception—agitation by means of locally published
      leaflets—is now inadequate; it is narrow, it deals only with local
      and mainly economic questions. We must try to create a higher form of
      agitation by means of the newspaper, which must contain a regular record
      of workers’ grievances, workers’ strikes, and other forms of proletarian
      struggle, as well as all manifestations of political tyranny in the whole
      of Russia; which must draw definite conclusions from each of these
      manifestations in accordance with the ultimate aim of socialism and the
      political tasks of the Russian proletariat. “Extend the bounds and
      broaden the content of our propagandist, agitational, and organisational
      activity”—this statement by P. B. Axelrod must serve as a slogan
      defining the activities of Russian Social-Democrats in the immediate
      future, and we adopt this slogan in the programme of our publications.
    

      Here the question naturally arises: if the proposed publications are to
      serve the purpose of uniting all Russian Social-Democrats and mustering
      them into a single party, they must reflect all shades of opinion, all
      local specific features, and all the various practical methods. How can

    

      we combine the varying points of view with the maintenance of a uniform
      editorial policy for these publications? Should these publications be
      merely a jumble of various views, or should they have an independent and
      quite definite tendency?
    

      We hold to the second view and hope that an organ having a definite
      tendency will prove quite suitable (as we shall show below), both for the
      purpose of expressing various viewpoints; and for comradely polemics
      between contributors. Our views are in complete accord with the
      fundamental ideas of Marxism (as expressed in the Communist
      Manifesto, and in the programmes of Social-Democrats in Western
      Europe); we stand for the consistent development of these ideas in the
      spirit of Marx and Engels and emphatically reject the equivocating and
      opportunist corrections

      à la Bernstein which have now become so fashionable. As we
      see it, the task of Social-Democracy is to organise the class struggle of
      the proletariat, to promote that struggle, to point out its essential
      ultimate aim, and to analyse the conditions that determine the methods by
      which this struggle should be conduct ed. “The emancipation of the
      working classes must be conquered by the working classes

      themselves.”[7]
      But while we do not separate Social-Democracy from the working-class
      movement, we must not forget that the task of the former is to represent
      the interests of this movement in all countries as a whole, that it must
      not blindly worship any particular phase of the movement at any particular
      time or place. We think that it is the duty of Social-Democracy to support
      every revolutionary movement against the existing political and social
      system, and we regard its aim to be the conquest of political power by
      the working class, the expropriation of the expropriators, and the
      establishment of a socialist society. We strongly repudiate every attempt
      to weaken or tone down the revolutionary character of Social Democracy,
      which is the party of social revolution, ruthlessly hostile to all classes
      standing for the present social system. We believe the historical task of
      Russian Social Democracy is, in particular, to overthrow the autocracy:

      Russian Social-Democracy is destined to become the vanguard fighter in
      the ranks of Russian democracy; it is destined to achieve the aim which
      the whole social development

    

      of Russia sets before it and which it has inherited from the glorious
      fighters in the Russian revolutionary movement. Only by inseparably
      connecting the economic and political struggles, only by spreading
      political propaganda and agitation among wider and wider strata of the
      working class, can Social-Democracy fulfil its mission.
    

      From this point of view (outlined here only in its general features, since
      it has been dealt with in greater detail and more thoroughly substantiated
      on many occasions by the Emancipation of Labour group, in the
      Manifesto of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party and in
      the “commentary” to the latter—the pamphlet, The
      Tasks of the Russian

Social-Democrats[1]

–and

      in The Working-Class Cause in Russia [a basis of the programme of
      Russian Social Democracy]), we shall deal with all theoretical and
      practical questions; and we shall try to connect all manifestations of the
      working-class movement and of democratic protest in Russia with these
      ideas.
    

      Although we carry out our literary work from the stand point of a definite
      tendency, we do not in the least intend to present all our views on
      partial questions as those of all Russian Social-Democrats; we do not deny
      that differences exist, nor shall we attempt to conceal or obliterate
      them. On the contrary, we desire our publications to become organs for the
      discussion of all questions by all Russian Social-Democrats of
      the most diverse shades of opinion. We do not reject polemics between
      comrades, but, on the contrary, are prepared to give them considerable
      space in our columns. Open polemics, conducted in full view of all Russian
      Social-Democrats and class-conscious workers, are necessary and desirable
      in order to clarify the depth of existing differences, in order to afford
      discussion of disputed questions from all angles, in order to combat the
      extremes into which representatives of various views, various localities,
      or various “specialities” of the revolutionary movement
      inevitably fall. Indeed, we regard one of the drawbacks of the present-day
      movement to be the absence of open polemics between avowedly differing
      views, the effort to conceal differences on fundamental questions.
    
 

      Moreover, while recognising the Russian working class and Russian
      Social-Democracy as the vanguard in the struggle for democracy and for
      political liberty, we think it necessary to strive to make our
      publications general-democratic organs, not in the sense that we
      would for a single moment agree to forget the class antagonism between the
      proletariat and other classes, nor in the sense that we would consent to
      the slightest toning-down of the class struggle, but in the sense that we
      would bring forward and discuss all democratic questions, not
      confining ourselves merely to narrowly proletarian questions; in the sense
      that we would bring forward and discuss all instances and manifestations
      of political oppression, show the connection between the working-class
      movement and the political struggle in all its forms, attract all honest
      fighters against the autocracy, regardless of their views or the class
      they belong to, and induce them to support the working class as the only
      revolutionary force irrevocably hostile to absolutism. Consequently,
      although we appeal primarily to the Russian socialists and class-conscious
      workers, we do not appeal to them alone. We also call upon all who are
      oppressed by the present political system in Russia, on all who strive for
      the emancipation of the Russian people from their political slavery to
      support the publications which will be devoted to organising the
      working-class movement into a revolutionary political party; we place the
      columns of our publications at their disposal in order that they may
      expose all the abominations and crimes of the Russian autocracy. We make
      this appeal in the conviction that the banner of the political struggle
      raised by Russian Social-Democracy can and will become the banner of the
      whole people.
    

      The tasks we set ourselves are extremely broad and all-embracing, and we
      would not have dared to take them up, were we not absolutely convinced
      from the whole of our past experience that these are the most urgent tasks
      of the whole movement, were we not assured of the sympathy and of promises
      of generous and constant support on the part of:

      1. several organisations of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party and
      of separate groups of Russian Social-Democrats working in various towns;
      2. the Emancipation of Labour group, which founded Russian
      Social-Democracy

    

      and has always been in the lead of its theoreticians and literary
      representatives; 3. a number of persons who are unaffiliated with any
      organisation, but who sympathise with the Social-Democratic working-class
      movement, and have proved of no little service to it. We will exert every
      effort to carry out properly the part of the general revolutionary work
      which we have selected, and will do our best to bring every Russian
      comrade to regard our publications as his own, to which all
      groups would communicate every kind of information concerning the
      movement, in which they would express their views, indicate their needs
      for political literature, relate their experiences, and voice their
      opinions concerning Social-Democratic editions; in a word, the medium
      through which they would thereby share whatever contribution they make to
      the movement and whatever they draw from it. Only in this way will it be
      possible to establish a genuinely all-Russian Social-Democratic
      organ. Russian Social-Democracy is already finding itself constricted in
      the underground conditions in which the various groups and isolated study
      circles carry on their work. It is time to come out on the road of open
      advocacy of socialism, on the road of open political struggle. The
      establishment of an all-Russian organ of Social-Democracy must be the
      first step on this road.
    

 
Notes
 

[1]

      See present edition, Vol. 2, p. 323.—Ed.
    
 



[2]

Iskra (The Spark) was the first all-Russian Illegal
      Marxist newspaper; it was founded by Lenin in 1900 and it played an
      important role in building the Marxist revolutionary party of the working
      class in Russia.
    

      It was impossible to publish the revolutionary newspaper in Russia on
      account of police persecution, and, while still in exile in Siberia, Lenin
      evolved a plan for its publication abroad. When his exile ended (January
      1900) Lenin immediately set about putting his plan into effect. In
      February, in St. Petersburg, he negotiated with Vera Zasulich (who had
      come from abroad illegally) on the participation of the Emancipation of
      Labour group in the publication of the newspaper. At the end of March and
      the beginning of April a conference was held—known as the Pskov
      Conference—with V. I. Lenin, L. Martov (Y. 0. Zederbaum),
      A. N. Potresov, S. I. Radchenko, and the ’legal Marxists”
      P. B. Struve and M. I. Tugan-Baranovsky participating, which discussed the
      draft declaration, drawn up by Lenin, of the Editorial Board of the
      all-Russian newspaper (Iskra) and the scientific and political

   

      magazine (Zarya) on the programme and the aims of these
      publications. During the first half of 1900 Lenin travelled in a number of
      Russian cities (Moscow, St. Petersburg, Riga, Smolensk, Nizhni Novgorod,
      Ufa, Samara, Syzran) and established contact with Social-Democratic groups
      and individual Social-Democrats, obtaining their support for
      Iskra. In August 1900, when Lenin arrived in Switzerland, be and
      Potresov conferred with the Emancipation of Labour group on the programme
      and the aims of the newspaper and the magazine, on possible contributors,
      and on the editorial board and its location. The conference almost ended
      in failure (see pp. 333-49 of this volume), but an agreement was finally
      reached on all disputed questions.
    

      The first issue of Lenin’s Iskra was published in Leipzig in
      December 1900; the ensuing issues were published in Munich; from July 1902
      the paper was published in London, and from the spring of 1903 in
      Geneva. Considerable help in getting the newspaper going (the organisation
      of secret printing-presses, the acquisition of Russian type, etc.) was
      afforded by the German Social-Democrats Clara Zetkin, Adolf Braun, and
      others; by Julian Marchlewski, a Polish revolutionary residing in Munich
      at that time; and by Harry Quelch, one of the leaders of the English
      Social-Democratic Federation.
    

      The Editorial Board of Iskra consisted of: V. I. Lenin,
      G. V. Plekhanov, L. Martov, P. B. Axelrod, A. N. Potresov, and
      V. I. Zasulich. The first secretary of the board was
      I. G. Smidovich-Leman; the post was then taken over, from the spring of
      1901 by N.K. Krupskaya, who also conducted the correspondence between
      Iskra and the Russian Social-Democratic organisations. Lenin was
      in actuality editor-in-chief and the leading figure in Iskra, in
      which he published his articles on all basic questions of Party
      organisation and the class struggle of the proletariat in Russia, as well
      as on the most important events in world affairs.
    

Iskra became the centre for the unification of Party forces, for
      the gathering and training of Party workers. In a number of Russian cities
      (St. Petersburg, Moscow, Samara, and others) groups and committees of the
      R.S.D.L.P. were organised on Leninist Iskra lines and a
      conference of Iskra supporters held in Samara in January 1902
      founded the Russian Iskra organisation. Iskra
      organisations grew up and worked under the direct leadership of Lenin’s
      disciples and comrades-in-arms: N. E. Bauman, I. V. Babushkin,
      S. I. Gusev, M. I. Kalinin, P. A. Krasikov, G. M. Krzhizhanovsky,
      F. V. Lengnik, P. N. Lepeshinsky, I. I. Radchenko, and others.
    

      On the initiative and with the direct participation of Lenin, the
      Iskra Editorial Board drew up a draft programme of the Party
      (published in No. 21 of Iskra) and prepared the Second Congress
      of the R.S.D.L.P., held in July and August 1903. By the time the Congress
      was convened the majority of the local Social-Democratic organisations in
      Russia had adopted the Iskra position, approved its programme,
      organisational plan, and tactical line, and recognised the newspaper as
      their leading organ. A special

   

      resolution of the Congress noted Iskra’s exceptional role in the
      struggle to build the Party and adopted the newspaper as the central organ
      of the R.S.D.L.P. The Congress approved an editorial board consisting of
      Lenin, Plekhanov, and Martov. Despite the Congress decision, Martov
      refused to participate, and Nos. 46-51 of Iskra were edited by
      Lenin and Plekhanov. Later Plekhanov went over to the Menshevik position
      and demanded that all the old Menshevik editors be included in the
      Editorial Board of Iskra, although they had been rejected by the
      Congress. Lenin could not agree to this and on October 19 (November 1),
      1903, he resigned from the Iskra Editorial Board. He was co-opted
      to the Central Committee, from where he conducted a struggle against the
      Menshevik opportunists. Issue No. 52 of Iskra was edited by
      Plekhanov alone. On November 13 (26), 1903, Plekhanov, on his own
      initiative and in violation of the will of the Congress, co-opted all the
      old Menshevik editors to the Editorial Board. Beginning with issue No. 52,
      the Mensheviks turned Iskra into their own organ.
    



[3]

Zarya (Dawn)—a Marxist scientific and political
      magazine published legally in Stuttgart in 1901-02 by the Iskra
      Editorial Board.  Altogether four numbers (in three issues) appeared:
      No. 1—April 1901 (it actually appeared on March 23, New Style);
      No. 2-3—December 1901; and No. 4—August 1902.
    



[4]

      Lenin refers to the “Announcement on the Renewal of Publications of
      the Emancipation of Labour Group” published at the beginning of 1900
      in Geneva, after the appearance of Lenin’s “A Protest by Russian
      Social-Democrats.” In their “Announcement” the Emancipation of
      Labour group supported Lenin’s appeal in the “Protest” for
      decisive struggle against opportunism in the ranks of Russian and
      international Social-Democracy.
    



[5]

      By groups and organisations Lenin means the Social-Democrats
      grouped round the newspaper Yashny Rabochy (Southern Worker), the

      Bond, 

      and the Union of Russian Social-Democrats Abroad, the leadership of
      which had been transferred from the Emancipation of Labour group to the
      “young” supporters of “economism.” These organisations planned
      to call the Second Congress of the Party in Smolensk in the spring of
      1900. The circumstances surrounding the preparation for the Congress are
      discussed in Chapter 5 of Lenin’s What Is to Be Done? (see
      present edition, Vol. 5).
    



[6]

      Lenin refers to “A Draft Programme of Our Party” which he
      wrote at the end of 1899 for No. 3 of Rabochaya Gazeta that never
      came to be published (see present volume, pp. 227-54). A draft programme
      of the Party was elaborated for the Second Congress of the R.S.D.L.P., on
      Lenin’s suggestion, by the Editorial Board of Iskra and
      Zarya and was printed in Iskra, No 21, on June 1, 1902;
      it was adopted by the Second Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. in August 1903.
    



[7]

      Lenin quotes the basic postulate of the “General Rules of the
      International Working Men’s Association” (First International) drawn
      up by Karl Marx (Marx and Engels, Selected Works, Vol. I, Moscow,
      1956, p. 386.
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 4

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## How the “Spark” Was Nearly Extinguished









Lenin: How the 'Spark' Was Nearly Extinguished







V. I.  

      Lenin
How the “Spark” Was Nearly Extinguished[1]





Written: Written beginning of September 1900 

Published:

      First published in 1924 in Lenin Miscellany I.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 4,

      pages 331-349.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

      
• README



    

    

 

      I first went to Zurich. I arrived alone without having seen Arsenyev
      (Potresov). P. B. Axelrod met me in Zurich with open arms and I spent two
      days in a heart-to-heart talk with him. The conversation was as between
      friends who had not seen each other for a long time; we spoke about
      anything and everything, in no particular order, and not at all in the
      manner of a business discussion. Indeed, in regard to practical matters,
      there is not much that Axelrod mitsprechen

kann,[2]

      but it was quite evident that he gravitated towards G. V. Plekhanov, from
      the manner in which he insisted on setting up the printing-press for the
      magazine in Geneva. Generally speaking, Axelrod was very
      “flattering” (excuse the expression), he said that our
      enterprise meant everything to them, that it meant their revival,
      that “we” would now be able to counteract Plekhanov’s extremism. I
      took particular note of the last remark, and the entire subsequent
      “history” has proved that those were words of especial
      significance.
    

      I went to Geneva. Arsenyev warned me to be particularly cautious with
      Plekhanov, who was terribly wrought up over the

      split[9]
      and very suspicious. My conversation with him did indeed show that he
      really was suspicious, distrustful, and rechthaberisch to the
      nec plus

ultra.[3]

      I tried to observe caution and avoided all “sore” points, but
      the constant restraint that I had to place on myself could not but greatly

    

      affect my mood. From time to time little “frictions” arose in
      the form of sharp retorts on the part of Plekhanov to any remark that
      might even in the least degree cool down or soothe the passions that had
      been aroused (by the split). There was also “friction” over
      questions concerning the tactics of the magazine, Plekhanov throughout
      displaying complete intolerance, an inability or an unwillingness to
      understand other people’s arguments, and, to employ the correct term,
      insincerity. We declared that we must make every possible
      allowance for Struve, that we ourselves bore some guilt for his
      development, since we, including Plekhanov, had failed to protest
      when protest was necessary (1895, 1897). Plekhanov absolutely refused to
      admit even the slightest guilt, employing transparently worthless
      arguments by which he dodged the issue without clarifying
      it. This diplomacy in the course of comradely conversations between future
      co-editors was extremely unpleasant. Why the self-deception with the
      pretence that he, Plekhanov, had in 1895 been “ordered [??] not to
      shoot” (at Struve) and that he was accustomed to doing as he was
      ordered

      (really!)?[10]
      Why the self-deception with the assertion that in 1897 (when Struve wrote
      in Novoye Slovo that his object was to refute one of the
      fundamental theses of Marxism) he had not opposed it, because he never
      could (and never would) conceive of polemics between

      collaborators[11]
      in one and the same magazine? This insincerity was extremely irritating,
      the more so by the fact that in the discussion Plekhanov sought to make it
      appear that we did not desire to carry on a ruthless fight against Struve,
      that we desired to “reconcile everything,” etc. A heated discussion
      arose over the question of polemics in general in columns of the
      magazine. Plekhanov was opposed and refused to listen to our arguments. He
      displayed a hatred towards “the Union-Abroad people” that
      bordered on the indecent (suspecting them of espionage, accusing them of
      being swindlers and rogues, and asserting that he would not hesitate to
      “shoot” such “traitors,” etc.). The remotest suggestion
      that he went to extremes (for example, my allusion to the publication, of
      private

      letters[12]
      and to the imprudence of such a procedure) roused him to a high pitch of
      excitement and manifest irritability. It became evident that he and we
      were becoming increasingly disgruntled.

    

      But with him it expressed itself, among other things, in the following: We
      had a draft prepared of an editorial declaration (“In the Name of the
      Editorial

      Board”),[4]

      in which we explained the aims and the programme of the publications. This
      was written in an “opportunist” spirit (from Plekhanov’s point
      of view)—polemics between members of the staff were to be permitted,
      the tone was modest, allowance was made for the possibility of a peaceful
      ending of the controversy with the “economists,” etc. The
      declaration laid stress on our belonging to the Party and on our desire to
      work for its unification. Plekhanov had read this declaration together
      with Arsenyev and Zasulich before my arrival; he had read it and raised no
      objection to the content. He had merely expressed a desire to improve the
      style, to elevate the tone, without changing the trend of the
      ideas. A. N. Potresov had left the declaration with him for this
      purpose. When I arrived,Plekhanov did not say a word to me about the
      matter, but when I visited him a few days later, he returned the
      declaration to me with an air of—Here you are, in the presence of
      witnesses, I return it to you intact; you see I have not lost it. I
      inquired why he had not made the suggested changes. He replied evasively
      that it could be done later, that it would not take long and was not worth
      doing at the time. I took the declaration, made the changes myself (it was
      a rough draft outlined when I was still in Russia), and read it a second
      time to Plekhanov (in the presence of Vera Zasulich), this time asking him
      point-blank to take the thing and correct it. Again he resorted
      to evasions and turned the job over to Vera Zasulich who was sitting
      beside him (an altogether strange suggestion, since we had never requested
      her to work on the statement, besides which, she could not have made the
      corrections, i.e., have “elevated” the tone and given the
      declaration the character of a manifesto).
    

      Thus matters went on until the conference (the conference of the entire
      Emancipation of Labour group: Plekhanov, Axelrod, and Zasulich, and we
      two, our third man being

      absent[13]).
      Finally Axelrod arrived and the conference began. On the question of our
      attitude towards the Jewish Union (the Bund), Plekhanov displayed extreme
      intolerance and

    

      openly declared it to be an organisation of exploiters who exploit the
      Russians and not a Social-Democratic organisation. He said that our aim
      was to eject this Bund from the Party, that the Jews are all chauvinists
      and nationalists, that a Russian party should be Russian and should not
      render itself into “captivity” to the “brood of vipers,”
      etc. None of our objections to these indecent speeches had any result and
      Plekhanov stuck to his ideas to the full, saying that we simply did not
      know enough about the Jews, that we had no real experience in dealing with
      Jews. No resolution on this question was adopted. We read the
      “declaration” together at the conference. Plekhanov’s
      behaviour was very odd. He remained silent, he suggested no changes, he
      did not take a stand against the idea in the declaration that polemics be
      permitted, and in general seemed to withdraw, precisely to withdraw. He
      did not wish to participate, and only casually threw in a venomous,
      malicious remark to the effect that he (meaning they, i.e., the
      Emancipation of Labour group of which he is dictator), of course, would
      have written a different sort of declaration. This remark, uttered in
      passing, after a sentence in connection with a different matter, struck me
      as being particularly repellent; a conference of co-editors is in session
      and one of them (who has been twice asked to submit his own draft
      or to suggest changes to ours) suggests no emendations, but sarcastically
      observes that he, of course, would not have written so (in so timid,
      modest, and opportunistic a manner, he wished to say). This showed clearly
      enough that normal relations did not exist between him and
      us. Subsequently—let me pass over the less important issues of the
      conference—the question of our attitude towards

      Bobo[14]
      and M. I. Tugan-Baranovsky came up. We were in favour of a
      conditional invitation(we were inevitably driven to this by the
      bitterness Plekhanov displayed; we wanted him to see that we desired a
      different attitude. His incredible bitterness drove one instinctively, as
      it were, to protest and to defend his opponents. Zasulich aptly remarked
      that Plekhanov always argued in a manner that aroused his readers’
      sympathy for his opponent). Very coldly and drily Plekhanov declared that
      he completely disagreed, and he demonstratively remained silent throughout
      the whole of our fairly protracted conversation with Axelrod and Zasulich,

    

      who were not disinclined to agree with us. The whole morning passed in
      what might be called a very tense atmosphere. It became clear beyond doubt
      that Plekhanov was presenting an ultimatum to us—to choose between
      him and those “rogues.” Seeing that things were coming to such a
      pass, Arsenyev and I agreed to give way and at the very opening of the
      evening session declared that “on the insistence of Plekhanov”
      we had withdrawn our proposal. This declaration met with silence (as if it
      were a matter of course that we could do nothing else but give way!). This
      “ultimatum atmosphere” (as Arsenyev later described it)
      greatly irritated us—Plekhanov’s desire to have unlimited power was
      obvious. A little before that, in a private conversation about Bobo (when
      Plekhanov, Arsenyev, Zasulich, and I were taking an evening walk in the
      woods), Plekhanov, after a heated discussion, said, laying his hand on my
      shoulders, “But, gentlemen, I am not putting any conditions; we
      shall discuss all this together at the conference and together we will
      decide.” I was touched by this at the time. But at the conference the very
      opposite happened; Plekhanov stood aside from the comradely discussion,
      maintained an angry silence, and by his silence obviously “put
      conditions.” To me it seemed to be a sharp display of insincerity
      (although I did not at the moment formulate my impressions so clearly),
      while Arsenyev declared outright: “I will never forgive him this
      concession!” Saturday came. I do not remember exactly what we spoke about
      that day, but in the evening, when we were all walking together, a fresh
      conflict flared up. Plekhanov proposed that a certain person (as yet
      unpublished in our literature, but in whom he claims to see philosophical
      talent; the person is unknown to me, except for
      a blind worship of Plekhanov) be assigned the writing of an article on a
      philosophical subject. Plekhanov went on to say:

      “I shall advise the person to begin the article with a remark against
      Kautsky somewhat as follows—a fine fellow, indeed! has already
      become a ’critic’ and publishes philosophic articles by ’critics’ in
      Neue

Zeit, [15]
      but does not give full scope to ’Marxists’ [read: Plekhanov].” Arsenyev,
      on hearing the proposal for a sharp attack upon Kautsky (who had been
      invited to contribute to the magazine), became indignant and heatedly
      opposed it on the grounds that it was uncalled for. Plekhanov became
      puffed up and irate, I

    

      seconded Arsenyev, Axelrod and Zasulich remained silent. Half an hour
      later, Plekhanov departed (we had accompanied him to the steamer), in the
      final moments he had sat in silence, his brow black as a cloud. As soon as
      he left us, we felt as though a weight had been lifted from us all, and
      the discussion proceeded in a “friendly spirit.” The next day,
      Sunday (today is September 2, Sunday. It happened only a week
      ago!!! But to me it seems like a year! How remote the thing has become!),
      we arranged to meet, not in our cottage, but at Plekhanov’s. We came to
      the place, Arsenyev arriving first, I later. Plekhanov had sent Axelrod
      and Zasulich to inform Arsenyev that he declined to be co-editor, desiring
      to be just a contributor. Axelrod left, and Zasulich, quite put out and
      confused, murmured to Arsenyev: “Georg is displeased, he
      declines....” I entered. The door was opened for me by Plekhanov, who
      offered me his hand with a rather queer smile and then walked out. I
      stepped into the room and found Zasulich and Arsenyev sitting there, their
      faces wearing a strange expression. “Well, ladies and gentlemen,”
      said I, “how goes it?” Plekhanov entered and invited us into his
      room. There he stated that it would be better if he were a contributor, an
      ordinary contributor, for otherwise there would be continual friction,
      that evidently his views on things differed from ours, that he understood
      and respected our, Party, point of view, but could not share it. Better,
      therefore, that we be the editors and he a contributor. We were amazed to
      hear this, positively amazed, and began to argue against the
      idea. Thereupon Plekhanov said: “Well, if we are to be together, how
      shall we vote; how many votes are there?” “Six.” “Six is not a
      practical number.” “Well, let Georg have two votes,” suggested
      Zasulich, “otherwise he will always be alone—two votes on
      questions of tactics.” We agreed to that. Upon that Plekhanov took the
      reins of management in his hands and with the air of editor-in-chief began
      apportioning departments among those present and assigning articles to
      this one and that in a tone that brooked no objection. We sat there as if
      we had been ducked; mechanically we agreed to everything, unable as yet to
      comprehend what had taken place. We realised that we had been made fools
      of; that our remarks were becoming more and more halting; that Plekhanov
      “waved them aside” (not refuting

    

      them but waving them aside) more and more easily and carelessly; that
      “the new system” was de facto tantamount to his
      complete domination; and that Plekhanov understood this perfectly, not
      hesitating to domineer over us without ceremony. We realised that we had
      been fooled and utterly defeated, but were as yet unable to get a full
      grasp of our position. Yet no sooner did we find ourselves alone, no
      sooner had we left the steamer and were on our way to the cottage, than
      the lid flew off and we broke out in a wild and furious tirade against
      Plekhanov.
    

      But before relating the substance of this tirade and what it led to, I
      shall go back a bit. Why did the idea of Plekhanov’s complete domination
      (quite apart from the form it assumed) rouse us to such
      indignation? Previously we had thought that we would be the editors, and
      they—close collaborators. I had proposed (back in Russia) that the
      matter be formally submitted in this manner, but Arsenyev had objected to
      a formal proposition and suggested that we go about it “in a
      friendly way” (which would achieve the same result), to which I
      agreed. But both of us were in accord on the point that we were to be the
      editors, because the “old ones” were extremely intolerant, in
      addition to the fact that they would not be able to perform painstakingly
      the drudgery of editorial work. These were the only considerations that
      guided us, for we were quite ready to accept their ideological
      guidance. The conversations I had had in Geneva with those of Plekhanov’s
      younger comrades and adherents closest to him (members of the
      Sotsial-Demokrat

      group,[16]
      long-standing adherents of
      Plekhanov, active Party workers, not working men, but simple, industrious
      people entirely devoted to Plekhanov) —these conversations
      strengthened my conviction (and Arsenyev’s) that this was exactly how we
      should arrange the matter. Those adherents had told us without
      equivocation that it was desirable to have the editorial office in
      Germany, where we would be more independent of Plekhanov, and
      that to allow the old ones to have practical control of the editorial work
      would bring about terrible delays, if not the collapse of the entire
      enterprise. For the very same reasons, Arsenyev was
      unconditionally in favour of Germany.
    

      I broke off my description of how the “Spark” was nearly
      extinguished at the point where we were returning home on

    

      the evening of Sunday, August 26 (New Style). As soon as we found
      ourselves alone, after leaving the steamer, we broke out into a flood of
      angry expressions. Our pent-up feelings got the better of us; the charged
      atmosphere burst into a storm. Up and down our little village we paced far
      into the night; it was quite dark, there was a rumbling of thunder, and
      constant flashes of lightning rent the air. We walked along, bursting with
      indignation. I remember that Arsenyev began by declaring that as far as he
      was concerned his personal relations with Plekhanov were broken off once
      and for all, never to be restored. He would maintain business relations
      with him, but as for personal

      relations—fertig.[5]

      Plekhanov’s behaviour had been insulting to such a degree that one could
      not help suspecting him of harbouring “unclean” thoughts about
      us (i.e., that he regarded us as

      Streber[6]

).

      He trampled us
      underfoot, etc. I fully supported these charges. My
      “infatuation” with Plekhanov disappeared as if by magic, and I
      felt offended and embittered to an unbelievable degree. Never, never in my
      life, had I regarded any other man with such sincere respect and
      veneration, never had I stood before any man so “humbly” and
      never before had I been so brutally “kicked.” That’s what it was, we
      had actually been kicked. We had been scared like little children, scared
      by the grown-ups threatening to leave us to ourselves, and when we funked
      (the shame of it!) we were brushed aside with an incredible
      unceremoniousness. We now realised very clearly that Plekhanov had simply
      laid a trap for us that morning when he declined to act as a co-editor; it
      had been a deliberate chess move, a snare for guileless “pigeons.”
      There could be no doubt whatever about that, for, had Plekhanov sincerely
      feared to act as a co-editor because he would be a stumbling-block and
      might rouse useless friction between us, he would not a moment later have
      revealed (and brutally revealed) the fact that his co-editorship was
      absolutely the equivalent of his sole editorship. And since a man
      with whom we desired to co-operate closely and establish most intimate
      relations, resorted to chess moves in dealing with comrades, there could
      be no doubt that this man

    

      was bad, yes, bad, inspired by petty motives of personal vanity and
      conceit—an insincere man. This discovery—and it was indeed a
      discovery—struck us like a thunderbolt; for up to that moment both
      of us had stood in admiration of Plekhanov, and, as we do with a loved
      one, we had forgiven him everything; we had closed our eyes to all his
      short comings; we had tried hard to persuade ourselves that those
      shortcomings were really non-existent, that they were petty things that
      bothered only people who had no proper regard for principles. Yet we
      ourselves had been taught practically that those “petty”
      shortcomings were capable of repelling the most devoted friends, that no
      appreciation of his theoretical correctness could make us forget his
      repelling traits. Our indignation knew no bounds. Our ideal had
      been destroyed; gloatingly we trampled it underfoot like a dethroned
      god. There was no end to the charges we hurled against him. It cannot go
      on like this, we decided. We do not wish, we will not, we cannot
      work together with him under such conditions. Good-bye, magazine! We will
      throw everything up and return to Russia, where we will start all over
      again, right from the very beginning, and confine ourselves to the
      newspaper. We refuse to be pawns in the hands of that man; he does not
      understand, and cannot maintain comradely relations. We did not dare
      undertake the editorship ourselves; besides, it would be
      positively repulsive to do so now, for it would appear as though we really
      coveted the editor’s post, that we really were Streber,
      careerists, and that we, too, were inspired by motives of vanity, though
      in a smaller way.... It is difficult to-describe adequately what our
      feelings were that night—such mixed, heavy, confused feelings. It
      was a real drama; the complete abandonment of the thing which for years we
      had tended like a favourite child, and with which we had inseparably
      linked the whole of our life’s work. And all because we had formerly been
      infatuated with Plekhanov. Had we not been so infatuated, had we regarded
      him more dispassionately, more level-headedly, had we studied him more
      objectively, our conduct towards him would have been different and we
      would not have suffered such disaster, in the literal sense of the word,
      we would not have received such a “moral ducking,” as Arsenyev
      correctly expressed it. We had received the most bitter lesson of our
      lives, a

    

      painfully bitter, painfully brutal lesson. Young comrades
      “court” an elder comrade out of the great love they bear for
      him—and suddenly he injects into this love an atmosphere of
      intrigue, compelling them to feel, not as younger brothers, but as fools
      to be led by the nose, as pawns to be moved about at will, and, still
      worse, as clumsy Streber who must be thoroughly frightened and
      quashed! An enamoured youth receives from the object of his love a bitter
      lesson— to regard all persons “without sentiment,” to keep a
      stone in one’s sling. Many more words of an equally bitter nature did we
      utter that night. The suddenness of the disaster naturally caused us to
      magnify it, but, in the main, the bitter words we uttered were
      true. Blinded by our love, we had actually behaved like slaves,
      and it is humiliating to be a slave. Our sense of having been wronged was
      magnified a hundredfold by the fact that “he” himself had
      opened our eyes to our humiliation....
    

      Finally, we returned to our respective rooms to go to bed, firmly
      determined to express our indignation to Plekhanov on the following day,
      to give up the magazine and go away, retain only the newspaper, and
      publish the material for the magazine in pamphlet form. The cause would
      not suffer by this, we thought, and we would avoid having intimate
      dealings with “that man.”
    

      Next morning I woke up earlier than usual. I was awakened by footsteps on
      the stairs and the voice of Axelrod who was knocking at Arsenyev’s door. I
      heard Arsenyev call out in reply and open the door—I heard all this
      and wondered whether he would have pluck enough to come out with
      everything immediately. Better to speak out at once, indeed better, than
      to drag the thing out! I washed and dressed and went to Arsenyev’s room,
      where I found him at his toilet. Axelrod was sitting in the armchair, his
      face wearing a somewhat strained expression. “Listen, Comrade X,”
      said Arsenyev turning to me, “I have told Axelrod of our decision to
      go back to Russia, and of our conviction that things can not be run like
      this.” I fully concurred with this, of course, and supported Arsenyev’s
      statement. We related everything to Axelrod, quite frankly, so much so
      that Arsenyev even spoke of our suspicion that Plekhanov regarded us as
      Streber. Axelrod half-sympathised with us generally, shook his
      head

    

      sadly, and appeared to be greatly perturbed, confused, put out. But
      hearing this last remark, he began to protest and to shout that our
      accusation was unfounded; that Plekhanov had many shortcomings, but not
      this one; that in this matter it was not he who was unjust to us, but we
      who were unjust to him; that until then he had been prepared to say to
      Plekhanov, “See what a mess you have made, now clear it up yourself,
      I wash my hands of the matter,” but he could no longer say this, seeing
      that we were also unjust. His assurances made little impression upon us,
      as may be imagined, and poor Axelrod looked pitiful when he finally
      realised that we were firm in our decision.
    

      We went out together to warn Vera Zasulich. It was to be expected that she
      would take the news of the “break” (for it did certainly look
      like a break) very badly. “I fear,” Arsenyev had said to me the
      previous evening, “I do seriously fear that she will commit
      suicide....”
    

      I shall never forget the mood in which we three went out that
      morning. “It’s like going to a funeral,” I thought to myself. And
      indeed we walked as in a funeral procession—silent, with downcast
      eyes, oppressed to the extreme by the absurdness, the preposterousness,
      and the senselessness of our loss. As though a curse had descended upon
      us! Every thing had been proceeding smoothly after so many misfortunes and
      failures, when suddenly, a whirlwind—and the end, the whole thing
      shattered again. I could hardly bring myself to believe it (as one cannot
      bring oneself to believe the death of a near one)—could it be I, the
      fervent worshipper of Plekhanov, who was now filled with bitter thoughts
      about him, who was walking along with clenched teeth and a devilish chill
      at the heart, intending to hurl cold and bitter words at him and almost to
      announce the “breaking-off of our relations”? Was this but a hideous
      dream, or was it reality?
    

      The impression clung to us even during our conversation with Zasulich. She
      did not display any strong emotion, but she was obviously deeply depressed
      and she asked us, almost implored us, could we not go back on our
      decision, could we not try—perhaps it was not so terrible, after
      all, and it would be possible to set things to rights once we were at
      work; during the work the repellent features of his character

    

      would not be so apparent.... It was extremely painful to listen to the
      sincere pleadings of this woman, weak before Plekhanov, but absolutely
      sincere and passionately loyal to the cause, who bore the yoke of
      Plekhanovism with the “heroism of a slave” (Arsenyev’s
      expression). It was, indeed, so painful that at times I thought I would
      burst into tears.... Words of pity, despair, etc., easily move one to
      tears at a funeral....
    

      We left Axelrod and Zasulich. We lunched, dispatched letters to Germany
      saying that we were coming and that they were to stop the
      machine; we had even sent a telegram about the matter (prior
      to our conversation with Plekhanov!!), and neither, of us doubted for a
      moment that we had done right.
    

      After lunch, at the appointed hour, we again went to the house of Axelrod
      and Zasulich, where Plekhanov was due to be by now. As we approached, the
      three of them came out to meet us. We greeted each other in
      silence. Plekhanov tried to start an extraneous conversation (we had asked
      Axelrod and Zasulich to warn him of our intention, so that he would know
      all about it), we returned to the room and sat down. Arsenyev began to
      speak—drily, briefly, and with restraint. He said that we despaired
      of the possibility of carrying on with relations such as they had
      developed on the previous evening; that we had decided to return to Russia
      to consult the comrades there, since we no longer dared to decide the
      matter ourselves, and that for the time being we would have to abandon the
      idea of publishing the magazine. Plekhanov was very calm and restrained,
      and apparently had complete command of himself; he did not show a trace of
      the nervousness betrayed by Axelrod and Zasulich (he had been in bigger
      battles than this! we thought to ourselves, gazing at him in fury). He
      inquired what it was all about. “We are in an atmosphere of
      ultimatums,” replied Arsenyev, and he expounded the idea at greater
      length. “Were you afraid that after the first issue I would go on
      strike before we got out the second?" asked Plekhanov aggressively. He
      thought we would not dare to say a thing like that. But I too was calm and
      cool, as I replied: “Is that very much different from what Arsenyev
      said? Isn’t that what he said?” Plekhanov seemed to bristle under the
      words. He had not expected such a dry tone and direct accusation.
    
 

      “Well, if you have decided to leave, what is there to discuss?” he
      said. “I have nothing to say, my position is a very curious one. All
      you do is talk of impressions and nothing else. You have the impression
      that I am a bad man. I cannot help that.”
    

      “We may be to blame,” I said, desiring to turn the conversation away
      from this “impossible” subject, “for having rushed
      across in this headlong manner without first sounding the ford.”
    

      “Not at all,” replied Plekhanov. “To speak quite frankly, you
      are to blame (perhaps Arsenyev’s state of nervousness may have had
      something to do with it) for attaching too much importance to impressions
      to which no importance whatever should have been attached.” After a
      moment’s silence we said that we could confine ourselves to publishing
      pamphlets for the time being. Plekhanov angrily retorted:

      “I haven’t thought about pamphlets and am not thinking of
them. Don’t count on me. I shall not sit idle with my arms
folded if you go away. I may take up some other enterprise before you
return.”
    

      Nothing so much lowered Plekhanov in my eyes as this statement when later
      I recalled it and turned it over in my mind. This was such a crude threat
      and such a badly calculated attempt to intimidate us, that it simply
      “finished” Plekhanov as far as we were concerned and exposed
      his “policy” towards us: give them a good scare and that will
      suffice....
    

      But we did not pay the slightest attention to his threat. I
      simply pressed my lips tight in silence: very well, if this is how you
      would have it, then à la guerre comme à la

guerre[7]

;

      but you must be a fool if you cannot see that we have changed, that we
      have undergone a transformation overnight.
    

      Perceiving that his threats were ineffective, Plekhanov tried another
      manoeuvre—for what else can it be called, when a few moments later
      he stated that the break with us would spell for him complete abandonment
      of political activity, that he would give up political work and devote
      himself to science, to purely scientific literature, for if he could not

    

      work with us, it meant that he would not be able to work with
      anybody.... Having found threats to be unavailing, he tried flattery! But
      coming as that did alter threats, it could only produce a feeling
      of revulsion.... The conversation was very brief and nothing came of
      it. Seeing this, Plekhanov switched the conversation to Russian atrocities
      in China, but he was almost the only one who spoke and very soon we parted
      company.
    

      Our conversation with Axelrod and Zasulich after Plekhanov’s departure was
      neither interesting nor important; Axelrod wriggled and tried to prove
      that Plekhanov was also crushed and that the sin would be on our heads if
      we left in this manner, etc., etc. In a tête-à-tête with
      Arsenyev, Zasulich confessed that “Georg” was always like that. She
      confessed to her “slavish heroism,” but admitted that it would
      “teach him a lesson” if we went away.
    

      We spent the rest of the evening in a state of idleness and depression.
    

      On the next day, Tuesday, August 28 (New Style), we were due to leave for
      Geneva, and from there to proceed to Germany. Early in the morning, I was
      awakened by Arsenyev (a late riser usually). I was surprised. He said that
      he had slept badly and that he had thought of a last possible scheme by
      which the matter could somehow be adjusted so that a serious
      Party enterprise might not be ruined by spoiled personal
      relations. We would publish a collection, since we had the
      material ready and had established contact with the printing-house. We
      would publish this collection under the present undefined editorial
      relations and see what happened; from this it would be just as easy to
      pass on to the publication of a magazine as to the publication of
      pamphlets. If Plekhanov remained stubborn, then, to the devil with him, we
      would know that we had done all we could.... And thus it was decided.
    

      We went out to inform Axelrod and Zasulich and met them on the way; they
      were coming to see us. They, of course, readily agreed and Axelrod
      undertook the task of negotiating with Plekhanov and of obtaining his
      consent.
    

      We arrived at Geneva and had our last interview with
      Plekhanov. He adopted a tone which might have suggested that all that had
      happened was a sad misunderstanding due to

    

      nervousness. He inquired sympathetically after Arsenyev’s health, and
      nearly embraced him—the latter almost gave a jump. Plekhanov agreed
      to the publication of a collection. We said that in regard to the
      editorial arrangements, three variations were possible: 1) we to be the
      editors, and he a contributor; 2) all of us to be the editors; 3) he to be
      the editor, and we contributors; that we would discuss all three
      alternatives in Russia, draw up a plan, and bring it back with
      us. Plekhanov declared that he absolutely rejected the third variant, that
      he insisted emphatically that this arrangement be definitely
      excluded, and that he agreed to the first two. We
      therefore decided that for the time being, until we submitted our
      proposal for the new editorial regime, the old system was to remain in
      force (the six of us to act as co-editors, with Plekhanov apportioned two
      votes).
    

      Plekhanov then expressed the desire to know precisely what it was that we
      were dissatisfied with. I remarked that perhaps it would be better to pay
      more attention to the future rather than to the past. But he insisted that
      the question be gone into and clarified. A conversation started in which
      only Plekhanov and I took part, Arsenyev and Axelrod remaining silent. The
      conversation was carried on rather calmly, even very calmly. Plekhanov
      said he had noticed that Arsenyev was irritated by his refusal concerning
      Struve; I remarked that he, on the contrary, had laid down conditions to
      us, notwithstanding his statement, previously made during our conversation
      in the woods, that he would impose no conditions. Plekhanov defended
      himself, saying that he had been silent, not because he was laying down
      conditions, but because the question was clear as far as he was
      concerned. I urged the necessity for permitting polemics and the necessity
      for voting among ourselves. Plekhanov agreed to the latter, but added that
      voting, of course, was permissible on partial questions, but impossible on
      fundamental questions. I objected by saying that it would not always be
      easy to distinguish between fundamental and partial questions, and that it
      was precisely in drawing such distinctions that the co-editors would have
      to take a vote. Plekhanov was stubborn. He said that this was a matter of
      conscience, that the distinction between fundamental and partial questions
      was perfectly clear, and that there would

    

      be no occasion for taking a vote. And so we got stuck in this dispute as
      to whether voting should be permitted among the editors on the question of
      defining what were fundamental and what were partial questions, and we
      could make no progress. Plekhanov displayed all his dexterity, the
      brilliance of his examples, smiles, jests, and citations, which compelled
      us to laugh in spite of ourselves; but he evaded the question without
      definitely saying “no.” I became convinced that he positively could
      not concede the point; that he could not abandon his
      “individualism” and his “ultimatums,” since he would
      never agree to take a vote on such questions but would present ultimatums.
    

      That evening I departed without again meeting any of the members of the
      Emancipation of Labour group. We had agreed among ourselves not to relate
      what had passed to any one except our most intimate friends. We decided to
      keep up appearances and not give our opponents cause for
      triumph. Outwardly it was as though nothing had happened; the apparatus
      must continue to work as it had worked till then, but within a chord had
      broken, and instead of splendid personal relations, dry, business-like
      relations prevailed, with a constant reckoning according to the principle:
      si vis pacem, para

bellum.[8]


      It will be of interest, however, to mention a conversation I had that same
      evening with an intimate friend and adherent of Plekhanov, a member of the
      Sotsial-Demokrat group. I mentioned no word to him about what had
      occurred; I told him that, we had arranged to publish a magazine, that the
      articles had been decided on—it was time to set to work. I discussed
      with him the practical ways of arranging the work. He gave stress to the
      opinion that the old ones were absolutely incapable of doing editorial
      work. I discussed with him the “three variations” and asked
      him directly which in his opinion was the best. Without hesitation, he
      answered—the first (we to be the editors, they the contributors),
      but in all probability, he thought, the magazine would be Plekhanov’s and
      the newspaper ours.
    

      As the affair became more and more remote, we began to think of it more calmly,
      and became convinced that it was

    

      entirely unreasonable to give up the enterprise, that we had for the time
      being no ground for fearing to undertake the editorship (of the
      collection), but that indeed it was necessary for us to undertake
      it, for there was absolutely no other way of making the apparatus work
      properly, and of preventing the project from being ruined by the
      disruptive “propensities” of Plekhanov.
    

      By the time we arrived at

      N.,[17]
      on September 4 or 5, we had drawn up the plan of the formal
      relations between us (I had begun to write i1 en route, on the
      train). That plan made us the editors and them the contributors, with the
      right to vote on all editorial questions. It was decided to discuss this
      plan with Yegor (Martov), and then to submit it to them.
    

      Hopes were beginning to rise that the “Spark” would
      be rekindled.
    

 
Notes
 

[1]

 A play of words on the title of the newspaper Iskra meaning spark.—Ed. 

[2]

      Can contribute.—Ed.
    

[3]

      Holding himself to be right to the nth degree.—Ed.
    

[4]

      See p. 320 of this’ volume.—Ed.
    

[5]

      Finished.—Ed.
    

[6]

      Careerists.—Ed.
    

[7]

      If it’s war, then the way of war!—Ed.
    

[8]

      If you desire peace, prepare for war.—Ed.
    
 



[9]

      The split in the Union of Russian Social-Democrats Abroad, referred to in
      this passage, occurred at the Second Congress of the Union in April
      1900. At the First Congress of the R.S.D.L.P., the Union was recognised as
      the representative of the Party abroad; the majority of its members,
      however, adopted the “economist” position, on account of which
      the Emancipation of Labour group and their supporters left the Congress,
      broke off relations with the Union, and formed an independent organisation
      of Russian Social-Democrats abroad under the name of Russian Revolutionary
      Organisation Sotsial-Demokrat.
    



[10]

      By saying that he had been “ordered” not “to
      shoot” at P. B. Struve in 1895 (in this case he is hinting at
      A. N. Potresov), G. V. Plekhanov was trying to justify his conciliatory
      attitude towards the revisionist position of the “legal Marxists.”
      Lenin considered Plekhanov’s behaviour to be incorrect, because he not
      only failed to criticise the bourgeois-liberal views of Struve but took
      the latter under his protection.
    



[11]

      Lenin is apparently referring to Struve’s article, “Again on Free
      Will and Necessity,” published in 1897 in issue No.8 of the magazine
      Novoye Slovo (New Word). In this article

      Strove 

      declared
      himself openly against the Marxist theory of the proletarian
      revolution. On June 27 (July 9), 1899, Lenin wrote to Potresov: “One
      thing I do not understand—how could Kamensky (Plekhanov.—
      Ed.) leave unanswered the articles by Struve and Bulgakov against
      Engels in Novoye Slovo! Can you explain this to me?”
    



[12]

      This passage refers to Vademecum, a collection of articles and
      documents for the Rabocheye Dyelo Editorial Board (1900) in which
      Plekhanov published, among other documents, three private letters from
      Z. M. Kopelson of the

      Bond 

      and from an “economist” leader,
      Y. D. Kuskova.
    



[13]

      “Our third man” was L. Martov (Y. O. Zederbaum) who
      was in the South of Russia at the time Lenin and Potresov conducted their
      negotiations with the Emancipation of Labour group and who did not go
      abroad until March 1901.
    



[14]

Bobo—P. B. Struve.
    



[15]

Die Neue Zeit (New Times)—theoretical publication
      of German Social-Democracy. Appeared in Stuttgart from 1883 to
      1923. Several articles by Frederick Engels appeared in its columns between
      1885 and 1895. Engels frequently offered points of advice to the

   

      editors of Die Neue Zeit and severely criticised them for
      departing from Marxism. In the late 1890s, after Engels’ death, the
      journal, which expounded Kautskian views, made a practice of publishing
      articles by revisionists. During the First World War (1914—18) the
      publication adopted a Centrist position and actually supported the
      social-chauvinists.
    



[16]

      These were former members of the Union of Russian Social-Democrats Abroad
      who, after the split at the Second Congress of the Union, in April 1900,
      broke with the opportunist majority and united with the Emancipation of
      Labour group to form the Sotsial Demokrat group.
    



[17]

N.— the city of Nuremberg which Lenin visited on his way
      from Geneva to Munich after the conference between the Iskra and
      the Emancipation of Labour groups.
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 4

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Draft Agreement









Lenin: Draft Agreement







V. I.  

      Lenin
Draft Agreement




Written: Written early in September 1900 

Published:

      First published in 1940 in the magazine Proletarskaya Revolyutsiya, No. 3.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 4,

      page 350.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

      
• README



    

    

      1. In view of the solidarity in fundamental conceptions and the identity
      of practical aims of the Sotsial-Demokrat group abroad and the
      Russian group that publishes the collection Zarya and the
      newspaper Iskra, these two organisations conclude an alliance.
    

      2. The two groups will afford each other all-round support: firstly, in
      regard to literature. The Emancipation of Labour group will collaborate
      closely in editing the collection Zarya and the newspaper

Iskra[1]

;

      secondly, in delivering and distributing literature, in expanding and
      consolidating revolutionary connections, and in obtaining material
      resources.
    

      3. The Sotsial-Demokrat group and special Iskra agents
      will be the foreign representatives of the Iskra group.
    

      4. Letters and packages from abroad addressed to the Iskra
      group will be forwarded to the address of the Sotsial Demokrat
      group. In the event of any member of the Iskra group being
      abroad, all correspondence will be transmitted to him. If at any given
      moment there is no member of the Iskra group abroad, the
      Sotsial-Demokrat group and Iskra agents will take the
      duties upon themselves.
    

 
Notes
 

[1]

      The terms of this collaboration are laid down in a special

      agreement.[2]
    —Lenin
 



[2]

      This “special agreement” was apparently written
      later. The following document is now in the arc hives of the Institute of
      Marxism- Leninism, Central Committee of the C.P.S.U.; it is in an envelope
      bearing the inscription by N. K. Krupskaya: “Documents relating to
      the earliest period. Agreement on the publication of Zarya and
      Iskra:
    

      “1. The collection Zarya and the newspaper Iskra
      are published and edited by a group of Russian Social-Democrats, the
      Emancipation of Labour group participating in the editorial work.
    

      “2. All articles on matters of principle and those of special
      significance will be communicated to all members of the Emancipation of
      Labour group, if that is not made impossible by editorial and technical
      circumstances.
    

      “3. The members of the Emancipation of Labour group will vote on all
      editorial questions—personally, if they are present in the place
      where the editorial office is located, and by mail when articles are
      communicated to them.
    

      “4. In the event of differences of opinion between the editors and
      the Emancipation of Labour group, the editors undertake to publish in full
      the special opinion of the group or of each of its members individually.
    

      “5. Only point I of this agreement is to be published.

      October 6, 1900.”
    

      The document is typewritten, has no heading, and is unsigned.
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 4

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Declaration of the Editorial Board of Iskra









Lenin: Declaration of the Editorial Board of Iskra







V. I.  

      Lenin
Declaration of the Editorial Board of Iskra
In the Name of the Editorial Board




Written: Written in September 1900 

Published:

      First published in 1900 by Iskra as a separate leaflet.

      Published according to the text of the leaflet, 1900.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 4,

      pages 351-356.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

      
• README



    

    

      In undertaking the publication of a political newspaper, Iskra,
      we consider it necessary to say a few words concerning the objects for
      which we are striving and the understanding we have of our tasks.
    

      We are passing through an extremely important period in the history of the
      Russian working-class movement and Russian Social-Democracy. The past few
      years have been marked by an astonishingly rapid spread of
      Social-Democratic ideas among our intelligentsia, and meeting this trend
      in social ideas is an independent movement of the industrial proletariat,
      which is beginning to unite and struggle against its oppressors, and to
      strive eagerly towards socialism. Study circles of workers and
      Social-Democratic intellectuals are springing up everywhere, local
      agitation leaflets are being widely distributed, the demand for
      Social-Democratic literature is increasing and is far outstripping the
      supply, and intensified government persecution is powerless to restrain
      the movement. The prisons and places of exile are filled to
      overflowing. Hardly a month goes by without our hearing of socialists
      “caught in dragnets” in all parts of Russia, of the capture of
      underground couriers, of the confiscation of literature and
      printing-presses. But the movement is growing, it is spreading to ever
      wider regions, it is penetrating more and more deeply into the working
      class and is attracting public attention to an ever-increasing degree. The
      entire economic development of Russia and the history of social thought
      and of the revolutionary movement in Russia serve

    

      as a guarantee that the Social-Democratic working-class movement will grow
      and will, in the end, surmount all the obstacles that confront it.
    

      On the other hand, the principal feature of our movement, which has become
      particularly marked in recent times, is its state of disunity and its
      amateur character, if one may so express it. Local study circles spring up
      and function independently of one another and—what is particularly
      important—of circles that have functioned and still function
      in the same districts. Traditions are not established and
      continuity is not maintained; local publications fully reflect this
      disunity and the lack of contact with what Russian Social-Democracy has
      already achieved.
    

      Such a state of disunity is not in keeping with the demands posed by the
      movement in its present strength and breadth, and creates, in our opinion,
      a critical moment in its development. The need for consolidation and for a
      definite form and organisation is felt with irresistible force in the
      movement itself; yet among Social-Democrats active in the practical field
      this need for a transition to a higher form of the movement is not
      everywhere realised. On the contrary, among wide circles an ideological
      wavering is to be seen, an infatuation with the fashionable
      “criticism of Marxism” and with “Bernsteinism,” the
      spread of the views of the so-called “economist” trend, and
      what is inseparably connected with it—an effort to keep the movement
      at its lower level, to push into the background the task of forming a
      revolutionary party that heads the struggle of the entire people. It
      is a fact that such an ideological wavering is to be observed among
      Russian Social-Democrats; that narrow practicalism, detached from the
      theoretical clarification of the movement as a whole, threatens to divert
      the movement to a false path. No one who has direct knowledge of the state
      of affairs in the majority of our organisations has any doubt whatever on
      that score. Moreover, literary productions exist which confirm this. It is
      sufficient to mention the Credo, which has already called forth
      legitimate protest; the Separate Supplement to
      “Rabochaya Mysl” (September 1899), which brought out
      so markedly the trend that permeates the whole of Rabochaya
      Mysl; and, finally, the manifesto of the St. Petersburg
      Self-Emancipation of


    

      the Working Class

      group,[1]
      also drawn up in the spirit of “economism.” And completely
      untrue are the assertions of Rabocheye Dyelo to the effect
      that the Credo merely represents the opinions of individuals,
      that the trend represented by Rabochaya Mysl expresses merely the
      confusion of mind and the tactlessness of its editors, and not a special
      tendency in the progress of the Russian working-class movement.
    

      Simultaneously with this, the works of authors whom the reading public has
      hitherto, with more or less reason, regarded as prominent representatives
      of “legal” Marxism are increasingly revealing a change of
      views in a direction approximating that of bourgeois apologetics. As a
      result of all this, we have the confusion and anarchy which has enabled
      the ex-Marxist, or, more precisely, the ex-socialist, Bernstein, in
      recounting his successes, to declare, unchallenged, in the press that the
      majority of Social-Democrats active in Russia are his followers.
    

      We do not desire to exaggerate the gravity of the situation, but it would
      be immeasurably more harmful to close our eyes to it. For this reason we
      heartily welcome the decision of the Emancipation of Labour group to
      resume its literary activity and begin a systematic struggle against the
      attempts to distort and vulgarise Social-Democracy.
    

      The following practical conclusion is to be drawn from the foregoing: we
      Russian Social-Democrats must unite and direct all our efforts towards the
      formation of a strong party which must struggle under the single banner of
      revolutionary Social-Democracy. This is precisely the task laid down by
      the congress in 1898 at which the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party
      was formed, and which published its Manifesto.
    

      We regard ourselves as members of this. Party; we agree entirely with the
      fundamental ideas contained in the Manifesto and attach extreme
      importance to it as a public declaration of its aims. Consequently, we, as
      members of the Party, present the question of our immediate and direct
      tasks as follows: What plan of activity must we adopt to revive the Party
      on the firmest possible basis?
    

      The reply usually made to this question is that it is necessary to elect
      anew a central Party body and instruct it to

    

      resume the publication of the Party organ. But, in the period of confusion
      through which we are now passing, such a simple method is hardly
      expedient.
    

      To establish and consolidate the Party means to establish and consolidate
      unity among all Russian Social-Democrats, and, for the reasons indicated
      above, such unity can not be decreed, it cannot be brought about by a
      decision, say, of a meeting of representatives; it must be worked for. In
      the first place, it is necessary to work for solid ideological unity which
      should eliminate discordance and confusion that—let us be
      frank!—reign among Russian Social-Democrats at the present
      time. This ideological unity must be consolidated by a Party
      programme. Secondly, we must work to achieve an organisation especially
      for the purpose of establishing and maintaining contact among all the
      centres of the movement, of supplying complete and timely information
      about the movement, and of delivering our newspapers and periodicals
      regularly to all parts of Russia. Only when such an organisation has been
      founded, only when a Russian socialist post has been established, will the
      Party possess a sound foundation and become a real fact, and, therefore,
      a mighty political force. We intend to devote our efforts to the first
      half of this task, i.e., to creating a common literature, consistent in
      principle and capable of ideologically uniting revolutionary
      Social-Democracy, since we regard this as the pressing demand of the
      movement today and a necessary preliminary measure towards the resumption
      of Party activity.
    

      As we have said, the ideological unity of Russian Social-Democrats has
      still to be created, and to this end it is, in our opinion, necessary to
      have an open and all-embracing discussion of the fundamental questions of
      principle and tactics raised by the present-day “economists,”
      Bernsteinians, and “critics.” Before we can unite, and in order that
      we may unite, we must first of all draw firm and definite lines of
      demarcation. Otherwise, our unity will be purely fictitious, it will
      conceal the prevailing confusion and binder its radical elimination. It is
      understandable, therefore, that we do not intend to make our publication a
      mere storehouse of various views. On the contrary, we shall conduct
      it in the spirit of a strictly defined tendency. This
      tendency can

    

      be expressed by the word Marxism, and there is hardly need to add that we
      stand for the consistent development of the ideas of Marx and Engels and
      emphatically reject the equivocating, vague, and opportunist
      “corrections” for which Eduard Bernstein, P. Struve, and many
      others have set the fashion. But although we shall discuss all questions
      from our own definite point of view, we shall give space in our columns to
      polemics between comrades. Open polemics, conducted in full view of all
      Russian Social-Democrats and class-conscious workers, are necessary and
      desirable in order to clarify the depth of existing differences, in order
      to afford discussion of disputed questions from all angles, in order to
      combat the extremes into which representatives, not only of various views,
      but even of various localities, or various “specialities” of
      the revolutionary movement, inevitably fall. Indeed, as noted above, we
      regard one of the drawbacks of the present-day movement to be the absence
      of open polemics between avowedly differing views, the effort to conceal
      differences on fundamental questions.
    

      We shall not enumerate in detail all questions and points of
      subject-matter included in the programme of our publication, for this
      programme derives automatically from the general conception of what a
      political newspaper, published under present conditions, should be.
    

      We will exert our efforts to bring every Russian comrade to regard our
      publication as his own, to which all groups would communicate every kind
      of information concerning the movement, in which they would relate their
      experiences, express their views, indicate their needs for political
      literature, and voice their opinions concerning Social-Democratic
      editions: in a word, they would thereby share whatever contribution they
      make to the movement and whatever they draw from it. Only in this way will
      it be possible to establish a genuinely all-Russian Social-Democratic
      organ. Only such a publication will be capable of leading the movement on
      to the high road of political struggle. “Extend the bounds and
      broaden the content of our propagandist, agitational, and organisational
      activity”—these words of P. B. Axelrod must serve as a slogan
      defining the activities of Russian Social Democrats in the immediate
      future, and we adopt this slogan in the programme of our publication.
    
 

      We appeal not only to socialists and class-conscious workers, we also call
      upon all who are oppressed by the present political system; we place the
      columns of our publications at their disposal in order that they may
      expose all the abominations of the Russian autocracy.
    

      Those who regard Social-Democracy as an organisation serving exclusively
      the spontaneous struggle of the proletariat may be content with merely
      local agitation and working-class literature “pure and simple.” We
      do not understand Social-Democracy in this way; we regard it as a
      revolutionary party, inseparably connected with the working-class movement
      and directed against absolutism. Only when organised in such a party will
      the proletariat—the most revolutionary class in Russia
      today—be in a position to fulfil the historical task that confronts
      it—to unite under its banner all the democratic elements in the
      country and to crown the tenacious struggle in which so many generations
      have fallen with the final triumph over the hated regime.
    
 *     *  * 

      The size of the newspaper will range from one to two printed signatures.
    

      In view of the conditions under which the Russian under ground press has
      to work, there will be no regular date of publication.
    

      We have been promised contributions by a number of prominent
      representatives of international Social-Democracy, the close co-operation
      of the Emancipation of Labour group (G. V. Plekhanov, P. B. Axelrod, and
      V. I. Zasulich), and the support of several organisations of the Russian
      Social-Democratic Labour Party, as well as of separate groups of Russian
      Social-Democrats.
    

 
Notes
 
 



[1]

The Self-Emancipation of the Working Class group was a small
      circle of “economists” that came into being in St. Petersburg
      in the autumn of 1898 and existed for a few months only. The group issued
      a manifesto announcing its aims (printed in the magazine Nakanune
      [On the Eve], published in London), its rules, and several
      proclamations addressed to workers.
    

      Lenin criticised the views of this group in Chapter 2 of his book,
What Is to Be Done? (see present edition, Vol. 5).
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 4

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Preface to the Pamphlet, May Days in Kharkov









Lenin: Preface to the Pamphlet, May Days in Kharkov







V. I.  

      Lenin
Preface to the Pamphlet, May Days in Kharkov




Written: Written early in November 1900 

Published:

      Published in January 1901 in a pamphlet issued by Iskra.

      Published according to the text of the pamphlet.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 4,

      pages 357-365.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.
Other Formats:  
Text
• README



    

    

      The present pamphlet contains a description of the celebrated May Day
      demonstrations in Kharkov in 1900; it was drawn up by the Kharkov
      Committee of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party on the basis of
      descriptions sent in by the workers themselves. It was sent to us as a
      newspaper report, but we consider it necessary to publish it as a
      separate pamphlet because of its size, as well as because in this way it
      will be possible to secure wider distribution. In another six months, the
      Russian workers will celebrate the First of May of the first year of the
      new century, and it is time we set to work organising the celebrations in
      as large a number of centres as possible, and on a scale as imposing as
      possible. They must be imposing, not only in the numbers of participants,
      but in the organised character and the class-consciousness the
      participants will display, in their determination to launch a resolute
      struggle for the political liberation of the Russian people and,
      consequently, for a free opportunity for the class development of the
      proletariat and its open struggle for socialism. It is time to prepare for
      the forthcoming May Day celebrations, and one of the most important
      preparation measures must consist in learning what the Social-Democratic
      movement in Russia has already achieved, in examining the short comings of
      our movement in general and of the May Day movement in particular, in
      devising means to eliminate these shortcomings and achieve better results.
    

      May Day in Kharkov showed what a great political demonstration a
      working-class festival can become and

    

      what we lack to make these celebrations a really great all-Russian
      manifestation of the class-conscious proletariat. What made the May Day
      celebrations in Kharkov an event of outstanding importance? The
      large-scale participation of the workers in the strike, the huge mass
      meetings in the streets, the unfurling of red flags, the presentation of
      demands put forth in proclamations and the revolutionary character of
      these demands: the eight-hour day and political liberty. The legend that
      the Russian workers have not yet matured for the political struggle, that
      their principal concern should be the purely economic struggle, which they
      should only little by little and very slowly supplement with partial
      political agitation for partial political reforms and not for the struggle
      against the entire political system of Russia—that legend has been
      totally refuted by the Kharkov May Day celebrations. But here we want to
      draw attention to another aspect of the matter. Although the May Day
      celebrations in Kharkov have once more demonstrated the political
      capacities of the Russian workers, they have, at the same time, revealed
      what we lack for the full development of these capacities.
    

      The Kharkov Social-Democrats tried to prepare for the May Day celebrations
      by distributing pamphlets and leaflets in advance, and the workers drew up
      a plan for the general demonstration and for the speeches to be delivered
      in Konnaya Square. Why did the plan not succeed? The Kharkov comrades say
      because the “general staff” of the class-conscious socialist
      workers did not distribute its forces evenly, there having been many in
      one factory, and in another few; and, further, because the workers’ plan
      “was known to the authorities,” who, of course, took all steps to
      split the workers. The conclusion to be drawn is obvious: we lack
      organisation. The masses of the workers were roused and ready to
      follow the socialist leaders; but the “general staff” failed
      to organise a strong nucleus able to distribute properly all the available
      forces of class-conscious workers and so ensure the necessary secrecy that
      the drawn-up plans of action should remain unknown, not only to the
      authorities, but to all individuals outside the organisation. This
      organisation must be a revolutionary organisation. It must be
      composed of men and women who clearly understand the tasks of the
      Social-Democratic

    


    

      working-class movement and who have resolved to engage in a
      determined struggle against the present political system. It must combine
      within itself the socialist knowledge and revolutionary experience
      acquired from many decades of activity by the Russian revolutionary
      intelligentsia with the knowledge of working-class life and conditions and
      the ability to agitate among the masses and lead them which is
      characteristic of the advanced workers. It should be our primary concern
      not to set up an artificial partition between the intellectual and the
      worker, not to form a “purely workers’" organisation, but to strive,
      above all, to achieve the above-stated combination. We permit ourselves in
      this connection to quote the following words of G. Plekhanov:
    

      “A necessary condition for this activity [agitation] is the
      consolidation of the already existing revolutionary forces. Propaganda in
      the study circles can be conducted by men and women who have no mutual
      contact whatever with one another and who do not even suspect one
      another’s existence; it goes without saying that the lack of organisation
      always affects propaganda, too, but it does not make it
      impossible. However, in a period of great social turmoil, when the
      political atmosphere is charged with electricity, when now here and now
      there, from the most varied and unforeseen causes, outbreaks occur with
      increasing frequency, heralding the approaching revolutionary
      storm—in a word, when it is necessary either to agitate or remain in
      the rear, at such a time only organised revolutionary forces can
      seriously influence the progress of events. The individual then becomes
      powerless; the revolutionary cause can then be carried forward only on the
      shoulders of units of a higher order—by revolutionary
      organisations” (G. Plekhanov, The Tasks of the Socialists
      in the Fight Against the Famine, p. 83).
    

      Precisely such a period is approaching in the history of the Russian
      working-class movement, a period of turmoil and of outbreaks precipitated
      by the most varied causes, and if we do not wish to remain “in the
      rear,” we must direct all our efforts towards establishing an all-Russian
      organisation capable of guiding all the separate outbreaks and ensuring in
      this way that the approaching storm (to which the Kharkov worker also
      refers at the end of the pamphlet) is not an elemental outburst, but a
      conscious movement of the proletariat

    

      standing at the head of the entire people in revolt against the
      autocratic government.
    

      In addition to manifesting the insufficient unity and preparedness of our
      revolutionary organisations, the Kharkov May Day celebrations also furnish
      another and no less important practical indication. “The May Day
      festival and demonstration,” we read in the pamphlet, “were
      unexpectedly interconnected with various practical demands presented
      without relevant preparation and, consequently, in general doomed to
      failure.” Let us take, for example, the demands put forward by the
      railway-workshop employees. Of the fourteen demands, eleven have to do
      with minor improvements, which can quite easily be achieved even under the
      present political system—wage increases, reduction of hours, removal
      of abuses. Included among these demands, as though identical with them,
      are the following three: 4) introduction of an eight-hour day, 7)
      guarantee against victimisation of workers after the May First events, and
      10) establishment of a joint committee of workers and employers for
      settling disputes between the two parties. The first of these demands
      (point 4) is a general demand advanced by the world proletariat; the fact
      that this demand was put forward seems to indicate that the advanced
      workers of Kharkov realise their solidarity with the world socialist
      working-class movement. But precisely for this reason it should not have
      been included among minor demands like better treatment by foremen, or a
      ten per cent increase in wages. Demands for wage increases and better
      treatment can (and should) be presented by the workers to their employers
      in each separate trade; these are trade demands, put forward by separate
      categories of workers. The demand for an eight-hour day, however, is the
      demand of the whole proletariat, presented, not to individual employers,
      but to the state authorities as the representative of the entire
      present-day social and political system, to the capitalist class as a
      whole, the owners of all the means of production. The demand for an
      eight-hour day has assumed special significance. It is a declaration of
      solidarity with the international socialist movement. We need to make the
      workers understand this difference, so that they do not reduce the demand
      for the eight-hour day to the level of demands like free railway tickets,
      or the dismissal of a

    

      watchman. Throughout the year the workers, first in one place and then in
      another, continuously present a variety of partial demands to their
      employers and fight for their achievement. In assisting the workers in
      this struggle, socialists must always explain its connection with the
      proletarian struggle for emancipation in all countries. And the First of
      May must be the day on which the workers solemnly declare that they
      realise this connection and resolutely join in the struggle.
    

      Let us take the tenth demand which calls for the establishment of a
      committee for the settlement of disputes. Such a committee composed of
      representatives of the workers and the employers could, of course, be very
      useful, but only if the elections were absolutely free and the elected
      representatives enjoyed complete independence. What purpose would such a
      committee serve, if the workers, who wage a struggle against the election
      of creatures of the management or who strongly attack the management and
      expose its tyranny, end by being discharged?  Such workers would not only
      be discharged, they would be arrested. Consequently, for such a committee
      to be of service to the workers, the delegates must, first, be absolutely
      independent of the factory management; this can be achieved only when
      there are free labour unions embracing many factories, unions that have
      their own resources and are prepared to protect their delegates. Such a
      committee can be useful only if many factories, if possible all the
      factories in the given trade, are organised. Secondly, it is necessary to
      secure guarantees of the inviolability of the person of the workers, i.e.,
      that they will not be arrested arbitrarily by the police or the
      gendarmerie. This demand to guarantee the workers against victimisation
      was put forward (point 7). But from whom can the workers demand guarantees
      of the inviolability of the person and freedom of association (which, as
      we have seen, is a necessary condition for the success of the committees)?
      Only from the state authorities, because the absence of a guarantee of
      inviolability of the person and freedom of association is due to the
      fundamental laws of the Russian state. Mere than that, it is due to the
      very form of government in Russia. The form of government in Russia is
      that of an absolute monarchy. The tsar is an autocrat, he alone decrees
      the laws and appoints all the higher

    

      officials without any participation of the people, without participation
      of the people’s representatives. Under such a state system there can be no
      inviolability of the person; citizens’ associations, and particularly
      working-class associations, cannot be free. For that reason, it is
      senseless to demand guarantees of the inviolability of the person (and
      freedom of association) from an autocratic government; for such a demand
      is synonymous with demanding political rights for the people, and an
      autocratic government is termed autocratic precisely because it implies
      negation of political rights for the people. It will be possible to obtain
      a guarantee of the inviolability of the person (and freedom of
      association) only when representatives of the people take part in
      legislation and in the entire administration of the state. So long as a
      body of people’s representatives does not exist, the autocratic
      government, upon making certain petty concessions to the workers, will
      always take away with one hand what it gives with the other. The May Day
      celebrations in Kharkov were another vivid proof that this is so—the
      governor con ceded to the demands of the working masses and released those
      who had been arrested, but within a day or two, on orders’ from
      St. Petersburg, scores of workers were again rounded up. The gubernia and
      factory officials “guarantee” immunity to delegates, while the
      gendarmes seize them and fling them into prison in solitary confinement or
      banish them from the city! Of what use are such guarantees to the people?
    

      Hence, the workers must demand from the tsar the con vocation of an
      assembly of the representatives of the people, the convocation of a Zemsky
      Sobor. The manifesto distributed in Kharkov on the eve of the First of May
      this year raised this demand, and we have seen that a section of the
      advanced workers fully appreciated its significance. We must make sure
      that all advanced workers understand clearly the necessity for
      this demand and spread it, not only among the masses of the workers, but
      among all strata of the people who come into contact with the workers and
      who eagerly desire to know what the socialists and the “urban”
      workers are fighting for. This year when a factory inspector asked a group
      of workers precisely what they wanted, only one voice shouted, “A
      constitution!”; and this voice sounded so isolated

    

      that the correspondent reported somewhat mockingly:

      “One proletarian blurted out....” Another correspondent put
      it, “Under the circumstances,” this reply was
      “semi-comical” (see Labour Movement in Kharkov,
      Report of the Kharkov Committee of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour
      Party, published by Rabocheye Dyelo, Geneva, September 1900,
      p. 14). As a matter of fact, there was nothing comical in the reply at
      all. What may have seemed comical was the incongruity between the demand
      of this lone voice for a change in the whole state system and the demands
      for a half-hour reduction in the working day and for payment of wages
      during working hours. There is, however, an indubitable connection between
      these demands and the demand for a constitution; and if we can get the
      masses to understand this connection (and we undoubtedly will), then the
      cry “A constitution!” will not be an isolated one, but will come
      from the throats of thousands and hundreds of thousands, when it will no
      longer be comical, but menacing. It is related that a certain person
      driving through the streets of Kharkov during the May Day celebrations
      asked the cabby what the workers wanted, and he replied: “They want
      an eight-hour day and their own newspaper.”  That cabby understood that
      the workers were no longer satisfied with mere doles, but that they wanted
      to be free men, that they wanted to be able to express their needs freely
      and openly and to fight for them. But that reply did not yet reveal the
      consciousness that the workers are fighting for the liberty of the whole
      people and for their right to take part in the administration of the
      state. When the demand that the tsar convene an assembly of people’s
      representatives is repeated with full consciousness and indomitable
      determination by the working masses in all industrial cities and factory
      districts in Russia; when the workers have reached the stage at which the
      entire urban population, and all the rural people who come into the towns,
      understand what the socialists want and what the workers are fighting for,
      then the great day of the people’s liberation from police tyranny will not
      be far off!
    

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 4

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Urgent Tasks of Our Movement









Lenin: The Urgent Tasks of Our Movement







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Urgent Tasks of Our Movement




Written: Written early in November 1900 

Published:

      Published in December 1900 in Iskra, No. 1.

      Published according to the Iskra text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 4,

      pages 366-371.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

      
• README



    

    

      Russian Social-Democracy has repeatedly declared the immediate political
      task of a Russian working-class party to be the overthrow of the
      autocracy, the achievement of political liberty. This was enunciated over
      fifteen years ago by the representatives of Russian
      Social-Democracy— the members of the Emancipation of Labour
      group. It was affirmed two and a half years ago by the representatives of
      the Russian Social-Democratic organisations that, in the spring of 1898,
      founded the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party. Despite these repeated
      declarations, however, the question of the political tasks of
      Social-Democracy in Russia is prominent again today. Many representatives
      of our movement express doubt as to the correctness of the above-mentioned
      solution of the question. It is claimed that the economic struggle is of
      predominant importance; the political tasks of the proletariat are pushed
      into the background, narrowed down, and restricted, and it is even said
      that to speak of forming an independent working-class party in Russia is
      merely to repeat somebody else’s words, that the workers should carry on
      only the economic struggle and leave politics to the intelligentsia in
      alliance with the liberals. The latest profession of the new faith (the
      notorious Credo) amounts to a declaration that the Russian
      proletariat has not yet come of age and to a complete rejection of the
      Social-Democratic programme. Rabochaya Mysl (particularly in its
      Separate Supplement) takes practically the same attitude. Russian
      Social-Democracy is passing through a period of vacillation and doubt
      bordering


    

      on self-negation. On the one hand, the working-class movement is being
      sundered from socialism, the workers are being helped to carry on the
      economic struggle, but nothing, or next to nothing, is done to explain to
      them the socialist aims and the political tasks of the movement as a
      whole. On the other hand, socialism is being sundered from the labour
      movement; Russian socialists are again beginning to talk more and more
      about the struggle against the government having to be carried on entirely
      by the intelligentsia because the workers confine themselves to the
      economic struggle.
    

      In our opinion the ground has been prepared for this sad state of affairs
      by three circumstances. First, in their early activity, Russian
      Social-Democrats restricted them selves merely to work in propaganda
      circles. When we took up agitation among the masses we were not always
      able to restrain ourselves from going to the other extreme. Secondly, in
      our early activity we often had to struggle for our right to existence
      against the Narodnaya Volya adherents, who understood by
      “politics” an activity isolated from the working-class
      movement and who reduced politics purely to conspiratorial struggle. In
      rejecting this sort of politics, the Social-Democrats went to the extreme
      of pushing politics entirely into the background. Thirdly, working in the
      isolation of small local workers’ circles, the Social-Democrats did not
      devote sufficient attention to the necessity of organising a revolutionary
      party which would combine all the activities of the local groups and make
      it possible to organise the revolutionary work on correct lines. The
      predominance of isolated work is naturally connected with the predominance
      of the economic struggle.
    

      These circumstances resulted in concentration on one side of the movement
      only. The “economist” trend (that is, if we can speak of it as
      a “trend”) has attempted to elevate this narrowness to the rank of a
      special theory and has tried to utilise for this purpose the fashionable
      Bernsteinism and the fashionable “criticism of Marxism,” which
      peddles old bourgeois ideas under a new label. These attempts alone have
      given rise to the danger of a weakening of connection between the Russian
      working-class movement and Russian Social-Democracy, the vanguard in the
      struggle for

    

      political liberty. The most urgent task of our movement is to strengthen
      this connection.
    

      Social-Democracy is the combination of the working-class movement and
      socialism. Its task is not to serve the working-class movement passively
      at each of its separate stages, but to represent the interests of the
      movement as a whole, to point out to this movement its ultimate aim and
      its political tasks, and to safeguard its political and ideological
      independence. Isolated from Social-Democracy, the working-class movement
      becomes petty and inevitably be comes bourgeois. In waging only the
      economic struggle, the working class loses its political independence; it
      becomes the tail of other parties and betrays the great principle:

      “The emancipation of the working classes must be conquered by the working
      classes

      themselves.”[1]
      In every country there has been a period in which the working-class
      movement existed apart from socialism, each going its own way; and in
      every country this isolation has weakened both socialism and the
      working-class movement. Only the fusion of socialism with the
      working-class movement has in all countries created a durable basis for
      both. But in every country this combination of socialism and the
      working-class movement was evolved historically, in unique ways, in
      accordance with the prevailing conditions of time and place. In Russia,
      the necessity for combining socialism and the working-class movement was
      in theory long ago proclaimed, but it is only now being carried into
      practice. It is a very difficult process and there is, therefore, nothing
      surprising in the fact that it is accompanied by vacillations and doubts.
    

      What lesson can be learned from the past?
    

      The entire history of Russian socialism has led to the condition in which
      the most urgent task is the struggle against the autocratic government and
      the achievement of political liberty. Our socialist movement concentrated
      itself, so to speak, upon the struggle against the autocracy. On the other
      hand, history has shown that the isolation of socialist thought from the
      vanguard of the working classes is greater in Russia than in other
      countries, and that if this state of affairs continues, the revolutionary
      movement in Russia is doomed to impotence. From this condition emerges the
      task which the Russian Social-Democracy is

    

      called upon to fulfil—to imbue the masses of the proletariat with
      the ideas of socialism and political consciousness, and to organise a
      revolutionary party inseparably connected with the spontaneous
      working-class movement. Russian Social-Democracy has done much in this
      direction, but much more still remains to be done. With the growth of the
      movement, the field of activity for Social-Democrats becomes wider; the
      work becomes more varied, and an increasing number of activists in the
      movement will concentrate their efforts upon the fulfilment of various
      special tasks which the daily needs of propaganda and agitation bring to
      the fore. This phenomenon is quite natural and is inevitable, but it
      causes us to be particularly concerned with preventing these special
      activities and methods of struggle from be coming ends in themselves and
      with preventing preparatory work from being regarded as the main and sole
      activity.
    

      Our principal and fundamental task is to facilitate the political
      development and the political organisation of the working class. Those who
      push this task into the back ground, who refuse to subordinate to it all
      the special tasks and particular methods of struggle, are following a
      false path and causing serious harm to the movement. And it is being
      pushed into the background, firstly, by those who call upon
      revolutionaries to employ only the forces of isolated conspiratorial
      circles cut off from the working-class movement in the struggle against
      the government. It is being pushed into the background, secondly, by those
      who restrict the content and scope of political propaganda, agitation, and
      organisation; who think it fit and proper to treat the workers to
      “politics” only at exceptional moments in their lives, only on
      festive occasions; who too solicitously substitute demands for partial
      concessions from the autocracy for the political struggle against the
      autocracy; and who do not go to sufficient lengths to ensure that these
      demands for partial concessions are raised to the status of a systematic,
      implacable struggle of a revolutionary, working-class party against the
      autocracy.
    

      “Organise!” Rabochaya Mysl keeps repeating to the workers in
      all keys, and all the adherents of the “economist” trend echo
      the cry. We, of course, wholly endorse this

      appeal, but we will not fail to add: organise, but not only in mutual
      benefit societies, strike funds, and workers’ circles; organise also in a
      political party; organise for the determined struggle against the
      autocratic government and against the whole of capitalist society. Without
      such organisation the proletariat will never rise to the class- conscious
      struggle; without such organisation the working-class movement is doomed
      to impotency. With the aid of nothing but funds and study circles and
      mutual benefit societies the working class will never be able to fulfil
      its great historical mission—to emancipate itself and the whole of
      the Russian people from political and economic slavery. Not a single class
      in history has achieved power without producing its political leaders, its
      prominent representatives able to organise a movement and lead it. And the
      Russian working class has already shown that it can produce such men and
      women. The struggle which has developed so widely during the past five or
      six years has revealed the great potential revolutionary power of the
      working class; it has shown that the most ruthless government persecution
      does not diminish, but, on the contrary, increases the number of workers
      who strive towards socialism, towards political consciousness, and towards
      the political struggle. The congress which our comrades held in 1898
      correctly defined our tasks and did not merely repeat other people’s
      words, did not merely express the enthusiasm of
      “intellectuals.”... We must set to work resolutely to fulfil these
      tasks, placing the question of the Party’s programme, organisation, and
      tactics on the order of the day. We have already set forth our views on
      the fundamental postulates of our programme, and, of course, this is not
      the place to develop them in detail. We propose to devote a series of
      articles in forthcoming issues to questions of organisation, which are
      among the most burning problems confronting us. In this respect we lag
      considerably behind the old workers in the Russian revolutionary
      movement. We must frankly admit this defect and exert all our efforts to
      devise methods of greater secrecy in our work, to propagate systematically
      the proper methods of work, the proper methods of deluding the gendarmes
      and of evading the snares of the police. We must train people who will
      devote the whole of

    

      their lives, not only their spare evenings, to the revolution; we must
      build up an organisation large enough to permit the introduction of a
      strict division of labour in the various forms of our work. Finally, with
      regard to questions of tactics, we shall confine ourselves to the
      following: Social-Democracy does not tie its hands, it does not restrict
      its activities to some one preconceived plan or method of political
      struggle; it recognises all methods of struggle, provided they correspond
      to the forces at the disposal of the Party and facilitate the achievement
      of the best results possible under the given conditions. If we have a
      strongly organised party, a single strike may turn into a political
      demonstration, into a political victory over the government. If we have a
      strongly organised party, a re volt in a single locality may grow into a
      victorious revolution. We must bear in mind that the struggles with the
      government for partial demands and the gain of certain concessions are
      merely light skirmishes with the enemy, en counters between outposts,
      whereas the decisive battle is still to come. Before us, in all its
      strength, towers the enemy fortress which is raining shot and shell upon
      us, mowing down our best fighters. We must capture this fortress, and we
      will capture it, if we unite all the forces of the awakening proletariat
      with all the forces of the Russian revolutionaries into one party which
      will attract all that is vital and’ honest in Russia. Only then will the
      great prophecy of the Russian worker-revolutionary, Pyotr Alexeyev, be
      fulfilled: “The muscular arm of the working mil lions will be
      lifted, and the yoke of despotism, guarded by the soldiers’ bayonets, will
      be smashed to

      atoms!”[2]


 

Notes
 
 



[1]

      See Note 125.
    



[2]

Pyotr Alexeyev—a worker-revolutionary in the seventies of
      the last century whose speech, made before a tsarist court on March 10
      (22), 1877, in St. Petersburg, was first printed in London in the
      irregularly appearing collection Vperyod!
      (Forward!). The speech was afterwards repeatedly published
      illegally and was very popular among Russian workers.
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 4

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The War in China









Lenin: The War in China







V. I.  

      Lenin
The War in China




Published:
Iskra, No. 1, December 1900.

      Published according to the Iskra text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 4,

      pages 372-377.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

      
• README



    

    

      Russia is bringing her war with China to a close: a number of military
      districts have been mobilised, hundreds of millions of rubles have been
      spent, tens of thousands of troops have been dispatched to China, a number
      of battles have been fought and a number of victories won—true, not
      so much over regular enemy troops, as over Chinese insurgents and,
      particularly, over the unarmed Chinese populace, who were drowned or
      killed, with no holding back from the slaughter of women and children, not
      to speak of the looting of palaces, homes, and shops. The Russian
      Government, together with the press that kowtows to it, is celebrating a
      victory and rejoicing over the fresh exploits of the gallant soldiery,
      rejoicing at the victory of European culture over Chinese barbarism and
      over the fresh successes of Russia’s “civilising mission” in
      the Far East.
    

      But the voices of the class-conscious workers, of the advanced
      representatives of the many millions of the working people, are not heard
      amid this rejoicing. And yet, it is the working people who bear the brunt
      of the victorious new campaigns, it is working people who are sent to the
      other end of the world, from whom increased taxes are extorted to cover
      the millions expended. Let us, therefore, see: What attitude should the
      socialists adopt towards this war? In whose interests is it being fought?
      What is the real nature of the policy now being pursued by the Russian
      Government?
    

      Our government asserts first of all that it is not waging war against China;
      that it is merely suppressing a

 

      rebellion, pacifying rebels; that it is helping the lawful government of
      China to re-establish law and order. True, war has not been declared, but
      this does not change the situation a bit, because war is being waged
      nonetheless. What made the Chinese attack Europeans, what caused the
      rebellion which the British, French, Germans, Russians, Japanese, etc.,
      are so zealously crushing?  “The hostility of the yellow race
      towards the white race,” “the Chinese hatred for European culture
      and

      civilisation”— answer 

      the supporters of the war. Yes! It is true the Chinese hate the Europeans,
      but which Europeans do they hate, and why?  The Chinese do not hate the
      European peoples, they have never had any quarrel with them—they
      hate the European capitalists and the European governments obedient to
      them. How can the Chinese not hate those who have come to China solely for
      the sake of gain; who have utilised their vaunted civilisation solely for
      the purpose of deception, plunder, and violence; who have waged wars
      against China in order to win the right to trade in opium with which to
      drug the people (the war of England and France with China in 1856); and
      who hypocritically carried their policy of plunder under the guise of
      spreading Christianity? The bourgeois governments of Europe have long been
      conducting this policy of plunder with respect to China, and now they have
      been joined by the autocratic Russian Government. This policy of plunder
      is usually called a colonial policy. Every country in which capitalist
      industry develops rapidly has very soon to seek colonies, i.e., countries
      in which industry is weakly developed, in which a more or less patriarchal
      way of life still prevails, and which can serve as a market for
      manufactured goods and a source of high profits. For the sake of the
      profit of a handful of capitalists, the bourgeois governments have waged
      endless wars, have sent regiments to die in unhealthy tropical countries,
      have squandered millions of money extracted from the people, and have
      driven the peoples in the colonies to desperate revolts or to death from
      starvation. We need only recall the rebellion of the native peoples
      against the British in

      India[1]
      and the famine that prevailed there, or think of the war the English are
      now waging against the Boers.
    
 

      And now the European capitalists have placed their rapacious paws upon
      China, and almost the first to do so was the Russian Government, which now
      so loudly proclaims its “disinterestedness.” It
      “disinterestedly” took Port Arthur away from China and began
      to build a railway to Manchuria under the protection of Russian
      troops. One after another the European governments began feverishly to
      loot, or, as they put it, to “rent,” Chinese territory, giving good
      grounds for the talk of the partition of China. If we are to call things
      by their right names, we must say that the European governments (the
      Russian Government among the very first) have already started to partition
      China. However, they have not begun this partitioning openly, but
      stealthily, like thieves. They began to rob China as ghouls rob corpses,
      and when the seeming corpse attempted to resist, they flung themselves
      upon it like savage beasts, burning down whole villages, shooting,
      bayonetting, and drowning in the Amur River unarmed inhabitants, their
      wives, and their children. And all these Christian exploits are
      accompanied by howls against the Chinese barbarians who dared to raise
      their hands against the civilised Europeans. The occupation of Niuchuang
      and the moving of Russian troops into Manchuria are temporary measures,
      declares the autocratic Russian Government in its circular note of August
      12, 1900 addressed to the Powers; these measures “are called forth
      exclusively by the necessity to repel the aggressive operations of Chinese
      rebels”; they “cannot in the least be regarded as evidence of
      any selfish plans, which are totally alien to the policy of the Imperial
      Government.”
    

      Poor Imperial Government! So Christianly unselfish, and yet so unjustly
      maligned! Several years ago it unselfishly seized Port Arthur, and now it
      is unselfishly seizing Manchuria; it has unselfishly flooded the frontier
      provinces of China with hordes of contractors, engineers, and officers,
      who, by their conduct, have roused to indignation even the Chinese, known
      for their docility. The Chinese workers employed in the construction of
      the Chinese railway had to exist on a wage of ten kopeks a day—is
      this not unselfish on Russia’s part?
    
 

      How is our government’s senseless policy in China to be explained? Who
      benefits by it? The benefit goes to a handful of capitalist magnates who
      carry on trade with China, to a handful of factory owners who manufacture
      goods for the Asian market, to a handful of contractors who are now
      piling up huge profits on urgent war orders (factories producing war
      equipment, supplies for the troops, etc., are now operating at full
      capacity and are engaging hundreds of new workers). This policy is of
      benefit to a handful of nobles who occupy high posts in the civil and
      military services. They need adventurous policies, for these provide them
      with opportunities for promotion, for making a career and gaining fame by
      their “exploits.” In the interests of this handful of capitalists
      and bureaucratic scoundrels, our government unhesitatingly sacrifices the
      interests of the entire people. And in this case, as always, the
      autocratic tsarist government has proved itself to be a government of
      irresponsible bureaucrats servilely cringing before the capitalist
      magnates and nobles.
    

      What benefits do the Russian working class and the labouring people
      generally obtain from the conquests in China? Thousands of ruined
      families, whose breadwinners have been sent to the war; an enormous
      increase in the national debt and the national expenditure; mounting
      taxation; greater power for the capitalists, the exploiters of the
      workers; worse conditions for the workers; still greater mortality among
      the peasantry; famine in Siberia—this is what the Chinese war
      promises and is already bringing. The entire Russian press, all the
      newspapers and periodicals are kept in a state of bondage; they dare not
      print anything without permission of the government officials. This is the
      reason for the lack of precise information as to what the Chinese war is
      costing the people; but there is no doubt that it requires the expenditure
      of many hundreds of millions of rubles. It has come to our
      knowledge that the government, by an unpublished decree, handed out the
      tidy sum of a hundred and fifty million rubles for the purpose of waging
      the war. In addition to this, current expenditures on the war absorb
      one million rubles every three or four days, and these terrific
      sums are

    

      being squandered by a government which, haggling over every kopek, has
      steadily cut down grants to the famine- stricken peasantry; which can find
      no money for the people’s education; which, like any kulak, sweats the
      workers in the government factories, sweats the lower employees in the
      post offices, etc.!
    

      Minister of Finance Witte declared that on January 1, 1900, there were two
      hundred and fifty million rubles available in the treasury. Now this money
      is gone, it has been spent on the war. The government is seeking loans, is
      increasing taxation, is refusing necessary expenditures because of the
      lack of money, and is putting a stop to the building of railways. The
      tsarist government is threatened with bankruptcy, and yet it is plunging
      into a policy of conquest—a policy which not only demands the
      expenditure of enormous sums of money, but threatens to plunge us into
      still more dangerous wars. The European states that have flung themselves
      upon China are already beginning to quarrel over the division of the
      booty, and no one can say how this quarrel will end.
    

      But the policy of the tsarist government in China is not only a mockery of
      the interests of the people—its aim is to corrupt the political
      consciousness of the masses. Governments that maintain themselves in power
      only by means of the bayonet, that have constantly to restrain or
      suppress the indignation of the people, have long realised the truism that
      popular discontent can never be removed and that it is necessary to divert
      the discontent from the government to some other object. For example,
      hostility is being stirred up against the Jews; the gutter press carries
      on Jew-baiting campaigns, as if the Jewish workers do not suffer in
      exactly the same way as the Russian workers from the oppression of capital
      and the police government. At the present time, the press is conducting a
      campaign against the Chinese; it is howling about the savage yellow race
      and its hostility towards civilisation, about Russia’s tasks of
      enlightenment, about the enthusiasm with which the Russian soldiers go
      into battle, etc., etc. Journalists who crawl on their bellies before the
      government and the money-bags are straining every nerve to rouse the
      hatred of the people against China. But the

 

      Chinese people have at no time and in no way oppressed the Russian
      people. The Chinese people suffer from the same evils as those from
      which the Russian people suffer—they suffer from an Asiatic
      government that squeezes taxes from the starving peasantry and that
      suppresses every aspiration towards liberty by military force; they
      suffer from the oppression of capital, which has penetrated into the
      Middle Kingdom.
    

      The Russian working class is beginning to move out of the state of
      political oppression and ignorance in which the masses of the people are
      still submerged. Hence, the duty of all class-conscious workers is to rise
      with all their might against those who are stirring up national hatred and
      diverting the attention of the working people from their real enemies. The
      policy of the tsarist government in China is a criminal policy which is
      impoverishing, corrupting, and oppressing the people more than ever. The
      tsarist government not only keeps our people in slavery but sends them to
      pacify other peoples who rebel against their slavery (as was the case in
      1849 when Russian troops suppressed the revolution in Hungary). It not
      only helps the Russian capitalists to exploit the Russian workers, whose
      hands it ties to hold them back from combining and defending themselves,
      but it also sends soldiers to plunder other peoples in the interests of a
      handful of rich men and nobles. There is only one way in which the new
      burden the war is thrusting upon the working people can be removed, and
      that is the convening of an assembly of representatives of the people,
      which would put an end to the autocracy of the government and compel it to
      have regard for interests other than those solely of a gang of courtiers.
    

 

Notes
 
 



[1]

      The reference is to the uprising for national liberation that began in
      India in 1857. The insurrection was suppressed by British troops in 1859.
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 4

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Split in the Union of Russian Social-Democrats Abroad









Lenin: The Split in the Union of Russian Social-Democrats Abroad







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Split in the Union of Russian Social-Democrats Abroad




Written: Written not later than December 8, 1900 

Published:

      Published in December 1900 in Iskra, No. 1.

      Published according to the Iskra text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 4,

      pages 378-379.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

      
• README



    

    

      In the spring of this year, there took place in Switzerland a conference
      of the members of the Union of Russian Social-Democrats Abroad which
      resulted in a split. The minority, led by the Emancipation of Labour
      group, which had found ed the Union Abroad and which until the autumn of
      1898 had edited the Union publications, formed a separate organisation
      under the name of the Russian Revolutionary Organisation
      Sotsial-Demokrat. The majority, including the Editorial Board of
      Rabocheye Dyelo, continues to call itself the Union. The congress
      of Russian Social-Democrats in the spring of 1898, which formed the
      Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party, recognised the Union as the
      representative of our Party abroad. How must we regard the question of
      representation now that the Union has split? We shall not go into detail
      concerning the causes of the split; we shall observe merely that the
      widespread and serious accusation that Plekhanov has seized the Union’s
      printing-press is not true. In reality, the manager of the printing-press
      had refused to turn it over entirely to only one part of the split
      Union, and the two parties soon divided the printing establishment between
      them. The most important thing, from our point of view, is the fact that
      Rabocheye Dyelo was in the wrong in this controversy; it
      erroneously denied the existence of an “economist” trend; it
      advocated the wrong tactics of ignoring the extremism of this trend and of
      refraining from combating it openly.
    

      For this reason, while not denying the service which Rabocheye Dyelo
      has rendered in publishing literature and

    

      organising its distribution, we refuse to recognise either section of the
      split organisation as the representative of our Party abroad. This
      question must remain open until our next Party congress. The official
      representatives of Russian Social-Democracy abroad at the present time are
      the Russian members of the permanent international Committee set up in
      Paris by the International Socialist Congress in the autumn of this

      year.[1]
      Russia has two representatives on this Committee:
      G. V. Plekhanov and B. Krichevsky (one of the editors of Rabocheye
      Dyelo). Until the two groups of Russian Social-Democracy become
      reconciled or come to an agreement, we intend to conduct all our business
      pertaining to the representation of Russia with G. V. Plekhanov. Finally,
      we must express our opinion on the question of whom we desire to see as
      the Russian secretary of the permanent international Committee. At the
      present time, when under the cloak of the “criticism of Marxism,”
      attempts are being made to corrupt Social-Democracy by bourgeois ideology
      and by a meek and mild policy towards an enemy armed to the teeth (the
      bourgeois governments), it is especially necessary to have at this
      responsible post a man able to stand against the tide and to speak with
      influence against ideological wavering. For this reason, as well as for
      those stated above, we cast our vote for G. V. Plekhanov.
    

 
Notes
 
 



[1]

The Fifth International Socialist Congress of the Second
International was held from September 10 to September 14 (23-27,
New Style), 1900, in Paris. The Russian delegation consisted of 23
members. Among its other decisions the Congress acted to establish a
standing International Socialist Bureau composed of representatives of
the socialist parties of all countries, its secretariat to be in
Brussels.
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 4

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Note of December 29, 1900









Lenin: Note of December 29, 1900







V. I.  

      Lenin
Note of December 29, 1900




Published:

      First published in 1924 in Lenin Miscellany I.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 4,

      pages 380-382.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.
Other Formats:  
Text
• README



    

    

      29. XII. 1900. Sunday, 2 a. m.
    

      I should like to set down my impressions of today’s talks with the
      “twin.”  It was a remarkable meeting, “historic” in a
      way (Arsenyev, Velika, the

      twin+wife[4]+myself)—at
      least it was historic as far as my life is concerned; it summed up, if not
      a whole epoch, at least a page in a life history, and it determined my
      conduct and my life’s path for a long time to come.
    

      As the case was first stated by Arsenyev, I understood that the twin was
      coming over to us and wished to take the first steps, but the very
      opposite turned out to be the case. In all probability this strange error
      originated from the fact that Arsenyev keenly desired what the twin was
      “tempting” us with, viz., political material, correspondence,
      etc. “The wish is father to the thought,” and Arsenyev believed in
      the possibility of what the twin was tempting him with; he wished to
      believe in the sincerity of the twin, and in the possibility of a decent
      modus vivendi with him.
    

      This very meeting utterly and irrevocably destroyed such a belief. The
      twin revealed himself in a totally new light, as a
      “politician” of the purest water, a politician in the worst
      sense of the word, an old fox, and a brazen huckster. He arrived
      completely convinced of our impotence, as Arsenyev himself
      described the results of our negotiations, and this formulation was
      entirely correct. Convinced of our impotence, the twin arrived for the
      purpose of laying down conditions of surrender, which be did in
      an exceedingly clever manner, without uttering a single impolite word,

    

      yet without being able to conceal the coarse haggling nature of the common
      liberal that lay hidden beneath the dapper, cultured exterior of this
      latest “critic.”
    

      In reply to my question (with which the business part of the evening
      began) as to why he did not agree to work simply as a contributor, the
      twin stated firmly that it was psychologically impossible for him to work
      for a magazine in which he would be “taken to task” (his
      precise words), and that surely we did not think that we could abuse him
      and he would “write political articles” (his very words!) for
      us; that he could co-operate only on terms of complete equality (i.e.,
      evidently, equality between the critics and the orthodox); that since the

      Declaration,[1]

      his comrade and

      friend[5]
      has refused even to meet Arsenyev; that his, the twin’s, attitude was
      determined not so much by the Declaration, in fact not at all by the
      Declaration, as by the fact that at first he had desired to confine
      himself to the role of “benevolent helpmate,” but that now he did
      not intend so to limit himself but wanted also to be an editor (he said it
      almost in these words!!). The twin did not blurt this out all in one
      breath, the negotiations concerning his collaboration dragged on for quite
      a long time (too long in the opinion of Arsenyev and Velika), but the
      negotiations made it quite clear to me that no business could be done with
      this gentleman.
    

      He then began to insist on his proposal: Why not establish a third
      political periodical on an equal basis with the others? This would be to
      our and his advantage (the newspaper would get material, we would
      “make” some thing out of the resources provided for it). He
      proposed that on the cover we should have nothing Social-Democratic,
      nothing to indicate our firm, and that we were obliged (not formally but
      morally) to contribute to this organ all our material of a general
      political nature.
    

      Everything became clear, and I said openly that the publication of a third
      periodical was out of the question, and that the whole matter reduced
      itself to the question as to whether Social-Democracy must carry on the
      political struggle or whether the liberals should carry it on as an

    

      independent and self-contained movement (I expressed myself more clearly
      and definitely, more precisely). The twin understood and angrily retorted
      that after I had expressed myself with anerkennenswerter

      Klarheit[2]

      (literally!) there was nothing more to be said and all
      that we might discuss was the placing of orders—orders for the
      collections; but that would be a sort of third magazine (I put
      in). “Well, then place an order for just the one available
      pamphlet,” replied the twin. “Which one?” I
      asked. “Why do you want to know?” retorted the wife
      insolently. “If you agree in principle, we shall decide, but if not,
      why do you want to know?” I inquired about the conditions of the
      printing. “Published by X, and nothing more; there must be no
      mention of your firm, nothing except the

      Verlag.[3]

      There must be no connection with your firm”—declared the twin. I
      argued also against that, demanding that mention be made of our
      firm. Arsenyev began to argue against me, and the conversation was cut
      off.
    

      Finally, we decided to postpone the decision. Arsenyev and Velika had
      another heated discussion with the twin, demanded an explanation from
      him, argued with him. I remained silent for the most part and laughed
      (so that the twin could see it quite clearly) and the conversation soon
      came to an end.
    

 
Notes
 

[1]

      See p. 351 of the present volume.—Ed.
    

[2]

      Commendable clarity.–Ed.
    —Lenin

[3]

      Publishers.–Ed.
    —Lenin
 



[4]

Arsenyev—A. N. Potresov;
      Velika—V. I. Zasulich; “the
      twin”—P. B. Struve; “the
      wife”—N. A. Struve, wife of P. B. Struve.
    



[5]

The comrade and friend of P. B. Struve—M.
      I. Tugan-Baranovsky.
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 4

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Casual Notes









Lenin: Casual Notes








V. I.  

      Lenin
Casual Notes




Written: Written in January 1901 

Published:

      Published in April 1901 in the magazine Zarya, No. 1.

      Signed: T. K..

      Published according to the text in the magazine.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 4,

      pages 383-413.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

      
• README



Contents






I. Beat – But Not to Death!
  387



II. Why Accelerate the Vicissitude of the Times?
  403



III. Objective Statistics
  408

 
 
 

Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 4

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Beat--But Not to Death!







Lenin: 1901/casual: I. Beat – But Not to Death!







V. I.  

      Lenin
Casual Notes



    

    
    


 I. Beat – But Not to Death! 

On
      January 23, in Nizhni-Novgorod, the Moscow High Court of
      Justice, in a special session, with the participation
      of representatives of the social-estates, tried the
      case of the murder of the peasant Timofei Vasilyevich Vozdukhov,
      who had been taken to the police-station “to sober up”
      and there beaten up by four policemen, Shelemetyev, Shulpin,
      Shibayev, and Olkhovin, and by acting Station Sergeant Panov, so
      that he died in the hospital the next day.
    

      Such is the simple tale of this case, which throws a glaring
      light upon what usually and always goes on in our
      police-stations.
    

      As far as can be gathered from the extremely brief newspaper
      reports, what appears to have happened is the following. On
      April 20, Vozdukhov drove up to the Governor’s house in a
      cab. The superintendent of the Governor’s house came out to him;
      in giving evidence at the trial the superintendent stated that
      Vozdukhov, hatless, had been drinking but was not drunk, and
      that he, Vozdukhov, complained to him about a certain steamboat
      booking office having refused to sell him a ticket (?). The
      superintendent ordered Shelemetyev, the policeman on duty, to
      take him to the police-station. Vozdukhov was sufficiently sober
      to be able to speak quietly with Shelemetyev and on arriving at
      the police-station quite distinctly told Sergeant Panov his name
      and occupation. Notwithstanding all this, Shelemetyev, no doubt
      with the knowledge of Panov, who had just questioned Vozdukhov,
      “pushed” the latter, not into the common
      cell, in which there were a number of other drunkards, but into
      the adjoining

    

“soldiers’ lock-up.” As he
      pushed him, his sword got caught on the latch of the door and it
      cut his hand slightly; imagining that Vozdukhov was holding the
      sword, he rushed at him to strike him, shouting that his hand
      bad been cut. He struck Vozdukhov with all his might in the
      face, in the chest, in the side; he struck him so hard that
      Vozdukhov fell, striking his forehead on the floor and begging
      for mercy.  “Why are you hitting me?” he implored,
      according to the statement of a witness, Semakhin, who was in
      the neighbouring cell at the time. “It was not my
      fault. Forgive me, for Christ’s sake!” According to the
      evidence of this witness, it was not Vozdukhov who was drunk,
      but sooner Shelemetyev. Shelemetyev’s colleagues, Shulpin and
      Shibayev, who had been continuously drinking in the
      police-station since the first day of Easter week (April 20 was
      Tuesday, the third day of Easter week), learned that Shelemetyev
      was “teaching” (the expression used in the indictment)
      Vozdukhov a lesson. They went into the soldiers’ lock-up
      accompanied by Olkhovin, who was on a visit from another
      station, and attacked Vozdukhov with their fists and
      feet. Police Sergeant Panov came on the scene and struck
      Vozdukhov on the head with a book, and then with his
      fists. “Oh! they beat and beat him so hard that my belly
      ached for pity,” said a woman witness, who was under arrest
      there at the time. When the “lesson” was over, the
      sergeant very coolly ordered Shibayev to wipe the blood from the
      victim’s face—it would not look so bad then; the chief might
      see it—and then to fling him into the common
      cell. “Brothers!” cried Vozdukhov to the other
      detainees, “see how the police have beaten me. Be my
      witnesses, I’ll lodge a complaint.” But he never lived to
      lodge the complaint.  The following morning, he was found in a
      state of unconsciousness and sent to the hospital where he died
      within eight hours without coming to himself again. A
      post-mortem revealed ten broken ribs, bruises all over his body,
      and haemorrhage of the brain.
    

      The court sentenced Shelemetyev, Shulpin, and Shibayev to four
      years’ penal servitude, and Olkhovin and Panov to one
      month’s detention, finding them guilty only of
      “insulting behaviour.”...
    
 

      With this sentence we shall commence our examination of the
      case.  Those sentenced to penal servitude were charged according
      to Articles 346 and 1490, Part II, of the Penal Code. The first
      of these articles provides that an official inflicting wounds or
      injuries in the exercise of his duties is liable to the maximum
      penalty reserved “for the perpetration of such a
      crime.” Article 1490, Part II, provides for a penalty of
      from eight to ten years’ penal servitude for inflicting torture
      resulting in death. Instead of inflicting the maximum
      penalty, the court, consisting of representatives of the
      social-estates and crown judges, reduced the sentence
      by two degrees (sixth degree, eight to ten years of
      penal servitude; seventh degree, four to six years), i.e., it
      made the maximum reduction of sentence permitted by the law in
      cases of extenuating circumstances, and, moreover, imposed the
      minimum penalty of that low degree. In a word, the
      court did all it could to let the culprits off as lightly as
      possible; in fact, it did more than it could, because it evaded
      the law concerning the “maximum penalty.” Of course,
      we do not wish to assert that “supreme justice”
      demanded precisely ten and not four years’ penal servitude; the
      essential point is that the murderers were declared to be
      murderers and that they were sentenced to penal servitude. But
      we cannot refrain from noting a tendency characteristic of the
      court of crown judges and representatives of the estates; when
      they try a police official, they are ready to display the
      greatest clemency, but when they sit in judgment over an act
      committed against the police, as is well known, they display
      inexorable

severity.[1]
   

    
 

      With a police sergeant before it, how could the court refuse him
      clemency? He had met Vozdukhov as he was brought in and
      apparently had ordered him to be placed, not in a common cell,
      but first, in order to teach him a lesson, in the soldiers’
      lock-up. He took part in the assault, using his fists and a book
      (no doubt a copy of the Penal Laws); he gave orders to have all
      traces of the crime removed (to wipe away the blood). On the
      night of April 20 he reported to the inspector, Mukhanov, upon
      his return, “everything in order at the station in his
      charge” (his exact words!)—but he had nothing to do with
      the murderers, he was only guilty of an insulting act, just
      insulting behaviour, punishable by detention.  Quite naturally,
      this gentleman, Mr. Panov, innocent of murder, is still in the
      police service occupying the post of a village police
      sergeant. Mr. Panov has merely transferred his useful directing
      activities in “teaching lessons” to the common people
      from the town to the country. Now, reader, tell us in all
      conscience, can Sergeant Panov understand the sentence of the
      court to mean anything else than advice in the future to remove
      the traces of a crime more thoroughly, to “teach” in
      such a manner as to leave no trace? You did right in ordering
      the blood to be wiped from the face of the dying man, but you
      allowed him to die.  That, pal, was careless. In the future be
      more careful and never forget the first and last commandment of
      the Russian

Derzhimorda [6]: “Beat—but not to
      death!”
    

      From the ordinary human point of view, the sentence Panov drew
      was a mockery of justice. It reveals a cringing, servile spirit,
      an attempt to throw the whole blame upon the minor police
      officers and to shield their immediate chief with whose
      knowledge, approval, and participation this brutal crime was
      committed. From the juridical point of view, the sentence is an
      example of the casuistry resorted to by bureaucratic judges who
      are themselves not far

    

removed from police sergeants. Speech was
      given to man to conceal his thoughts, say the diplomats. Our
      jurists may say that the law is given to distort the concepts of
      guilt and responsibility. Indeed, what refined juridical art is
      required to be able to reduce complicity in torture to simple
      insulting behaviour! Panov was guilty of an offence equal in
      gravity to that perhaps committed by a factory hand who possibly
      on the morning of April 20 mischievously struck Vozdukhov’s cap
      off his head! In fact, milder than that: it was not an offence
      but merely an infringement.  Even participation in a brawl (let
      alone the brutal assault upon a helpless man), if it results in
      a fatality, is liable to a severer punishment than that meted
      out to the police sergeant. Legal chicanery took advantage of
      the fact that the law provides for various degrees of punishment
      for inflicting injuries in the exercise of official duties and
      allows the court the discretion to pronounce sentences ranging
      from two months’ imprisonment to permanent banishment to
      Siberia, according to the circumstances of the case. Of course,
      it is quite a rational rule not to bind a judge to strictly
      formal definitions, but to allow him certain latitude. Our
      professors of criminal law have often praised Russian
      legislation for this and have emphasised its liberal
      character. However, in praising our law, they lose sight of one
      trifle, namely, that, for rational laws to be applied, it is
      necessary to have judges who are not reduced to the role of mere
      officials, that it is necessary to have representatives of the
      public in the court, and for public opinion to play its part in
      the examination of cases. Secondly, the assistant public
      prosecutor came to the aid of the court by
      withdrawing the charge against Panov (and
      Olkhovin) of torture and cruelty and pleading only for a
      sentence for insulting behaviour. In his plea, the assistant
      prosecutor called expert evidence to prove that the blows
      inflicted by Panov were neither numerous nor painful. As you
      see, the juridical sophistry is not very ingenious: since Panov
      did less beating than the others, it may be
      argued that his punches were not very
      painful, and since they were not very painful, it
      may be argued that his offence was not
      “torture and cruelty”; and since it was not torture
      and cruelty, then it was merely insulting behaviour. All this
      works out to

    

everybody’s satisfaction, and Mr. Panov remains in
      the ranks of the guardians of law and

order....[2]


      We have just referred to the participation of representatives of
      the public in court trials, and to the part that should be
      played by public opinion. The case in point is an excellent
      illustration.  In the first place, why was this case tried, not
      by a jury, but by a court of crown judges and representatives of
      the estates?  Because the government of Alexander III, having
      declared ruthless war upon every public aspiration towards
      liberty and independence, very soon found that trial by jury was
      dangerous. The reactionary press declared trial by jury to be
      “trial by the street,” and launched against it a
      campaign which, be it said in passing, continues to this
      day. The government adopted a reactionary programme.  Having
      crushed the revolutionary movement of the seventies, it
      insolently declared to the representatives of the people that it
      regarded them as the “street,” the mob, which must not
      interfere in the

    

work of legislation, let alone interfere in the
      administration of the state, and which must be driven from the
      sanctuary where Russian citizens are tried and punished
      according to the Panov method. In 1887 a law was passed removing
      crimes committed by and against officials from the jurisdiction
      of courts sitting with a jury and transferring them to courts of
      crown judges and representatives of the estates. It is well
      known that these representatives of the estates, merged into a
      single collegium with the bureaucratic judges, are mute
      super-numeraries playing the miserable role of witnesses ready
      to say yes to everything the officials of the Department of
      Justice decide. This is one of a long series of laws adopted
      during the latest reactionary period of Russian history and
      having one single tendency in common: to re-establish a
      “sound authority.” Under the pressure of
      circumstances, the government in the latter half of the
      nineteenth century was compelled to come into contact with the
      “street”; but the character of the street changed with
      astonishing rapidity and the ignorant inhabitants gave place to
      citizens who were beginning to understand their rights and who
      were capable even of producing the champions of their
      rights. Realising this, the government drew back in horror, and
      is now making convulsive efforts to surround itself by a Chinese
      Wall, to immure itself in a fortress into which no
      manifestations of independent public action can penetrate....
      But I have strayed somewhat from my subject.
    

      Thanks to the reactionary law, the street was deprived of the
      right to try representatives of the government. Officials have
      been tried by officials. This has affected, not only the
      sentence passed by the court, but also the character of the
      preliminary investigation and the trial. Trial by the street is
      valuable because it breathes a living spirit into the
      bureaucratic formalism which pervades our government
      institutions. The street is interested, not only, and not so
      much, in the definition of the given offence (insulting
      behaviour, assault, torture), or in the category of punishment
      to be imposed; it is interested in exposing thoroughly and
      bringing to public light the significance and all the social and
      political threads of the crime in order to draw lessons in
      public morals and practical

    

politics from the trial. The street
      does not want to see in the court “an official
      institution,” in which functionaries apply to given cases
      the corresponding articles of the Penal Code, but a public
      institution which exposes the ulcers of the present system,
      which provides material for criticising it and, consequently,
      for improving it. Impelled by its practical knowledge of public
      affairs and by the growth of political consciousness, the street
      is discovering the truth for which our official, professorial
      jurisprudence, weighed down by its scholastic shackles, is
      groping with such difficulty and timidity—namely, that in the
      fight against crime the reform of social and political
      institutions is much more important than the imposition of
      punishment. For this reason the reactionary publicists and the
      reactionary government hate, and cannot help hating, trial by
      the street. For this reason the curtailments put on the
      competency of jury courts and the restrictions on publicity run
      like a scarlet thread throughout the whole of the post-Reform
      history of Russia; indeed, the reactionary character of the
      “post-Reform” epoch was exposed immediately
      after the law of 1864, reforming our “judicature,”
      came into

force.[3]

      The absence of “trial by the street” was markedly felt
      in this particular case. Who in the court that tried this case
      could have been interested in its social aspect, and who would
      have sought to bring it out prominently? The public prosecutor?
      The official who is closely connected with the police, who
      shares responsibility for the detention of prisoners and the
      manner in which they are treated, who, in certain cases, is
      actually the chief of police? We have seen that the assistant
      prosecutor even withdrew the charge of torture against
      Panov. The civil plaintiff—in the event that Vozdukhova, the
      widow of the murdered man and a witness

    

at the trial, had put in
      a civil claim against the murderers? But how was this simple
      woman to know that it was permissible to bring a civil claim for
      damages before a criminal court? But even had she known it,
      would she have been able to retain a lawyer?  And even had she
      been able to do so, could a lawyer have been found who was
      willing to call public attention to the state of affairs brought
      to light by this murder? And even if such a lawyer had been
      found, would his ”civic zeal” have been supported by such
      “delegates” of the public as the representatives of
      the social-estates? Picture to yourself a rural district elder—
      I have in mind a provincial court—embarrassed in his rustic
      clothes, not knowing what to do with his rough, peasant hands,
      awkwardly trying to conceal his feet encased in greased
      top-boots, gazing with awe upon His Excellency, the president of
      the court, who is seated on the same bench with him. Or imagine
      a city mayor, a fat merchant, breathing heavily in his
      unaccustomed livery, with his chain of office round his neck,
      trying to ape his neighbour, a Marshal of the Nobility, a
      gentleman in a nobleman’s uniform, who looks sleek and well
      tended, with aristocratic manners. By his side are judges, men
      who have gone through the hard grind of the school of
      bureaucracy, genuine functionaries who have grown grey in the
      service and are filled with a consciousness of the importance of
      the duty they have to fulfill—to try representatives of the
      authorities whom the street is not worthy to try. Would not this
      scene dampen the ardour of the most eloquent lawyer?  Would it
      not remind him of the ancient aphorism: “neither cast ye
      your pearls before...”?
    

      And so it happened that the case was rushed through at express
      speed, as if all concerned were eager to get it off their hands
      as quickly as

possible,[4]

      as if they feared to rake too thoroughly in the muck; one may
      get accustomed to living near a cesspool and not notice the foul
      odours emanating from it, but as soon as an attempt is made to
      cleanse it,

    

the stench assails the nostrils, not only of the
      inhabitants of the particular street, but also of those of the
      neighbouring streets.
    

      Just think of the number of questions that naturally arise and
      that no one has taken the trouble to clear up! Why did Vozdukhov
      go to the Governor? The indictment—the document which
      embodied the effort of the prosecuting authorities to disclose
      the crime—not only failed to reply to this question, but
      deliberately obscured it with the statement that Vozdukhov
      “was detained in a state of intoxication in the courtyard
      of the Governor’s house by policeman Shelemetyev.” It even
      gives ground for the assumption that Vozdukhov was brawling—
      and where do you think? In the courtyard of the Governor’s
      house! In actuality, Vozdukhov drove up to the
      Governor’s house in a cab in order to lodge a
      complaint—this fact was established. What did he go
      to complain about? Ptitsyn, the superintendent of the Governor’s
      house, stated that Vozdukhov had complained about the refusal of
      a steamship booking office to sell him a ticket (?). The witness
      Mukhanov, formerly inspector of the station in which Vozdukhov
      was assaulted (and now governor of the provincial prison in
      Vladimir), stated that he had heard from Vozdukhov’s wife that
      she and her husband had been drinking and that in
      Nizhni they had been beaten up in the river police-station and
      in the Rozhdestvensky police-station, and that Vozdukhov had
      gone to the Governor to complain about
      this. Notwithstanding the fact that the witnesses
      obviously contradicted each other, the court did not make the
      slightest attempt to clear up the matter. On the contrary, one
      has every reason to conclude that the court did not
      wish to clear up the matter. Vozdukhov’s wife gave
      evidence at the trial, but no one took the trouble to ask her
      whether she and her husband had really been assaulted in several
      Nizhni police-stations, under what circumstances they had been
      arrested, in what premises they had been assaulted, and by whom,
      whether her husband had really wished to complain to the
      Governor, and whether he had mentioned his intention to any one
      else. Most likely the witness Ptitsyn, an official in the
      Governor’s office, was not inclined to accept complaints from
      Vozdukhov—who was not drunk, but whom, nevertheless, it was
      necessary to make

    

sober!—against the police and ordered the
      intoxicated police-man Shelemetyev to take
      the complainant to the police-station to be sobered up. But this
      interesting witness was not cross-examined. The cabby, Krainov,
      who had driven Vozdukhov to the Governor’s house and
      subsequently to the police-station, was not questioned as to
      whether Vozdukhov had told him why he was going to the Governor,
      as to what he had said to Ptitsyn, and whether anybody else had
      heard the conversation. The court was satisfied merely to hear
      the brief written affidavit of Krainov (who did not appear in
      court) which testified that Vozdukhov had not been drunk, but
      only slightly intoxicated, and the assistant prosecutor had not
      even taken the trouble to subpoena this important witness. If we
      bear in mind that Vozdukhov, a sergeant in the army reserve and
      consequently a man of experience who must have known something
      about law and order, had said even after the last fatal blows,
      “I am going to lodge a complaint,” it appears more
      than likely that he went to the Governor to lodge a complaint
      against the police, that Ptitsyn lied to shield the police and
      that the servile judges and the servile prosecutor did not wish
      to bring this delicate story to light.
    

      Further, why was Vozdukhov beaten? Again the indictment presents
      the case in a manner most favourable ... to the accused. The
      “motive for the torture,” it is alleged, was the
      cutting of Shelemetyev’s hand when he pushed Vozdukhov into the
      soldiers’ lock-up. The question arises, why was Vozdukhov, who
      spoke calmly both with Shelemetyev and with Panov, pushed
      (assuming that it was really necessary to
      push him!), not into the common cell, but
      first into the soldiers’ lock-up? He had been brought to the
      station to be sobered up—there were already a number of
      drunkards in the common cell, and later on Vozdukhov was put
      into the common cell; why, then, did Shelemetyev, after
      “introducing” him to Panov, push him into the
      soldiers’ lock-up? Evidently for the
      purpose of beating him. In the common cell there were a number
      of people, whereas in the soldiers’ lock-up Vozdukhov would be
      alone, and Shelemetyev could call to his aid his comrades and
      Mr. Panov, who was “in charge” of Police-Station No. 1
      at the time. Consequently, the torture was inflicted, not for
      some chance reason, but

    

deliberately and with forethought.  We
      can assume one of two things—either that all who are taken to
      the police-station for sobering up (even when they behave
      themselves decently and quietly) are first put into the
      soldiers’ lock-up to be “taught a lesson,” or that
      Vozdukhov was put in there precisely for the reason
      that he had gone to the Governor to lodge a complaint against
      the police. The newspaper reports of the trial are so
      brief that one hesitates to express oneself categorically in
      favour of the second hypothesis (which is not at all
      improbable); but the preliminary investigation and the court
      examination could have cleared this point up beyond any
      doubt. It stands to reason that the court did not pay any
      attention whatever to this. I say “it stands to
      reason,” because the indifference of the court reflects not
      only bureaucratic formalism, but the simple point of view of the
      Russian man in the street.  “What is there to make a fuss
      about? A drunken muzhik was killed in a police-station! Worse
      things than that happen!” And the man in the street begins
      to relate scores of incomparably more revolting cases, in which
      the culprits have gone scot-free.  The remarks of the man in the
      street are absolutely just; nevertheless, his attitude is
      absolutely wrong and by his arguments he merely reveals his
      extreme, philistine short-sightedness. Are not incomparably more
      revolting cases of police tyranny possible in our country only
      because this tyranny is the common, everyday practice in every
      police-station? And is not our indignation impotent against
      these exceptional cases because we, with customary indifference,
      tolerate the “normal” cases; because our indifference
      remains unperturbed, even when a customary practice like an
      assault upon a drunken (or allegedly drunken) “muzhik”
      in a police-station rouses the protest of this very muzhik (who
      ought to be accustomed to this sort of thing), of this very
      muzhik, who paid with his life for his most impertinent attempt
      to submit a humble petition to the Governor?
    

      There is another reason why we must not ignore this all too
      common case. It has long been held that the preventive
      significance of punishment is not in its severity, but in its
      inevitableness.  What is important is not that a crime shall be
      severely punished, but that not a single
    

crime shall pass undiscovered. From this aspect, too, the
      present case is of interest. Illegal and savage assault is
      committed in police-stations in the Russian Empire—it may be
      said without exaggeration-daily and

hourly,[5]

      and only rare and very exceptional cases are brought up in
      court.  This is not in the least surprising, since the criminals
      are the very police who in Russia are charged with the duty of
      disclosing crime. These circumstances compel us to devote all
      the greater, if unusual, attention to those cases in which the
      courts are constrained to raise the curtain that conceals such
      habitual facts.
    

      Note, for example, how the police perpetrate their assault. Five
      or six of them together set upon their victim with brutal
      cruelty, many of them are drunk, all are armed with swords. But
      not one of them ever strikes the victim with his sword. They are
      men of experience and they know how to beat a man up. A sword
      blow leaves a mark of guilt, but try and prove that bruises made
      by fists were inflicted

    

by the police! “Arrested during a
      brawl in which he was beaten up,”—and your case isn’t
      worth a straw.  Even in the present instance, when the man, as
      it happened, was beaten to death (“the devil tempted him to
      die, a hefty muzhik like that! Who would have thought
      it!”), the prosecution was obliged to bring witnesses to
      testify that “Vozdukhov was absolutely sound in health
      before he was taken to the police-station.” Apparently, the
      murderers, who maintained throughout the trial that they had not
      beaten the man, stated that they had brought him to the station
      in a battered condition. It is an extremely difficult matter to
      get witnesses to give evidence in a case like this. By a happy
      chance, the window between the common cell and the soldiers’
      lock-up was not completely curtained off. True, instead of glass
      the panes consisted of sheets of tin with holes punched through,
      and on the side of the soldiers’ lock-up these holes were
      covered up by a leather curtain. By poking a finger through a
      hole, one could raise the curtain and see what was going on in
      the soldiers’ lock-up. Only through this circumstance was it
      possible at the trial to obtain a picture of the scene of the
      “lesson.” But such negligence as improperly curtained
      windows could exist only in the past century. In the twentieth
      century, the little window between the common cell and soldiers’
      lock-up in the Kremlin district Police-Station No. 1 in
      Nizhni-Novgorod is no doubt blocked up.... And since there are
      no witnesses, woe betide the poor fellow who finds himself in
      the soldiers’ lock-up!
    

      In no country in the world is there such a multitude of laws as
      in Russia. We have laws for everything. There are special
      regulations governing detention in custody, which specifically
      state that detention is legally permissible only in special
      premises, subject to special supervision. As you see, the law is
      observed. In the police-station, there is a special “common
      cell.” But before a man is put into
      the common cell, it is “customary” to
      “shove” him into the soldiers’ lock-up. Although the
      role of the soldiers’ lock-up as a real torture chamber was
      perfectly clear throughout the trial, the judicial authorities
      did not even think of paying the matter the slightest attention.
      Surely, the prosecuting attorney cannot be expected to expose

    

the excesses of our brutal police and to take measures against
      them!
    

      We have referred to the question of witnesses in a case of this
      kind. At best, such witnesses can only be persons in the hands
      of the police. Only under the most exceptional circumstances
      would it be possible for an outsider to witness a police
      “lesson” given in a police-station. But it is possible
      for the police to influence the witnesses that are in their
      hands. And this is what happened in the present case. The
      witness Frolov, who at the time of the murder was in the common
      cell, stated during the preliminary investigation that Vozdukhov
      had been assaulted by the policemen and the sergeant; later he
      withdrew his testimony against Sergeant Panov; at the trial,
      however, he stated that none of the policemen had struck
      Vozdukhov, that he had been persuaded to give evidence against
      the police by Semakhin and Barinov (two other men in the common
      cell who were the principal witnesses for the prosecution), and
      that the police had not persuaded or prompted him to say this.
      The witnesses Fadeyev and Antonova stated that no one had laid a
      finger on Vozdukhov in the soldiers’ lock-up, that everything
      had been quiet there and no quarrelling had taken place.
    

      As is to be seen, quite the usual thing happened. And the
      judicial authorities behaved with customary indifference. There
      is a law that provides severe penalties for perjury. A
      prosecution instituted against the two perjurers would throw
      further light on the outrages the police perpetrate against
      those who have the misfortune to fall into their hands and are
      almost completely defenceless (hundreds of thousands of the
      “common” people meet with such misfortune every
      day). But all that the court is concerned about is applying this
      or that article of the Penal Code; it is not in the least
      concerned about that defencelessness. This detail in the trial,
      like all the others, showed clearly how strong and
      all-entangling is the net, how persistent the canker, which can
      only be removed by abolishing the whole system of police tyranny
      and denial of the people’s rights.
    

      About thirty-five years ago, F. M. Reshetnikov, a well-known
      Russian writer, met with an unpleasant adventure.

    

One evening he
      went to the Assembly of Nobles in St. Petersburg under the
      mistaken impression that a concert was to he given there. The
      policeman at the door barred his way and shouted at him:
      “What’s the shoving? Who are you?” “A factory
      hand,” roughly replied Reshetnikov, stung to anger by this
      affront. What followed this reply, as related by Gleb Uspensky,
      was that Reshetnikov spent the night in the police-station, from
      which he emerged bruised and battered, bereft of his money and
      his ring. “I report this matter to Your Excellency,”
      wrote Reshetnikov in a petition to the St. Petersburg Chief of
      Police. “ I seek no compensation.  May I only humbly
      trouble you with the request that the police officers and their
      subordinates shall not beat the people....
      As it is, the people have only sufferings in store for

      them.”[7]


      The modest request which a Russian writer was bold enough to
      make to the chief of police of the capital so long ago has not
      yet been fulfilled and it cannot be
      fulfilled so long as the present political system
      lasts. At the present time, however, every honest man who is
      tormented by the contemplation of this brutality and violence
      turns towards the great new movement among the people that is
      mustering its forces in order to wipe all brutality from the
      face of the land of Russia and to achieve mankind’s finest
      ideals. During recent decades, hatred for the police has grown
      immensely and has become deep-rooted in the hearts of the masses
      of the common people. The development of urban life, the growth
      of industry, the spread of literacy, have all served to imbue
      even the uneducated masses with aspirations for a better life
      and a consciousness of their human dignity; the police, however,
      have remained as tyrannical and brutal as ever. To their
      bestiality we now see added a greater subtlety in the detection
      and persecution of the new, most dangerous enemy, i.e.,
      everything that brings to the masses of the people a ray of
      consciousness of their rights and confidence in their
      strength. Fertilised by this consciousness and this confidence,
      popular hatred will find vent, not in savage vengeance, but in
      the struggle for liberty.
    

    

    
 
Notes
 

[1]

  In passing, we shall adduce another fact indicating the
  punishments imposed by our courts for various crimes. A few
  days after the Vozdukhov murder trial, the Moscow District
  Military Tribunal tried a private in the local artillery
  brigade for stealing fifty pairs of trousers and a few pairs
  of boots, while on guard duty in the storeroom. The sentence
  was four years’ penal servitude. A
  human life entrusted to the police is equal in value to
  fifty pairs of trousers and a few pairs of boots entrusted
  to a sentry. In this peculiar “equation” the whole
  of our police state system is reflected as the sun is
  reflected in a drop of water. The individual against state
  power is nothing.  Discipline within the state power is
  everything... pardon me, “everything” only for the
  small fry. A petty thief is sentenced to penal servitude,
  but the big thieves, the magnates, cabinet ministers, bank
  directors, builders

   

of railways, engineers, contracts, etc.,
  who plunder the Treasury of property valued at tens and
  hundreds of thousands of rubles are punished only on very
  rare occasions, and at the worst are banished to remote
  provinces where they may live at ease on their loot (the
  bank thieves in Western Siberia), and from where it is easy
  to escape across the frontier (Colonel of Gendermes
  Meranville de Saint-Clair).
—Lenin

[2]

  In Russia, instead of exposing the outrage in all its horror
  before the court and the public, they prefer to hush up the
  case in court and do nothing more than send out circular
  letters and orders full of pompous but meaningless
  phrases. For instance, a few days ago the Orel Chief of
  Police issued an order which, confirming previous orders,
  instructs the local police inspectors to impress upon
  subordinates, personally and through their assistants, that
  they must refrain from roughness and violence in handling
  drunkards in the streets and when taking them to the
  police-station to sober up. The order further specifies that
  police officers must explain to their subordinates that it
  is the duty of the police to protect drunkards who cannot be
  left alone with obvious danger to themselves; that
  subordinate police officers, whom the law has placed in the
  position of first protectors and guardians of citizens,
  must, therefore, in taking drunkards into custody, not only
  refrain from treating them roughly and inhumanly, but must
  do all they can to protect them until they have become
  sober.  The order warns subordinate police officials that
  only by such conscientious and lawful exercise of their
  duties will they earn the confidence and respect of the
  population, and that if, on the contrary, police officials
  treat drunkards harshly and cruelly, or resort to violent
  conduct incompatible with the duty of a police officer, who
  should serve as a model of respectability and good morals,
  they will be punished with all the vigour of the law and any
  subordinate police officer guilty of such conduct will be
  rigorously prosecuted. A capital idea for a cartoon in a
  satirical journal—a police sergeant, acquitted of the
  charge of murder, reading an order that he must serve as a
  model of respectability and good morals!
—Lenin

[3]

  In their polemics in the legal press against the
  reactionaries, the liberal advocates of trial by jury often
  categorically deny its political significance and endeavour
  to show that they favour participation of public
  representatives in the courts for reasons other than
  political. This may partly be explained by the lack of
  ability on the part of our jurists to think politically to a
  logical conclusion, notwithstanding their specialisation in
  “political” science. But, chiefly, it is to be
  explained by the necessity to speak in Aesopean language, by
  the impossibility openly to declare their sympathies for a
  constitution.
—Lenin

[4]

  No one, however, thought of bringing the case to trial
  quickly.  Despite the fact that the case was remarkably
  clear and simple, it was not tried until January 23, 1901,
  although the crime had been committed on April 20, 1899. A
  speedy, just, and merciful trial!
—Lenin

[5]

  These lines were already written when the press brought
  another confirmation of the correctness of this
  assertion. At the other end of Russia, in Odessa—a city
  enjoying the status of a capital—a magistrate acquitted a
  certain M. Klinkov who had been charged by Station Sergeant
  Sadukov with disorderly conduct while under arrest in the
  police-station. At the trial, the accused and his four
  witnesses testified to the following: Sadukov arrested M.
  Klinkov, who was in a state of drunkenness, and took him to
  the police-station. When he became sober, Klinkov demanded
  to be released, upon which a policeman grabbed him by the
  collar and began to punch him. Three other police-men
  arrived on the scene, and the four of them fell upon him,
  striking him in the face, on the head, the chest, and the
  sides. Under the rain of blows and covered with blood,
  Klinkov fell to the floor, whereupon the policemen assaulted
  him with even greater fury. According to the evidence of
  Klinkov and his witnesses, this torture was inflicted at the
  instigation and with the encouragement of Sadukov. As a
  result of the blows he received, Klinkov lost
  consciousness. On reviving, he was released from the
  police-station. Immediately on his release he went to be
  examined by a physician. The magistrate advised Klinkov to
  lodge a complaint with the prosecutor against Sadukov and
  the policemen, to which Kinkov replied that he had already
  done so and that he would bring twenty witnesses.


  One need not be a prophet to foretell that M. Klinkov will
  fail to get the policemen brought to trial and punished for
  torture.  They did not actually beat him to death; but if,
  contrary to expectation, they are prosecuted, they are sure
  to get off lightly.
—Lenin
 



[6]

Derzhimorda—the name of the policeman in N. V. Gogol’s comedy
The Inspector-General; a boorish, insolent oppressor, a man of
violence.




[7]

Lenin quotes from Gleb Uspensky’s “Fyodor Mikhailovich Reshetnikov.”



 
  


|

II. Why Accelerate the Vicissitude of the Times?

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 4

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Why Accelerate the Vicissitude of the Times?









Lenin: 1901/casual: II. Why Accelerate the Vicissitude of the Times?







V. I.  

      Lenin
Casual Notes



    

    
      II. Why Accelerate the Vicissitude of the Times?
    

      The Assembly of Nobles of Orel Gubernia has adopted an interesting
      project, but more interesting is the debate which it occasioned.
    

      The issue is the following. The gubernia Marshal of the Nobility,
      M. A. Stakhovich, proposed in his report the conclusion of a contract with
      the Finance Department, under which the Orel nobles would be appointed to
      the posts of excise-collectors. With the introduction of the liquor
      monopoly forty collectors are to be appointed to gather the moneys from
      the government liquor shops. Their remuneration will amount to 2,180
      rubles per annum (900 rubles salary, 600 rubles travelling expenses, and
      680 rubles for hiring a guard). The nobles thought it would be a good
      thing to get these posts, and for this purpose it was suggested that they
      form a guild and enter into a contract with the Treasury. Instead of the
      required deposit (from 3,000 to 5,000 rubles), they suggested that at
      first 300 rubles per annum be deducted from the pay of each collector,
      which sums could serve to establish a nobles’ guaranty fund to be
      deposited with the liquor department.
    

      The proposal—certainly a practical one—proves that our higher
      estate possesses a highly developed flair for grabbing slices of the state
      pie wherever possible. But it is precisely this business acumen that
      seemed to many of the high-born landlords to be excessive, disreputable,
      and unworthy of nobility. A heated discussion flared up on the question,
      in the course of which three distinct points of view came to light.
    

      The first is the practical point of view. A man must live, the nobility is
      in straitened circumstances ... here is an opportunity to earn money
      ... surely they cannot refuse to help the poor nobles. Besides, the
      collectors could help to encourage sobriety among the people. The second
      is the point of view of the romantics. To trade in liquor, to be in a
      position only slightly above that of a bar tender, subordinate to common
      store managers, “very often persons of the lower orders”!?... and
      there followed a hot stream of words about the high calling of the
      nobility. We intend to deal with these speeches, but first let us mention

    

      the third point of view—that of the statesmen. On the one hand,
      there is no denying that the thing seems some what discreditable, but, on
      the other, it must be admitted that it is lucrative. But we can make money
      and at the same time preserve our virtue. The chief excise officer may
      even hand out appointments without deposits, and all the forty nobles may
      obtain posts at the request of the gubernia Marshal of the Nobility
      without forming a guild or entering into contracts, otherwise “the
      Minister of Internal Affairs may refuse to endorse the decision in order
      to safeguard the proper functioning of the existing state system.” In all
      probability, this wise opinion would have prevailed, had not the Marshal
      of the Nobility made two important statements: first, that the contract
      had already been submitted to the Council of the Ministry of Finance,
      which had recognised its feasibility and approved it in principle; and,
      secondly, that “it was impossible to obtain such posts merely at the
      request of the gubernia Marshal of the Nobility.” The report was
      approved.
    

      Poor romantics! They suffered defeat. But how eloquently they had
      pleaded!
    

      “Hitherto the nobility has provided people for leading positions
      only. The report suggests the formation of some sort of guild. Is this
      compatible with the past, the present, and the future of the nobility?
      According to the law, if a bartender embezzles funds, the nobleman will
      have to step behind the bar. Death is preferable to such a position
      !"
    

      Good Lord! How noble man is! Death is preferable to selling vodka! To
      trade in corn is quite a noble occupation, particularly in years of bad
      harvest, when high profits can be made out of the starvation of the
      people. A still more noble occupation is usury in grain, the lending of
      grain to the starving peasants in the winter with the stipulation that
      they will work in the summer at one-third of the usual wage-rate. In the
      central black earth zone, in which Orel Gubernia is situated, the
      landlords have always engaged in this noble form of usury with particular
      zeal. And in order to draw a distinction between noble and ignoble usury,
      it is necessary, of course, to proclaim as loudly as possible that the
      position of a bartender is a degrading occupation for a nobleman.
    
 

      “We must carefully cherish our calling which is expressed in the
      celebrated imperial manifesto by the words, unselfishly to serve the
      people. To serve for selfish motives would contradict this.... A
      social-estate that has to its credit such services as the valiant martial
      deeds of its ancestors and that had to bear the brunt of the great reforms
      of Emperor Alexander II still possesses opportunities for the future
      fulfilment of its duties to the state.”
    

      Yes, unselfish service! The distribution of lands, the granting of
      inhabited estates, i.e., gifts of thousands of dessiatines of land,
      together with thousands of serfs; the establishment of a class of big
      landowners possessing hundreds, thousands, and tens of thousands of
      dessiatines and by exploitation reducing millions of peasants to
      poverty—these are the manifestations of this unselfishness. The
      reference to the “great” reforms of Alexander II is
      particularly charming. Take, for example, the emancipation of the
      peasants. How unselfishly our noble aristocracy fleeced these peasants,
      compelling them to pay for their own land, at a price three times its real
      value; robbing them by cutting off various parts of their land; exchanging
      their own sandy wastes, gullies, and uncultivable land for the peasants’
      good land;— and now they have the insolence to boast of these
      exploits!
    

      “There is nothing patriotic in the liquor trade.... Our traditions
      are not based on rubles, but on service to the state. The nobility must
      not become stockbrokers.”
    

      Sour grapes! The nobility “must not” become stock brokers
      because large capital is required on the Stock Exchange, and our quondam
      slaveowners have squandered their fortunes. In the eyes of the broad
      masses they have long ago become, not stockbrokers, but the slaves of the
      Stock Exchange, the slaves of the ruble. And in their pursuit of the
      ruble, the “highest social-estate” has long been engaged in
      such highly patriotic occupations as the manufacture of raw brandy, the
      installation of sugar-refineries and other enterprises, participation in
      sundry dubious commercial and industrial undertakings, begging at the
      doors of high Court circles, grand dukes, cabinet ministers, etc., etc.,
      in order to obtain concessions and government guarantees for such
      enterprises, in order to entreat for doles in the form

    

      of privileges for the Nobles’ Bank, sugar-export bonuses, slices
      (thousands of dessiatines in extent!) of Bashkirian or other land, soft,
      lucrative jobs, etc.
    

      “The ethics of the nobility bear the traces of history, of social
      position..."—as well as traces of the stable in which the
      nobles were trained to practise violence and indignities on the
      muzhiks. The age-long habit of command has bred in the nobles something
      even more subtle: the ability to clothe their exploiting interests in
      pompous phrases, calculated to deceive the ignorant “common people.”
      Listen further:
    

      “Why accelerate the vicissitude of the times? It may be a prejudice,
      but old traditions forbid us to help bring these things upon
      ourselves....”
    

      These words, uttered by Mr. Naryshkin (one of the members of the council
      that advocated the state point of view), express a true class sense.

      0f 

      course, to hesitate to accept the position of a collector (or even of a
      bartender) is, in these times, mere prejudice. But does not the
      unparalleled and shameless exploitation of the peasantry by the landlords
      in our rural districts rest on the prejudices of the benighted masses of
      the peasantry? Prejudices are dying out anyhow; why then hasten their
      death by openly bringing together the noble and the bartender, and in this
      way help the peasant to understand (which he is beginning to do, anyway)
      the simple truth that the noble landlord is a usurer and robber, a beast
      of prey, like any village blood sucker, only immeasurably more powerful
      because of the lands he owns, his ancient privileges and his close
      relations with the tsarist government, his habit to command, and his
      ability to conceal his

      Judas[4]
      nature under a doctrine of romanticism and magnanimity?
    

      Yes, Mr. Naryshkin is certainly a counsellor from whose lips political
      wisdom drops. I am not surprised that the Marshal of the Orel Nobility
      replied to him in terms so refined that they would do honour to an
      English lord. He said:
    

      “It would be mere boldness on my part to object to the authorities
      whom we have heard here, were I not convinced that in arguing against
      their opinions, I am not arguing against their convictions.”
    

      Now, this is true, and, moreover, in a much wider sense than
      Mr. Stakhovich, who indeed accidentally let the truth

    

      slip, imagined. All the nobles, from the most practical to the most
      romantic, share the same convictions. All are fully convinced of their
      “sacred right” to possess the hundreds and thousands of
      dessiatines of land their ancestors grabbed or had granted to them by
      land-grabbers, the right to exploit the peasants and play the dominant
      role in the state, the right to enjoy the biggest (and if the worst comes
      to the worst, even smaller) slices of the state pie, i.e., the people’s
      money. Their opinions differ only in regard to the expediency of
      undertaking this or that enterprise, and their discussions of these
      divergent opinions are as instructive for the proletariat as are all other
      domestic quarrels in the camp of the exploiters. Such disputes bring out
      the differences between the common interests of the capitalist or landlord
      class as a whole, and the interests of individual persons or separate
      groups. Not infrequently in the course of such disputes, one blabs what
      one has sought ever so carefully to conceal.
    

      Besides this, however, the Orel episode throws some light upon the
      character of the notorious liquor monopoly. What benefits our official and
      semi-official press expected from it! Increased revenues, improved
      quality, and less drunkenness! But instead of increased revenues, all we
      actually have so far is an increase in the price of spirits, confusion in
      the budget, and the impossibility of determining the exact financial
      results of the whole operation. In stead of improvement in quality, we
      have deterioration; and the government is hardly likely to impress the
      public with its reports, displayed in the entire press, of the successful
      results of the “degustation” of the new “government
      vodka.” Instead of less drunkenness, we have more illicit trading in
      spirits, augmented police incomes from this trading, the opening of liquor
      shops over the protests of the population, which is petitioning against
      their being

      opened,[1]

      and increased drunkenness in the

      streets.[2]

      But

    

      above all, what a new and gigantic field is opened for official
      arbitrariness, tyranny, favour-currying and embezzlement by the creation
      of this new state enterprise, with a turnover of many millions of rubles,
      and the creation of a whole army of new officials! It is the invasion of a
      locust-swarm of officials, boot-licking, intriguing, plundering, wasting
      seas of ink and reams upon reams of paper. The Orel project is nothing but
      an attempt to cloak in legal forms the striving to grab the fattest
      possible slices of the state pie, a desire which is so prevalent in our
      provinces, and which, in view of the unrestrained power of the officials
      and the gagging of the people, threatens to intensify the reign of tyranny
      and plunder. A simple illustration: last autumn the newspapers reported
      “a building incident in connection with the liquor monopoly.” In
      Moscow, three warehouses are being built for storing vodka to supply the
      whole of Moscow Gubernia. The government appropriated a sum of 1,637,000
      rubles for this purpose. It now appears that “it has been found
      necessary to make a supplementary appropriation of two-and-a-half

millions.”[3]

      Apparently the officials who had charge of this state property pinched a
      little more than fifty pairs of trousers and a few pairs of boots!
    


 
Notes
 

[1]

      For example, it was recently reported in the newspapers that as far back
      as 1899 a number of villages in Archangel Gubernia adopted resolutions
      against the opening of liquor shops in their localities. The government,
      which at this very moment is introducing the liquor monopoly into that
      district, of course answered with a refusal, no doubt out of
      regard for the sobriety of the people!
    —Lenin

[2]

      This is quite apart from the enormous amount of money the peasant communes
      have lost as a result of the liquor monopoly. Hitherto

   

      they obtained a revenue from liquor shops. The Treasury has deprived them
      of this source of revenue without a kopek compensation! In his interesting
      book, Das hungernde Russland (Reiseeindrücke,
      Beobochtungen und Untersuchungen [Starving Russia (Travel
      Impressions, Observations, and Inquiries).—Ed.] by
      C. Lehmann and Parvus, Stuttgart, Dietz Verlag, 1900), Parvus justly
      describes this as robbing the rural commune funds. He states that
      according to the calculations of the Samara Gubernia Zemstvo, the losses
      incurred by the peasant communes in the three years 1895-97 as a result of
      the introduction of the liquor monopoly amounted to 3,150,000
      rubles!
    —Lenin

[3]

      Author’s italics, see S. Peterburgskiye Vedomosti
(St. Petersburg Recorder), No. 239, September 1, 1900.
    —Lenin
 



[4]

      Lenin refers to Porphyry (nicknamed Judas) Golovlyov, a sanctimonious,
      hypocritical landlord serf-owner described in M. Saltykov-Shchedrin’s
      The Golovlyov’ Family.
    

 
  

I. Beat – But Not to Death!

|

III. Objective Statistics

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 4

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Objective Statistics









Lenin: 1901/casual: III. Objective Statistics







V. I.  

      Lenin
Casual Notes



    

    
      III. Objective Statistics
    

      Our government is in the habit of accusing its opponents, not only
      revolutionaries, but also liberals, of being tendentious. Have you ever
      read the comments of the official press on the liberal (legal, of course)
      publications?  Vestnik
    

      Finansov,[2]
      the organ of the Ministry of Finance, would at times publish reviews of
      the press, and each time the official in charge of this column referred to
      the comments of the (big) liberal magazines on the budget, on the famine,
      or on some government measure, he always spoke with indignation of their
      “tendentiousness” and, by way of contrast, pointed,
      “objectively,” not only to “the seamy side,” but to the
      “gratifying features.” This, of course, is only a minor example, but
      it illustrates the habitual attitude of the government, its habitual
      tendency to brag of its “objectivity.”
    

      We shall endeavour to bring some satisfaction to these strict and
      impartial judges. We shall endeavour to do this in dealing with
      statistics. Naturally, we shall not take statistics on this or that set of
      facts of public life: it is well known that the facts are recorded by
      biased people and generalised by institutions which are sometimes
      decidedly “tendentious,” like the Zemstvos. No, we shall deal with
      statistics on ... laws. The most ardent supporter of the government, we
      imagine, would hardly dare to assert that there is anything more objective
      and impartial than statistics on laws—a simple calculation of the
      decisions made by the government, quite apart from any consideration of
      the divergence between word and deed, between promulgation and execution,
      etc.
    

      And now, to the matter.
    

      The State Senate publishes, as is known, a Compendium of the Laws and
Edicts of the Government, a periodical that announces the measures
adopted by the government. We shall examine these facts, and note
what the laws and edicts are about. Precisely: what
they are about. We dare not criticise the official edicts; we shall
merely compute the number issued in this or that sphere. The January
newspapers reprinted from this government publication the content of
Nos. 2905 to 2929 of last year and Nos. 1 to 66 of the current
year. Thus, in the period from December 29, 1900, to January 12, 1901,
the very threshold of the new century, ninety-one laws and edicts were
promulgated. The character of these ninety-one laws renders them very
convenient for “statistical” analysis. None of them is out
standing; there is nothing that puts everything else in

    

      the shade and lays a special impress upon the present period of domestic
      administration. All of them are relatively petty and answer to current
      requirements continuously and regularly arising. We thus see the
      government in its everyday garb, and this serves as a further guarantee
      of the objectivity of the “statistics.”

    

      Of the ninety-one laws, thirty-four, i.e., more than a third, deal with
      one and the same subject: extension of the call dates for payment of
      capital on shares or of payment of purchases of stock in various
      commercial and industrial joint-stock companies. These laws can be
      recommended to newspaper readers as a means of refreshing their memory in
      regard to the list of our industrial enterprises and the names of various
      firms. The second group of laws is entirely analogous to the first in
      content. It deals with changes in the articles of association of
      commercial and industrial companies. These include fifteen acts revising
      the articles of association of K. and S. Popov Bros., tea dealers;

      A. Nauman & Co., cardboard and tar-paper manufacturers; I. A. Osipov
      & Co., tanners, and leather, canvas and linen merchants; etc., etc. To
      these must be added eleven more acts, of which six were passed to meet
      certain requirements of trade and industry (the establishment of a public
      bank and a mutual credit society; the fixing of prices of securities to be
      taken as deposit for state contracts; rules for the movement of
      privately-owned cars on the railways; regulations governing brokers on the
      Borisoglebsk Corn Exchange), while five deal with the appointment of six
      additional policemen and two mounted police sergeants to four factories
      and one mine.
    

      Thus, sixty out of ninety-one of the laws, i.e., two- thirds, directly
      serve the various practical needs of our capitalists and (partly) protect
      them from the discontent of the workers. The impartial language of figures
      tells us that our government, judging by the very nature of most of its
      everyday laws and edicts, is a loyal servant of the capitalists and that,
      in relation to the capitalist class as a whole, it functions in exactly
      the same way as, say, the head office of an iron trust, or as does the
      office of a sugar-refining syndicate in relation to the capitalists in the
      individual branches of industry. Of course, the fact

    

      that special laws have to be passed in order to introduce some trifling
      alteration in the articles of association of a company or to extend the
      call dates for payments on shares simply shows the unwieldiness of our
      state machinery; only a slight “improvement in the machinery”
      is necessary for all this to come under the jurisdiction of the local
      authorities. On the other hand, the unwieldiness of the machine, the
      excessive centralisation, the necessity for the government itself to poke
      its nose into everything—this is a feature of the whole of our
      public life, not merely of the sphere of commerce and industry. Hence, the
      examination of the number of enacted laws of this or that kind gives us a
      pretty fair insight into what the government interests itself in, into
      what it thinks and does.
    

      But the government displays considerably less interest in private
      associations that do not pursue aims so honourable from the moral point of
      view, and safe from the political point of view, as profit-making (except
      that it displays interest in order to hamper, prohibit, suppress,
      etc.). In the period “under review”—the writer of these lines
      is in the civil service, and he hopes, therefore, that the reader will
      forgive his employment of bureaucratic terms—the articles of
      association of two societies were sanctioned (those of the Society for the
      Aid to Needy Students in the Vladikavkaz Boys’ Gymnasium, and of the
      Vladikavkaz Society for Educational Excursions and Tours); by imperial
      grace permission to change the statutes was authorised for three others
      (the Saving and Mutual Aid Societies of the office employees and workers
      of the Lyudinovo and Sukreml Works and of the Maltsov Railway, the First
      Hop-Cultivation Society, and the Philanthropic Society for the
      Encouragement of Female Labour); fifty-five laws were passed pertaining to
      commercial and industrial companies; and five, in relation to various
      other societies. In the sphere of commercial and industrial interests,
      “we” exert our best efforts for the task and strive to do
      everything possible to facilitate association between merchants and
      manufacturers (strive, but do nothing, for the unwieldiness of the machine
      and the end less red tape considerably restrict the
      “possibilities” in the police state). In the sphere of
      non-commercial associations, we stand in principle for homeopathy. Now,
      hop-growing

    

      societies and societies for the encouragement of female labour are not so
      bad, but educational excursions.... God knows what may be discussed on
      these excursions! And will not the constant surveillance of the inspectors
      be made difficult? Now, you know, one must be careful in handling fire.
    

      Schools. As many as three new schools have been established. And what
      schools!  An elementary school for farm yard workers in the village of
      Blagodatnoye on the estate of His Imperial Highness, the Grand Duke Pyotr
      Nikolayevich. That the villages belonging to the Grand Dukes are all

      paradises[1]

      I have long ceased to doubt. But neither do I now doubt that
      even the highest personages may sincerely and whole-heartedly interest
      themselves in the education of the “younger brother.” Moreover, the
      rules of the Dergachi Rural Handicraft School, and of the Asanovo
      Elementary Agricultural School have been confirmed. I regret that I have
      not a reference book at hand to inform me whether or not some
      highly-placed personage owns these village paradises, in which popular
      education—and landlord farming are being cultivated with such
      zeal. But I console myself with the thought that such inquiries do not
      enter into the duties of a statistician.
    

      This, then, is the sum total of the laws that express “the
      government’s solicitude for the people.” As the reader will observe, I
      have made the greatest possible allowances in grouping these laws. Why,
      for example, is the Hop-Cultivation Society not a commercial enterprise?
      Perhaps be cause commerce is not the only thing that is discussed at its
      meetings. Or take the school for farmyard workers. Who can tell whether it
      is a school or an improved stockyard?
    

      We have still to deal with the last group of laws that shows the
      government’s solicitude for itself. This group consists of three times as
      many laws as we assigned to the last two categories, twenty-two laws,
      dealing with administrative reforms, each one more radical than the
      other—changing the name of the village Platonovskoye to
      Nikolayevskoye; modifying the articles of association, staffs, rules,

    

      lists, hours for sessions (of certain uyezd conferences), etc.; increasing
      the salary of midwives attached to army units in the Caucasus military
      area; determining the sums for shoeing and veterinary treatment of Cossack
      mounts; changing the by-laws of a private commercial school in Moscow;
      defining the rules of the scholarship grants endowed by Privy Councillor
      Daniil Samuilovich Polyakov at the Kozlov Commercial School. I am not sure
      whether I have classified these laws correctly. Do they really express the
      government’s solicitude for itself, or for commercial and industrial
      interests? If I have classified them wrongly, I beg the reader’s
      indulgence, since this is the first attempt that has been made to compile
      statistics on laws. Hitherto no one has attempted to raise this sphere of
      knowledge to the level of a strict science, not even the professors of
      Russian state law.
    

      Finally, one legislative act must be treated as a special, independent
      group, both because of its content and be cause of its being the first
      governmental measure in the new century. This is the law concerning the
      “increase in the area of forests to be devoted to the development
      and improvement of His Imperial Majesty’s hunting.” A grand
      début worthy of a great power!
    

      Now, to strike a balance. Statistics would be incomplete without it.
    

      Fifty laws and edicts devoted to various commercial and industrial
      companies and enterprises; a score of administrative name-changes and
      reforms; two creations and three reorganisations of private societies;
      three schools for the training of landlords’ employees; six policemen and
      two mounted sergeants appointed to factories. Can there be any doubt
      whatever that such richly varied legislative and administrative activity
      will guarantee our country rapid and undeviating progress in the twentieth
      century?
    

 
Notes
 

[1]

      A play on the name of the village Blagodatnoye which implies an earthly
      paradise.—Ed.
    
 



[2]

Vestnik Finansov, Promyshlennosti i Torgooli (Finance,
Industry and Trade Messenger)—a weekly journal published by
the Ministry of Finance in St. Petersburg from November 1883 to 1917
(until January 1885 it was called Ukazatel Pravitelstvennykh
Rasporyazheny po Ministerstvu Finansov—Record of
Government Instructions, Ministry of Finance). It carried
government regulations, economic articles, and reviews.
    

 
  

II. Why Accelerate the Vicissitude of the Times?

|


  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 4

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Drafting of 183 Students Into the Army









Lenin: The Drafting of 183 Students Into the Army







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Drafting of 183 Students Into the Army[1]





Written: Written in in January 1901 

Published:

      Published in February 1901 in Iskra, No. 2.

      Published according to the Iskra text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 4,

      pages 414-419.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.
Other Formats:  
Text
• README



    

    

      The newspapers of January 11 published the official announcement of the
      Ministry of Education on the drafting into the army of 183 students of
      Kiev University as a punishment for “riotous assembly.” The
      Provisional Regulations of July 29, 1899—this menace to the student
      world and to society—are being put into execution less than eighteen
      months after their promulgation, and the government seems to hasten to
      justify itself for applying a measure of unexampled severity by publishing
      a ponderous indictment in which the misdeeds of the students are painted
      in the blackest possible colours.
    

      Each misdeed is more ghastly than the preceding one! In the summer a
      general students’ congress was convened in Odessa to discuss a plan to
      organise all Russian students for the purpose of giving expression to
      protests against various aspects of academic, public, and political
      life. As a punishment for these criminal political designs all the student
      delegates were arrested and deprived of their documents. But the unrest
      does not subside—it grows and persists in breaking out in
      many higher educational institutions. The students desire to
      discuss and conduct their common affairs freely and independently. Their
      authorities—with the soulless formalism for which Russian officials
      have always been noted—retaliate with petty vexations, rouse the
      discontent of the students to the highest

    

      pitch, and automatically stimulate the thoughts of the youths who have not
      yet become submerged in the morass of bourgeois stagnation to protest
      against the whole system of police and official tyranny.
    

      The Kiev students demand the dismissal of a professor who took the place
      of a colleague that had left. The administration resists, provokes
      students to “assemblies and demonstrations”
      and—yields. The students call a meeting to discuss what could make
      possible so horrendous a case—two “white

      linings”[2]
      (according to reports) raped a young girl. The administration sentences
      the “ringleaders” to solitary confinement in the students’
      detention cell. These refuse to submit. They are expelled. A crowd of
      students demonstratively accompany the expelled students to the railway
      station. A new meeting is called; the students remain until evening and
      refuse to disperse so long as the rector does not show up. The
      Vice-Governor and Chief of Gendarmerie arrive on the scene at the head of
      a detachment of troops, who surround the University and occupy the main
      hall. The rector is called. The students demand—a constitution,
      perhaps? No. They demand that the punishment of solitary confinement
      should not be carried out and that the expelled students should be
      reinstated. The participants at the meeting have their names taken and are
      allowed to go home.
    

      Ponder over this astonishing lack of proportion between the modesty and
      innocuousness of the demands put forward by the students and the panicky
      dismay of the government, which behaves as if the axe were already being
      laid to the props of its power. Nothing gives our “omnipotent”
      government away so much as this display of consternation. By this it
      proves more convincingly than does any “criminal manifesto” to
      all who have eyes to see and ears to hear that it realises the complete
      instability of its position, and that it relies only on the bayonet and
      the knout to save it from the indignation of the people. Decades of
      experience have taught the government that it is surrounded by inflammable
      material and that a mere spark, a mere protest against the students’
      detention cell, may start a conflagration. This being the case, it is
      clear that the punishment had to be an exemplary one: Draft hundreds of
      students into the army! “Put

    

      the drill sergeant in place of

      Voltaire!”[3]—the
      formula has not become obsolete; on the contrary, the twentieth century is
      destined to see its real application.
    

      This new punitive measure, new in its attempt to revive that which has
      long gone out of fashion, provokes many thoughts and comparisons. Some
      three generations ago, in the reign of Nicholas I, drafting into the army
      was a natural punishment entirely in keeping with the whole system of
      Russian serf-owning society. Young nobles were sent to the army and
      compelled to serve as private soldiers, losing the privileges of their
      estate until they earned officer’s rank. Peasants were also drafted into
      the army, and it meant a long term of penal servitude, where “Green

      Street”[4]
      with its inhuman torment awaited them. It is now more than a quarter of a
      century since “universal” military service was introduced,
      which at the time was acclaimed as a great democratic reform. Real
      universal military service that is not merely on paper is undoubtedly a
      democratic reform; by abolishing the social-estate system it would make
      all citizens equal. But if such were the case, could drafting into the
      army be employed as a punishment? When the government converts military
      service into a form of punishment, does it not thereby prove that we are
      much nearer to the old recruiting system than to universal
      military service? The Provisional Regulations of 1899 tear off the
      pharisaical mask and expose the real Asiatic nature even of those of our
      institutions which most resemble European institutions. In reality,we have
      not and never had universal military service, because the privileges
      enjoyed by birth and wealth create innumerable exceptions. In reality, we
      have not and never had anything resembling equality of citizens in
      military service. On the contrary, the barracks are completely saturated
      with the spirit of most revolting absence of rights. The soldier from the
      working class or the peasantry is completely defenceless; his human
      dignity is trodden underfoot, he is robbed, he is beaten, beaten, and
      again beaten—such is his constant fare. Those with influential
      connections and money enjoy privileges and exemptions. It is not
      surprising, therefore, that drafting into this school of tyranny and
      violence can be a punishment, even a very severe punishment, amounting
      almost to deprivation of rights.

    

      The government thinks it will teach the “rebels” discipline in
      this school. But is it not mistaken in its calculations? Will not this
      school of Russian military service become the military school of the
      revolution? Not all the students, of course, possess the stamina to go
      through the whole coarse of training in this school. Some will break down
      under the heavy burden, fall in combat with the military authorities;
      others—the feeble and flabby—will be cowed into submission by
      the barracks. But there will be those whom it will harden, whose outlook
      will be broadened, who will be compelled to ponder and profoundly sense
      their aspirations towards liberty. They will experience the whole weight
      of tyranny and oppression on their own backs when their human dignity will
      be at the mercy of a drill sergeant who very frequently takes deliberate
      delight in tormenting the “educated.” They will see with their own
      eyes what the position of the common people is, their hearts will be rent
      by the scenes of tyranny and violence they will be compelled to witness
      every day, and they will understand that the injustices and petty
      tyrannies from which the students suffer are mere drops in the ocean of
      oppression the people are forced to suffer. Those who will understand this
      will, on leaving military service, take a Hannibal’s

      vow[5]
      to fight with the vanguard of the people for the emancipation of the
      entire people from despotism.
    

      The humiliating character of this new punishment is no less outrageous
      than its cruelty. In declaring the students who protested against
      lawlessness to be mere rowdies—even as it declared the exiled
      striking workers to be persons of depraved demeanour—the government
      has thrown down a challenge to all who still possess a sense of
      decency. Read the government communication. It bristles with such words as
      disorder, brawling, outrage, shamelessness, licence. On the one hand, it
      speaks of criminal political aims and the desire for political protest;
      and on the other, it slanders the students as mere rowdies who must he
      disciplined. This is a slap in the face of Russian public opinion, whose
      sympathy for the students is very well known to the government. The only
      appropriate reply the students can make is to carry out the threat of the
      Kiev students, to organise a determined general student strike in all
      higher educational

    

      institutions in support of the demand for the repeal of the Provisional
      Regulations of July 29, 1899.
    

      But it is not the students alone who must reply to the government. Through
      the government’s own conduct the incident has become something much
      greater than a mere student affair. The government turns to public opinion
      as though to boast of the severity of the punishment it inflicts, as
      though to mock at all aspirations towards liberty. All conscious elements
      among all strata of the people must take up this challenge, if they do not
      desire to fall to the level of dumb slaves bearing their insults in
      silence. At the head of these conscious elements stand the advanced
      workers and the Social-Democratic organisations inseparably linked with
      them. The working class constantly suffers immeasurably greater injuries
      and insults from the police lawlessness with which the students have now
      come into such sharp conflict. The working class has already begun the
      struggle for its emancipation. It must remember that this great struggle
      imposes great obligations upon it, that it cannot emancipate itself
      without emancipating the whole people from despotism, that it is its duty
      first and foremost to respond to every political protest and render every
      support to that protest. The best representatives of our educated classes
      have proved—and sealed the proof with the blood of thousands of
      revolutionaries tortured to death by the government—their ability
      and readiness to shake from their feet the dust of bourgeois society and
      join the ranks of the socialists. The worker who can look on indifferently
      while the government sends troops against the student youth is unworthy of
      the name of socialist. The students came to the assistance of the
      workers—the workers must come to the aid of the students. The
      government wishes to deceive the people when it declares that an attempt
      at political protest is mere brawling. The workers must publicly declare
      and explain to the broad masses that this is a lie; that the real hotbed
      of violence, outrage, and licence is the autocratic Russian Government,
      the tyranny of the police and the officials.
    

      The manner in which this protest is to be organised must be decided by the
      local Social-Democratic organisations and workers’ groups. The most
      practical forms of protest

    

      are the distribution, scattering, and posting up of leaflets, and the
      organisation of meetings to which as far as possible all classes of
      society should be invited. It would be desirable, however, where strong
      and well-established organisations exist, to attempt a broader and more
      open protest by means of a public demonstration. The demonstration
      organised last December 1, outside the premises of the newspaper
      Yuzhny

Krai[6]
      in Kharkov, may serve as a good example of such a protest. The jubilee of
      that filthy sheet, which baits everything that aspires to light and
      freedom and glorifies every bestiality of our government, was being
      celebrated at the time. The large crowd assembled in front of Yuzhny
      Krai, solemnly tore up copies of the paper, tied them to the tails of
      horses, wrapped them round dogs, threw stones and stink-bombs containing
      sulphuretted hydrogen at the windows, and shouted: “Down with the
      corrupt press!” Such celebrations are well deserved, not only by
      the corrupt newspapers, but by all our government offices. If they but
      rarely celebrate anniversaries of official benevolence, they constantly
      deserve the celebration of the people’s retribution. Every manifestation
      of governmental tyranny and violence is a legitimate motive for such a
      demonstration. The people must not let the government’s announcement of
      its punishment of the students go unanswered!
    

 
Notes
 

[1]

 We were going to press when the official announcement was published. —Lenin
 



[2]

      “White linings”—the name given in tsarist Russia to
      monarchist-minded students from aristocratic and bourgeois circles who
      conducted a struggle against the democratic section of the students,
      supporters of the revolutionary movement. The name derived from the white
      silk linings of their uniforms.
    



[3]

      The words of Colonel Skalozub, a character in A. S. Griboyedov’s comedy
      Wit Works Woe.
    



[4]

      “Green Street”—a form of corporal punishment employed
      in the army of feudal Russia. The condemned man was tied to a rifle and
      made to run the gauntlet between two ranks of soldiers who beat him with
      sticks or green switches. This form of punishment was particularly
      widespread under Tsar Nicholas I (1825-55).
    



[5]

Hannibal’s vow—unwavering determination to fight to the
      end. The Carthagenian general, Hannibal, made a vow not to cease the
      struggle against Rome until his dying day.
    



[6]

Yuzhny Krai (Southern Region)—a daily newspaper
      dealing with social, literary, and political problems founded in Kharkov
      in 1880. The paper, published and edited by A. A. Yuzefovich, an extreme
      reactionary, upheld conservative, royalist views.
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 4

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Workers' Party and the Peasantry









Lenin: The Workers' Party and the Peasantry







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Workers’ Party and the Peasantry[2]




Written: Written in February 1901 

Published:

      Published in April 1901 in Iskra, No. 3.

      Published according to the Iskra text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 4,

      pages 420-428.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.
Other Formats:  
Text
• README



    

    

      Forty years have passed since the peasants were emancipated. It is quite
      natural that the public should celebrate with particular enthusiasm
      February 19, the anniversary of the fall of old feudal Russia and the
      beginning of an epoch which promised the people liberty and
      prosperity. But we must not forget that besides genuine loathing of
      serfdom and all its manifestations, there is also much unctuousness in the
      laudatory orations delivered on the occasion. The now fashionable
      estimation of the “great” Reform as “the emancipation of
      the peasantry accompanied by a grant of land with the aid of
      state compensation” is utterly hypocritical and false. Actually, the
      peasants were emancipated from the land, inasmuch as the plots
      they had tilled for centuries were ruthlessly cut down and hundreds of
      thousands of peasants were deprived of all their land and settled on a
      quarter or beggar’s

      allotment.[3]
      In point of fact, the peasants were
      doubly robbed: not only were their plots of land cut down, but they had to
      pay “redemption money” for the land left to them, and which
      had always been in their possession; the redemption price, moreover, was
      far above the actual value of the land. Ten years after the emancipation
      of the peasantry the landlords themselves admitted to government officials
      investigating the state of agriculture that the peasants had been made to
      pay, not only for their land, but for their personal liberty. Yet,
      although the peasants had to pay redemption money for their liberation,
      they were not granted real freedom; for twenty years they remained
      “temporarily

      bound”[4];
      they were left—and have remained to
      this day—the lowest social-estate, subject to flogging;

    

      liable to special taxes; bereft of the right freely to leave the
      semi-feudal commune, freely to dispose of their own land, or freely to
      settle in any part of the country. Our peasant Reform, far from
      manifesting magnanimity of the government, on the contrary, serves as a
      great historical example of the extent to which the autocratic government
      befouls everything it touches. Under pressure of military defeat,
      appalling financial difficulties, and menacing discontent among the
      peasantry, the government was actually compelled to liberate the
      peasants. The tsar himself admitted that the peasants had to be
      emancipated from above, lest they emancipate themselves from below. But in
      embarking on emancipation, the government did everything possible and
      impossible to satisfy the greed of the “injured” serf-owners;
      it did not even stop at the base device of reshuffling the men who were to
      carry out the Reform, although the men selected had come from among the
      nobility itself!  The first body of mediators was dissolved and replaced
      by men incapable of refusing to help the serf-owners cheat the peasantry
      in the very process of demarcating the land. Nor could the great Reform be
      carried out with out resort to military punitive action and the
      shooting-down of peasants who refused to accept the title-deeds to the

      land.[5]
      It is not surprising, therefore, that the best men of the time,
      muzzled by the censors, met this great Reform with the silence of
      condemnation.
    

      The peasant, “emancipated” from corvée service, emerged
      from the hands of the reformers crushed, plundered, degraded, tied to his
      allotment, so much so that he had no alternative but
      “voluntarily” to accept corvée services. And so he
      began to cultivate the land of his former master, “renting” from him
      the very land that had been cut off from his own allotment, hiring himself
      out in the winter for summer work in return for the corn he had to borrow
      from the landlord to feed his hungry family. The “free labour,” for
      which the manifesto drawn up by a jesuitical priest called upon the
      peasantry to ask the “blessing of God,” turned out to be nothing
      more nor less than labour-service and bondage.
    

      To oppression by the landlords, which was preserved thanks to the
      magnanimity of the officials who introduced

    

      and carried out the Reform, was added oppression by capital. The power of
      money, which crushed even the French peasant, emancipated from the power
      of the feudal landlords, not by a miserable, half-hearted reform, but by a
      mighty popular revolution—this power of money bore down with all its
      weight upon our semi-serf muzhik. He had to obtain money at all
      costs—in order to pay the taxes which had increased as a result of
      the beneficent Reform, to rent land, to buy the few miserable articles of
      factory-made goods which began to squeeze out the home manufactures of the
      peasant, to buy corn, etc. The power of money not only crushed the
      peasantry, but split it up. An enormous number of peasants were steadily
      ruined
      and turned into proletarians; from the minority arose a small group of
      grasping kulaks and enterprising muzhiks who laid hands upon the peasant
      farms and the peasants’ lands, and who formed the kernel of the rising
      rural bourgeoisie. The forty years since the Reform have been marked by
      this constant process of “de-peasantising” the peasants, a
      process of slow and painful extinction. The peasant was reduced to
      beggary. He lived together with his cattle, was clothed in rags, and fared
      on weeds; he fled from his allotment, if he had anywhere to go, and even
      paid to be relieved of it, if he could induce anyone to take over
      a plot of land, the payments on which exceeded the income it yielded. The
      peasants were in a state of chronic starvation, and they died by the tens
      of thousands from famine and epidemics in bad harvest years, which
      recurred with increasing frequency.
    

      This is the state of our countryside even at the present time. One might
      ask: What is the way out, by what means can the lot of the peasantry be
      improved? The small peasantry can free itself from the yoke of capital
      only by associating itself with the working-class movement, by helping the
      workers in their struggle for the socialist system, for transforming the
      land, as well as the other means of production (factories, works,
      machines, etc.), into social property. Trying to save the peasantry by
      protecting small-scale farming and small holdings from the onslaught of
      capitalism would be a useless retarding of social development; it would
      mean deceiving the peasantry with illusions of the possibility of
      prosperity even under capitalism,

    

      it would mean disuniting the labouring classes and creating a privileged
      position for the minority at the expense of the majority. That is why
      Social-Democrats will always struggle against senseless and vicious
      institutions such as that which forbids the peasant to dispose of his
      land, such as collective liability, or the system of prohibiting the
      peasants from freely leaving the village commune or freely accepting into
      it persons belonging to any social-estate. But, as we have seen, our
      peasants are suffering not only and not so much from oppression by capital
      as from oppression by the land lords and the survivals of
      serfdom. Ruthless struggle against these shackles, which immeasurably
      worsen the condition of the peasantry and tie it hand and foot, is not
      only possible but even necessary in the interest of the country’s social
      development in general; for the hopeless poverty, ignorance, lack of
      rights, and degradation, from which the peasants suffer, lay an imprint of
      Asiatic backwardness upon the entire social system of our
      country. Social-Democracy would not be doing its duty if it did not render
      every assistance to this struggle. This assistance should take the form,
      briefly put, of carrying the class struggle into the countryside.
    

      We have seen that in the modern Russian village two kinds of class
      antagonism exist side by side: first, the antagonism between the
      agricultural workers and the proprietors, and, secondly, the antagonism
      between the peasantry as a whole and the landlord class as a whole. The
      first antagonism is developing and becoming more acute; the second is
      gradually diminishing. The first is still wholly in the future; the second
      to a considerable degree already belongs to the past. And yet, despite
      this, it is the second antagonism that has the most vital and most
      practical significance for Russian Social-Democrats at the present
      time. It goes without saying, it is an axiom for every Social-Democrat,
      that we must utilise all the opportunities presenting themselves to us to
      develop the class-consciousness of the agricultural wage-workers, that we
      must pay attention to the migration of urban workers to the countryside
      (e.g., mechanics employed on steam threshing machines, etc.) and to the
      markets where agricultural labourers are hired.
    
 

      But our rural labourers are still too closely connected with the
      peasantry, they are still too heavily burdened with the misfortunes of the
      peasantry as a whole to enable the movement of the rural workers to assume
      national significance, either now or in the immediate future. On the other
      hand, the question of sweeping away the survivals of serfdom, of driving
      the spirit of social-estate inequality and degradation of tens of millions
      of the “common people” out of the whole of the Russian state
      system is already a matter of national significance, and the Party which
      claims to be the vanguard in the fight for freedom cannot ignore it.
    

      The deplorable condition of the peasantry has now be come (in a more or
      less general form) almost universally recognised. The phrase about
      “the defects” of the Reform of 1861 and the need for state aid
      has become a current truism. It is our duty to point out that peasant
      distress arises precisely from the class oppression of the peasantry; that
      the government is the loyal champion of the oppressing classes; and that
      those who sincerely and seriously desire a radical improvement in the
      condition of the peasantry must seek, not aid from the government, but
      deliverance from its oppression and the achievement of political
      liberty. There is talk of the redemption payments being excessively high,
      and of benevolent measures on the part of the government to reduce them
      and extend the dates of payment. Our reply to this is: all payment of
      redemption money is nothing more nor less than robbery of the peasantry by
      the landlords and the government, screened by legal forms and bureaucratic
      phrases; it is nothing more nor less than tribute paid to the serf-owners
      for emancipating their slaves. We will put forward the demand for the
      immediate and complete abolition of redemption payments and quit-rents,
      and the demand for the return to the people of the hundreds of millions
      which the tsarist government has extorted from them in the course of the
      years to satisfy the greed of the slaveowners. There is talk of the
      peasants not having sufficient land, of the need for state aid to provide
      them with more land. Our reply to this is: it is precisely because
      of state aid (aid to the landlords, of course) that the peasants in
      such an enormous number of cases were deprived of land they vitally
      needed. We put forward the demand for restitution to the

      peasants of the land of which they have been deprived, a condition that
      still binds them to forced labour, to the rendering of corvée
      service, i.e., that virtually keeps them in a state of serfdom. We will
      put forward the demand for the establishment of peasant committees to
      remove the crying injustices perpetrated against the emancipated slaves by
      the Committees of Nobles set up by the tsarist government. We will demand
      the establishment of courts empowered to reduce the excessively high
      payment for land extorted from the peasants by the landlords who take
      advantage of their hopeless position, courts in which the peasants could
      prosecute for usury all who take advantage of their extreme need to impose
      shackling agreements upon them. We will utilise every opportunity to
      explain to the peasants that the people who talk to them about the
      tutelage or aid of the present state are either fools or charlatans, and
      are their worst enemies; that what the peasants stand most in need of is
      relief from the monstrous oppression of the bureaucratic power,
      recognition of their complete and absolute equality in all respects with
      all other social-estates, complete freedom of movement from place to
      place, freedom to dispose of their lands, and freedom to manage their own
      communal affairs and dispose of the communal revenues. The most common
      facts in the life of any Russian village provide a thousand issues for
      agitation in behalf of the above demands. This agitation must be based
      upon the local, concrete, and most pressing needs of the peasantry; yet it
      must not be confined to these needs, but must be steadily directed towards
      widening the outlook of the peasants, towards developing their political
      consciousness. The peasants must be brought to understand the special
      positions occupied in the state by the landlords and the peasants
      respectively, and they must be taught that the only way to free the
      countryside from tyrannical oppression is to convene an assembly of
      representatives of the people and to overthrow the arbitrary rule of the
      officials. It is absurd to assert that the demand for political liberty
      would not be understood by the workers; not only the workers who have
      engaged the factory owners and the police in direct battle for years and
      who constantly see their best fighters subjected to arbitrary arrests and
      persecution—not

    

      only these workers, who are already imbued with socialism, but every
      sensible peasant who thinks at all about the things he sees going on
      around him will understand what the workers are fighting for, will
      understand the significance of a Zemsky Sobor which will emancipate the
      whole country from the unlimited power of the hated officials. Agitation
      on the basis of the direct and most urgent needs of the peasants will
      fulfil its purpose—i.e., carry the class struggle into the
      countryside—only when it succeeds in combining every exposure of
      some “economic” evil with definite political demands.
    

      But the question arises whether the Social-Democratic Labour Party can
      include in its programme demands like those referred to above. Can it
      undertake to carry on agitation among the peasantry? Will it not lead to
      the scattering and diversion of our revolutionary forces, not very
      numerous as it is, from the principal and only reliable channel of the
      movement?
    

      Such objections are based on a misunderstanding. We must definitely
      include in our programme demands for the emancipation of our countryside
      from all the survivals of slavery, demands capable of rousing the best
      section of the peasantry, if not to engage in independent political
      action, then at all events consciously to support the working-class
      struggle for emancipation. We should be making a mistake if we defended
      measures that would have the effect of retarding social development or of
      artificially shielding the small peasantry against the growth of
      capitalism, against the development of large-scale production; but we
      should be committing a much more disastrous mistake if we failed to
      utilise the working-class movement for the purpose of spreading among the
      peasantry the democratic demands of which the Reform of February 19, 1861,
      fell short because of its distortion by the landlords and the
      officials. Our Party must include such demands in its programme if it is to
      take the lead of the whole people in the struggle against the

      autocracy.[1]
    

      But the inclusion of these points does not mean that we would call active
      revolutionary forces from the towns to the villages. Such a thing is out
      of the question. There can be no doubt that all the militant elements of
      the Party must concentrate on work in the towns and industrial centres;
      that only the industrial proletariat is capable of conducting a steadfast
      and mass struggle against the autocracy, of employing such methods of
      struggle as organising public demonstrations, or of issuing a
      popular political newspaper regularly and circulating it
      widely. We must include peasant demands in our programme, not in order to
      call convinced Social-Democrats from the towns to the countryside, not in
      order to chain them to the village, but to guide the activities of those
      forces that cannot find an outlet anywhere except in the rural
      localities and to utilise for the cause of democracy, for the political
      struggle for freedom, the ties which, owing to the force of circumstances,
      a good many faithful Social-Democratic intellectuals and workers have with
      the countryside—ties that are necessarily increasing and growing
      stronger with the growth of the movement. We have long passed the stage
      when we were a small detachment of volunteers, when the reserves of
      Social-Democratic forces were limited to circles of young people who all
      “went to the workers.” Our movement now has a whole army at its
      command, an army of workers, engaged in the struggle for socialism and
      freedom—an army of intellectuals who have been taking part in the
      movement and who can now be found over the whole length and breadth of
      Russia—an army of sympathisers whose eyes are turned with faith and
      hope towards the working-class movement and who are prepared to render it
      a thousand services. We are confronted with the great task of organising
      all these armies in such a manner as will enable us, not only to organise
      transient outbreaks, not only to strike casual and sporadic (and therefore
      not dangerous) blows at the enemy, but to pursue the enemy steadily
      and persistently, in a determined struggle all along the line, to harass
      the autocratic government wherever it sows oppression and gathers a
      harvest of hatred. Can this aim be achieved without sowing the seeds of
      the class struggle and political consciousness among the many millions of
      the peasantry? Let no one say it is impossible

    

      to sow these seeds! It is not only possible, it is already being done in a
      thousand ways that escape our attention and influence. This process will
      evolve much more widely and rapidly when we issue a slogan that will bring
      our influence to bear and when we unfurl the banner of the emancipation of
      the Russian peasantry from all the survivals of shameful serfdom. Country
      people coming to the towns even today regard with curiosity and interest
      the workers’ struggle, incomprehensible to them, and carry news of it to
      the remotest parts of the land. We can and must bring about a situation in
      which the curiosity of the bystanders is replaced, if not by full
      understanding, then at least by a vague consciousness that the workers are
      struggling for the interests of the whole people, by a growing sympathy
      for their struggle. And when that has been done, the day of the victory of
      the revolutionary workers’ party over the police government will come with
      a rapidity exceeding our own anticipation.
    

 
Notes
 

[1]

      We have drafted a Social-Democratic programme which includes the
      above-mentioned demands. We hope—after this draft has been discussed and
      amended with the participation of the Emancipation of Labour group—to
      publish it as the draft programme of our Party in one of our forthcoming
      issues.
    —Lenin
 



[2]

      The article, “The Workers’ Party and the Peasantry,” was
written in connection with the elaboration of the agrarian programme of
the R.S.D.L.P., published in the name of the Editorial Board of
Iskra and Zarya in the summer of 1902 and adopted by
the Second Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. in 1903.
    



[3]

A quarter or beggar’s allotment—a quarter of the so-called
      “maximum” or “decree” allotment, the amount
      established by law for a given district at the time of the Reform of
      1861. Some of the peasants received these tiny parcels of land from the
      landlords wit out payment of redemption money. Such allotments were,
      therefore, also called “gift allotments” and the peasants who
      received them were called “gift peasants.”
    



[4]

Temporarily bound peasants—peasants who were still
      compelled to carry out certain duties (payment of quit-rent or performance
      of corvée service) for the use of their land even after the Reform and
      until they started paying redemption money to the landlord for their
      allotment.
    

      From the moment the redemption contract was concluded, the peasants ceased
      to be “temporarily bound” and joined the category of
      “peasant property-owners.”
    



[5]

      These title-deeds were documents defining the land-owning
      relations of temporarily bound peasants and landlords upon the abolition
      of serfdom in 1861. The title-deed indicated the amount of land used by
      the peasant before the Reform and the land and other properties that
      remained in his hands after “emancipation”; the deed also listed the
      duties the peasant had to perform for the land lord. The amount of
      redemption money to be paid by the peasant was determined on the basis of
      this title-deed.
    










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 4

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 





