# Volume 29

==========

## Table of contents





Lenin Collected Works: Volume 29







Lenin 
      Collected Works: Volume 29



 
Lenin Collected Works: Volume 29
March - August 1919


Preface




1919


Session of the Petrograd Soviet. March 12, 191969k

Session of the First Congress of
Farm Labourers of Petroorad Gubernia
     March 13, 1919

1. Speech on the Organisation of a Farm Labourers’ Union 

2. Replies to Written Questions20k

Speech Delivered at a
  Meeting In the People’s House, Petrograd
     March 13, 1919. Newspaper Report20k

The Achievements and Difficulties of the Soviet Government76k

Speech In Memory of
  Y. M. Sverdlov at a Special Session of the all-Russia
  Central Executive Committee
     March 18, 191915k

Speech Delivered at the
  Funeral of Yakov Sverdlov
     March 18, 1919. Newspaper Report3k


Draft Programme of
    the R.C.P.(B.)
    
  1. Rough Draft of the Programme of the R.C.P.

  The Basic Tasks of the Dictatorship of the
Proletariat In Russia 
  
    2. Draft Programme of the R.C.P. (Bolsheviks)
  
    3. Insertion For Political Section of the Programme
    4. Fragment of the Political Section of the Programme
    5. Section of the Programme on National Relations
  
    6. Insertion For the Final Draft of the Programme Section
  on the National Question
  
    7. Preamble to the Military Section of the Programme
  
    8. First Paragraph of Section of the Programme on the
  Courts
  
    9. Section of the Programme Dealing With Public Education
  
    10. Section of the Programme Dealing With Religion
  
    11. Points From the Economic Section of the Programme
  
    12. Agrarian Section of the
  Programme196k


Eighth
    Congress of the R.C.P.(B.).
     March 18-23, 1919
  
  
  1. Speech Opening the Congress. March 15
  
  
  2. Report of the Central Committee. March 15
  
  
  3. Report on the Party Programme. March 19
  
  
  4. Speech Closing the Debate on the Party Programme. March 19
  
  
  5. Wireless Message of Greeting on Behalf of
  the Congress to the Government of the
  Hungarian Soviet Republic. March 22
  
  
  6. Report on Wore In the Countryside. March 23
  
  
  7. Speech In Opposition to a Motion to Close
  the Debate on the Report on Work In the
  Countryside March 23
  
  
  8. Resolution on the attitude to the Middle Peasants
  
  
  9. Speech Closing the Congress. March 23
  

213k


Wireless Message of Greeting to the
    Government of the Hungarian Soviet Republic
    
March 22, 19193k

Record of Wireless Message
  to Bela Kun
    
March 23, 19193k

Reply to an Open Letter By a Bourgeois Specialist15k

On the Candidacy of
  H. I. Kalinin For the Post of Chair Man of the
  all-Russia Central Executive Committee
    
March 30, 191910k


Speeches on
  Gramophone Records


1. In Memory of
  Comrade Yakov Mikhailovich Sverdlov,
Chairman of the all-Russia Central Executive
Committee
2. The Third,
  Communist International
3. Communication on
  the Wireless Negotiations With Bela Run
4. An Appeal to the
  Red Army
5. The Middle
    Peasants
6. What Is Soviet
    Power?
7. How the Working
    People Can Be Saved From the Oppression of the
    Landowners and Capitalists For Ever
8. Anti-Jewish
    Pogroms


--k


Telephone Message to the
  all-Russia Extraordinary Commission
    
April 1, 19194k

Extraordinary Plenary
  Meeting of the Moscow Soviet of Workers’ and Red
  army Deputies
    April 3, 1919
  
  1. Report on the Domestic and Foreign Situation of the Soviet Republic
  
  2. Resolution on the Report on the Domestic and Foreign Situation of the Soviet Republic46k

Letter to the Petroghad Workers on aid For the Eastern Front4k

Theses of the Central Committee of the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks) on the Situation on the Eastern  Front16k

Plenary Meeting of the
  all-Russia Central Council of Trade Unions
    
April 11, 1919

  
  1. Report on the Tasks of the Trade Unions In the Mobilisation For the Eastern Front
  
  2. Reply to a Question on the Tula Strike
  
  3. Speech Closing the Discussion.48k

Foreword to Henri Guildeaux’s Pamphlet Socialism and Syndicalism in France During the War8k

Speech Delivered at the
  First the First Moscow Soviet Commanders’
  Courses
    
April 15, 1919. Brief Newspaper Report8k

The Third International and Its Place In History28k

Speech at a Meeting of the
  Railwaymen of Moscow Junction
    
April 16, 191920k

The Fight against
  Kolchak. Speech at a Conference of Moscow Factory
  Committees and Trade Unions
    
April 17, 1919. Newspaper Report.12k

Speech at the First
  all-Russia Congress of Communist Students
    
April 11, 19198k

Message of Greetings to the Bavarian Soviet Republic4k

Telegram to the Chairman of  the Council of People’s  Commissars of the Ukraine8k

Three Speeches Delivered In
  Red Square
    
May 1, 1919. Newspaper Report.8k

First all-Russia Congress on
  adult Education
    
May 6-19, 1919
  
  1. Speech of Greeting. May 6
  
  2. Deception of the People With Slogans of Freedom
  and Equality, May 19104k

Foreword to the Published Speech ’Deception of the People With Slogans of Freedom and Equality’20k

Telegram to the Council of People’s Commissars of the Ukraine7k

Addendum to the Draft appeal to German Workers and to Peasants Who Do Not Exploit the Labour of Others7k

Telegram to J. V. Stalin
    
May 20, 19193k

Speech at the Universal
  Military Training Festival
    
May 25, 1919. Brief Newspaper Report11k

Greetings to the Hungarian Workers16k

The Heroes of the Berne International28k

Telegram to J. V. Stalin
    
May 29, 19194k

Beware of Spies!8k

Draft C.C. Directives on army Unity12k

Telegram to J. V. Stalin
    
June 4, 19193k

Draft Decision of the C.C. R.C.P.(B.) on the Petrograd Front8k

A Great Beginning. Heroism of the Workers In the Rear. “Communist Subbotniks”68k

Telegram to J. V. Stalin
    
June 30, 191940k

All Out For the Fight
  against  Denikin!
    
Letter of the Central Committee of the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks)To Party Organisations


Main Task of the Moment


The Truth about Kolehak and Denikin Must Be Explained to the People

 
Work among Men Called Up For Service


Work among the Deserters


Direct aid to the army


Curtailment of Work Not For the War

 
Work In the Front Zone


Attitude towards Military Experts


The Fight against Counter-Revolution In the Rear


The Population Must Be Mobilised For War to a Man


“Work In a Revolutionary Way”48k

The Present Situation and the
Immediate Tasks of Soviet Power Report
    
Delivered to a Joint Meeting of the all-Russia Central Executive
Committee, the Moscow Soviet of Workers’ and Red army
Deputies, the all-Russia Council of Trade Unions and
Representatives of Moscow Factory Committees. July 4,
191933k

The State: a Lecture
  Delivered at the Sverdlov University
    
July 11, 191945k

The Domestic and Foreign Situation
  of the Republic
    
Report Delivered to the Moscow Conference of the
  R.C.P.(B.) July 12, 1919. Newspaper Report13k

The Tasks of the Third
  International
    
Ramsoy Mac Donald on the Third International48k

 Speech on the Domestic and
  Foreign Situation Delivered to a Red army Conference
  Held in Khodynseoye Camp
    
July 15, 1919. Brief Newspaper Report7k

Answers to an American Journalist’s Questions12k

The Food and War
  Situation
     Speech at a Moscow Conference of
Factory Committees, Trade Unions and Representatives of the
Moscow Central Workers’ Co-Operative. July 30,
191940k

Speech at the First
  all-Russia Congress of Workersin Education and
  Socialist Culture
    
July 81, 191920k

In the Servants’ Quarters 17k

Speech at a Non-Party
  Conference of Workers and Men Of the Red Army
    
August 6, 1919. Newspaper Report 11k

To Comrades Serhati and Lazzari 2k

Letter to the Workers and Peasants apropos of the Victory Over Kolchak 21k

Letter to Sylvia Pankhurst16k

Freedom to Trade In Grain, the Basic Conditions for Victory11k

 


Volume 29
      Transcription/Mark-up: Robert Cymbala, David
    Walters, and Zodiac,   2000—2002 







 
Previous

 | 
 Next 

 
Lenin
      Collected Works 
 | 
 Lenin
      Internet Archive 

 




 


 
 
 







==========

## Session of the Petrograd Soviet.











Session Of The Petrograd Soviet; Report On The Foreign And Home Policy
Of The Council Of People’s Commissars 



V. I. Lenin
Session Of The Petrograd 
Soviet
March 12, 1919
I
Report On The Foreign And Home Policy
Of The Council Of People’s Commissars
Brief Newspaper Report


Written: 12 March, 1919
First Published: First published in the Fourth
(Russian) Edition of the Collected Works according, to the Verbatim Report 
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, pages 19-38
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License.


(Lenin’s appearance on the platform is greeted by a lengthy ovation. All rise.)
“This hail reminds me of the first time I
    spoke at a meeting of the Petrograd Soviet, when the Mensheviks
    and Socialist-Revolutionaries still ruled it. We have forgotten
    the recent past too soon, but today, the way the revolution is
    developing in other countries reminds us of what we experienced
    not so long ago. Formerly it was assumed that in the West, where
    class antagonisms are much more developed, because of the more
    intensive development of capitalism, the revolution would proceed
    on lines differing somewhat from those of this country, and that
    power would pass directly from the bourgeoisie to the
    proletariat. Events in Germany, however, indicate the
    contrary. The German bourgeoisie have united to counteract the
    masses of the proletariat who have raised their heads; they
    acquire strength from the greater experience gained by the Western
    bourgeoisie, and are waging a systematic struggle against the
    proletariat. The German revolutionary masses, however, still lack
    experience, and can gain it only in the course of this
    struggle. Everybody remembers the revolution of 1905, when the
    Russian proletariat entered the struggle without any previous
    experience. In the present revolution, however, we have taken into
    account and made use of the experience we gained in the revolution
    of 1905.”
Lenin then proceeded to review the work of the Council of
    People’s Commissars. He recalled the first period of
    therevolution when the masses did not yet know what to do and
    still lacked sufficiently authoritative and powerful guiding
    centres.
“We knew perfectly well,” Lenin continued,
    “that to achieve success in the struggle that had been
    started the greatest possible cohesion of the exploited masses and
    all elements of the entire working population was essential, and
    this inevitably brought us face to face with the question of forms
    of organisation. We remembered very well the part the Soviets had
    played in 1905, and revived them as the most suitable means of
    uniting the working people in their struggle against the
    exploiters. Before the revolution in Germany we always said that
    the Soviets were the most suitable organs of government for
    Russia. At that time we could not say that they were equally
    suitable for the West, but events have shown that they are. We see
    that Soviets are gaining popularity in the West, and that the
    fight for them is going on not only in Europe, but also in
    America. Soviet-type councils are being set up everywhere, and
    sooner or later they will take power into their own hands.
“The present situation in America, where such councils
    are being set up, is extremely interesting. Perhaps the movement
    there will not develop as it is developing in this country, but
    the important thing is that there, too, the Soviet form of
    organisation has gained extensive popularity. This form has
    superseded all other forms of proletarian organisation. The
    anarchists were formerly opposed to all government but after they
    had got to know the Soviet form they accepted it, and thereby
    demolished the whole theory of anarchism, which repudiates every
    form of government. Two years ago the compromising idea of
    collaboration with the bourgeoisie was dominant in our Soviets. A
    certain amount of time was required to clear the minds of the
    masses of the old rubbish that prevented them from understanding
    what was going on. This could be achieved only when the Soviets
    had undertaken the practical work of building the state. The
    masses of the workers in Germany are now in the same position, and
    their minds, too, must be cleared of the same old rubbish,
    although in that country the process is more intense, cruel and
    bloody than in Russia.
“I have digressed somewhat from the subject on which the
    Presidium of the Petrograd Soviet has asked me to speak, but this
    could not be helped.
“The activities of the Council of People’s
    Commissars during the past year can be understood only by
    appraising the role of the Soviets in the light of the world
    revolution. Often the minor daily affairs of administration and
    the inevitable petty problems of the work of organisation distract
    our attention and make us forget the great cause of the world
    revolution. But only by gauging the role of the Soviets on a world
    scale can we properly understand the minor details of the internal
    life of our country, and regulate them in proper time. The bigwig
    inspectors from Berne[1] say that we advocate violence, but
    they deliberately shut their eyes to the practices of their own
    bourgeoisie which governs exclusively with the aid of
    violence.
“Before we adopted the Soviet form of government there
    was a period of several months during which the masses prepared
    themselves for this new, hitherto unprecedented form of
    government. We tore the Kerensky government to shreds; we
    compelled the Provisional Government to keep on changing its
    Cabinet, to jump from right to left, up and down, and this
    definitely proved to the masses that the clique of compromisers
    with bourgeoisie who claimed the right to power at that time were
    unfit to govern the country, and only after this did we take power
    into our hands.
“The matter is much more complicated when taken on a
    world scale. In that case, revolutionary violence is not enough;
    revolutionary violence must be preceded by a period of
    preparation, like the one we passed through, but of somewhat
    longer duration, of course. At one time the Treaty
    of Brest was a vexed question, and certain gentlemen called it
    a compromise and decided to take advantage of this step of the
    Soviet government to serve their demagogic aims. But if this is
    called a compromise, it would also be correct to say that we
    compromised with the tsar when we went into the State Duma in
    order to disrupt it from within. We concluded the Treaty of Brest
    because we expected the development of conditions in Germany that
    would bring about the overthrow of Wilhelm, and this shows how
    correct our calculations were.
“In the Entente[2] countries we see the awakening of the
    masses which the governments of these countries are doing their
    utmost to prevent. For this purpose the thoughts of the as yet
    politically unenlightened masses are being diverted to
    ‘patriotic’ channels. The masses are being lured by
    promises of the advantages of a victorious peace, they are being
    promised incalculable blessings when peace is concluded. They are
    being sustained with illusions. But the extent to which these
    illusions are likely to become reality may be gauged by the
    conversation I had recently with an American, a shrewd and
    level-headed businessman, whose interests differ entirely from
    ours. He described the situation in France as follows. The French
    Government is promising the masses piles of gold which, it claims,
    will be obtained from the Germans but the Germans have to have
    something to pay with, for if a debtor has nothing, nothing can be
    got front him and all the illusions based on the prospect of
    concluding an advantageous peace with Germany will be dispelled,
    for the peace that has been concluded will be a bankrupt
    peace. Even the enemies of the revolution realise this, for they
    see no way out of the present situation except the overthrow of
    capitalism. In this respect the temper of the Paris crowds, which
    are extremely sensitive and responsive, is typical. Six months ago
    people were quite tolerant towards speakers at meetings who
    roundly abused the Bolsheviks. But now, if any speaker dares to
    say anything against the Bolsheviks, they refuse to give him a
    hearing. The bourgeoisie have helped us a great deal to popularise
    our ideas. Their attacks on us made the masses think and discuss
    and, as a consequence, those of the masses of Paris who are able
    to think for themselves have come to the conclusion that since the
    bourgeoisie detest the Bolsheviks so much the Bolsheviks must know
    how to fight them. The Entente has now turned its attention to its
    and wants to pay the bills it owes out of our pocket. We have to
    reckon with a powerful enemy whose military strength is superior
    to ours, but not for long. Disillusionment with the victory is
    bound to set in, and this will lead to the collapse of all the
    ‘Allied’ machinations, that is, if they do not quarrel
    with each other before that. All countries are now suffering from
    hunger and no victory will hell) overcome it.. We are confronted
    with complicated problems of foreign policy. In this respect we
    have the experience of the Brest peace, time most important step
    in the foreign policy of the Council of People’s
    Commissars. The Brest peace was concluded with a powerful enemy
    who was far superior to us in military strength, and this caused
    disagreement even in our own ranks, but the proletarian state had
    to take such a first step because it was surrounded on all sides
    by imperialist predators. The Brest peace sapped the strength of
    our powerful enemy. In a very short time the Germany which had
    forced these predatory terms upon its collapsed, and the same fate
    awaits the other countries, the more so that everywhere we see the
    armies falling to pieces.
“We must recall the time when the disintegration of our
    army was ascribed to the impatience of the Russians, but this
    seems to be the lot of all countries that take the path of
    revolution. The downright robbery now being perpetrated by the
    ‘democratic’ governments in Paris is opening the eyes
    of the masses, the more so that their bickering over the spoils,
    which at times grows into a serious quarrel, is no longer a
    secret.[3] Unfavourable though the conditions
    under which Soviet Russia exists may be, we have this one
    advantage, which even the bourgeois Times lays stress upon. In an
    article written by its military expert it spoke of the growing
    disintegration of the armies of all countries except
    Russia. According to time Times, Russia is the only country in
    which the army is not falling to pieces but is being built
    up. This has been one of the most important features of our
    development during the past year. We are surrounded by enemies, we
    are defending ourselves and fighting to regain every inch of
    Soviet Russia’s territory, and every month of struggle
    brings us nearer and nearer to the world revolution. We were the
    first in the world to take power, and today Soviets of working
    people govern our country. Shall we succeed in retaining power? If
    we do not, it will prove that historically we were not justified
    in seizing power. But today we can be justly proud of having
    withstood this test and of having upheld the power of the working
    people in spite of the incalculable suffering we have been
    compelled to undergo.”
Lenin then went on to deal with the question of the specialists.
 
      Some of our comrades, he said, express indignation at the fact
      that former officers and others who served the tsar are at the
      head of the Red Army. “Naturally, in organising the Red
      Army this question acquires special significance and success in
      this work depends on its correct presentation. But the question
      of specialists must be discussed on a broader scale. We must
      make use of them in all spheres of organisation, wherever we,
      lacking the experience and scientific training of the old
      bourgeois specialists, are ourselves naturally unable to cope
      with our tasks. We are not utopians who think that socialist
      Russia must be built up by men of a new type; we must utilise
      the material we have inherited from the old capitalist world. We
      are placing people of the old type in new conditions, keeping
      them under proper control, under the vigilant supervision of the
      proletariat, and making them do the work we need. This is the
      only way we can build. If you are unable to erect the edifice
      with the materials bequeathed to us by the bourgeois world, you
      will not be able to build it at all, and you will not be
      Communists, but mere phrase-mongers. For the purpose of building
      socialism, we must make the fullest use of the science,
      technology and, in general, everything that capitalist Russia
      bequeathed to us. Of course there will be great difficulties in
      our way. Mistakes are inevitable. There are deserters and
      deliberate saboteurs everywhere. Against these, force had to be
      the primary weapon. But after that we must make use of the moral
      weight of the proletariat, strong organisation and
      discipline. There is no need whatever to reject useful
      specialists, but they must be kept within definite limits so
      that the proletariat can keep them under control. They must be
      entrusted with certain work, but a vigilant eye must also be
      kept on them, commissars must be placed over them to thwart
      their counter-revolutionary scheming. At the same time we must
      also learn from them. Above all, no political concessions
      whatever must be made to these gentlemen whose services we are
      using wherever possible. We have already succeeded in doing this
      to some extent. We have passed from the stage of suppressing the
      capitalists to the stage of using their services, and this,
      perhaps, is one of the most important achievements in the field
      of internal development during the past year.
“One of the most serious problems affecting our cultural
    development is that of the rural districts. Soviet power
    presupposes the widest. possible support of the working
    people. This sums up our entire rural policy during this
    period. It was necessary to link up the urban proletariat with the
    rural poor, and this we have done. Today they are most intimately
    connected by thousands of imperceptible threads. Here, as
    elsewhere, we encounter considerable difficulties, for the
    peasants are accustomed to feel that they are independent
    proprietors. They are accustomed to sell their grain freely, and
    every peasant regarded this as his inalienable right. Now a
    tremendous effort is needed to convince them definitely that only
    by means of the communist organisation of production shall we be
    able to cope with the devastation caused by the war. This must be
    done by persuasion and not by force. Of course, among the peasants
    too we have open enemies, the kulaks; but the bulk of the poor
    peasants, and of the middle peasants who are close to them, are on
    our side. Against the kulaks, who are our inveterate enemies, we
    have but one weapon—force. When we began to carry out our
    food policy on the principle that the peasants must surrender
    their surplus stocks for the benefit of the famine-stricken, some
    people began to shout to the peasants: ‘They’re
    robbing you!’ These were the inveterate enemies of the
    peasants, workers and communism, enemies arrayed in Menshevik,
    Left Socialist-Revolutionary, or other clownish costumes, and
    these we shall continue to treat in the same way as we have
    treated them up to now.”
Severruya Kornnlna No. 58,

      March 14, 1919
Published according to the
Severnaya Kommuna text
2
Replies to Written Questions
Comrades, I now want to reply to the written quest
    ions, two of which are not quite clear. However, one of them
    appears to contain two main ideas. In the first place, its author
    has a grudge against the Bolsheviks who went at things with a
    rush, and sympathises with the Mensheviks because of their love of
    the gradual. Secondly, he asks about peasant revolts.
Insofar as concerns the first question, let me say that if you
    make this sort of accusation against the Bolsheviks you must say
    what they did in a rush, and what is good about gradualness. The
    main thing that distinguishes us from the Mensheviks was our
    insistence on the transfer of all power to the Soviets and we
    rushed things to such an extent that in October of the year before
    last we took power. The Mensheviks advocated procrastination since
    they did not desire that transfer of power. The well-known
    socialist Kautsky, for instance, a man who sympathises with the
    Mensheviks, said in a pamphlet in August 1918 that the Bolsheviks
    should not take power because they would not be able to hold out,
    that they would perish and in that way destroy a whole party. I
    think that view has been disproved by the course of events and
    that it is not worth while wasting time on it, especially as there
    have not been any clear objections. In Germany, Kautsky insisted
    on democracy, on a Constituent Assembly. The German Mensheviks and
    ours said that power should not be given to the Soviets. The
    Constituent Assembly assembled in Germany, and in January and
    March there were several huge workers’ revolts, a civil war,
    the result of which was that the German Mensheviks, headed by
    Hilferding, proposed in recent articles to combine the Constituent
    Assembly with Workers’ Councils in such a way as to give the
    Central Committee of the Councils the right to hold up decisions
    made by the Constituent Assembly and submit questions to a
    plebiscite. This shows that the German Mensheviks, even the best
    of them, are in an absolute muddle. The idea of combining the
    Constituent Assembly and the Workers’ Councils, the
    dictatorship of the bourgeoisie and the dictatorship of the
    proletariat, deserves nothing but ridicule.
With regard to the peasant revolts—there is a question on
    that subject here. We have, of course, experienced a number of
    kulak revolts and they are still occurring. Last summer there was
    a whole string of them. The kulak is our implacable enemy. And
    here we can hope for nothing unless we crush him. The middle
    peasant is a different case, he is not our enemy. It is not true
    that there have been peasant revolts in Russia that involved a
    large number of peasants who were not kulaks. An individual
    village or a volost does join the kulaks, but under Soviet power
    there have been no peasant revolts that involved all the peasants
    in Russia. There have been kulak revolts and there will be more
    under a government that insists on surplus grain being sold to the
    hungry at fixed prices. Such revolts are inevitable because the
    kulak who has a big stock of grain can sell it at several hundred
    rubles a pood; we all know what prices the food profiteers are
    getting. If we allow the kulaks so much freedom, the rich man who
    has a secret cache of Kerensky paper money[4] will
    fill his belly, but the majority who have nothing hidden will go
    hungry. And so we do not close our eyes to the inevitability of
    kulak revolts against Soviet power. When the capitalists were in
    power workers’ revolts against them arid peasant revolts
    against the landowners were inevitable. Now that the landowners
    and capitalists have been smashed kulak revolts will occur less
    and less frequently. You have to take your choice. If there is
    anyone who wants everything to go smoothly without any revolts,
    who wants the rich people to hand us a declaration of love on a
    salver and promise to hand over all surpluses peacefully, I
    don’t think we can take him seriously.
The other unclear note contains the following. What is to be
    done when workers, misled by the appeals of the
    SocialistRevolutionaries, do not work, go on strike, and come out
    against Soviet power because of the food shortage? I cannot, of
    course, count on all workers, down to the last, supporting Soviet
    power. When the Paris workers revolted in 1871, quite a large
    number of workers in other towns fought against them in the
    whiteguard troops and crushed the Paris workers. That did not
    prevent politically-conscious socialists from asserting that the
    Paris Communards represented the entire proletariat, that is, all
    that was best and honest—only backward sections of the
    workers served in the whiteguard troops. We, too, have backward
    workers who are not politically conscious and who have not yet
    understood Soviet power; we are doing our best to enlighten
    them. No other government has satisfied the demands for standing
    representative bodies of workers to the extent the Soviets have,
    which are willing to give any representative of a factory a place
    in a government institution. We are, as far as possible, drawing
    workers into the implementation of the policy of the state; under
    capitalism, even in republics, the workers were kept out of it but
    Soviet power does its best to attract workers, although some of
    them will feel the attraction of the old for quite a long time to
    come.
There are very few people among you, probably only an
    individual or two, who remember serfdom; only very old people can
    remember that, but there are people who remember what things were
    like thirty or forty years ago. Anyone who was in the rural
    districts knows that some thirty years ago there were quite a
    number of old people in the villages who said, “It was
    better under serfdom, there was more order, things were strict and
    the women did not dress extravagantly.” If you now read Gleb
    Uspensky—we are erecting a monument to him as one of the
    best writers about peasant life you will find descriptions dating
    back to the eighties and nineties of honest old peasants and
    sometimes just ordinary elderly people who said frankly that it
    had been better under serfdom. When an old social order is
    destroyed it cannot be destroyed immediately in the minds of all
    people, there will always be some who are drawn to the old.
Some workers, printers, for instance, say that capitalism was
    good, there were a lot of newspapers whereas now there are few, in
    those days they earned a decent wage and they do not want any
    socialism. There were quite a number of branches of industry that
    depended on the rich classes or on the production of articles of
    luxury. Under capitalism quite a number of workers in big cities
    lived by producing articles of luxury. In the Soviet Republic we
    shall have to leave those workers unemployed for a time. We shall
    say to them, “Get down to some other, useful work.”
    And the worker will say, “I did delicate work, I was a
    jeweller, it was clean work, I worked for gentlemen; now the
    muzhik is in power, the gentlemen have been scattered and I want
    to go back to capitalism.” Such people will preach going
    back to capitalism, or, as the Mensheviks say, going forward to
    healthy capitalism and sound democracy. A few hundred workers are
    to be found who will say, “We lived well under a healthy
    capitalism.” The people who lived well under capitalism were
    an insignificant minority—we defend the interests of the
    majority that lived badly under capitalism. (Applause.) Healthy
    capitalism led to world slaughter in the countries with the
    greatest freedom. There can be no healthy capitalism, there can be
    capitalism of the sort obtaining in the freest republic, one like
    the American republic, cultured, rich, technically developed; and
    that democratic and most republican capitalism, led to the most
    savage world slaughter over the plunder of the whole world. Out of
    fifteen million workers you will find a few thousand who lived
    well under capitalism. In the rich countries there are more such
    workers because they work for a greater number of millionaires and
    multimillionaires. They served that handful and received
    particularly high wages from them. Take hundreds of British
    millionaires—they have accumulated thousands of millions
    because they have plundered India and a large number of
    colonies. It meant nothing to them to make gifts to 10,000 or
    20,000 workers, giving them double or higher wages so that they
    would work well for them. I once read the reminiscences of an
    American barber whom a multimillionaire paid a dollar a day to
    shave him. And that barber wrote a whole book praising that
    multimillionaire and his own wonderful life. For a daily visit of
    one hour to his financial majesty he received a dollar,
    wassatisfied and did not want anything but capitalism. We have to
    be on our guard against such an argument. The vast majority of
    workers were not in such a position. We, the Communists of the
    whole world, defend the interests of the vast majority of working
    people, and it was a small minority of working people whom the
    capitalists bribed with high wages and made them the loyal
    servants of capital. Under serfdom there were people, peasants,
    who said to the landowners, “We are your slaves (that was
    after emancipation), we hall not leave you.” Were there many
    of them? An insignificant few. Can you deny that there was a
    struggle against serfdom by reference to theni? Of course not. And
    today communism cannot be denied by reference to the minority of
    workers who earned good money on bourgeois newspapers, on the
    production of articles of luxury and for their personal services
    to multimillionaires.
I shall now deal with the questions that were presented
    clearly, first of all with the question of concessions in general
    and of the Great Northern Railways[5] in particular. It is
    said that it would be allowing predators to plunder the wealth of
    the nation. In answer to this I say that the question is closely
    connected with bourgeois specialists and the question of world
    imperialism. Can we smash world imperialism today? It would be our
    duty to do it if we could, but you know that we cannot do it today
    any more than we could have overthrown Kerensky in March 1917; we
    had to wait for the Soviet organisations to develop, we had to
    work for that and not revolt against Kerensky immediately. And
    today, is an offensive war against world imperialism any more
    possible? Of course not. If we had been strong enough, if we could
    have obtained a lot of grain quickly, and had machinery and so on,
    we would not have allowed the Scheidernanns
    to mow down the Spartacists
    but would have kicked them out. Today, however, that is misplaced
    fantasy, today our country alone cannot overthrow world
    imperialism; other countries are experiencing a period in which
    there is no Soviet majority and in many countries Soviets are only
    just beginning to appear so that we have to make concessions to
    imperialism. Today we cannot build railways on a large
    scale—God grant that we can handle those already
    existing. We are short of grain and fuel, we have not got enough
    locomotives, several million poods of grain are lying on
    the Volga-Bugulma Railway and we cannot bring it away. In the
    Council of People’s Commissars a few days ago we passed a
    decision to send representatives with extensive powers to get the
    grain away from there. The people are hungry in Petrograd and
    Moscow while millions of poods of grain are stored there
    and we cannot get them away because we have not got enough
    locomotives and there is no fuel. And we say that it is better to
    pay tribute to foreign capitalists as long as they build
    railways. We shall not perish on account of that tribute but if we
    do not organise railway transport we may perish because the people
    are hungry; great as the endurance of the Russian worker may he,
    there is a limit to it. It is, therefore, our duty to take
    measures to improve railway facilities even at the expense of
    paying tribute to capitalism. Good or had, there is so far no
    choice. We shall not ruin Soviet power by paying tribute to world
    capitalism until it is finally overthrown. We paid gold to the
    German imperialists, we had to under the terms of the Treaty of
    Brest, and now the Entente countries are taking that gold away
    from them—the victorious bandit is robbing the defeated
    bandit. We say today that as long as the world movement of the
    proletariat does not bring victory we shall either fight or pay
    those bandits to buy them off and do not see anything bad in
    it. While we were buying off the German bandits by paying them a
    few hundred million we strengthened our Red Army, but the German
    bandits now have nothing left. That’s what will happen to
    other imperialist bandits. (Applause.)
The comrade adds that lie was under arrest for four days for
    opposing the ruin of the middle peasants; he asks what the middle
    peasant is and refers to a number of peasant revolts. If the
    comrade was arrested for protesting against the ruin of the middle
    peasants that was, of course, incorrect, and judging by his speedy
    release I imagine that either the one who arrested him or some
    other representative of Soviet power found the action
    incorrect. Now about the middle peasant. He differs from the kulak
    in not exploiting the labour of others. The kulak steals other
    people’s money and other people’s labour. The poor
    peasants, the seini-proletarians, are those who are themselves
    exploited; the middle peasant does not exploit other people, gets
    his living from his own farni, has approximately enough grain, is
    no kulak but is not to be classed as poor either. Such peasants
    waver between us and the kulaks. A few of them may become kulaks
    if they are lucky, that is why they are attracted to the kimlaks,
    but the majority of then will never be kulaks. If the socialists
    and Communists are able to talk intelligently to the middle
    peasant they can prove to him that the Soviet government is more
    advantageous than any other, because other governments oppress and
    crush the middle peasant. The middle peasant, however,
    wavers. Today he is for us, tomorrow for some other power; partly
    for us and partly for the bourgeoisie. In the programme we shall
    adopt in a few days we are against any kind of force in respect of
    the middle peasant. Our Party makes this declaration. If there are
    arrests we condemn them and will put matters right. In respect of
    the kulak we are for force but in respect of the middle peasant we
    are against force. To him we say, “If you are oil time side
    of Soviet power we shall not drive you into a commune by force, we
    have never forced peasants into communes and no decree to that
    effect exists.” If it happens in the localities, it is abuse
    of power for which the people in office are removed and
    indicted. This is a big question. The middle peasant stands
    between two camps. But, comrades, in this case the policy is quite
    clear—we are against force where the middle peasants are
    concerned, we favour agreement with them we favour concessions to
    them. The middle peasant can and will come to communism by a slow
    journey. In the freest capitalist republic the middle peasant is
    threatened by capital that oppresses and crushes him in some way
    or other.
The next note asks my opinion of the Baltic Fleet. I have not
    studied the question of the. Baltic Fleet and cannot answer at the
    moment; the speech by the comrade from the fleet probably
    exhausted that question.
Then there is a question about the mouldiness, moss and red
    tape that has grown in the localities and about the need to fight
    it. That is perfectly true. When the October Revolution kicked out
    the old bureaucrats it did so because it had created the
    Soviets. It turned out the old judges and made the court a
    people’s court. The court could have been simplified; for
    this there was no need to know the old laws but simply to be
    guided by a sense of justice. It was easy to get rid of
    bureaucratic methods in the courts. In other areas it was much
    more difficult. We threw out the old bureaucrats, but they have
    come back, they call themselves “commonists” when they
    can’t bear to say the word Communist, and they wear a red
    ribbon in their buttonholes and creep into warm corners. What to
    do about it? We must tight this scum again and again and if the
    scum has crawled back we must again and again clean it up, chase
    it out,keep it under the surveillance of communist workers and
    peasants whom we have known for more than a month and for more
    than a year. There is still another question here, a note which
    says that it is a bad thing to give advantages to members of the
    Party because scoundrels will worm their way in. We are fighting
    against that and will continue to do so, comrades; we have passed
    a decision not to allow members who have been in the Party less
    than a year to be delegates to a Party congress; we shall continue
    to adopt such measures. When a party is in power it has to give
    preference to its members—let us suppose that two men apply,
    one of them shows a Party membership card and the other has no
    Party card and both of them are equally unknown; it is natural
    that preference should be given to the Party member, the one who
    has the Party card. How can one really decide whether a person is
    in the Party because of his convictions or for gain? The date he
    joined the Party must be entered on his Party card, he must not be
    given the card until he has been tested, until he has been through
    probation, etc.
There is also a note about the revolutionary tax[6] to the
    effect that it is a burden on the middle peasant. There has been a
    special session on this question, there were many complaints, and
    in order to verify them we did the following. We have a Central
    Statistical Board in which the best specialists in statistics in
    Russia are employed, most of them Right Socialist-Revolutionaries,
    Mensheviks and even Cadets; there are very few Communists,
    Bolsheviks—they were more concerned with the fight against
    tsarism than with practical work. As far as I have been able to
    see these specialists are working satisfactorily, although that
    does not mean that we do not have to fight against some
    individuals. We gave them the job of making probes in a few
    volosts to see how the peasants have distributed time
    revolutionary tax. There are very many complaints; when we
    realise, however, that they amount to about a thousand for the
    whole country, then we see that it is an insignificant number for
    Russia—if there are a thousand complaints to several million
    farms that is a mere bagatelle; if three people a day come to the
    Central Executive Committee that makes 90 complaints a month, but
    it creates the impression that we are snowed under with
    complaints. To cheek up on this we decided to investigate a few
    volosts and we got a precise answer in Popov’s report which
    was repeated at a sitting of the Central Executive Committee in
    the presence of workers. The report showed that in the majority of
    cases the peasants distribute the tax justly. Soviet power demands
    that the poor do not pay anything, the middle peasants a moderate
    amount and the rich peasants a lot, although it is, of course,
    impossible to determine exactly who is rich and who is poor and
    there have been mistakes, but on the whole the peasants distribute
    the tax correctly. That’s as it should be. (Applause.) There
    have been mistakes, of course. For instance, there was a petty
    clerk on the railway who complained that the house committee had
    taxed him unjustly. He informed the Soviet authorities of
    this. And they said, search his place, he is a profiteer. And they
    found several sacks containing a million rubles in Kerensky
    notes. This will continue until we have found a way of changing
    all the old notes for new ones. When we change these notes for new
    ones all the profiteers will be exposed. All of them will have to
    change old notes for new. (Stormy applause.) If you present the
    small amount of money necessary for a working man you will get a
    ruble for a ruble, if you present one or two thousand—ruble
    for ruble. If you present more we shall give you some of it in new
    money and the rest will go into a bookyou can wait for
    it. (Applause.) In order to do that sort of thing we have to get
    the new notes ready. There are about 60,000 million of the old
    money. We do not need to change such a huge sum for new money, but
    specialists have computed that we shall need no less than 20,000
    million rubles’ worth. We already have 17,000
    million. (Applause.) The question has been raised at the Council
    of People’s Commissars of making the final preparations in
    the near future for this measure that will strike a 1)10W at the
    profiteers. This measure will expose those who are concealing
    Kerensicy notes, The measure will require a lot of organisational
    work, for it is no easy one.
Then there is a question on how matters stand with the sowing,
    since it is difficult to get enough seed. That, of course, is
    true. A Cultivated Land Committee[7] has been set
    up. Here, at the Commissariat of Agriculture, a Working
    Committee[8] has been formed in accordance with a
    Soviet decree and its work will be organised jointly with the
    trade unions. Its job will be to see that the land is not left
    vacant and that any land left vacant by the landowners is given to
    workers. There is an order to the effect that if the peasants do
    not take the land the government will try to adapt it to its
    needs. There is a shortage of seed, of course. In this case the
    poor peasants must drag out into the open those kulaks who have a
    hidden surplus grain and have mot given it up for seed. It is
    important to time kulak to conceal these surpluses because he will
    get a thousand rubles a pood for it in time hungry months and it
    does not worry him that grain will not be planted and that he will
    be doing harm to thousands of workers. He is an enemy of time
    people and lie must be exposed.
The next question is about wages; the specialist gets three
    thousand, he goes from place to place and is difficult to catch. I
    say this about the specialists—they are people who have a
    knowledge of bourgeois science and engineering at a higher level
    than the overwhelming majority of workers and peasants; such
    specialists are needed and we say that at the moment we cannot
    introduce equalitarian wages, and are in favour of paying more
    than three thousand. Even if we pay several million a year in
    wages it will not be too much as long as we learn to work well
    with their help. We do not see any other way of arranging things
    so that they do not work under time lash, and as long as there are
    few specialists we are compelled to retain high wages. I recently
    had a talk on this question with Schmidt, the Commissar for
    Labour, and he agrees with our policy and says that formerly,
    under capitalism, the wages of an unskilled worker were 25 rubles
    a month and those of a good specialist not less than 500 rubles, a
    ratio of 20 to 1; now the lowest wages amount to 600 rubles and
    the specialists get 3,000, a ratio of 5 to 1. We have, therefore,
    done a lot to equalise low and high wages and we shall continue in
    the same vein. At the moment we cannot equalise wages and as long
    as there are few specialists we shall not refuse to raise their
    wages. We say that it is better to pay out an extra million or a
    thousand million as long as we can employ all the specialists, for
    what they will teach our workers and peasants is worth more than
    that thousand million.
Next comes a question about agricultural communes and whether
    former landowners can 1)0 allowed to remain in them. That depends
    on what the landowner was like. There has been no decree
    forbidding the landowner admission to the commune. The landowner,
    of course, does not inspire confidence because lie has been
    oppressing the peasants for centuries and they hate him, but if
    there are landowners that the peasants know as decent people you
    not only can but must admit them. We must use such specialists,
    they are used to organising big farms and there is a lot they can
    teach peasants and farm workers.
Then it is asked whether the middle peasants should be allowed
    on public ploughiands. Of course they should. Whole uyezds have
    recently decided to go over to collective ploughing—to what
    extent it will be carried out I don’t know; for this it is
    important to attract the middle peasants, because the poor
    peasants are on our side but the middle peasantsriot always, and
    they have to be won over. We are in favour of using force against
    the capitalists and against the landowners, and are riot only in
    favour of the use of force but of the confiscation of everything
    they have accumulated; we are in favour of the use of force
    against the kulak, but not of his complete expropriation, because
    he farms the land and part of what he has accumulated comes from
    his own labour. This is a difference that must be fully
    understood. The complete expropriation of the landowner and
    capitalists; not all the property of the kulak can be confiscated,
    there has been no such order; we want to convince the middle
    peasant and draw him over to us by example and persuasion. That is
    our programme. If there are deviations from it in the localities,
    they are infringements of the decrees of Soviet power either by
    people who do not want to carry out our decrees or by those who do
    riot understand them.
Then there is a question on how to smarten imp the railway
    workers, and also about the cessation of traffic on the
    railways. This question has been heatedly discussed by the Council
    of People’s Commissars and many measures have been
    adopted. This is a fundamental question. Millions of
    poods of grain are lying on the Volga-Bugulma Railway
    arid may be ruined because in some places the grain is lying in
    the snow and when the thaw sets in the grain will be spoiled. It
    is already damp (tip to 20 per cent humidity). This grain must he
    brought away or it will be destroyed. The main thing is that the
    railwaymen themselves are badly in need of grain. For this purpose
    it will be necessary, according to the estimate of our comrades in
    the Commissariat of Railways, to stop passenger traffic from March
    18 to April 10. This cancelling of passenger traffic can give its
    the three and a half million poods of grain that can be
    brought out using even light passenger locomotives. If profiteers
    were to carry grain on those trains they would, at most, bring
    half a million poods. Those who complain about the
    cessation of passenger traffic are not in the right. Profiteers
    would, at best, transport half a million poods and we
    shall bring in three and a half million, if we fill the cars with
    grain and if the railwaymen help us, and in this way we shall
    improve the food situation. That is why we say that all comrades
    who are more developed and more organised must work for the war
    and for food. Give us people again and again, no matter how
    difficult it may be. We know very well that Petrograd has given
    more people than any other town in Russia, because the most
    developed arid best organised workers are in Petrograd. This,
    however, is going to be a difficult six months. The first
    half-year of 1918 produced 27 million poods, and in the
    second we got 67 million poods. We have reached a hungry
    half-year. March, April, May and June will he difficult months. We
    must bend all efforts to prevent this. The question must he raised
    at every factory and at every study circle of whether there is a
    man who can be sent to work at a railway workshop and replaced by
    a woman, and if there is, to send him to that work. In every study
    circle, in every group and in every organisation thought must he
    given to this, new workers must be supplied if we are to cope with
    this difficult half-year. (Applause.)

Endnotes
[1]
    This refers to a commission appointed to visit Soviet Russia by
    the Borne Conference of the Second International which took place
    from February 3 to February 10, 1919. In reply to a request for
    the commission to be allowed to enter the country, the Soviet
    Government said on February 10, 1910, that, although it did not
    consider the Berne Conference to be in the least either socialist
    or representative of the working class; it would nevertheless
    permit  the commission to visit Soviet Russia. The visit did not
    take place. 
[2]
      Entente or the, “Allies’—Britain, France, the
      U.S.A., Japan and other countries that took part in the
      intervention against Soviet Russia. It should not be confused with
      the Entente cordiale, the alliance of France and Great Britain
      and, later, tsarist Russia. 
[3]
    This refers to the Paris Peace Conference that was called on the
    conclusion of the First World War. The Conference opened on
    January 18, 1919 and ended its deliberations on June 28, 1919 with
    the signing of the Treaty of Versailles.
[4]
    This refers to paper money that was issued by the Provisional
    Government in the summer of 1917.
[5]
    The question of granting a concesion to build the Great North-ern
    Railway, to link the River Oh with Petrograd and Murmansk via
    Kotlas was discussed at a meeting of the Council of Peoples
    Commissars on February 4, 1919. The Council adopted Lenin’s
    motion which recognised as permissible the granting of concessions
    to foreign capital for the purpose of developing the
    country’s productive forces. No contract for this railway
    was concluded.
[6]
    The decree introducing this tax was passed by a session of the
    All-Russia Central Executive Committee on October 30, 4918, The
    extaerdinary tax to raise the sum of 10,000 million rubles was to
    be imposed, mainly on the kulaks and the urban bourgeoisie; the
    middle strata of the population were lightly taxed. The urban and
    rural poor and persons whose wages constituted their only source
    of income were exempted. On April 9, 1919, the All-Russia Central
    Executive Committee adopted an additional decree granting certaik
    exemptions from this tax to the middle peasants.
[7]
Cultivated Land Committee was at up at the People’s
    Commissariat of Agriculture by it decree of the Council of People
    s Commissars of January 28, 1919. The decree stated that all
    unused arable land would be taken over by the state for the
    purpose of grain production, The Committee’s duties included
    general guidance and the implementation of measures to extend the
    area under crops.
[8]
Working Committee was organised in February 1919 at the
    People’s Commissariat of Agriculture on the basis of the
    "Statuteon’ Socialist Land Settlement and the Measures for
    the Transition to Socialist Farming" that had been approved by the
    All-Russia Central Executive Committee. The Committee was
    responsible for sending experienced organisers from among the
    workers  to gubernia and district state-farm boards and to
    individual  state farms, recruiting industrial workers for farm
    work,  arranging for all kinds of technical equipment for the
    state farms  and for the neighbouring rural population, helping
    organise trade  unions for farm workers, etc. 
    

Collected Works Volume 29
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## Session of the First Congress of
Farm Labourers of Petroorad Gubernia











Session of the First Congress of Farm Laborers Of Petrograd Gubernia March 13, 1919



V. I. Lenin
Session Of The First Congress Of
Farm Labourers Of Petrograd Gubernia[1]
March 13, 1919


Delivered: 13 March, 1919
First Published: Part 1: Brief report published in Severnaya Kommuna No. 58, March 14, 1919; First published in full in the journal Rabotnik Zemli i Lesa No. 4-5, 1923; Published according to the verbatim report, verified with the text in the journal; Part 2: 1926; Published according to the verbatim report
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, pages 38-46
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. 


1
Speech On The Organisation Of A Farm Labourers’ Union
  
 Comrades, I am very glad to be able on behalf of the Council of People’s Commissars to greet this Congress of Farm Labourers, the object of which is to form a farm labourers’ union. 
 Comrades, the Central Committee of our Party and the All-Russia Council of Trade Unions have on more than one occasion held joint conferences with Comrade Schmidt, People’s Commissar for Labour, members of the All-Russia Council of Trade Unions and others, to discuss how to set about organising farm labourers. Nowhere in the world, even in the most advanced capitalist countries, where trade unions have existed not only for decades but for centuries, have farm labourers succeeded in forming anything like permanent trade unions. You know how the conditions of life of the peasants and farm labourers hamper this and the fact that they are scattered and disunited is a great obstacle, so that it is far more difficult for them than for urban workers to unite in a trade union. 
 The workers’ and peasants’ government, however, has set to work all along the line to build communist society. It has not only set out to make a clean sweep of the landowners and capitalists—this has been almost completely achieved—but has set out to build a society in which there will never again be landowners and capitalists. There has been more than one instance in the history of revolutions where, soon after the old landowners and capitalists were swept away, new capitalists sprang up from the ranks of the kulaks, the wealthy peasants, profiteers, who, in many cases, exploited the workers more than the old landowners and capitalists did. The task that confronts us is to sweep away the old capitalists and to make it impossible for new ones to emerge; to see to it that power remains fully, entirely and exclusively in the hands of those who work, who live by their own labour. How can this be done? There is only one way, and that is by organising the rural workers, the proletarians. This organisation must be permanent. Only in a permanent, mass organisation can farm labourers learn the business of managing large-scale farms; for if they do not learn to do this themselves, nobody will do it for them. You remember the words to this effect in our anthem, the Internationale. The most the Soviet government can do is to give such an organisation every assistance. The capitalist organisations did everything in their power, resorted to every lawful means, various ruses, police devices, honest and dishonest schemes to prevent labourers from organising. To this day in Germany, the most advanced country in Europe, farm labourers are deprived of the right to organise. There, the ancient master and servant law is still in force, and farm labourers continue to have the status of servants. Quite recently I had a conversation with a prominent Englishman who came to Russia during the war. In the past he sided with capitalism, but in the course of our revolution he developed splendidly, first into a Menshevik and later into a Bolshevik. During our conversation we discussed labour conditions in England—there are no peasants in England, there are only big capitalists and farm workers—and he said, “I am not hopeful, because our farm labourers live under feudal and not capitalist conditions; they are so overburdened, crushed and ground down by toil, that it is difficult for them to unite.” And this is in a most advanced country, where a certain farm labourer attempted to form a farm labourers’ union quite half a century ago. This is what progress amounts to in the free capitalist countries! Our government, however, decided to help to organise the rural and other workers as soon as it came into being. We must render every assistance. I am particularly pleased to note that here, in Petrograd, where there are so many beautiful buildings, palaces, which were not built for the right purposes, our comrades have quite properly converted them into premises for meetings, congresses and conferences of precisely those classes of the population which worked to build them, which have built them for centuries, but which were never allowed to come within a mile of them! (Applause.) I think, comrades, that now that nearly all the palaces in Petrograd have been converted into meeting halls and premises for unions of workers—primarily urban, but also rural workers, the working section of the peasantry—I think that we may regard this as a first step towards providing the working people, the formerly exploited section of the population, with the opportunity to organise. I repeat, the Soviet government will do all in its power immediately and unconditionally to help such an organisation to remould rural life and leave no room for kulaks or profiteers, so that co-operative labour, labour in common, may become the general rule in the countryside. This is the task we have all set ourselves. You know perfectly well how difficult this task is, that it is impossible to change all the conditions of rural life by means of decrees, laws and ordinances. It was possible by means of ordinances and decrees to overthrow the landowners and capitalists, it is possible by this means to curb the kulaks. But if the millions of farm labourers will not have their own organisation, if they do not learn in this organisation, step by step, to manage their own affairs, political and economic—and the economic affairs are most important—if they do not learn to manage large-scale farms and transform them—since they enjoy a number of privileges which other farms do not—from models of exploitation where formerly the workers had their sweat and blood squeezed out of them, into model co-operative farms, the working people themselves will be to blame for it. The old farms cannot now be restored. It is impossible for us to provide ten good horses and ten good ploughs for every hundred dessiatines of land (if we take ten small farms of ten dessiatines each). We have not that number of horses or ploughs left. But if the same hundred dessiatines are cultivated on a large scale on the basis of co-operative or common tillage, or as a voluntary agricultural commune, we shall need, probably, not ten horses and ploughs, but only three. This is how a saving in human labour and better results can be achieved. But there is only one way to achieve this, and that is by an alliance of urban and rural workers. The urban workers have taken power in the cities. All the best that has been created in the cities in the shape of palaces, fine buildings and culture, the workers place at the disposal of the rural population, for they know that their power in the cities cannot be durable unless a sound alliance is established with the farm workers. Only such an alliance, the foundations of which you are here laying down, can make a permanent change possible. The middle peasants, too, will voluntarily join this alliance. It will entail a vast amount of effort, of course, but nothing can be done at one stroke. If your union is formed, if it grows, develops and spreads all over Russia, if it maintains the closest contact with the urban workers’ union, we shall fulfil this difficult task by the joint efforts of millions of organised farm and urban workers and thus extricate ourselves from the state of ruin into which we and all other nations were plunged by the four years’ war. We shall emerge from this state, but we shall not go back to the old system of individual and scattered production—this system of production condemns man to ignorance, poverty, disunity; we shall organise collective, large-scale, co-operative production. For this, all that human knowledge, human skill and human invention have achieved, all the knowledge of the specialists, must be devoted to the service of the united workers. The workers must become the masters in all fields; they must learn to be managers and to direct those who up to now, like many agronomists, for example, acted as stewards for the capitalists against the workers. This is no easy problem, but in the towns very much has been done to solve it. You are now taking the first steps towards solving this problem in the rural districts. Permit me to conclude by repeating my greetings from the Council of People’s Commissars and to express once again the firm conviction that the union of which you are here laying the foundations will in the near future grow into a united All-Russia Farm Labourers’ Union. This union will serve as a genuine bulwark of Soviet power in the rural districts, as the vanguard in the struggle to remould rural life in such a way as to prevent the revival of any exploitation, of the rule of the rich over the poor, on the basis of common, united, co-operative labour. This is what I wish you, comrades. (Applause.)
2
Replies To Written Questions
 Two notes have been handed up, both asking whether workers in state farms are allowed to keep their own small livestock, vegetable plots and poultry. I have just asked for a copy of the act we recently discussed in the Council of People’s Commissars and which was passed by the Central Executive Committee. This act is entitled “Statute on Socialist Land Settlement and the Measures for the Transition to Socialist Farming”. I don’t know whether a copy of this act is available here. I helped to draft it and delivered a report on it to the Commission set up by the Central Executive Committee. If my memory does not betray me—we have so many laws that one cannot remember them all, and many more acts have been passed since then—I think this act contains a clause which prohibits workers in state farms from keeping their own livestock and holding separate vegetable plots. I should like to have a copy of that act and consult it. (A copy of the act is handed to Lenin.) Here is Clause 46: “No worker or office employee in a state farm shall have the right to keep his own livestock, poultry, or vegetable plot.” Thus, it turns out that not all of you were aware of the existence of this act. One of the comrades in the Presidium told me that there was a heated debate on this question at this Congress. I do not quite understand why. I have just been handed a copy of Izvestia containing this act entitled “Statute on Socialist Land Settlement and the Measures for the Transition to Socialist Farming”. Why was this clause inserted in the act? To introduce labour in common on a common farm. If private vegetable plots, animals, poultry, and so forth, were permitted again, we should revert to the small farming that had existed hitherto. If that were the case, would it be worth while to have all this bother. Would it be worth while establishing state farms? It goes without saying that if you discuss this question and, knowing as you do the conditions prevailing in Petrograd Gubernia—I am told that this Congress consists solely of representatives of Petrograd Gubernia—if on the basis of your experience of what has been done in Petrograd Gubernia, and in spite of all the arguments in favour of common production, you arrive at the conclusion that a temporary exception should be made for this gubernia, we shall re-examine the question. Only, you must try to prove to us that such an exception is really necessary, that special conditions, absent in other gubernias, prevail in Petrograd Gubernia, otherwise, all the others will demand the same exception. Then you must explain that you regard the measure you recommend to the government, or on which you insist, as a temporary one, for there can hardly be any dispute about the fact that a state farm deserving the name must be run on the basis of common labour. We have had the old system of labour whereby each peasant toiled on his own strip of land, had his own farm-house, his own cattle, poultry, harrow, wooden plough, and so forth, for many years, for many centuries. We know perfectly well that in Russia and in other countries this resulted in the peasants remaining ignorant and poverty-stricken with the rich oppressing the poor, for the problems that have to be faced in agriculture cannot be solved on individual lines. If we attempt it, it will only result in a reversion to the former poverty, from which only one in a hundred, or perhaps, five out of a hundred, climb into the ranks of the more well-to-do, while the rest live in want. That is why our task is now to go over to the collective tillage of the land, to large-scale farming in common. But the Soviet government must not under any circumstances resort to coercion. There is no law which makes this compulsory. Agricultural communes are established on a voluntary basis; the adoption of collective tillage must be voluntary; the workers and peasants’ government must refrain from exercising the slightest compulsion, and the law prohibits this. If anyone of you here knows of cases of compulsion, then please regard it as an abuse of power, an infringement of the law, which we shall do our utmost to rectify, which we shall rectify. Organised farm labourers must help us; only with the aid of their organisation shall we be able to prevent such abuses. The state farms, however, are something different. They were never in the hands of individual small farmers. The Soviet government takes them over and says that we shall send the available agronomists to them and transfer to them all the farm implements that have remained intact. If we succeed in bringing the war to a close and conclude peace with America, we shall order a shipload of up-to-date implements and supply the state farms with them so that these large-scale farms may by common labour produce better than before, at lower cost than before, and more than before. It will be the function of the state farms gradually to teach the rural population to work out for themselves the new system, the system of common labour, which will prevent the resurgence of a handful of rich men to exploit tha masses of the poor as was always the case in the rural districts, not only in this country but also in the most free of republics. You know perfectly well that there are still large numbers of peasant profiteers in the rural districts who piled up hundreds of thousands of rubles during the war, who are hoarding Kerensky notes in anticipation of being able to in vest them again and so exploit the poor peasants. What measures can be taken to combat this? None, except the adoption of collective farming. Agricultural communes must be formed on an entirely voluntary basis; there must be no coercion whatever. The same applies to collective tillage of the land. State farms are established on nationalised land. You know that on the demand of the vast majority of the peasants the private ownership of land was entirely abolished on October 26, 1917, on the first night after our Soviet revolution. These large-scale farms established on nationalised land are called state farms. Can we allow the old system of small farming to revive on state farms? I think you will all agree that we cannot, and must not do so. If the economic conditions prevailing in Petrograd Gubernia, the conditions of practical work with which you are closely familiar, and which we, of course, could not take into account as we were not aware of them—if, after thoroughly discussing the matter from all angles you arrive at the conclusion that these conditions make an exception necessary in the case of Petrograd Gubernia, that for a time it should be exempted, then, in order that we may revise our decision you must try to submit the most definite proof possible that this is necessary, and if you do I promise that we shall discuss this matter again in the Council of People’s Commissars, in the light of the decision of your Congress, and examine it again in the Central Executive Committee. We shall discuss whether Petrograd Gubernia should be exempted for a time, and under certain conditions, from the operation of Clause 46, which prohibits the possession of vegetable plots, small livestock, poultry, and so forth by state farm employees. Although we agree that it is necessary to adopt farming in common, and although all the work will be conducted on these lines, nevertheless, on the recommendation of people who are familiar with the practical side of the work; we shall make an exception—we shall not refuse to do so, for sometimes it is necessary to make exceptions. We trust that by working on these lines good progress will be made, and that we shall succeed in laying the foundations of real socialist agriculture. (Applause.) 


Endnotes
[1] This Congress was held in Petrograd, March 11-13, 1919, and was attended by about 200 delegates. The Congress discussed urgent problems, the work of the Organising Bureau and current agricultural policy, and heard reports from localities. The Congress adopted the Rules of the Farm Labourers’ Union and elected its executive. 

Collected Works Volume 29
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## Speech Delivered at a
  Meeting In the People’s House, Petrograd











Speech Delivered At A Meeting In The People’s House, Petrograd March 13, 1919



V. I. Lenin
Speech Delivered At A Meeting
In The People’s House, 
      Petrograd
March 13, 1919
Newspaper Report


Delivered: 13 March, 1919
First Published: Severnaya Kommuna No. 58, 14 March, 1919. Published acording to the Severnaya Kommuna text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, pages 47-53
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. 
    

“The question that mainly interests most of
    you is the food situation, and what the Council of People’s
    Commissars has done in the matter. Permit me to tell you briefly
    what it has done. We have entered into a severe, hungry
    half--year, and all our enemies at home and abroad, including the
    Right and Left Socialist-Revolutionaries and the Menshe-viks,
    knowing what hardships the people are suffering, are trying to
    make capital out of it, are trying to overthrow the Soviet
    government and thus, whether they realise it or not, restore the
    rule of the landowners and capitalists. We have entered a period
    when the collection of grain at its source is exceeding
    deliveries, and the establishment of Soviet power in the Ukraine
    gives us grounds for hoping that we shall be able to cope with the
    food situation in the coming half-year better than we did last
    year, although we shall now have to pull through a half-year that
    will be more severe than the preceding one. The fact that a
    considerable section of the peasant masses has turned in favour of
    Soviet power is a great gain for us. In those regions where the
    Czechoslovaks[1] were, the Trans-Volga region and Ufa
    Gubernia, the attitude of even the well-to-do peasants has changed
    abruptly in favour of Soviet power, for the Cze-choslovaks taught
    them a severe lesson. Only a few days ago a delegation of peasants
    representing five volosts in the Sarapul Uyezd came to
    see me. These are the volosts which quite recently sent
    40,000 poods of grain each to Moscow and Petrograd. 1
    asked the delegation to tell me what the attitude of the peasants
    was towards the Soviet government, and I received the following
    reply. ’Yes, the Czechoslovaks taught us a lesson, and now,
    nobody will turn us away from the Soviet government.’ In
    other regions, too, in the Urals, for example, where,
    incidentally, there are huge stocks of grain, the peasants are now
    on the side of the Soviets. At one time, influenced by the
    Mensheviks and Left Socialist-Revolutionaries—you will
    remember the Left Socialist-Revolutionary Muravyov nearly
    succeeded in opening our front to the Czechoslovak—the
    peasants in these regions were hostile to the Soviets. But the
    atrocities perpetrated by the officers of the Czechoslovak army,
    their brutal treatment of the population, their attempts to
    restore the old tsarist and landowner system in its
    entirety—all this taught the peasants a lesson. At the
    present time Soviet activities are being carried on in those
    gubernias with a zest that you here can scarcely imagine, for
    here, in the large centres, the people are exhausted by lengthy
    under-nourishment, whereas in those regions, where there are
    fairly large stocks of grain, problems of filling the stomach
    recede into the background.
“I now come to the details. In Ufa Gubernia there are
    stocks of grain amounting to 60,000,000 poods,
    procurement is proceeding rapidly, but we are encountering
    colossal transport difficulties. On the railways, on the
    Kazan-Sarapul and Volga-Bugulma lines, we have about 10,000,000
    poods of grain already collected, but we cannot transport
    it owing to the shortage of locomotives, trucks and fuel and the
    exceedingly bad state of the available locomo-tives. To increase
    the carrying capacity, of our railways we have been obliged to
    resort to an extremely radical measure; we have decided to suspend
    all passenger traffic on the rail-ways all over Russia for a
    period extending from March 18 to April 10. Before deciding on
    this measure we discussed it three times with our railwaymen
    comrades and with prominent railway experts. Only after we had
    discussed the matter from every angle and had weighed up all
    probable consequences did we make the decision. Our calculations
    showed that the suspension of passenger traffic will release 220
    locomotives; although they are of low power they are capable of
    transporting 3,500,000 poods of grain. If we calculate
    the amount of grain the private profiteers carry-there were weeks
    when we were obliged to allow them to transport food
    unhindered—we shall find that in a period of three weeks
    these profiteers might bring in no more than 200,000
    poods. That decided the issue.. The kulaks, profiteers,
    and even individual workers, will, of course, raise a howl about
    this and say that we are depriving the people of the only
    opportunity they have of bringing in even a pood or so of
    grain. We know that the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks
    will appear on the scene and try to take advantage of the famine
    to turn the people against the Soviet government. But here.,. as
    in all other cases of difficulty, we rely exclusively on the
    class-con-sciousness of the masses of the advanced workers. Better
    suffer privation, better encounter the hostile agitation of the
    Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks, but face up to the
    danger and say frankly, ’We shall not extricate ourselves
    from our food difficulties unless we adopt the most radical
    measures and strain every nerve to transport the grain.’ In
    many places grain intended for delivery has been piled near the
    railway stations on the bare ground and is in danger of being
    swept away by the spring floods. Meas-ures must be taken to
    accelerate loading and transport. In deciding on this radical
    measure we took into account all the contingent circumstances. We
    know that before Easter there is a heavy increase in the number of
    working-men passengers on the railways and that is why we decided
    to restore passenger traffic by that time. We know, too, that the
    suburban services are absolutely essential for the workers, and we
    therefore decided not to suspend them. We have sent our most
    energetic and experienced comrades to various localities. To Ufa
    Gubernia we have sent Comrade Bryukhanov, Deputy Commissar for
    Food, who is closely familiar with conditions in that gubernia. He
    will be assist-ed by comrades from the ’War Department, for
    the front is not far away. We have also sent comrades from the War
    Department to the other railway line, K.azan-Sarapul. They have
    been instructed to mobilise the local peasants and to strain every
    nerveto get the grain moved, at least as far as Kazan. In this way
    we shall save it and ensure its delivery to the metropolitan
    cities and the non-agricultural districts. On this we base our
    hope of defeating the famine. The attempt of the Mensheviks and
    Socialist-Revolutionaries to make capital out of the
    people’s misfortunes will be thwarted once again.
“Unlike the situation last year, when the Czechoslovaks
    were attacking us and had deprived us of our most fertile regions,
    we now have two new sources of grain supply, on which our food
    supply authorities could not count last autumn when they drew up
    their food supply plans for the whole year. These sources are the
    Ukraine and the Don region. Last autumn the Germans were still in
    occupation of the Ukraine. The German imperialists counted on
    shipping 60,000,000 poods of grain from the Ukraine to
    Germany, and with this flood of foodstuff hoped to destroy the
    germs of Bolshevism among the masses of the German people. But
    something entirely different happened. Instead of 60,000,000
    poods the Germans shipped only 9,000,000 poods
    from the Ukraine. But they shipped the seeds of Bolshevism with
    this grain and they are growing splendidly in Germany. In
    Germany— today, Bolshevism is fighting the social-traitors
    in the streets of Berlin, where workers’ blood is flowing,
    shed by the social-traitors. We are convinced that the Ger-man
    social-traitors will be vanquished just as Kerensky was vanquished
    in this country. (Applause.)
“But in addition to the Ukraine we have the Don
    region. Krasnov’s Cossacks have been able to hold out all
    this time with the aid of foreign gold, first German and later
    Anglo--French. But this does not help—our victory over the
    Cos-sacks is certain. At the present time we are holding the
    Tsa-ritsyn-Likhaya line, the link between grain and coal
    sup-plies. Thus, we have two sources of supply—the Ukraine
    and the Don region. The Ukraine is a fraternal Soviet republic,
    with which we are on the best of terms. This republic is settling
    the question of assisting us not as a huckster, not as a
    profiteer; the Ukraine is guided exclusively by an ardent desire
    to assist the hungry North. The first socialist duty of every
    citizen of the Ukraine is to come to the aid of the North. But in
    the Ukraine, too, we are encountering tremen-dous
    difficulties. The Council of People’s Commissars has
    repeatedly invited Comrade Rakovsky to meet us to discuss the
    matter, and has sent military men to the Ukraine. But it appears
    that as regards organisation, matters are in a worse state in the
    Ukraine than they were here after the October Revolution. Kerensky
    left us something of a food supply organisation. The fond supply
    officials sabotaged us, of course, and came to the Smolny not to
    co-operate but to bargain with us. But we broke the resistance of
    these groups and in the end compelled them to work. In the Ukraine
    they have no food supply organisation whatever. The Germans, when
    they were there, only engaged in plunder; they plundered as long
    as they had the power to do so, and, of course, they left no food
    supply organisation. The Ukraine has no officials experienced in
    handling food supplies, or large working-class centres from which
    capable men could be drawn. The Donets Basin has been devastated
    to a degree that one cannot even imagine. To this day gangs of
    Cossacks are roaming in the remoter parts of the region robbing
    the local population. From all parts of the Ukraine we hear the
    cry ’Send us workers!’ We have set up a food supply
    bureau there consisting of representatives of the trade union
    move-ment. We are transferring there the more experienced food
    supply officials from Voronezh and Tambov gubernias, and we are
    enlisting the more capable urban proletarians for the food supply
    organisations. Nevertheless no grain has been procured in the
    Ukraine, there are no purchasing organisa-tions, the peasants have
    no confidence in our currency, and we have no goods with which to
    barter. Notwithstanding all these unfavourable circumstances, we
    have given the Ukrain-ian comrades the assignment to ship to
    Russia 50,000,000 poods of grain by June 1, 1919. I do
    not think this will be carried out in full, but it will be good if
    only a half, or two- thirds is delivered!"

Lenin then went on to say that the victories we have gained in
    the Don region were due entirely to the intensification of Party
    activities and to cultural and educational work in the ranks of
    the Red Army.
“This brought about a psychological change, and as a
    result our Red Army won the Don region for us.” (Stormy
    applause.)
“Generally speaking, our Red Army is growing stronger day
    after day. Even the bourgeois military experts admit that in the
    imperialist countries the armies are disintegrat-ing, whereas our
    army is becoming sounder, is maturing and growing stronger. In the
    Don region, too, there are large stocks of grain, and there is no
    food supply organisation there; but we have there our disciplined
    army, and this is already an organisation by means of which we
    shall obtain grain with the minimum of expenditure and the maximum
    results.
“I must say that the Czechoslovaks and the Cossacks are
    continuing their tactics of destroying all they can. They blew up
    the railway bridge across the Volga and then destroyed all other
    railway bridges and put all the Trans-Volga main lines out of
    commission. The Council of People’s Commissars for a long
    time discussed ways and means of restoring at least two lines:
    Liski-Rostov and Likhaya-Tsaritsyn. Radical measures have been
    adopted, and at time last meeting of the Council of Defence held
    on Monday, March 10, it was reported that all the necessary tools
    and materials had already been delivered to these lines and that
    they would be restored before the spring thaw makes the roads
    impassable."

      Referring once again to the assistance which the Don region and
      the Ukraine will render us in the way of food supplies, Lenin
      exclaimed: ’This half-year is time last severe
      half-year!” (Applause.)
“The international situation, though still acute, is
    nevertheless improving. All of you saw and heard the foreign
    dele-gates to the Third International[2] who in their speeches
    and reports emphasised that the road we have taken is the right
    one. Bolshevism has become an international force. This is evident
    from the fact that the most advanced bourgeois democracies, which
    boast so much of their liberties, are taking stern measures
    against the Bolsheviks. The United States of America, one of the
    richest bourgeois republics in the world, with its hundred million
    population, is hastening to deport several hundred Russian
    Bolsheviks, most of whom do not even speak English. Whence this
    horror of Bolshevism? As the newspapers report, at workers’
    meetings in Paris, even those workers who do not sympathise with
    the Bolsheviks refuse to give a hearing to speakers who are
    hostile to Bolshevism. (Applause.)
    Notwithstanding the flood of lies and calumny which the
    bourgeois press of Western Europe daily turns against the
    Bolsheviks, the people have learned the truth and are siding with
    the Bolsheviks. Let the French bourgeois press say that the
    Bolsheviks are inhuman monsters who gobble up little
    children—the French workers do not trust that press.

      “We have succeeded in making the word ’Soviet’
      intelligible in all languages. The masses have realised that
      their salvation lies in a workers’ and peasants’
      government, in Soviets. That is why it was so easy for us to
      reach agreement at the Congress of the Third International in
      Moscow. In the most remote corners, in some Italian
      Poshiekhonye,[3] farm labourers and workers gather
      together and declare, ’We greet the German Spartacists and
      the Russian “Sovietists"and demand that their programme
      shall become the programme of the workers of the world.’ I
      shall repeat here what I have already said in Moscow.[4] This shows that victory will be
      ours, and there call be no doubt about this whatever. We have
      won the sympathies of the workers in spite of the lies uttered
      by the bourgeois press. Meanwhile, the imperialists at the peace
      conference cannot reach an agreement and are ready to fly at
      each other’s throats. The Bolshevik contagion has already
      spread to all the countries of Europe and Amer-ica. Deporting
      Bolsheviks will 1)0 of no avail. Even if
      West-em Europe were to isolate itself from us by means of a
      Chinese Wall, even if all the Russian Bolsheviks disappeared
      into the underworld, it would not relieve time position of the
      Western imperialists. The masses of the people have realised
      that they cannot improve their conditions with the aid of
      parlia-ment. A workers’ government, Soviets, are
      needed. Huge debts accrue from the war, and the imperialists
      have lost their senses to such an extent that they are demanding
      that the nations should pay their war debts. They say to the
      nations, ’Pay us millions and millions for having been
      kind enough to permit the slaughter of 10,000,000 men to settle
      the question of our profits!’ In all countries imperialism
      is slipping into the abyss into which German imperialism has
      fallen.” (Stormy applause.)

Endnotes
[1]
    This refers to the counter-revolutionary revolt of the
    Czechoslo-vak Corps engineered by the  Entente imperialists with
    the active  participation of the Mensheviks and
    Socialist-Revolutionaries.  The Corps was formed in Russia before
    the October Revolution  from Czechoslovak prisoners of war. After
    the establishment of  Soviet power the counter-revolutionary
    officers of the Corps were  used by the Entente imperialists and
    Russian reactionaries to  struggle against the Soviet
    Republic. The revolt began at Chelya-  binsk in May 1918 and by
    the beginning of June the Czechoslovak  troops had occupied Omsk
    and Samara, (now Kutbyshev), Where  the Committee of the
    Constituent Assembly Members was formed;  the Committee declared
    itself the provisional authority over the  territory occupied by
    the mutineers, On July 5, the eve of the  Loft
    Socialist-Revolutionary revolt in Moscow, the Czechoslovaks
    occupied Ufa. The position on the Eastern Front was worsened  as a
    result of the treachery of the commander of that front, the  Left
    Socialist-Revolutionary Muravyov, who on July 11 tried to
    conclude an agreement with the Czechoslovaks and advance on
    Moscow to support the revolt of the Left SocialistRevoIutionaries
    there; Muravyoy was killed at the very beginning of this venture.
    The Czechoslovak mutiny was finally put down at the end of  1919
    at the time KolchAk was routed. 
[2]
    This refers to the First Congress of the Communist International
    held in Moscow, March 2-6, 1919.
[3]
Poshekhonye was an uyezd town in tsarist Russia that
    became asynonym for everything extremely backward and
    provincial, after M. Y. Saltykov-Shchedrin published his Old
    Times in Poshekhoaye. 
[4]
    See present edition, Vol. 28, 
      Speech
on the Founding of he Communist International


Collected Works Volume 29
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive

 
 







==========

## The Achievements and Difficulties of the Soviet Government











Achievements and Difficulties of the Soviet Government



V. I. Lenin
 Achievements and Difficulties of the Soviet Government


Written: Early Spring, 1919
First Published: Published in pamphlet form by the Petrograd Soviet of Workers’ and Red Army Deputies, March-April 1919; Afterword first published in 1922; Published according to the pamphlet, afterword according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, pages 55-88
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002; Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License.
    

 It is now the right time, when we have succeeded
    in restoring the revolutionary International, the Communist
    International, when the Soviet form of the movement has itself
    become both the theoretical and practical programme of the entire
    Third International—now that this has been done it is
    appropriate to review the general course of development of the
    Soviets. What are the Soviets? What is the significance of this
    form which was created by the masses, and was not invented by any
    individual? 
 It seems to me that the tasks now confronting us, the
    proletariat that has won power, can be appraised only from this
    angle, as can also the degree to which we have attempted to fulfil
    these tasks and the degree to which we have succeeded during the
    past year under the dictatorship of the proletariat in
    Russia. 
 Only in the light of the general role of the Soviets, of their
    general significance, of the place they occupy in world history,
    is it possible to understand the situation we found ourselves in,
    why we had to act in the way we did and in no other, and how,
    looking back, we must examine the correctness or incorrectness of
    the steps we took. 
 And we are now doubly in need of such a more general, broader,
    and more far-reaching outlook, because it is some times painful
    for Party people in Russia to see faults and defects and feel
    dissatisfied with their work, because the practical fulfilment of
    the urgent, current, immediate, everyday administrative duties
    that have been, and continue to be, the lot of the Soviet
    authorities often distracts attention, compels us, in spite of
    ourselves—it is no use rebelling against the conditions
    under which we have to work—to devote too much attention to
    the petty details of administration. They cause us to forget the
    general course of the world-wide development 

      of the proletarian dictatorship, its evolution through Soviet
      power or, more correctly, the Soviet movement, through the
      groping of the proletarian masses within the
      Soviets—something we all experienced and have
      forgotten—and through the attempt to achieve the
      dictatorship within the Soviets. 
 These are the difficulties we have encountered and the general
    tasks to which, in my opinion, we must turn our attention so that
    we may as far as possible get away from the petty details of
    administration in which everybody who is engaged in practical
    local government work is absorbed, and so that we may understand
    what a long way we, as a contingent of the world proletarian army,
    have still to go. 
 Complete and final victory on a world scale cannot be achieved
    in Russia alone; it can be achieved only when the proletariat is
    victorious in at least all the advanced countries, or, at all
    events, in some of the largest of the advanced countries. Only
    then shall we be able to say with absolute confidence that the
    cause of the proletariat has triumphed, that our first
    objective—the overthrow of capitalism—has been
    achieved. 
 We have achieved this objective in one country, and this
    confronts us with a second task. Since Soviet power has been
    established, since the bourgeoisie has been overthrown in one
    country, the second task is to wage the struggle on a world scale,
    on a different plane, the struggle of the proletarian state
    surrounded by capitalist states. 
 This situation is an entirely novel and difficult one. 
 On the other hand, since the rule of the bourgeoisie has been
    overthrown, the main task is to organise the development of the
    country. 
 The yellow socialists who have gathered in Berne and now
    intend to honour us with a visit by distinguished foreigners, are
    extremely fond of repeating that “the Bolsheviks believe in
    the almighty power of violence”. This phrase only shows that
    those who use it are people, who in the heat of the revolutionary
    struggle, when they are being completely crushed by the violence
    of the bourgeoisie—look at what is going on in
    Germany—are incapable of teaching their own proletariat the
    tactics of necessary violence. 
 Under certain circumstances violence is both necessary and
    useful, but there are circumstances under which violence  cannot
    produce results. There have been cases, however, of not everyone
    appreciating this difference, so that it must be discussed. In
    October violence—the overthrow of the bourgeoisie by Soviet
    power, the removal of the old government, revolutionary
    violence—resulted in a brilliant success. 
 Why? First, because the masses were organised in Soviets, and
    secondly, because in the long political period, from February to
    October, the position of the enemy—the bourgeoisie—was
    undermined, sapped, washed away, like a block of ice by the spring
    thaw, and internally had been deprived of his strength; and the
    movement in October, compared, say, with the present revolutionary
    movement in Germany, brought us such a complete and brilliant
    victory for revolutionary violence. 
 May we assume that such a path, such a form of struggle, such
    an easy victory for revolutionary violence, is possible if these
    conditions do not exist? 
 It would be a very great mistake to assume that. And the
    greater the revolutionary victories achieved under certain
    specific conditions the more often does the danger arise of our
    allowing ourselves to be flattered by such victories and not
    stopping to think coolly, calmly and attentively, about the
    conditions that made them possible. 
 When we tore the Kerensky government and Milyukov’s
    coalition ministry to shreds, so to speak, compelled them to
    shuffle portfolios over and over again, compelled them to play
    ministerial leapfrog from right to left, from left to right, up
    and down and down and up, it became obvious that they could not
    pull together, no matter in what order they sat, and then they
    were blown away like so much chaff. 
 Is the situation that now confronts our practical tasks in
    respect of world imperialism anything like that? Of course
    not. 
 That is why the Treaty of Brest created serious difficulties
    in the sphere of foreign policy, but the mass character of the
    movement helped us to overcome them. 
 But what is the source of the mistakes that caused some of our
    comrades to think that we were committing a heinous crime? There
    is still an odd crank or two among people able to wield the pen
    who imagine that they are somebodies, that they have experience,
    can teach others, and so forth, who even now assert that this was
    a compromise with German imperialism.  
 Yes, we made the same compromise when we
    “compromised” with the tsar by entering the
    disgusting, reactionary Duma and undermining it from within. 
 Can we count on the overthrow of world imperialism merely by
    force before the proletariat in those imperialist countries has
    reached the necessary stage of development? 
 If the question is presented in this way—and we as
    Marxists have always taught that this is the only way to present
    the question—we must agree that it would be very absurd and
    foolish to employ the policy of violence under those
    circumstances, and complete failure to understand the conditions
    under which a policy of violence can be successful. 
 Now we realise this; we have gained experience. 
 While we, at the time of the Treaty of Brest, were obliged to
    muster our forces and amidst the most extraordinary difficulties
    lay the foundations of a new army, the Red Army, in a country
    ruined and exhausted by war to a greater degree than any other
    country in the world, while we, in the first half and the
    beginning of the second half of 1918, were, stone by stone, laying
    the foundations of a genuine socialist Red Army, the imperialism
    of other countries was being sapped by internal disintegration and
    the growing discontent, and was becoming enfeebled. 
    
  
      And revolutionary violence triumphed in Germany after many
      months of development of the struggle had sapped the strength of
      imperialism in that country; and the same thing is now being
      repeated to some extent—to some extent, but not
      entirely—in the Entente countries. 
 An American who had watched events in the West-European
    countries very closely, at first hand, and without prejudice, said
    to me recently, “France is undoubtedly on the eve of a great
    disappointment, the collapse of illusions. The French people are
    being fed with promises—you are the victors, they are
    told.” The bourgeoisie is taking advantage of the old
    patriotic sentiments of the entire French nation, of their anger
    at the way they were crushed in 1870, and of their fury at the way
    the country has been depopulated, bled

      white and exhausted by four years of war—the bourgeoisie
      is taking advantage of all this to divert these sentiments into
      chauvinist channels: “We have beaten the Germans; our
      pockets will now be filled, and we shall be able to
      relax.” But the dispassionate American, looking at things
      like a businessman, says, “The Germans will not pay, for
      they have nothing to pay with.” 
 That is why the French nation is being fed with promises and
    fairy-tales about the peace, the final victory, that is coming
    soon. But peace means the collapse of all hopes of being able to
    crawl out of this bloody mire at least partly alive—with
    broken arms and legs, but alive. It will be impossible to crawl
    out of this peace while the old capitalist system is intact,
    because the war has piled up such a heap of debts, such a mass of
    ruins throughout the capitalist world, that it is impossible to
    crawl out of it without upsetting the whole pile and starting an
    avalanche. 
 Even those who are not revolutionaries, who have no faith in
    revolution, and dread it, are nevertheless discussing it
    theoretically and will be convinced by the course of events, by
    the consequences of the imperialist war, that there is no way out
    except revolution. 
 I repeat, I was particularly astonished by the
    American’s appraisal of the situation from the point of view
    of a business man who, of course, has not studied the theory of
    the class struggle and sincerely thinks it is nonsense, but who is
    interested in millions and thousands of millions, and being able
    to count, asks: “Will they pay or not?” And he
    answers, again from the shrewd businessman’s point of view:
    “They have nothing to pay with! You will not even get 20
    kopeks in the ruble! 
 It is in such a situation in all the Entente countries that we
    see profound and widespread unrest stimulated by the
    workers’ sympathy for the Soviet form. 
 A Paris crowd, for example, is perhaps more sensitive than any
    assembly of people in any other country, because the people there
    have had a very good schooling, they have made a number of
    revolutions—and there, this most responsive crowd, which
    will not allow a speaker to strike a false note, now interrupts
    those who dare to say anything against the Bolsheviks. And yet,
    only a few months ago, nobody could even as much as hint that he
    is in favour of Bolshevism without being jeered at by the very
    same crowd. 
 Meanwhile the Paris bourgeoisie has set its entire machine of
    lies, slander and deception in motion against Bolshevism. But now
    we know what this means, for in 1917 we Bolsheviks experienced the
    persecution of the entire bourgeois press. The bourgeoisie in our
    country, however, miscalculated slightly and overdid it in
    thinking that they could enmesh the Bolsheviks in their net of
    slander; they overdid things so badly, they went so far in their
    attacks that they gave us a free advertisement and compelled even
    the most backward workers to say to themselves: “Well, if
    the capitalists are abusing the Bolsheviks so much, it shows that
    those Bolsheviks know how to fight the capitalists!” 
 That is why the policy which we were obliged to pursue at the
    time of the Brest peace, a most brutal, violent and humiliating
    peace, proved to be the only correct policy that could have been
    pursued. 
 And I think that it will be useful to recall this policy once
    again at the present time when a similar situation is arising in
    the Entente countries, when there, too, the bourgeoisie is filled
    with a mad desire to thrust their debts, poverty and ruin on
    Russia, to plunder Russia and crush her in order to divert the
    rising anger of the masses of their own working people from
    themselves. 
 Looking at the situation dispassionately we must say to
    ourselves very clearly, if we do not want to fool ourselves and
    others—this is a dangerous thing for revolutionaries to
    indulge in—we must say that as far as military strength is
    concerned, the Entente is stronger than we are. But if we look at
    things in the light of their development, we shall also say very
    definitely and with a conviction based not only on our
    revolutionary views but also on our experience, that the strength
    of the Entente countries will not last, they are on the threshold
    of a great and abrupt change in the temper of their masses. 
 They have been feeding both French and British workers with
    promises, saying, “We shall finish plundering the whole
    world and you will have enough to eat.” This is what the
    bourgeois press is shouting and dinning into the ears of the
    ignorant masses. 
    

      They will probably conclude peace in a few months—if they
      do not quarrel among themselves in the meantime, and there are a
      number of serious symptoms that this is possible. But if they
      succeed in concluding peace without flying at each other’s
      throats, this peace will be the beginning of an immediate
      collapse, because these unprecedented debts cannot be paid, and
      they can do nothing to alleviate the desperate state of ruin,
      when in France the production of wheat has dropped to less than
      half and famine is knocking at the door everywhere, and the
      productive forces have been destroyed; they are unable to do
      anything about it. 
 If we look at the situation soberly we shall have to admit
    that the method of appraising affairs which proved so correct in
    appraising the Russian revolution is, day after day, indicating
    the coming of the world revolution. We know that the streams that
    will carry with them the icebergs of the Entente, of capitalism,
    of imperialism, are gaining strength day after day. 
 On the one hand, the Entente countries are stronger than we
    are; but on the other hand, they-cannot possibly hold out long
    owing to the internal situation. 
 It is this situation that determines the intricate tasks of
    international policy—tasks which we may, and probably will,
    have to tackle in the very near future, and which, though I am
    insufficiently informed about them in all their detail, I would
    like to talk to you-about most of all so that a picture of the
    experience of the work done by the Council of People’s
    Commissars, work in the sphere of foreign policy, will be
    presented to you, comrades, in a clear and interesting form. 
 The most important of our experiences is the Brest peace. This
    is the most significant result of the foreign policy of the
    Council of People’s Commissars. We were obliged to play for
    time, to retreat, manoeuvre and sign a most humiliating peace
    treaty, and in this way gain an opportunity to lay the foundation
    of a new socialist army. This foundation we have laid, while our
    once mighty and all-powerful enemy is already powerless. 
 All over the world things are moving in the same direction,
    and this is the chief and principal lesson that we must learn and
    try to understand as clearly as possible in order to avoid making
    mistakes in the extremely intricate, extremely difficult and
    extremely involved problems of foreign policy which any day may
    confront the Council of People’s Commissars, the Central
    Executive Committee, and Soviet power as a whole. 
 I shall conclude my remarks on foreign policy with this and
    proceed to deal with some other extremely important
    questions. 
  Comrades, as regards activities in the military field—a
    year ago, in February and March 1918, we had no army at all. We
    had, perhaps, ten million armed workers and peasants who
    constituted the old army that had collapsed completely, was fully
    ready and determined to desert, to flee, to abandon everything,
    come what may. 
 At that time this was regarded as an exclusively Russian
    phenomenon. People thought that owing to the Russians’
    characteristic impatience, or lack of organisation, they would not
    hold out, whereas the Germans would. 
 That is what we were told. And now we see that a few months
    have passed and the same thing has happened to the German army,
    which was immeasurably superior to ours in culture, equipment, and
    discipline, in providing decent conditions for the sick and
    wounded, as regards home leave, and so forth. Even the most
    cultured and disciplined masses could not stand the slaughter, the
    many years of slaughter, and so a period of absolute
    disintegration set in when even the advanced German army broke
    down. 
 Evidently, there is a limit not only for Russia but for all
    countries. There are different limits for different countries, but
    for all of them there is a limit beyond which it is impossible to
    continue to wage war for the sake of the interests of the
    capitalists. This is what we see today. 
 German imperialism has completely exposed itself as a
    predator. The most important thing is that even in America and in
    France, in these notorious democracies (the traitors to socialism,
    the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries, those hapless people
    who call themselves socialists, are fond of chattering about
    democracies), in these most advanced democracies of the world, in
    these republics, imperialism is becoming more arrogant every day
    and we find there beasts of prey more predatory than anywhere
    else.  They are plundering the world, fighting each other, and
    arming against each other. This cannot be concealed for long. It
    could be concealed when the war fever was at its height. But the
    fever is subsiding, peace is approaching, and it is precisely in
    these democracies that the masses see, in spite of all the lies
    they are being told, that the war has led to fresh plunder, that
    the most democratic republic is nothing more nor less than a
    disguise for the most brutal and cynical predator who is ready to
    ruin hundreds of millions of people in order to pay the debts,
    that is, to pay the imperialist gentlemen, the capitalists, for
    being good enough to allow the workers to cut each other’s
    throats. This is becoming clearer to the masses every day. 
 It is this situation that makes possible political statements
    such as the article written by the military correspondent of a
    newspaper that belongs to the richest and most politically
    experienced bourgeoisie, the London Times ; the author
    appraises events by saying that all over the world the armies are
    breaking up and there is only one country where the army is being
    built up, and that country is Russia. 
 The bourgeoisie—which militarily is far stronger than
    Soviet Bolshevism—is compelled to admit this fact. And this
    fact serves as a criterion of what we have accomplished in the
    course of our Soviet activities in the past year. 
 We succeeded in reaching a turning-point where instead of an
    army of ten million, the bulk of which had deserted, unable to
    stand the horrors of war, and which had realised that this was a
    criminal war, we began to build, one hundred thousand after
    another, a socialist army, which knows what it is fighting for and
    is ready to make greater sacrifices and suffer more privation than
    under tsarism. For this army knows that it is fighting for its own
    cause, for its own land, for its own power in the factories, that
    it is defending the power of the working people, and that the
    working people of other countries are awakening, slowly and with
    great difficulty, but awakening nevertheless. 
 This is the situation that characterises the year’s
    experience of Soviet power. 
 War is an incredible hardship for Soviet Russia, war is an
    incredible hardship for a people who for four years have borne the
    horrors of the imperialist war. For SovietRussia war is an
    incredibly heavy burden. But at the present time even our powerful
    enemies admit that their armies are cracking up, whereas our army
    is being built. For the first time in history an army is being
    built on the basis of the closest contact, inseverable contact,
    coalescence, one might say, of the army and the Soviets. The
    Soviets unite all the working people, all the exploited, and the
    army is being built up for the purpose of socialist defence and on
    the basis of class-consciousness. 
 An eighteenth-century Prussian monarch once wisely remarked:
    “If our soldiers knew what we were fighting for, it would be
    impossible to wage a single war.” That old Prussian monarch
    was no fool. We, however, are prepared to say, comparing our
    position with that of the monarch, that we can wage war because
    the masses know what they are fighting for; and they want to fight
    notwithstanding the incredible burdens—burdens, I repeat,
    far greater than under tsarism—knowing that they are making
    these desperate and incredibly heavy sacrifices in defence of
    their socialist cause, fighting side by side with those workers of
    other countries who are “disintegrating” and are
    beginning to understand our position. 
 Some foolish people are shouting about red militarism. These
    are political crooks who pretend that they believe this absurdity
    and throw charges of this kind right and left, exercising their
    lawyers’ skill in concocting plausible arguments and in
    throwing dust in the eyes of the masses. And the Mensheviks and
    Socialist-Revolutionaries shout: “Look, instead of
    socialism, they are giving you red militarism!” 
 What a “horrible” crime, indeed! The imperialists
    of the whole world hurled themselves upon the Russian Republic in
    order to crush it, and we began to form an army which for the
    first time in history knows what it is fighting for and what it is
    making sacrifices for, which is successfully contending against a
    numerically superior enemy, and which with every month of its
    resistance on an unprecedented scale is bringing nearer the world
    revolution, and this is denounced as red militarism! 
 I repeat, these are either fools to whom no political
    appraisal can apply, or else political crooks.  

    
 
      Everybody knows that this war was forced upon us. We brought the
      old war to a close at the beginning of 1918, and did not start a
      new war. Everybody knows that the white guards attacked us in
      the West, South and East, only because they were assisted by the
      Entente, which scattered millions right and left. And these
      advanced countries collected and handed over to the whiteguards
      the vast stocks of war supplies and ammunition left over from
      the imperialist war, for those gentlemen, the millionaires and
      multimillionaires, know that their fate is being decided here,
      that it is here they will perish if they do not crush us at
      once. 
 The socialist, republic is straining every nerve, is making
    sacrifices and winning victories. And if after a year of civil war
    you look at the map and compare what Soviet Russia was in March
    1918 and in July 1918—when the German imperialists in the
    West occupied the line laid down by the Treaty of Brest, when the
    Ukraine was under the heel of the German imperialists, when the
    Czechoslovaks, bribed by the French and British, lorded it in the
    East as far as Kazan and Simbirsk—if you look at the map
    today, you will see that we have expanded immensely, that we have
    won enormous victories. 
 Is this situation, only sordid and despicable political crooks
    can use strong language and accuse us of red militarism. 
 Never in history has there been a revolution in which it was
    possible to lay down one’s arms and rest on one’s
    laurels after the victory. Whoever thinks that such revolutions
    are possible is not only no revolutionary, but the worst enemy of
    the working class. There has never been a revolution, even a
    second-rate one, even a bourgeois revolution in which the only
    issue was the transfer of power from one propertied minority to
    another. We know of examples! The French revolution, against which
    the old powers hurled themselves at the beginning of the
    nineteenth century in order to crush it, we call great precisely
    because it succeeded in rousing the vast masses of the people in
    defence of its gains and they resisted the whole world; this was
    one of its greatest merits. 
 Revolutions are subjected to the most serious tests in the
    fire of battle. If you are oppressed and exploited and think of
    throwing off the power of the exploiters, if you are deter- mined
    to carry this to its logical conclusion, you must under stand that
    you will have to contend against the onslaught of the exploiters
    of the whole world. If you are ready to offer resistance and to
    make further sacrifices in order to hold out in the struggle, you
    are a revolutionary; if not, you will be crushed. 
 This is how the question is presented by the history of all
    revolutions. 
 The real test to which our revolution is being subjected is
    that we, in a backward country, succeeded in capturing power
    before the others, succeeded in establishing the Soviet form of
    government, the power of the working and exploited people. Shall
    we be able to hold, on at least until the masses in the other
    countries make a move? If we are not prepared to make fresh
    sacrifices and do not hold out, it will be said that our
    revolution was historically unjustified. But democrats in
    civilised countries who are armed to the teeth dread the presence
    of a hundred or so Bolsheviks in a free republic with a hundred
    million population, in the way America does. Bolshevism is so
    infectious! And it turns out that the democrats cannot cope with a
    hundred immigrants from starving, ruined Russia who might talk
    about Bolshevism! The masses sympathise with us! The bourgeoisie
    have only one path of salvation, and that is, while their hand
    still grasps the sword, while they still control the guns, to turn
    these guns against Soviet Russia and to crush her in a few months,
    because later on nothing will crush her. This is the situation we
    are in; this is what determined the military policy of the Council
    of People’s Commissars during the past year; and this is
    why, pointing to the facts, to the results, we have a right to say
    that we have stood the test only because the workers and peasants,
    though utterly exhausted by war, are creating a new army under
    still more arduous conditions and are displaying new heroism. 
 That is a brief summary of the policy of the Soviet government
    in the military field. Permit me to say just a few more words
    about a matter in which military policy overlaps policy in another
    field—economic policy. I refer to the military experts. 
 You are probably aware of the controversy that has arisen over
    this question, and that some comrades, most devoted and  convinced
    Bolshevik Communists, often expressed vehement protests against
    the fact that for the purpose of organising our socialist Red Army
    we are utilising the services of the old military experts, tsarist
    generals and officers, whose records are blemished by their
    service to the tsar, and in some cases by the bloody acts of
    repression against workers and peasants. 
 The contradiction here is glaring, and indignation, one might
    say, springs up of its own accord. How can we build a socialist
    army with the aid of tsarist experts?! 
 It turned out that this was the way, the only way, we did
    build up an army. If we give some thought to the task that has
    fallen to our lot, it will not be difficult to understand that it
    is the only way we could build it. This is not only a military
    matter, it is a task that confronts us in all spheres of everyday
    life, and of the country’s economy. 
 The old utopian socialists imagined that socialism could be
    built by men of a new type, that first they would train good, pure
    and splendidly educated people, and these would build
    socialism. We always laughed at this and said that this was
    playing with puppets, that it was socialism as an amusement for
    young ladies, but not serious politics. 
 We want to build socialism with the aid of those men and women
    who grew up under capitalism, were depraved and corrupted by
    capitalism, but steeled for the struggle by capitalism. There are
    proletarians who have been so hardened that they can stand a
    thousand times more hardship than any army. There are tens of
    millions of oppressed peasants, ignorant and scattered, but
    capable of uniting around the proletariat in the struggle, if the
    proletariat adopts skilful tactics. And there are scientific and
    technical experts all thoroughly imbued with the bourgeois world
    outlook, there are military experts who were trained under
    bourgeois conditions—if they were only bourgeois it would
    not be so bad, but there were also conditions of landed
    proprietorship, serfdom and the big stick. As far as concerns the
    economy, all the agronomists, engineers and school-teachers were
    recruited from the propertied class; they did not drop from the
    skies. Neither under the reign of Tsar Nicholas nor under the
    Republican President Wilson were the propertyless proletarians at
    the bench and the peasants at the plough able to get a university
    education. Science and technology exist only for the rich, for the
    propertied class; capitalism provides culture only for the
    minority. We must build socialism out of this culture, we have no
    other material. We want to start building socialism at once out of
    the material that capitalism left us yesterday to be used today,
    at this very moment, and not with people reared in hothouses,
    assuming that we were to take this fairy-tale seriously. We have
    bourgeois experts and nothing else. We have no other bricks with
    which to build. Socialism must triumph, and we socialists and
    Communists must prove by deeds that we are capable of building
    socialism with these bricks, with this material, that we are
    capable of building socialist society with the aid of proletarians
    who have enjoyed the fruits of culture only to an insignificant
    degree, and with the aid of bourgeois specialists. 
 If you do not build communist society with this material, you
    will prove that you are mere phrase-mongers and windbags. 
 This is how the question is presented by the historical legacy
    of world capitalism! This is the difficulty that confronted us
    concretely when we took power, when we set up the Soviet machinery
    of state! 
 This is only half the task, but it is the greater half. Soviet
    machinery of state means that the working people are united in
    such a way as to crush capitalism by the weight of their mass
    unity. The masses did this. But it is not enough to crush
    capitalism. We must take the entire culture that capitalism left
    behind and build socialism with it. We must take all its science,
    technology, knowledge and art. Without these we shall be unable to
    build communist society. But this science, technology and art are
    in the hands and in the heads of the experts. 
 This is the task that confronts us in all spheres. It is a
    task with inherent contradictions, like the inherent
    contradictions of capitalism as a whole. It is a most difficult
    task, but a practicable one. We cannot wait twenty years until we
    have trained pure, communist experts, until we have trained the
    first generation of Communists without blemish and without
    reproach. No, excuse me, but we must build now, in two months and
    not in twenty years’ time, so as to be able to fight the
    bourgeoisie, to oppose the bourgeois science and  technology of
    the whole world. Here we must achieve victory. It is difficult to
    make the bourgeois experts serve us by the weight of our masses,
    but it is possible, and if we do it, we shall triumph. 
 When Comrade Trotsky informed me recently that the number of
    officers of the old army employed by our War Department runs into
    several tens of thousands, I perceived concretely where the secret
    of using our enemy lay, how to compel those who had opposed
    communism to build it, how to build communism with the bricks
    which the capitalists had chosen to hurl against us! We have no
    other bricks! And so, we must compel the bourgeois experts, under
    the leadership of the proletariat, to build up our edifice with
    these bricks. This is what is difficult; but this is the pledge of
    victory. 
 Naturally, on this path, which is a new and difficult one, we
    have made more than a few mistakes; on this path we have met with
    more than a few reverses. Everybody knows that a certain number of
    experts have systematically betrayed us. Among the experts in the
    factories, among the agronomists, and in the administration, we
    have seen and see today at every step a malicious attitude to
    work, malicious sabotage. 
 We know that all this presents tremendous difficulties and
    that we cannot achieve victory by violence alone. . . . We, of
    course, are not opposed to violence. We laugh at those who are
    opposed to the dictatorship of the proletariat, we laugh and say
    that they are fools who do not understand that there must be
    either the dictatorship of the proletariat or the dictatorship of
    the bourgeoisie. Those who think otherwise are either idiots, or
    are so politically ignorant that it would be a disgrace to allow
    them to come anywhere near a meeting, let alone on the
    platform. The only alternative is either violence against
    Liebknecht and Luxemburg, the murder of the best leaders of the
    workers, or the violent suppression of the exploiters; and whoever
    dreams of a middle course is our most harmful and dangerous
    enemy. That is how the matter stands at present. Hence, when we
    talk of utilising the services of the experts we must bear in mind
    the lesson taught by Soviet policy during the past year. During
    that year we have broken and defeated the exploiters and we must
    now solve the prob- lem of using the bourgeois specialists. Here,
    I repeat, violence alone will get us nowhere. Here, in addition to
    violence, after successful violence, we need the organisation,
    discipline and moral weight of the victorious proletariat, which
    will subordinate all the bourgeois experts to its will and draw
    them into its work. 
 Some people may say that Lenin is recommending moral
    persuasion instead of violence! But it is foolish to imagine that
    we can solve the problem of organising a new science and
    technology for the development of communist society by violence
    alone. That is nonsense! We, as a Party, as people who have
    learned something during this year of Soviet activity, will not be
    so foolish as to think so, and we will warn the masses not to
    think so. The employment of all the institutions of bourgeois
    capitalist society requires not only the successful use of
    violence, but also organisation, discipline, comradely discipline
    among the masses, the organisation of proletarian influence over
    the rest of the population, the creation of a new, mass
    environment, which will convince the bourgeois specialists that
    they have no alternative, that there can be no return to the old
    society, and that they can do their work only in conjunction with
    the Communists who are working by their side, who are leading the
    masses, who enjoy the absolute confidence of the masses, and whose
    object is to ensure that the fruits of bourgeois science and
    technology, the fruits of thousands of years of the development of
    civilisation, shall be enjoyed not by a handful of people for the
    purpose of distinguishing themselves and amassing wealth, but by
    literally all the working people. 
 This is an immensely difficult task, the fulfilment of which
    will require decades! But to carry it out ,we must create a force,
    a discipline, comradely discipline, Soviet discipline, proletarian
    discipline, such as will not only physically crush the
    counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie, but also encompass them
    completely, subordinate them to our will, compel them to proceed
    along our lines, to serve our cause. 
 I repeat that we come up against this problem every day is the
    work of organising our military forces, in the work of economic
    development, in the work of every economic council, in the work of
    every factory committee and of every nationalised factory. There
    was hardly a week during all past year that the Council of
    People’s Commissars did not discuss and settle this question
    in one way or another. I am sure that there was not a single
    factory committee in Russia, not a single agricultural commune,
    not a single state farm, not a single uyezd land department which
    did not come up against this issue scores of times in the course
    of the past year’s Soviet activity. 
 This is what makes this task so difficult, but it is also what
    makes it a really gratifying one. This is what we must do now, the
    day after the exploiters were crushed by the force of the
    proletarian insurrection. We suppressed their
    resistance—this had to be done. But this is not the only
    thing that has to be done. By the force of the new organisation,
    the comradely organisation of the working people, we must compel
    them to serve us. We must cure them of their old vices and prevent
    them from relapsing into their exploiting practices. They have
    remained bourgeois, and they occupy posts as commanders and staff
    officers in our army, as engineers and agronomists, and these old,
    bourgeois people call themselves Mensheviks and
    Socialist-Revolutionaries. It does not matter what they call
    themselves. They are bourgeois through and through, from head to
    foot, in their outlook and in their habits. 
 Well, what shall we do, throw them out? You cannot throw out
    hundreds of thousands! And if we did we should be harming only
    ourselves. We have no other material with which to build communism
    than that created by capitalism. We must not throw them out, but
    break their resistance, watch them at every step, make no
    political concessions to them, which spineless people are inclined
    to do every minute. Educated people yield to the policy and
    influence of the bourgeoisie because they acquired all their
    education in a bourgeois environment and from that
    environment. That is why they stumble at every step and make
    political concessions to the counter-revolutionary
    bourgeoisie. 
 A Communist who says that he must not get into a state where
    he will soil his hands, that he must have clean, communist hands,
    and that he will build communist society with clean communist
    hands and scorn the services of the contemptible,
    counter-revolutionary bourgeois co-operators, is a mere
    phrase-monger, because we cannot help resorting to their
    services. 

    
 
      The practical task that confronts us now is to enlist the
      services of all those whom capitalism has trained to oppose
us, to watch them day after day, to place worker commissars
over them in an environment of communist organisation, day
after day to thwart their counter-revolutionary designs, and
at the same time to learn from them. 
 The science which we, at best, possess, is the science of the
    agitator and propagandist, of the man who has been steeled by the
    hellishly hard lot of the factory worker, or starving peasant, a
    science which teaches us how to hold out for a long time and to
    persevere in the struggle, and this has saved us up to now. All
    this is necessary, but it is not enough. With this alone we cannot
    triumph. In order that our victory may be complete and final we
    must take all that is valuable from capitalism, take all its
    science and culture. 
 How can we take it? We must learn from them, from our
    enemies. Our advanced peasants, the class-conscious workers in
    their factories, our officials in the uyezd land departments must
    learn from the bourgeois agronomists, engineers, and others, so as
    to acquire the fruits of their culture. 
 In this respect, the struggle that flared up in our Party
    during the past year was extremely useful. It gave rise to
    numerous sharp collisions, but there are no struggles without
    sharp collisions. As a result, however, we gained practical
    experience in a matter that had never before confronted us but
    without which it is impossible to achieve communism. I say again
    that the task of combining the victorious proletarian revolution
    with bourgeois culture, with bourgeois science and technology,
    which up to now has been available to few people, is a difficult
    one. Here, everything depends on the organisation and discipline
    of the advanced sections of the working people. If, in Russia, the
    millions of downtrodden and ignorant peasants who are totally
    incapable of independent development, who were oppressed by the
    landowners for centuries, did not have at their head, and by their
    side an advanced section of the urban workers whom they
    understood, with whom they were intimate, who enjoyed their
    confidence, whom they believed as fellow-workers, if there were
    not this organisation which is capable of rallying the masses of
    the working people, of influencing them, of explaining to them and
    convincing them of the importance of the task of taking over the
    entire bourgeois culture, the cause of communism would be
    hopeless. 
 I say this not from the abstract point of view, but from the
    point of view of a whole year’s daily experience. Although
    this experience includes a multitude of petty details, some times
    dull and unpleasant, we must learn to see something deeper in
    them. We must understand that these petty details, these conflicts
    between, say, a factory committee and an engineer, a Red Army man
    and some bourgeois officer, a peasant and a bourgeois
    agronomist—these conflicts, this friction, these petty
    details contain much that is immeasurably deeper. We have
    vanquished the prejudice that these bourgeois specialists should
    be thrown out. We have taken over this machine, it is still
    running badly, we have no illusions on that score; it keeps
    stopping, it makes mistakes all the time, it runs into ditches,
    and we drag it out again, but it is moving, and we shall keep it
    on the right road. This is the only way we can emerge from this
    quagmire of destruction, frightful difficulties, ruin, barbarism,
    poverty and starvation into which we were dragged by the war, and
    into which the imperialists of all countries are trying to push us
    and keep us. 
 But we have begun to emerge, the first steps have been
    taken. 
 This year of Soviet activity has taught us clearly to
    understand the task in every individual case of work in the
    factories and among the peasants, and we have mastered it. Soviet
    power has gained tremendously by it in the past year, and it has
    been worth while spending a year on it. We shall not, as we did in
    the old days, discuss theoretically and in general terms the
    importance of bourgeois specialists and the importance of
    proletarian organisations, but at every step, in every factory
    committee, and in every land organisation, we shall make use of
    the experience we have gained. We have laid the foundation of our
    Red Army, we now have a small foundation, we now have nationalised
    factories where the workers understand their tasks and have begun
    to increase labour productivity with the aid of bourgeois
    specialists (who at every step are trying to turn to the past
    while the mass organisations of the workers are compelling them to
    march forward in step with Soviet power)—all this is a great
    gain for Soviet power. This work is imperceptible, there is
    nothing brilliant about it, it is difficult to appraise its real
    value, but the very fact that from simply suppressing the
    exploiters we have advanced to a phase where we are learning
    ourselves and teaching the masses how to build communism with
    capitalist bricks and compel the capitalist bourgeois specialists
    to work for us, is a step forward for our movement. Only on this
    road shall we achieve victory. And now we know that if we proceed
    as we have been up to now we shall really achieve this victory.

    

    Comrades, I now come to the last question that I want to deal
    with, if only briefly, for I have already spoken too long. I have
    in mind the question of our relations with the countryside.   

    

      Up to now I have spoken about our activities in the military
      field, about the dictatorship, and about utilising the services
      of bourgeois specialists. Now I want to deal with another great
      difficulty that we encounter in our work of communist
      construction.  

    

      What is to be done if the proletariat has taken power in a
      country where the urban proletariat constitutes a minority of
      the population, while the majority are peasants accustomed to
      work individually and deeply imbued with habits of individual
      farming?

    

      The majority of these peasants, however, have been so ruined,
    impoverished and exhausted by the oppression of the landowners and
    capitalists that they willingly render assistance to the
    proletariat. When an urban worker approaches a peasant in a
    reasonable way, tactfully, as man to man, and not as if he wants
    to be a boss, which arouses legitimate hatred, he wins the
    peasant’s most comradely confidence and complete support. We
    know that this is a fact, and Soviet power in the villages is
    based on it. Soviet power has been able to hold out only because
    it has been receiving the sincere support of the majority of the
    working people. We have been receiving this support because the
    urban workers have established contact with the rural poor in
    thousands of ways, of which we have not even an inkling.
 The state, which formerly hindered the establishment of such
    contacts, is now doing all it can to facilitate it. This alone
    explains why Soviet power has been able to hold out and this is
    the sole pledge of victory.  
 The enormous difficulties I have just referred to are due to
    the peasants being accustomed to work individually and to sell
    their grain freely. They think this is quite legitimate. They
    argue as follows. How can it be that having worked so hard to
    produce grain at the cost of so much sweat and blood, we have no
    right to sell it as we please? The peasants consider themselves
    the injured party. 
 But we know from the entire development of Russia that freedom
    to trade means freely breeding capitalists; and freedom to trade
    in a country which has been exhausted by starvation, where
    starving people are prepared to give any thing, even to sell
    themselves into slavery, for a crust of bread, freedom to trade
    when the country is starving means allowing the minority freely to
    amass wealth and ruin the majority.  
 We must prove that help for the peasantry is a primary task in
    a country which has been exhausted by starvation; but we can help
    the peasantry only by uniting their activities, by uniting the
    masses, for the peasants are scattered, disunited and accustomed
    to work and live out of contact with one another. 
 There are no objective obstacles to the fulfilment of this
    difficult task. All that had to be done by means of force, has
    been done; we do not reject force, for we know that there are
    kulaks among the peasants who are actively resisting us and go to
    the length of organising whiteguard revolts. This, however, does
    not apply to peasants in the mass. The kulaks are a minority. As
    far as they are concerned, the only thing to do is to fight them
    and to keep on fighting them. They must be crushed, and we are
    crushing them. But after the successful fulfilment of the task of
    crushing the rural exploiters problems arise which cannot be
    solved by the use of force. In this sphere, as in all the others,
    we can fulfil our task only by means of mass organisation, by
    means of the prolonged educational influence of the urban
    proletariat over the peasantry. 
 Shall we succeed in this tasks? Yes, we know from experience
    that we shall, and only because the vast majority of the
    peasants have confidence in the workers’ government and on
    the basis of this confidence in the workers we can reinforce the
    foundation we have begun to build, and which we mustcontinue to
    build, but only by means of comradely influence and
    discipline. 
 This is the practical task that now confronts us. 
 When we established the Poor Peasants  Committees,[1] when we
    tried to introduce barter with the rural districts, we did so not
    to enable the rich peasants to obtain goods, but primarily to
    enable the poor peasants to obtain the small quantities of goods
    that the cities could provide so that by helping the poor we would
    be able with their aid to beat the kulaks and take their surplus
    grain. 
 It has been an extremely difficult task to supply grain to the
    population of a vast country with poor transport facilities and a
    scattered peasantry, and it has given us the most trouble. I
    recall all the meetings of the Council of People’s
    Commissars and must say that the Soviet government has not worked
    so persistently on anything as it has on this. Our peasants are
    extremely scattered and disunited. In the rural districts
    ignorance and the habit of working individually are more deep
    rooted than anywhere: The rural population is dissatisfied with
    not being allowed freedom to trade in grain. And in this
    situation, of course, political crooks, all sorts of
    Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks, incite the peasantry by
    saying to them, “They are robbing you!” 
 There are scoundrels who after a year of Soviet activity when,
    incidentally, food supply authorities have shown that during the
    past few months we supplied the rural districts with 42,000
    carloads of goods and received in exchange only 39,000 carloads of
    grain—there are scoundrels, I say, who, after this come
    along and yell, “Peasants, the Soviet government is robbing
    you!” 
 At a time when the workers in the towns are on the verge of
    exhaustion—and nowhere is there such terrible hunger as in
    the towns and in the non-agricultural parts of Russia—when
    the peasants have taken all the land and grain that belonged to
    landowners, and when the bulk of the peasants, as we know, in the
    first year of Soviet power worked for themselves and not for the
    landowners and merchants and are now feeding better than they did
    before, when the population of the urban and non-agricultural
    districts of the country is starving and all the capitalists are
    trying to crush us by famine, at such a time people wearing
    Menshevik, Socialist-  Revolutionary, or other clownish costumes,
    have the insolence to shout, “They are robbing you!”
    These people are agents of capitalism, and we must treat them as
    such and nothing else! 
 At a time when the main difficulty confronting the Soviet
    government is the famine, it is the duty of every Soviet citizen
    to hand over all his surplus grain to the famine-stricken. This is
    so clear and obvious, so intelligible to every working man, that
    nobody can say a word against it. One must be a scoundrel, a
    political crook, to obscure this plain, clear and obvious truth,
    to make it unintelligible, or distort it! 
 It is on this truth that the urban workers rely. It is because
    this truth is so obvious that they are able to do their extremely
    difficult job. Up to now they have told the poor peasants that
    they and the workers constitute the real bulwark of Soviet power,
    that is why the working class has established Poor Peasants’
    Committees, organised barter, and made it obligatory for the
    co-operatives to include the whole population. All the decrees on
    agriculture issued up to now have this main idea running through
    them. And in all our appeals to the urban workers we have said,
    “Unite with the rural poor, for unless you do, you will be
    unable to solve the most important and most difficult problem,
    namely, the bread problem.” And to the peasants we said,
    “Either you unite with the urban workers, in which case we
    shall triumph; or you allow yourselves to be misled by the
    admonitions and exhortations of the capitalists and their servants
    and flunkeys in Menshevik garb, who say, “Don’t let
    the towns rob you, trade as you please, the rich get richer, what
    do you care if people are dying of starvation’, in which
    case you yourselves will perish, you will become the slaves of the
    capitalists and cause the ruin of Soviet Russia.” It was
    only under capitalism that people argued, “I shall trade, I
    shall get rich. Every man for himself and God for all.” This
    was the principle of capitalism and it engendered war; that is why
    the workers and peasants were poor, and an insignificant number of
    people became multimillionaires. 
 The problem is how to approach the peasants in the course of
    practical work, how to organise the poor and middle peasants so as
    to be able at every step to combat their gravita- tion towards the
    past, their attempts to go back to free trading activities, their
    constant striving to be “free” producers. The word
    “freedom” is a good word. We meet it at every step:
    freedom to trade, freedom to sell, freedom to sell one self, and
    so forth. And there are Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries,
    rascals, who garble and distort this beautiful word
    “freedom” in every newspaper and in every speech. But
    these are all crooks, capitalism’s prostitutes, who are
    trying to drag the people back to the past.   

    

      Lastly, the main
      object of the attention and activities of the Council of
      People’s Commissars as well as of the Council of Defence has
      recently, during the past few months and weeks, been the fight
      against the famine.
    
 The famine is particularly disastrous for us at the present
      time, on the threshold of the spring; and the spring threatens to
      be a most severe period for us. Just as last year the most severe
      period was the end of winter, the spring and the beginning of the
      summer, so, this year, we are now on the threshold of a severe
      period. The whiteguards, landowners and capitalists have greater
      hopes of being able to play on the famine as a means of crushing
      Soviet power since they have been unable to do it in open
      struggle. 
 The people who call themselves Mensheviks and Right or Left
    Socialist-Revolutionaries have sunk so low that they claim to side
    with the working people but when the food situation becomes more
    acute and famine is approaching they try to take advantage of it
    and incite the masses of the people against the workers’ and
    peasants’ government. They do not understand that this sort
    of policy today, this incitement and these attempts by the Left
    Socialist-Revolutionaries to make capital out of the famine,
    ostensibly for the benefit of the workers, are direct assistance
    to the whiteguards, just as much as was the treachery of the Left
    Socialist-Revolutionary Muravyov on the Eastern Front last year,
    which cost the lives of tens of thousands of workers and
    peasants. Any such agitation costs thousands more lives in the war
    against the whiteguards. When Muravyov committed his act of
    treachery last year, he opened up almost the entire front to the
    enemy and caused us a number of severe reverses. 
 That is why I should like primarily and mainly to deal very
    briefly with the major facts.  

    
 
      Although today our food situation has become worse, just as it
      did last spring, we have every hope that we shall not only
      overcome this difficulty but shall cope with it better than we
      did last year. This hope is based on the fact that the situation
      in the East and South has greatly improved; and the East and
      South are the main granaries of Russia. At a number of meetings
      of the Council of Defence and the Council of People’s
      Commissars held during the past few days we ascertained very
      definitely that about nine million poods of grain have been
      piled up on the railways between Kazan and Saratov, and on the
      Volga-Bugulma line, to the east of Samara, across the
      Volga. 
 The great difficulty, and great danger, is that our railways
    are in such a state of disrepair, and the shortage of locomotives
    is so considerable, that we are not sure of being able to move all
    this grain. This is what we have concentrated our main attention
    and activities on during the past few days, and that is why we
    resolved to resort to a measure like the suspension of all
    passenger traffic from March 18 to April 10. 
 We know that this is a harsh measure. Agitators who are
    helping the whiteguards will no doubt come along and shout,
    “Look, the people are starving, and yet passenger traffic
    has been stopped, to make it impossible to carry grain.”
    Agitators of this type will certainly appear. But we tell
    ourselves that in all cases of difficulty we rely on the
    class-consciousness of the honest workers, and they will side with
    us. 
 According to the calculations of the experts, the suspension
    of passenger traffic will release 220 locomotives. These passenger
    locomotives are less powerful than freight locomotives, they
    cannot haul as much; but we have estimated that during this period
    they will be able to haul about three and a half million poods of
    grain. Individual food profiteers and the starving people who roam
    all over the country in search of grain, would, at the most, be
    able to carry half a million poods in such a period. This will be
    confirmed by every experienced railway worker, by everybody, who
    has been on the Trans-Volga line and has seen the grain heaped up,
    sometimes right on the bare snow. The sacks of grain may be
    damaged; as it is the grain is moist, and the situation will
    become worse when the spring thaw commences. We therefore resorted
    to this harsh measure, convinced that the truth cannot be
    concealed from the vast masses of the workers, that the Left
    Socialist-Revolutionaries will not succeed in misleading them,
    that truth will prevail. 
 This harsh measure, the suspension of passenger traffic, will
    provide us with several million poods of grain. We must brush
    aside the lies, slander and fairy-tales to the effect that it is
    harmful to suspend passenger traffic and say that with the
    assistance of the Petrograd, Moscow and Ivanovo-Voznesensk workers
    who are being sent to the South, it will provide a sufficient
    quantity of grain. Incidentally, I will remind you that no city
    has devoted so much effort to the organisation of food supplies as
    Petrograd. All the best forces in that city have already been
    mustered for the work, and this is what the workers in the other
    advanced cities should do, too. 
 The socialist revolution cannot be accomplished without the
    working class. It cannot be accomplished if the working class has
    not accumulated sufficient forces to be able to lead the tens of
    millions of exhausted, illiterate, and scattered rural people who
    had been crushed by capitalism. Only the advanced workers can lead
    them. But our best forces have already been used up, they are
    weary and exhausted. Their places must be taken by average people
    and young forces. Probably they will make mistakes, but that does
    not matter so long as they are devoted to the workers’
    cause, and so long as they have been brought up in the environment
    of the proletarian struggle. 
 We have already taken measures to send our best forces to the
    Volga-Bugulma Railway. Comrade Bryukhanov has gone there
    accompanied by a group of workers. Army detachments accompanied by
    workers have been sent to other lines, too, and, I repeat, there
    are good grounds for hoping that we shall obtain grain. A severe
    half-year lies ahead of us, but this will be the last severe
    half-year, because instead of an enemy who is becoming stronger,
    we have in front of us an enemy who is disintegrating, for the
    Soviet movement is growing in all countries. 
 These are the grounds on which, after discussing the matter
    most carefully and verifying our calculations again and again, we
    say that the suspension of passenger traffic will enable us to
    bring in several million poods of grain and  use the extremely
    rich granaries of the East and South. In the course of this severe
    half-year we shall vanquish our chief enemy, the famine. Moreover,
    our position today is much better than it was last year, because
    we now have reserves. 
 Last yearthe Czechoslovaks reached Kazan and Simbirsk; the
    Ukraine was under the heel of the Germans; Krasnov, financed by
    the Germans, was mustering troops in the Don region, and we were
    cut off from the South. Today the Ukraine is being liberated from
    the German imperialists. The latter had planned to ship 60,000,000
    poods of grain to Germany, but they shipped only 9,000,000 poods,
    and with it something they cannot digest, namely, Bolshevism. This
    is what upset the German imperialists, and this is what will upset
    the French and British imperialists if it becomes possible for
    them to advance farther into Russia. 
 We now have a Soviet Ukraine. And when it comes to supplying
    us with grain, the Soviet Government of the Ukraine will not fix
    its price like a huckster, a profiteer, or a muzhik who says,
    “The starving will give me a 1,000 rubles a pood. To hell
    with the state monopoly. All I want is to get rich. If the people
    are starving, all the better, they will pay more.” This is
    the way the rural bourgeoisie, the kulaks, the profiteers argue,
    and they are being assisted by all those who agitate against the
    state grain monopoly, by those who stand for “freedom”
    to trade, that is, freedom for the rich muzhik to amass wealth,
    and freedom for the workers who are getting nothing to starve to
    death. But the Ukrainian Government said, “Our first task is
    to help the starving North. The Ukraine cannot hold out if the
    North, which is exhausted by famine, does not hold out. The
    Ukraine will hold out, and her victory will be certain, if she
    helps the starving North.” 
 In the Ukraine there are huge stocks of grain. We cannot ship
    it all at once. We have sent our best Soviet forces to the Ukraine
    and already they all report in one voice that the stocks of grain
    are enormous, but they cannot be dispatched all at once, we
    haven’t the machinery for it. The Germans devastated the
    Ukraine to such a degree that the machinery of administration must
    be built entirely anew, and this has only just begun. Complete
    chaos reigns there. The worst period, the first weeks at Smolny
    after the October Revolu- tion when we were trying to overcome the
    chaos, was nothing compared with the difficulties that are now
    being experienced in the Ukraine. The Ukrainian comrades are
    complaining bitterly about the lack of people, lack of forces with
    which to build up the Soviet government. They have no machinery of
    administration, they have no proletarian centre like Petrograd or
    Moscow, for the Ukrainian proletarian centres are occupied by the
    enemy. Kiev is not a proletarian centre. The Donets Basin,
    exhausted by starvation, has not yet been liberated from the
    Cossacks. Our Ukrainian comrades cry, “Workers of the North,
    come to our assistance!” 
 And that is why we, on behalf of the Ukrainian comrades, say
    to the Petrograd workers, knowing that they have done more than
    the workers of any other city, “Do a little more, make
    another effort!” Now we can and must come to the aid of our
    Ukrainian comrades, because they must build up the machinery of
    the Soviet state on a site that was cleared and laid waste by
    suffering as no other place has been! 
 We discussed the situation in the Central Committee of our
    Party and gave instructions that everything should first be done
    to help to build up administrative machinery in the Ukraine, and
    in return for this, when this machinery is available, to set to
    work to obtain 50,000,000 poods of grain by June 1. 
 I do not in the least wish to assert that this will be
    done. We all know that of all the tasks we undertook, not one was
    fulfilled by the appointed date. Suppose only part of this task is
    fulfilled; at all events you will know definitely that when things
    get worse, when the famine here becomes more acute, and when the
    food supply machinery will be working at top speed in the East and
    South, we shall be able to obtain urgent aid from the South and
    improve our situation. 
 In addition to the Ukraine, we have another source of grain
    supply—the Don region. There, the victories of the Red Army
    have already worked miracles. Several weeks ago the situation on
    the Don, in the war against Krasnov, against our main enemy,
    against the officers and Cossacks who received millions in bribes,
    first from the Germans and then from the British and French, who
    are still continuing to help them—several weeks ago, our
    position was very serious. But now we have, with tremendous speed,
    regained territory  not only up to Tsaritsyn, but farther to the
    south. The forces of Krasnov and the Don counter-revolutionaries
    have been broken in spite of the assistance they received from the
    imperialists. 
 What does this mean? It means that we are getting nearer to
    coal and grain, for the lack of which we are perishing—owing
    to the shortage of coal, the railways and factories are coming to
    a standstill, and owing to the shortage of grain, the workers in
    the towns, and in the non-agricultural districts generally, are
    suffering the pangs of starvation. 
 In the Don area, as in the Ukraine, the grain stocks are
    enormous. Furthermore, it cannot be said that there is no
    administrative machinery in the Don area. In every military unit
    there is a Communist group, worker commissars, and groups of food
    supply workers. The greatest difficulty there is that neither of
    the two main railway lines can be used because the whiteguards, on
    retreating, blew up the bridges. 
 The last meeting of the Council of Defence and the Council of
    People’s Commissars was attended by experts whom we asked
    how material could be obtained to repair the lines, and how at
    least one of them could be repaired. At the last meeting of the
    Council of Defence we were able to assure ourselves that thanks to
    an enormous exertion of effort not only were materials provided,
    but the comrades on the spot assured us, almost guaranteed, that
    both lines would be repaired before the spring thaw. The
    resumption of traffic on these two lines is perhaps worth many
    victories over the Cossacks and enables us to say that we must
    hold on for another few severe months, we must strain every nerve,
    obtain the assistance of the Petrograd, Moscow and
    Ivanovo-Voznesensk workers. In addition to the East, from where it
    is difficult to ship anything, in addition to the Ukraine, where
    there are vast stocks but no administrative machinery, we have the
    Don region, which has been reconquered by the Red Army. That is
    why we cautiously, after cool calculation, after verifying all
    this by means of repeated reports and communications from the
    people on the spot and hearing the statements of food supply and
    railway experts, say that we have very good grounds for believing
    that we can not only hold out as we held out last year, but also
    greatly improve our conditions. 

    
 
      Our internal enemy is collapsing, and our external enemy cannot
      possibly hold out for long. Comrades, we were particularly
      convinced of this by what we heard from our foreign comrades who
      arrived here, and jointly with whom we recently formed the
      Communist International in Moscow. In Paris, speakers at public
      meetings who attack Bolshevism are driven from the
      platform. Yes, victory will be ours! The imperialists may yet
      shed the blood of thousands and thousands of workers, murder
      Rosa Luxemburg and Karl Liebknecht, and hundreds of the best
      representatives of the International, they may fill the prisons
      in Britain, France, Germany and Italy with socialists, but this
      will not avail them! Victory will be ours! For in spite of all
      the lies and the torrents of abuse and filthy slander that are
      poured out against us, the workers of all countries now
      understand what is meant by Soviets, by Soviet power. The
      capitalists of no country have a way out. I repeat that when
      they conclude peace they will be at loggerheads. France is ready
      to hurl herself upon Italy, they are quarrelling over the
      division of the booty. Japan is arming against America. They
      have imposed upon the peoples an incredible burden of tribute,
      millions upon millions of war debts. But everywhere the people
      are exhausted by war, everywhere there is a shortage of food,
      industry is at a stand still, and starvation reigns. The
      Entente, which is promising right and left to help the
      counter-revolutionaries, cannot feed its own countries. The
      masses of the workers in Paris, in London and in New York have
      translated the word “Soviet” into their own
      languages, they have made it intelligible for every worker, for
      they know that the old bourgeois republic cannot help their
      cause, that only a workers’ government can help them. 
 Soviet Russia encounters enormous difficulties because the
    military forces of the most well-armed and most powerful countries
    of the world have been hurled against her. In spite of this,
    Soviet power in Russia has succeeded in winning the sympathy, the
    attention and moral support of the workers of the world. And on
    the basis of these facts, not exaggerating in the least, and not
    shutting our eyes to the fact that in Germany and in other
    countries workers’ blood is flowing and many of the best
    socialist leaders are being brutally done to death—we know
    this and do not shut our eyes to it—we  assert that victory,
    complete victory, will be ours, because the power of the
    imperialists in the other countries has been shaken, while the
    workers are emerging from their state of stultification and
    deception. Soviet power has already won recognition from the
    workers of all countries. Everywhere the Soviets, the capture of
    power by the workers themselves, are regarded as the only
    hope. 
 And when the workers learn that the united workers even in an
    underdeveloped and backward country, after capturing power, have
    succeeded in creating a force that is resisting the imperialists
    of the whole world, when they learn that these workers have
    succeeded in taking the factories from the capitalists and in
    giving to the peasants the land that formerly belonged to the
    landowners—when this truth reaches the masses of workers of
    all countries, we shall be able once again to say loudly, and with
    firm conviction, that our victory on a world scale is assured, for
    the power of the bourgeoisie has been shaken, it will no longer
    succeed in deceiving the workers, for the Soviet movement has
    sprung up everywhere. And iust as we saw the birth of the Soviet
    Republic on October 25, 1917, and the birth of the Third,
    Communist International a few days ago in Moscow, so we shall soon
    see the birth of a World Soviet Republic. (The speech was
    interrupted by applause and ended in an ovation.) 
I should very much like the Petrograd comrades to print the
    following as a foreword or afterword to my
    speech, even if only in small type. 
April 17 

      Lenin 
Afterword[2]
 
      After spending no little effort in correcting the verbatim
      report of my speech, I am compelled to make the following urgent
      request to all comrades who want to report my speeches for the
      press. 
 My request is that they should never rely on the shorthand or
    any other verbatim reports of my speeches, never make any
    endeavour to obtain such reports, and never publish such reports
    of my speeches. 
 Instead of publishing the shorthand reports of my speeches let
    them, if necessary, publish summaries of them. I have seen
    newspaper summaries of my speeches that were satisfactory; but I
    have never seen a single verbatim report of my speeches that was
    at all satisfactory. Whether this is due to the fact that I speak
    too fast, or that I do not construct my sentences properly, or to
    some other reason, I will not undertake to say; but the fact
    remains that I have never seen a single satisfactory shorthand, or
    any other verbatim report of my speeches. 
 A good summary of a speech is better than a bad verbatim
    report. That is why I request that no verbatim report of my
    speeches should ever be published. 
    
April 17, 1919

      N. Lenin

Endnotes
[1]
Poor Peasants’ Committees were set up during the
    spring and summer of 1018; the poor peasants in the villages
    united to fight for Soviet power against the kulaks who were
    organising counter-revolutionary acts and attempting to prevent
    the supply of fodd to the hungry towns. A decree of the All-Russia
    Central Executive Committee of June 11, 1918 defined the work of
    the Committees as; the distribution of grain, farm implements and
    articles of primary necessity and aid to the local food supply
    organisations in requisitioning grain surpluses from the
    kulaks. The decree granted various privileges to the poor peasants
    in the distribution of grain and farn implements.
The Poor Peasants’ Committees were the
    main support of the dictatorship of the proletariat in the
    countryside where they helped strengthen Soviet power and attract
    the middle peasants to its side.
The Extraordinary Sixth All-Russia Congress of
    Soviets (November 1918) passed a decision to merge the Committees
    with the village Soviets since they had served ’the purpose
    for which they were set up.
[2]
    Lenin ’s request notwithstanding, this Afterword was not
    published in 1919 through the fault of Zinoviev; it was first
    published in 1922.
    

Collected Works Volume 29
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 







==========

## Speech In Memory of
  Y. M. Sverdlov at a Special Session of the all-Russia
  Central Executive Committee











Speech In Memory Of Y. M. Sverdlov At A Special Session Of The All-Russia Central Executive Committee March 18, 1919



V. I. Lenin
Speech In Memory Of Y. M. Sverdlov
At A Special Session Of

       The All-Russia Central Executive Committee
March 18, 1919


Delivered: March 18, 1919
First Published: Pravda No. 60,  March 20, 1919; Published according to  the verbatim report, verified with the Pravda text 
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, pages 89-94
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002; Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License.
    

 Comrades, today, when the workers of all countries
    are honouring the memory of the heroic rise and tragic end of the
    Paris Commune we have to inter the remains of Yakov Mikhailovich
    Sverdlov. In the course of our revolution, and in its victories,
    Comrade Sverdlov succeeded in expressing more fully and integrally
    than anybody else the chief and most important features of the
    proletarian revolution, and this, even more than his boundless
    devotion to the cause of the revolution, made him significant as a
    leader of the proletarian revolution. 
    
 Comrades, people who judge by what they see on the surface,
    the numerous enemies of our revolution, and those who to this day
    vacillate between the revolution and its opponents, consider the
    most striking feature of our revolution to be the determined and
    relentlessly firm way it has dealt with the exploiters and the
    enemies of the working people. There is no doubt that without
    this, without revolutionary violence, the proletariat could not
    have triumphed. Nor can there be any doubt that revolutionary
    violence was a necessary and legitimate weapon of the revolution
    only at definite stages of its development, only under definite
    and special conditions, and that a far more profound and permanent
    feature of this revolution and condition of its victory was, and
    remains, the organisation of the proletarian masses, the
    organisation of the working people. 

      And it is this organisation of millions of working people that
      constitutes the best stimulant for the revolution, its deepest
      source of victory. And it is this feature of the proletarian
      revolution which, in the course of the struggle, brought to the
      fore those leaders who best expressed that specific feature of
      our revolution that was never seen in revolutions before,
      namely, the organisation of the masses. This feature of the
      proletarian revolution also brought to the fore Yakov Sverdlov,
      a man who was first and foremost an organiser. 
 Comrades, we Russian revolutionaries, particularly in the
      stern days of the prolonged, sometimes painful and excessively
      long period of preparation for the revolution, suffered because
      of the gulf between theory, principle and programme and our
      practical work. We suffered most of all from a too deep
      engrossment in theory divorced from direct action. 
The history of the Russian revolutionary movement over a
      period of many decades contains a list of martyrs who were
      devoted to the revolutionary cause, but who had no opportunity
      to put their revolutionary ideals into practice. In this
      respect, the proletarian revolution, for the first time,
      provided these formerly isolated heroes of the revolutionary
      struggle with real ground, a real basis, a real environment, a
      real audience, and a real proletarian army in which they could
      display their talents. And in this respect, the most outstanding
      leaders are those who, as practical, efficient organisers, have
      succeeded in winning for themselves an exceptionally prominent
      place such as Yakov Sverdlov won for himself and rightly
      occupied. 
 If we survey the life of this leader of the proletarian
      revolution we see that his wonderful organising talents
      developed in the course of long struggle. We see that this
      leader of the proletarian revolution himself cultivated every
      one of his wonderful gifts as a great revolutionary who had
      passed through and experienced different epochs in the severest
      conditions of revolutionary activity. He dedicated himself
      entirely to the revolution in the very first period of his
      activities, when still a youth who had barely acquired political
      consciousness. In that period, at the very beginning of the
      twentieth century, Comrade Sverdlov stood before  us as the most
      perfect type of professional revolutionary, a man who had
      entirely given up his family and all the comforts and habits of
      the old bourgeois society, a man who devoted himself heart and
      soul to the revolution, and who for many years, even decades,
      passing from prison to exile and from exile to prison,
      cultivated those characteristics which steeled revolutionaries
      for many, many years. 
 However, this professional revolutionary never, not even for
      a moment, lost contact with the masses. Although the conditions
      of tsarism condemned him, like all the revolutionaries of those
      days, mainly to underground, illegal activities, even then, even
      in those underground and illegal activities, Sverdlov always
      marched shoulder to shoulder and hand in hand with the advanced
      workers who, at the beginning of the twentieth century, began to
      take the place of the earlier generation of revolutionary
      intellectuals. 
 It was at this time that scores and hundreds of advanced
      workers took up activities and acquired that steel-like hardness
      in the revolutionary struggle which, together with the closest
      contact with the masses, made it possible to bring about a
      successful proletarian revolution in Russia. It is precisely
      this long period of illegal activity that most of all
      characterises the man who was constantly in the fight, who never
      lost contact with the masses, who never left Russia, who always
      worked in conjunction with the best of the workers, and who, in
      spite of the isolation from general life to which persecution
      condemned the revolutionary, succeeded in becoming not only a
      beloved leader of the workers, not only a leader who was most
      familiar with practical work, but also an organiser of the
      advanced proletarians. Some people were of the opinion—and
      this applies mostly to our opponents, or to the
      waverers—that this complete absorption in illegal
      activities, this specific feature of the professional
      revolutionary, cut him off from the masses. But the
      revolutionary activities of Yakov Sverdlov prove to us how
      utterly mistaken this opinion was, that, on the contrary, this
      boundless devotion to the revolutionary cause, which is typical
      of the lives of people who had seen the inside of many prisons
      and had been in exile in the remotest regions of Siberia,
      produced such leaders, the flower of our 

      

proletariat. And when this was combined with a knowledge of
men and organisational ability, it produced great
organisers. The illegal circles, revolutionary underground
work, the illegal Party, which nobody personified or expressed
so integrally as Yakov Sverdlov—this was the practical
school through which he passed, and the only school that could
have enabled him to reach the position of the first man in the
first socialist Soviet Republic, the position of the first
organiser of the broad proletarian masses. 
 Comrades, all those who, like myself, have had occasion to
      work with Comrade Sverdlov day after day, had it vividly brought
      home to them that it was the exceptional organising talent of
      this man which gave us that which we have been so proud of, so
      justly proud of, up to now. He made it possible for us to carry
      on concerted, efficient, really organised activities, activities
      worthy of the organised proletarian masses, and answering to the
      requirements of the proletarian revolution—those
      concerted, organised activities without which we could not have
      achieved a single success, without which we could not have
      overcome any one of the innumerable difficulties which we have
      had to face, and without which we would not have been able to
      stand up to any one of the severe trials we experienced in the
      past, and are experiencing at the present time. 
 In that seething struggle that is revolution, at that
      special post which every revolutionary occupies, at a time when
      the work of even a small body of men takes the form of
      deliberations, of enormous importance is high moral prestige won
      in the course of the struggle, unquestionable and unchallenged
      prestige, the roots of which lie, of course not in abstract
      morals, but in the morals of the revolutionary fighter, the
      morals of the rank and file of the revolutionary masses. 
 The fact that for over a year we have been able to bear the
      incredible burdens that have fallen to the lot of a narrow
      circle of devoted revolutionaries, the fact that the leading
      groups could so firmly, quickly, and unanimously decide the most
      difficult problems, is due entirely to the prominent place among
      them occupied by such an exceptionally talented organiser as
      Yakov Sverdlov. He alone managed to acquire an amazing knowledge
      of the leading  men of the proletarian movement, he alone, in
      the course of the long years of struggle—to which I can
      refer here only very briefly—succeeded in acquiring the
      wonderful intuition of the practical worker, the wonderful
      talent of an organiser, an absolutely unchallenged prestige,
      thanks to which he was able to take sole charge of some of the
      largest branches of the work of the All-Russia Central Executive
      Committee which only a group of ordinary people could cope
      with. He alone succeeded in winning for himself such a position
      that on a large number of extremely big and important practical
      questions of organisation, his mere word was sufficient to
      secure an unchallenged and final settlement, without
      conferences, without a formal vote; and everybody felt convinced
      that the questions had been settled on the basis of such
      profound practical knowledge and organising intuition that not
      only hundreds and thousands of advanced workers, but also the
      masses would accept that settlement as final. 
 History long ago proved that in the course of the struggle
      great revolutions bring great men to the forefront and develop
      talents that had previously seemed impossible. Nobody would have
      believed that the school of the illegal study circle and
      underground activities, the school of the small, persecuted
      Party, the school of Turukhansk prison could produce this
      organiser who won absolutely unchallenged prestige, the
      organiser of Soviet power throughout Russia, the man, unique in
      his knowledge, who organised the work of the Party which created
      the Soviets and established the Soviet government which is now
      making its arduous, painful, bloody but triumphant advance to
      all nations, to all countries throughout the world. 
 We shall never be able to replace this man who had
      cultivated such an exceptional organising talent, if by
      replacement we mean finding one man, one comrade, with all these
      qualities. Nobody who has been close to Yakov Sverdlov and has
      watched him constantly at work can have any doubt that in this
      respect he is irreplaceable. The work he performed as an
      organiser, in choosing men and appointing them to responsible
      posts in all the various departments, will be performed in
      future only if we appoint whole groups of men to handle the
      different major departments that he had  sole charge of, and if
      these men, following in his footsteps, come near to doing what
      this one man did alone. 
 But the proletarian revolution is strong precisely because
      its roots run deep. We know that it promotes new men to take the
      place of those who devotedly sacrificed their lives in the
      struggle, they are perhaps less experienced, possess less
      knowledge, and are at first less trained, but they are men who
      have broad contacts with the masses and who are capable of
      promoting from their ranks groups of men to take the place of
      the departed geniuses, to continue their cause, to continue
      along the road they pursued and to complete what they had
      begun. In this respect we are fully convinced that the
      proletarian revolution in Russia and all over the world will
      promote group after group of men, numerous sections of the
      proletariat and of the working peasantry, which will possess
      that practical knowledge of life, that organising talent,
      collective if not individual, without which the million-strong
      army of the proletariat cannot achieve victory. 
 The memory of Comrade Yakov Sverdlov will serve not only as
      a permanent symbol of the revolutionary’s devotion to his
      cause and as the model of how to combine a practical sober mind,
      practical skill, close contact with the masses and ability to
      guide them; it is also a pledge that ever-growing numbers of
      proletarians, guided by these examples, will march forward to
      the complete victory of the world communist revolution.

Collected
Works Volume 29

Collected Works Table of
   Contents

Lenin Works Archive








==========

## Speech Delivered at the
  Funeral of Yakov Sverdlov








      Speech Delivered 
      At The Funeral Of Yakov Sverdlov
      March 18, 1919
    








V.I. Lenin
Speech Delivered
At The Funeral Of Yakov Sverdlov
March 18, 1919
Newspaper Report


Delivered: 
        March 18, 1919
        
        
First published: 
        in Vecherniye
Izvestia Moskovshovgo Soveta No. 196, March 19,
1919
        
        
Published: 
        according to the newspaper text
        
        
Source:
V.I. Lenin Collected Works, 
          Volume 29, 
          Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, 
          pg. 95.
        
        
Edited by: George Hanna
        
        

          Transcription/HTML Markup:
         David Walters & Robert Cymbala
        
        
Copyright:
          V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002; 
          Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the 
          GNU Free Documentation License.
      




      We have lowered into the grave the remains of a proletarian leader who did
      more than anybody to organise the working class and to ensure victory. Now
      that Soviet power is spreading throughout the world and the knowledge is
      rapidly gaining ground of how the proletariat, organised in Soviets, is
      struggling to put its ideas into effect, we are burying a representative
      of the proletariat who set an example of how to fight for these
      ideas.
Millions of proletarians will repeat our words: “Long live the
      memory of Comrade Sverdlov. At his graveside we solemnly vow to fight
      still harder for the overthrow of capital and for the complete
      emancipation of the working people... .”
    


Volume
       29 
          ⇐ Collected Works ⇒  
        All Volumes

Lenin Works Archive









==========

## Draft Programme of
    the R.C.P.(B.)











Draft Programme of the R.C.P.(B.)



V. I. Lenin
Draft Programme of the 
R.C.P.(B.)[1]


First Published:  First published in 1931 Draft Programme section on the national question first published in 1925; Rough draft of the Programme of the R.C. P. first published in full in the Fourth (Russian) Edition of the Collected Works; Published according to
manuscript and typewritten copies
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, pages 97-140
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002; Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License.


1
Rough Draft Of The Programme of the R.C.P.
Plan. The programme shall consist of the following sections.
I. Preamble. The proletarian revolution has begun in Russia and
    ’is rapidly spreading everywhere. To understand the
    revolution it is necessary to understand the nature of capitalism
    and the inevitability of its development towards the dictatorship
    of the proletariat. 2. Capitalism and the dictatorship of the
    proletariat. On this point repeat the main section of our old
    Marxist programme, drawn up by Plekhanov, so as to explain also
    the “historical roots” of our world
    outlook. 3. Imperialism. To be taken from the draft programme of
    May 1917. 4. Three trends in the world working-class movement and
    the new International. Revision of the draft of May 1917. 5. The
    fundamental tasks of the proletarian dictatorship in Russia. To be
    taken from The draft of December 1917-January 1918.[2] 6. These
    tasks in the political sphere to be formulated concretely
    (new). 7. Ditto in the national, religious, educational spheres
    (new). 8. Ditto in economic sphere (new). 9. Ditto in agrarian
    sphere (new). 10. Ditto as regards protection of the working
    people (to be written by Schmidt). 11 and 12. To be added on other
    spheres (not yet written).
Much in this rough draft is unfinished, especially the editorial aspect of it, and in some cases, instead of programme formulations, commentaries have been provisionally taken.
(1) The Revolution of October. 25 (November 7), 1917 established the dictatorship of the proletariat in Russia which began, with the support of the poor peasantry or semi-proletariat, to build a communist society. The growth of the revolutionary movement of the proletariat in all advanced countries, the universal emergence and development of the Soviet form of that movement,. i.e., a form which aims directly at the establishment of the dictatorship of the proletariat, and, lastly, the beginning and progress of the revolution in Austria-Hungary and, particularly, in Germany, all goes to show vividly that the era of the world proletarian, communist revolution has begun.
(2) The causes, significance and aims of this revolution can be correctly understood, first, by making clear the real nature, the fundamental character of capitalism and of bourgeois society, and the inevitability of their development towards communism; and secondly, by making clear the nature of imperialism and of imperialist wars, which have accelerated the collapse of capitalism and have placed the proletarian revolution on the order of the day.
     
*     *
*

(3) The nature of capitalism and of the bourgeois society which still dominates in most civilised countries and the development of which inevitably leads, and has been leading, to the world communist revolution of the proletariat, was described in our old Marxist programme in the following terms.
(4) “The principal specific feature of this society is commodity production based on capitalist production relations, under which the most important and major part of the means of production and exchange of commodities belongs to a numerically small class of persons while the vast majority of the population is made up of proletarians and semiproletarians, who, owing to their economic position, are compelled permanently or periodically to sell their labourpower, i.e., to hire themselves out to the capitalists and to create by their labour the incomes of the upper classes of society.
(5) “The ascendancy of capitalist production relations
    extends its area more and more with the steady improvement of
    technology, which, by enhancing the economic importance of the
    large enterprises, tends to eliminate the small independent
    producers, converting some of them into proletarians and narrowing
    the role of others in the social and economic sphere, and in some
    places making them more or less completely, more or less
    obviously, more or less painfully dependent on capital.
(6) “Moreover, this technical progress enables the employers to make growing use of female and child labour in the process of production and exchange of commodities. And since, on the other hand, it causes a relative decrease in the employers’ demand for human labour-power, the demand for labour-power necessarily lags behind its supply, as a result of which the dependence of wage-labour on capital is increased and exploitation of labour rises to a higher level.
(7) “This state of affairs in the bourgeois countries and the steadily growing competition among them in the world market make it more and more difficult for them to sell the goods which are produced in ever-increasing quantities. Over-production, manifesting itself in more or less acute industrial crises followed by more or less protracted periods of industrial stagnation, is an Inevitable consequence of the development of the productive forces in bourgeois society. Crises and periods of industrial stagnation, in their turn, still further ruin the small producers, still further increase the dependence of wage-labour on capital, and lead still more rapidly to the relative and sometimes to the absolute deterioration of the condition of the working class.
(8) “Thus, improvement in technology, signifying increased labour productivity and greater social wealth, becomes in bourgeois society the cause of greater social inequality, of widening gulfs between the rich and poor, of greater insecurity, unemployment, and various hardships of the mass of the working people.
(9) “However, in proportion as all these contradictions, which are inherent in bourgeois society, grow and develop, so also does the discontent of the toiling and exploited masses with the existing order of things grow; the numerical strength and solidarity of the proletarians increase and their struggle against their exploiters is sharpened. At the same time, by concentrating the means of production and exchange and socialising the process of labour in capitalist enterprises, the improvement in technology more and more rapidly creates the material possibility of capitalist production relations being superseded by communist relations, i.e., the possibility of bringing about the social revolution, which is the ultimate aim of all the activities of the international communist party as the conscious exponent of the class movement of the proletariat.
(10) “By introducing social in place of private ownership of the means of production and exchange, by introducing planned organisation of social production to ensure the well-being and many-sided development of all the members of society, the proletarian social revolution will do away with the division of society into classes and thereby emancipate the whole of oppressed humanity, for it will put an end to all forms of exploitation of one section of society by another.
(11) “A necessary condition for this social revolution is the dictatorship of the proletariat, i.e., the conquest by the proletariat of such political power as will enable it to suppress all resistance on the part of the exploiters. Aiming at making the proletariat capable of fulfilling its great historic mission, the international communist party organises the proletariat in an independent political party opposed to all the bourgeois parties, guides all the manifestations of its class struggle, reveals to it the irreconcilable antagonism between the interests of the exploiters and those of the exploited, and explains to the proletariat the historical significance of and the necessary conditions for the impending social revolution. At the same time it reveals to all the other toiling and exploited masses the hopelessness of their position in capitalist society and the need for a social revolution if they are to free themselves from the yoke of capital. The Communist Party, the party of the working class, calls upon all sections of the working and exploited population to join its ranks insofar as they adopt the standpoint of the proletariat.”
(12) World capitalism has at the present time, i.e., about the beginning of the twentieth century, reached the stage of imperialism. Imperialism, or the epoch of finance capital, is a high stage of development of the capitalist economic system, one in which monopoly associations of capitalists, syndicates, cartels, and trusts—have assumed decisive importance; in which enormously concentrated banking capital has fused with industrial capital; in which the export of capital to foreign countries has assumed vast dimensions; in which the whole world has been divided up territorially among the richer countries, and the economic carve-up of the world among international trusts has begun.
(13) Imperialist wars, i.e., wars for world domination, for markets for banking capital and for the subjugation of small and weaker nations, are inevitable under such a state of affairs. The first great imperialist war, the warof 1914-18, is precisely such a war.
(14) The extremely high level of development which world apitalism in general has attained, the replacement of free competition by monopoly capitalism, the fact that the banks and the capitalist associations have prepared the machinery for the social regulation of the process of production and distribution of products, the rise in the cost of living and increased oppression of the working class by the syndicates due to the growth of capitalist monopolies, the tremendous obstacles standing in the way of the proletariat’s economic and political struggle, the horrors, misery, ruin, and brutalisation caused by the imperialist war—all these factors transform the present stage of capitalist development into an era of proletarian socialist revolution.
That era has dawned.
(15) Only a proletarian socialist revolution can lead humanity out of the impasse which imperialism and imperialist wars have created. Whatever difficulties the revolution may have to encounter, whatever possible temporary setbacks or waves of counter-revolution it may have to contend with, the final victory of the proletariat is inevitable.
 (16) The victory of the proletarian revolution calls for the complete confidence., the closest fraternal alliance and the greatest possible unity of revolutionary action on the part of the working class of all the advanced countries. These conditions cannot be created without a determined principled rupture with, and a relentles struggle against, those bourgeois distortions of socialism that have gained the upper hand in the top echelons of the vast majority of official “Social-Democratic” and “socialist” parties.
(17) One such distortion, on the one hand, is the trend of opportunism and social-chauvinism, socialism in words but chauvinism in deeds, the concealment of the defence of the predatory interests of one’s “own” national bourgeoisie behind the slogan of “defence of the fatherland”, both in general and during the imperialist war of 1914-18 in particular. This trend has come into being because in nearly all the advanced countries, the bourgeoisie, by plundering the colonial and weak nations, has been able to bribe the upper stratum of the proletariat with crumbs from the superprofits, to ensure them in peace-time a tolerable, pettybourgeois existence, and to take the leaders of that stratum into its service. The opportunists and social-chauvinists, being servants of the bourgeoisie, are real class enemies of the proletariat.
(18) Another bourgeois distortion of socialism is, on the other band, the “Centrist” trend, which is equally broad and international, which wavers between the social-chauvinists and the Communists, advocates unity with the former and is attempting to resuscitate the bankrupt and putrid Second International. The only really proletarian and revolutionary International is the new, Third, Communist International, that has actually been founded by the formation of Communist Parties out of the former socialist parties in a number of countries, particularly in Germany, and is gaining the growing sympathy of the proletarian masses in all countries.

The  Basic Tasks Of The
 Dictatorship Of The Proletariat In Russia

In Russia today the basic tasks of the dictatorship of the proletariat are to carry through to the end, to complete, the expropriation of the landowners and bourgeoisie that has already begun, and the transfer of all factories, railways, banks, the merchant fleet and other means of production and exchange to ownership by the Soviet Republic;
to employ the alliance of urban workers and poor peasants, which has already led to the abolition of private ownership of land, and the law on the transitional form between smallpeasant farming and socialism, which modern ideologists of the peasantry that has put itself on the side of the proletarians have called socialisation of the land, for a gradual but steady transition to joint tillage and large-scale socialist agriculture;
to strengthen and further develop the Federative Republic of Soviets as an immeasurably higher and more progressive form of democracy than bourgeois parliamentarism, and as the sole type of state corresponding, on the basis of the experience of the Paris Commune of 1871 and equally of the experience of the Russian revolutions of 1905 and 1917-18, to the transitional period between capitalism and socialism, i.e., to the period of the dictatorship of the proletariat;
by employing in every way the torch of world socialist revolution lit in Russia to paralyse the attempts of the imperialist bourgeois states to intervene in the internal affairs of Russia or to unite for direct struggle and war against the socialist Soviet Republic and to carry the revolution into the most advanced countries and in general into all countries; by a number of gradual but undeviating measures to abolish private trading completely and to organise the regular, planned exchange of products between producers’ and consumers’ communes to form the single economic entity the Soviet Republic must become.
The Russian Communist Party, developing the general tasks of
    the Soviet government in greater detail, at present formulates
    them as follows.
In the Political Sphere
Prior to the capture of political power by the proletariat it
    was (obligatory) necessary to make use of bourgeois democracy,
    parliamentarism in particular, for the political education and
    organisation of the working masses; now that the proletariat has
    won political power and a higher type of democracy is being put
    into effect in the Soviet Republic, any step backward to bourgeois
    parliamentarism and bourgeois democracy would undoubtedly be
    reactionary service to the interests of the exploiters, the
    landowners and capitalists. Such catchwords as supposedly popular,
    national, general, extra-class but actually bourgeois democracy
    serve the interests of the exploiters alone, and as long as the
    land and other means of production remain private property the
    most democratic republic must inevitably remain a bourgeois
    dictatorship, a machine for the suppression of the overwhelming
    majority of working people by a handful of capitalists.
The historical task that has fallen to the lot of the Soviet Republic, a new type of state that is transitional until the state disappears altogether, is the following.
(1) The creation and development of universal mass
    organisations of precisely those classes that are oppressed under
    capitalism—the proletariat and semi-proletariat. A
    bourgeois-democratic republic at best permits the organisation of
    the exploited masses, by declaring them free to organise, but
    actually has always placed countless obstacles in the way of their
    organisation, obstacles that were connected with the private
    ownership of the means of production in a way that made them
    irremovable. For the first time in history, Soviet power has not
    only greatly facilitated the

      organisation of the masses who were oppressed under capitalism,
      but has made that organisation the essential permanent basis of
      the entire state apparatus, local and central, from top to
      bottom. Only in this way is it possible to ensure democracy for
      the great majority of the population (the working people), i.e,,
      actual participation in state administration, in contrast to the
      actual administration of the state mainly by members of the
      bourgeois classes as is the case in the most democratic
      bourgeois republics.
(2) The Soviet system of state administration gives a certain actual advantage to that section of the working people that all the capitalist development that preceded socialism has made the most concentrated, united, educated and steeled in the struggle, i.e., to the urban industrial proletariat. This advantage must be used systematically and unswervingly to counteract the narrow guild and narrow trade interests that capitalism fostered among the workers and which split them into competitive groups, by uniting the most backward and disunited masses of rural proletarians and semi-proletarians more closely with the advanced workers, by snatching them away from the influence of the village kulaks and village bourgeoisie, and organising and educating them for communist development.
(3) Bourgeois democracy that solemnly announced the equality of all citizens, in actual fact hypocritically concealed the domination of the capitalist exploiters and deceived the masses with the idea that the equality of exploiters and exploited is possible. The Soviet organisation of the state destroys this deception and this hypocrisy by the implementation of real democracy, i.e., the real equality of all working people, and by excluding the exploiters from the category of members of society possessing full rights. The experience of world history, the experience of all revolts of the exploited classes against their exploiters shows the inevitability of long and desperate resistance of the exploiters in their struggle to retain their privileges. Soviet state organisation is adapted to the suppression of that resistance, for unless it is suppressed there can be no question of a victorious communist revolution.
(4) The more direct influence of the working masses on state structure and administration—i.e., a higher form of democracy—is also effected under the Soviet type of state, first, by the electoral procedure and the possibility of holding elections more frequently, and also by conditions for re-election and for the recall of deputies which are simpler and more comprehensible to the urban and rural workers than is the case under the best forms of bourgeois democracy;
(5) secondly, by making the economic, industrial unit (factory) and not a territorial division the primary electoral unit and the nucleus of the state structure under Soviet power. This closer contact between the state apparatus and the masses of advanced proletarians that capitalism has united, in addition to effecting a higher level of democracy, also makes it possible to effect profound socialist reforms.
(6) Soviet organisation has made possible the creation of armed forces of workers and peasants which are much more closely connected with the working and exploited people than before. If this had not been done it would have been impossible to achieve one of the basic conditions for the victory of socialism—the arming of the workers and the disarming of the bourgeoisie.
(7) Soviet organisation has developed incomparably farther and deeper that feature of bourgeois democracy which marks historically its great progressive nature as compared with medieval times, i.e., the participation of the people in the election of individuals to office. In none of the most democratic bourgeois states have the working masses ever been able to enjoy the electoral rights formally granted them by the bourgeoisie (who actually hinder their enjoyment) anywhere near as extensively, frequently, universally, easily and simply as they are enjoyed under Soviet power. Soviet power has, at the same time, swept away those negative aspects of bourgeois democraythat the Paris Commune began to abolish, i.e., parliamentarism, or the separation of legislative and executive powers, the narrow, limited nature of which Marxism has long, since indicated. By merging the two aspects of government the Soviets bring the state apparatus closer to the working people and remove the fence of the bourgeois parliament that fooled the masses with hypocritical signboards concealing the financial and stock-exchange deals of’ parliamentary businessmen and ensured the inviolability of the bourgeois apparatus of state administration.
(8) Soviet state organisation alone has enabled the proletarian revolution to smash the old bourgeois state apparatus at one blow and destroy it to the very foundations; had this not been done no start could have been made on socialist development. Those strongholds of the bureaucracy which everywhere, both under monarchies and in the most democratic bourgeois republics, has always kept the state bound to the interests of the landowners and capitalists, have been destroyed in present-day Russia. The struggle against the bureaucracy, however, is certainly not over in our country. The bureaucracy is trying to regain some of its positions and is taking advantage, on the one hand, of the unsatisfactory cultural level of the masses of the people and, on the other, of the tremendous, almost superhuman war efforts of the most developed section of the urban ’workers. The continuation of the struggle against the bureaucracy, therefore, is absolutely necessary, is imperative, to ensure the success of future socialist development.
(9) Work in this field is closely connected with the implementation of the chief historical purpose of Soviet power, i.e., to advance towards the final abolition of the state, and should consist of the following. First, every member of a Soviet must, without fail, do a certain job of state administration; secondly, these jobs must be consistently changed so that they embrace all aspects of government, all its branches; and, thirdly, literally all the working population must be drawn into independent participation in state administration by means of a series of gradual measures that are carefully selected and unfailingly implemented.
(10) By and large, the difference between bourgeois democracy and parliamentarism on the one hand, and Soviet or proletarian democracy on the other, boils down to this: the centre of gravity of the former is in its solemn and pompous declarations of numerous liberties and rights which the majority of the population, the workers and peasants, cannot enjoy to the full. Proletarian, or Soviet, democracy, on. the contrary, has transferred the centre of gravity away from the declaration of rights and liberties for the entire people to the actual participation of none but the working people, who were oppressed and exploited by capital, in the administration of the state, the actual use of the best buildings and other premises for meetings and congresses, the best printing-works arid the biggest warehouses (stocks) of paper for the education of those who were stultified and downtrodden under capitalism, and to providing a real (actual) opportunity for those masses gradually to free themselves from the burden of religious prejudices, etc., etc. It is precisely in making the benefits of culture, civilisation and democracy really available to the working and exploited people that Soviet power sees its most important work, work which it must continue unswervingly in the future.
The policy of the R.C.P. on the national question, unlike the bourgeois-democratic declaration of the equality of nations, which cannot be implemented under imperialism, is that of steadily drawing together and merging the proletarians and the working masses of all nations in their revolutionary struggle for the overthrow of the bourgeoisie. Among the working people of the nations that entered into the Russian Empite the mistrust of the Great Russians that has been inherited from the epoch of tsarist and bourgeois GreatRussian imperialism is rapidly vanishing, under the influence of their acquaintance with Soviet Russia, but that mistrust has not yet completely disappeared among all nations and among all sections of the working people. It is, therefore, necessary to exercise special caution in respect of national feelings and to ensure the pursuance of a policy of actual equality and freedom to secede so as to remove the grounds for this mistrust and achieve the close voluntary union of the Soviet republics of all nations. Aid to backward and weak nations must be increased by assisting the independent organisation and education of the workers arid peasants of all nations in the struggle against medieval and bourgeois oppression and also by assisting in the development of the language and literature of nations that have been oppressed or have been underprivileged.
In respect of the policy on religion the task of the (R.C.P.) dictatorship of the proletariat must not be confined to decreeing the separation of the church from the state and the school from the church, that is, to measures promised by bourgeois democrats but never fully carried out anywhere in  the world because of the many and varied connections actually existing between capital and religious propaganda. The proletarian dictatorship must completely destroy the connection between the exploiting classes—the landowners and capitalists—and the organisation of religious propaganda as something which keeps the masses in ignorance. The proletarian dictatorship must consistently effect the real emancipation of the working people from religious prejudices, doing so by means of propaganda and by raising the political consciousness of the masses but carefully avoiding anything that may hurt the feelings of the religious section of the population and serve to increase religious fanaticism.
In the sphere of public education, the object of the R.C.P. is
    to complete the work that began with the October Revolution in
    1917 to convert the school from an instrument of the class rule of
    the bourgeoisie into an instrument for the overthrow of that rule
    and for the complete abolition of the division of society into
    classes.
In the period of the dictatorship of the proletariat, i.e., in the period in which conditions are being prepared for the full realisation of communism, the school must be the vehicle, not merely of the general principles of communism but also of the ideological, organisational and educational influence of the proletariat on the semi-proletarian and nonproletarian sections of the working people, in order to train a generation that is fully capable of building communism
The immediate tasks in this field are, for the present, the following.
(1) The implementation of free, obligatory general and polytechnical education (acquaintance with all the main branches of production theoretically and in practice) for all children of both sexes up to the age of 16.
(2) The closest connection between schooling and productive social labour.
(3) The provision of food, clothing, books and other teaching aids for all school children at the expense of the state.
(4) Greater agitation and propaganda among schoolteachers.
(5) The training of new teaching staffs imbued with communist ideas.
(6) The working people must be drawn into active participation, in the work of education (the development of the public education councils, mobilisation of the educated, etc.).
(7) All-round help on the part of Soviet power in the matter of the self-education and self-development of workers and working peasants (organisation of libraries, schools for adults, people’s universities, courses of lectures, cinemas, studios, etc.).
(8) Development of the most extensive propaganda of communist ideas.
The Russian Communist Party, developing the general tasks of the Soviet government in greater detail, at present formulates them as follows.
In the Economic Sphere
The present tasks of Soviet power are:
(1) To continue steadily and finish the expropriation of the bourgeoisie and the conversion of the means of production and distribution into the property of the Soviet Republic, i.e., into the common property of all working people, which has in the main been completed.
(2) To pay particularly great attention to the development and
    strengthening of comradely discipline among the working people and
    to stimulate their initiative and sense of responsibility in every
    field. This is the most. important if not the sole means of
    completely overcoming capitalism and the habits formed by the rule
    of the private ownership of the means of production. This aim can
    be achieved only by slow, persistent work to re-educate the
    masses; this re-education has not only become possible now that
    the masses have seen that the landowner, capitalist and merchant
    have really been eliminated, but is actually taking place in
    thousands of ways through the practical experience of the workers
    and peasants themselves. It is extremely important in this respect
    to work for the further organisation of the working people in
    trade unions; never before has this organisation developed as
    rapidly anywhere in the world as under Soviet power, and it must
    be developed until litrally all working people are organised


    in properly constituted, centralised and disciplined trade
    unions. We must not confine ourselves to the old, stereotyped
    forms of the trade union movement, but must, on the one hand,
    systematically convert the trade unions into organs administering
    the economy, carefully checking every step we take against the
    results of practical work; there must be greater and stronger
    bonds between the trade unions and the Supreme Economic Council,
    the Commissariat of Labour and, later, with all other branches of
    the state administration; on the other hand, the trade unions must
    to a greater degree become organs for the labour and socialist
    education of the working masses as a whole so that the practical
    experience of participation in the administration spreads to the
    more backward sections of the workers, under the control of the
    vanguard of the workers.
(3) One of the basic tasks is to raise the level of labour productivity, for without this the full transition to communism is impossible. In addition to lengthy work to educate the masses and raise their cultural level, the achievement of this goal requires the immediate, extensive and comprehensive employment in science and technology of those specialists who have been left us as our heritage from capitalism and, as a rule, are imbued with the bourgeois world outlook and habits. The Party, in close alliance with the trade union organisations, must continue its former line—on the one hand, there must not be the slightest political concession to this bourgeois section of the population, and any counter-revolutionary attempts on its part must be ruthlessly suppressed, and, on the other hand, there must be a relentless struggle against the pseudo-radical but actually ignorant and conceited opinion that the working people are capable of overcoming capitalism and the bourgeois social system without learning from bourgeois specialists, without making use of their services and without undergoing the training of a lengthy period of work side by side with them.
Although our ultimate aim is to achieve full communism and equal remuneration for all kinds of work, we cannot introduce this equality straightaway, at the present time, when only the first steps of the transition from capitalism to communism are being taken. For a certain period of time, therefore, we must retain the present higher remuneration for specialists in order to give them an incentive to work no worse, and even better, than they have worked before; and with the same object in view we must not reject the system of paying bonuses for the most successful work, particularly organisational work; bonuses would be impermissible under a full communist system but in the period of transition from capitalism to communism bonuses are indispensable, as is borne out by theory and by a year’s experience of Soviet power.
We must, furthermore, work consistently to surround the
    bourgeois specialists with a c.omradely atmosphere created by
    working hand in hand with the masses of rank-and-file workers led
    by politically-conscious Communists; we must not be dismayed by
    the inevitable individual failures but must strive patiently to
    arouse in people possessing scientific knowledge a consciousness
    of how loathsome it is to use science for personal enrichment and
    for the exploitation of man by man, a consciousness of the more
    lofty aim of using science for the purpose of making it known to
    the working people.
(4) The building of communism undoubtedly requires the greatest possible and most strict centralisation of labour on a nation-wide scale, and this presumes overcoming the scattering and disunity of workers, by trades and locally, which was one of the sources of capital’s strength and labour’s weakness. The struggle against the narrowness and limitations of the guild and against its egoism is closely connected with the struggle to remove the antithesis between town and country; it presents great difficulties and cannot be begun on a broad scale without first achieving a considerable increase in the productivity of the people’s labour. A start on this work must, however, be made immediately, if at first only on a small, local scale and by way of experiment for the purpose of comparing the results of various measures undertaken in different trades and in different places. The mobilisation of the entire able-bodied population by the Soviet government, with the trade unions participating, for certain public works must be much more widely and systematically practised than has hitherto been the case.
(5) In the sphere of distribution, the present task of Soviet
    power is to continue steadily replacing trade by the planned,
    organised and nation-wide distribution of goods. The goal is the
    organisation of the entire population in producers’ and
    consumers’ communes that can distribute all essential
    products most rapidly, systematically, economically and with the
    least expenditure of labour by strictly centralising the entire
    distribution machinery. The cooperatives are a transitional means
    of achieving this aim. The use of them is similar to the use of
    bourgeois specialists insofar as the co-operative machinery we
    have inherited from capitalism is in the hands of people whose
    thinking and business habits are bourgeois. The R.C.P. must
    systematically pursue the policy of making it obligatory for all
    members of the Party to work in the co-operatives and, with the
    aid of the trade unions, direct them in a communist spirit,
    develop the initiative and discipline of the working people who
    belong to them, endeavour to get the entire population to join
    them, and the co-operatives themselves to merge into one single
    co-operative that embraces the whole of the Soviet
    Republic. Lastly, and most important, the dominating influence of
    the proletariat over the rest of the working people must be
    constantly maintained, and everywhere the most varied measures
    must be tried with a view to facilitating and bringing about the
    transition from petty-bourgeois co-operatives of the old
    capitalist type to producers’ and consumers’ communes
    led by proletarians and semi-proletarians.
(6) It is impossible to abolish money at one stroke in the first period of transition from capitalism to communism. As a consequence the bourgeois elements of the population continue to use privately-owned currency notes—these tokens by which the exploiters obtain the right to receive public wealth—for the purpose of speculation, profit-making and robbing the working population. The nationalisation of the banks is insufficient in itself to combat this survival of bourgeois robbery. The R.C.P. will strive as speedily as possible to introduce the most radical measures to pave the way for the abolition of money, first and foremost to replace it by savings-bank books, cheques, short-term notes entitling the holders to receive goods from the public stores, and so forth, to make it compulsory for money to be deposited in the banks, etc. Practical experience in paving the way for, and carrying out, these and similar measures will show which of them are the most expedient.
(7) In the sphere of finance, the R.C.P. will introduce a
    graduated income-and-property tax in all cases where it is
    feasible. But these cases cannot be numerous since private
    property in land, the majority of factories and other enterprises
    has been abolished. In the epoch of the dictatorship of the
    proletariat and of the state ownership of the principal means of
    production, the state finances must be based on the direct
    appropriation of a certain part of the revenue from the different
    state monopolies to meet the needs of the state. Revenue and
    expenditure can be balanced only if the exchange of commodities is
    properly organised, and this will be achieved by the organisation
    of producers’ and consumers’ communes and the
    restoration of the transport system, which is one of the major
    immediate objects of the Soviet government.
In the Sphere of Agriculture
After the abolition of private property in land and the
    Falmosti complete expropriation of the landowners and the
    promulgation of a law on the socialisation of the land which
    regards as preferable the large-scale farming of commonly-owned
    estates, the chief task of Soviet power is to discover and test in
    practice the most expedient and practical transitional measures to
    effect this.
The main line and the guiding principle of the R.C.P. agrarian policy under these circumstances still remains the effort to rely on the proletarian and semi-proletarian elements of the countryside. They must first and foremost be organised into an independent force, they must be brought closer to the urban proletariat and wrested from the influence of the rural bourgeoisie and petty-property interests. The organisation of Poor Peasants’ Committees was one step in this direction; the organisation. of Party cells in the villages, the re-election of Soviet deputies to exclude the kulaks, the establishment of special types of trade unions for the proletarians and semi-proletarians of the country-side-all these and similar measures must be effected without fail.
As far as the kulaks, the rural bourgeoisie, are concerned, the policy of the R.C.P. is one of decisive struggle against their attempts at exploitation and the suppression of their resistance to Soviet socialist policy.
As far as the middle peasant is concerned, the policy of the R.C.P. is one of a cautious attitude towards him; he must not be confused with the kulak and coercive measures must not be used against him; by his class position the middle peasant can be the ally of the proletarian government during the transition to socialism, or, at least, he can remain a neutral element. Despite the unavoidable partial failures and waverings of the middle peasant, therefore, we must strive persistently to reach agreement with him, showing a solicitous attitude to all his desires and making concessions in selecting ways of carrying out socialist reforms. In this respect a prominent, place must be given to the struggle against the abuses of those representatives of Soviet power who, hypocritically taking advantage of the title of Communist, are carrying out a policy that is not communist but is a policy of the bureaucracy, of officialdom; such people must be ruthlessly banished and a stricter control established with the aid of the trade unions and by other means.
Insofar as concerns measures for the transition to communist farming, the R.C.P. will test in practice three principal measures that have already taken shape-state farms, agricultural communes and societies (and co-operatives) for the collective tilling of the soil, care being taken to ensure their more extensive and more correct application, especially in respect of ways of developing the voluntary participation of the peasants in these new forms of cooperative farming and of the organisation of the working peasantry to carry out control from below and ensure comradely discipline.
The R.C.P. food policy upholds the consolidation and development of the state monopoly, and does not reject the use of co-operatives and private traders or the employees of trading firms, or the application of a system of bonuses, on the condition that it is controlled by Soviet power and serves the purpose of the better organisation of the business. The partial concessions that have to be made from time to time are only due to the extreme acuteness of need and never imply a refusal to strive persistently to implement the state monopoly. It is very difficult to implement it in a country of small peasant farms, it requires lengthy work and the practical testing of a number of transitional measures that lead to the goal by various ways, i.e., that lead to the universal organisation and correct functioning of producers’ and consumers’ communes that hand over all food surpluses to the state.
2
Draft Programme Of The R.C.P. (Bolsheviks)
(1) The Revolution of October 25 (November 7), 1917 established the dictatorship of the proletariat in Russia which began, with the support of the poor peasantry or semi-proletariat, to lay the foundations of a communist society. The growth of the revolutionary movement of the proletariat in all advanced countries, the universal emergence and development of the Soviet form of that movement, i.e., a form which aims directly at the establishment of the dictatorship of the proletariat, and, lastly, the beginning and progress of the revolution in Austria-Hungary and, particularly, in Germany, all goes to show vividly that the era of the world proletarian, communist revolution has begun.
(2) The causes, significance and aims of this revolution can be correctly understood only by making clear the real nature of capitalism and the inevitability of its development towards communism through imperialism and the imperialist wars that are accelerating the collapse of capitalism.
(3) The nature of capitalism and of the bourgeois society which still dominates in most civilised countries and the development of which inevitably leads to the world communist revolution of the proletariat was correctly described in our old Programme (if we disregard the inaccurate name of Social-Democratic Party) in the following terms.
(4) “The principal specific feature of this society is commodity production based on capitalist production relations, under which the most important and major part of the means of production and exchange of commodities belongs to a numerically small class of persons while the vast majority of the population is made up of proletarians and semi-proletarians, who, owing to their economic position, are compelled permanently or periodically to sell their labour-power, i.e., to hire themselves out to the capitalists and to create by their labour the incomes of the upper classes of society.
(5) “The ascendancy of capitalist production relations
    extends its area more and more with the steady improvement of
    technology, which, by enhancing the economic importance of the
    large enterprises, tends to eliminate the small independent
    producers, converting some of them into proletarians and narrowing
    the role of others in the social and economic sphere, and in some
    places making them more or less completely, more or less
    obviously, more or less painfully dependent on capital.
(6) “Moreover, this technical progress enables the employers to make growing use of female and child labour in the process of production and exchange of commodities. And since, on the other hand, it causes a relative decrease in the employers’ demand for human labour-power, the demand for labour-power necessarily lags behind its supply, as a result of which the dependence of wage-labour on capital is increased and exploitation of labour rises to a higher level.
(7) “This state of affairs in the bourgeois countries and the steadily growing competition among them in the world market make it more and more difficult for them to sell the goods which are produced in ever-increasing quantities. Over-production, manifesting itself in more or less acute industrial crises followed by more or less protracted periods of industrial stagnation, is an inevitable consequence of the development of the productive forces in bourgeois society. Crises and periods of industrial stagnation, in their turn, still further ruin the small producers, still further increase the dependence of wage-labour on capital, and lead still more rapidly to the relative and sometimes to the absolute deterioration of the condition of the working class.
 (8) “Thus, improvement in technology, signifying increased labour productivity and greater social wealth, becomes in bourgeois society the cause of greater social inequality, of widening gulfs between the rich and poor, of greater insecurity, unemployment, and various hardships of the mass of the working people.
(9) “However, in proportion as all these contradictions, which are inherent in bourgeois society, grow and develop, so also does the discontent of the toiling and exploited masses with the existing order of things grow; the numerical strength and solidarity of the proletarians increase and their struggle against their exploiters is sharpened. At the same time, by concentrating the means of production and exchange and socialising the process of labour in capitalist enterprises, the improvement in technology more and more rapidly creates the material possibility of capitalist production relations being superseded by communist relations, i.e., the possibility of bringing about the social revolution, which is the ultimate aim of all the activities of the international communist party as the conscious exponent of the class movement of the proletariat.
(10) “By introducing social in place of private ownership of the means of production and exchange, by introducing planned organisation of social production to ensure the well-being and many-sided development of all the members of society, the proletarian social revolution will do away with the division of society into classes and thereby emancipate the whole of oppressed humanity, for it will put an end to all forms of exploitation of one section of society by another,
(11) “A necessary condition for, this social revolution is the dictatorship of the proletariat, i.e., the conquest by the proletariat of such political power as will enable it to suppress all resistance on the part of the exploiters. Aiming at making the proletariat capable of fulfilling its great historic mission, the international communist party organises the proletariat in an independent political party opposed to all the bourgeois parties, guides all the manifestations of its class struggle, reveals to it the irreconcilable antagonism between the interests of the exploiters and those of the exploited, and explains to the proletariat the historical significance of and the necessary conditions for the impending social revolution. At the same time it reveals to all the other toiling and exploited masses the hopelessness of their position in capitalist society and the need for a social revolution if they are to free themselves from the yoke of capital. The Communist Party, the party of the working class, calls upon all sections of the working and exploited population to join its ranks insofar as they adopt the standpoint of the proletariat.”
(12) The concentration and centralisation of capital which destroys free competition, had, by the turn of the twentieth century, created powerful monopoly associations of capitalists, syndicates, cartels and trusts—that became of decisive importance in all economic life, had led to the merging of hank capital and highly concentrated industrial capital, to the increased export of capital to other countries and to the stage which marked the beginning of the economic division of the world among the trusts that embrace ever growing groups of capitalist powers when it had already been divided territorially between the richest countries. This epoch of finance capital, the epoch of a struggle between capitalist states unparalleled in its ferocity, is the epoch of imperialism.
(13) The inevitable outcome of this is imperialist wars, wars
    for markets, spheres of investment, raw materials and cheap
    labour-power, i.e., for world domination and the crushing of small
    and weak peoples. The first great imperialist war of 1914-18 was a
    war of this type.
(14) The extremely high level of development which world capitalism in general has attained, the replacement of free competition by state monopoly capitalism, the fact that the banks and the capitalist associations have prepared the machinery for the social regulation of the process of production and distribution of products, the rise in the cost of living and increased oppression of the working class by the syndicates and its enslavement by the imperialist state due to the growth of capitalist monopolies, the tremendous obstacles standing in the way of the proletariat’s economic and political struggle, the horrors, misery, ruin, and brutalisation caused by the imperialist war—all these factors transform the present stage of capitalist development into an era of proletarian communist revolution.
That era has dawned.
(15) Only a proletarian communist revolution can lead humanity out of the impasse which imperialism and imperialist wars have created. Whatever difficulties the revolution may have to encounter, whatever possible temporary setbacks or waves of counter-revolution it may have to contend with, the final victory of the proletariat is inevitable.

      (16) The victory of the world proletarian revolution calls for
      the complete confidence, the closest fraternal alliance.

      and the greatest possible unity of revolutionary action on the
      part of the working class of the advanced countries.

      These conditions cannot be created without a determined,
      principled rupture with, and a relentless struggle against,
      those bourgeois distortions of socialism that have gained the
      upper hand in the top echelons of the official
      “SocialDemocratic” and “socialist”
      parties.
(17) One such distortion, on the one hand, is the trend of opportunism and social-chauvinism, socialism in words but chauvinism in deeds, the concealment of the defence of the predatory interests of one’s “own” national bourgeoisie behind the false slogan of “defence of the fatherland”, both in general and during the imperialist war of 1914-18 in particular. This trend has come into being because in the advanced capitalist states, the bourgeoisie, by plundering the colonial and weak nations, has been able to bribe the upper stratum of the proletariat with crumbs from the superprofits obtained from this plunder and ensure them in peace-time a tolerable, petty-bourgeois existence, and to take the leaders of that stratum into its service. The opportunists and social-chauvinists, being servants of the bourgeoisie, are real class enemies of the proletariat, especially today, when, in alliance with the capitalists, they are crushing the proletarian revolutionary movement with a mailed fist, both in their own and in other countries.
(18) Another bourgeois distortion of socialism is, on the other hand, the “Centrist” trend, also to be found in all capitalist countries, which wavers between the social-chauvinists and the Communists, advocates unity with the former and is attempting to resuscitate the bankrupt Second International. The only leader of the proletariat in its struggle for emancipation is the new, Third, Communist International that has actually been founded by the formation of Communist Parties from the truly proletarian elements of the former socialist parties in a number of countries, particularly in Germany, and is gaining the growing sympathy of the proletarian masses in all countries. This International is returning to Marxism, not only in its name, but in all its political and ideological content, and in all its activities is implementing the revolutionary doctrine of Marx, cleansed of bourgeois opportunist distortions.
Pravda No. 43,
      February 25, 1919
      Published according to a typewritten copy corrected by Lenin
3
      Insertion For Political Section
      Of The Programme

      To avoid making an incorrect generalisation of transient
      historical needs the R.C.P. must also explain to the working
      people that in the Soviet Republic the disfranchisement of a
      section of the citizens does not mean, as was the case in the
      majority of bourgeois-democratic republics, that a definite
      category of citizens are disfranchised for life. It applies,
      only to the exploiters, to those who, in violation of the
      fundamental laws of the socialist Soviet Republic, persist in
      their efforts to cling to their exploiters’ status and to
      preserve capitalist relations. Consequently, in the Soviet
      Republic, on the one hand, as socialism grows daily stronger and
      the number of those who are objectively able to remain
      exploiters or preserve capitalist relations is reduced, the
      number of disfranchised persons will automatically
      diminish. Even now the disfranchised persons in Russia
      constitute barely two or three per cent of the population. On
      the other hand, in the very near future, the cessation of
      foreign invasion and the completion of the expropriation of the
      expropriators may, under certain circumstances, create a
      situation where the proletarian state will choose other methods
      of suppressing the resistance of the exploiters and will
      introduce unrestricted universal suffrage.
 
4Fragment Of The Political Section
Of The Programme

The Soviet Constitution ensures the working people immeasurably larger opportunities than are provided by bourgeois democracy and parliamentarism to elect and recall deputies in a way that is most easy and accessible for workers and peasants; it also eliminates the negative aspects of parliamentarism which have been evident since the Paris Commune, particularly the division of legislative and executive power, the alienation of parliament from the masses, and so forth.
The Soviet Constitution also brings the machinery of state closer to the masses by making the electoral constituency and the basic unit of the state not territorial but industrial units (the factory, etc.).
The closer contact between the machinery of state and the masses under the Soviet system. makes it possible to create...[3]
5

Section Of The Programme
On National Relations

On the national question, the policy of the proletariat which has captured political power—unlike that of the bourgeois-democratic formal proclamation of equality of nations, which is impossible under imperialism—is persistently to bring about the real rapprochement and amalgamation of the workers and peasants of all nations in their revolutionary struggle for the overthrow of the bourgeoisie. To achieve this object, the colonial and other nations which are oppressed, or whose rights are restricted, must be completely liberated and granted the right to secede as a guarantee that the sentiment inherited from capitalism, the distrust of the working people of the various nations and the wrath which the workers o the oppressed nations feel towards the workers of the oppressor nations, will be fully dispelled and replaced by a conscious and voluntary alliance. The workers of those nations which under capitalism were oppressor nations must take exceptional care not to hurt the national sentiments of the oppressed nations (for example, the attitude of the Great Russians, Ukrainians and Poles towards the Jews, the attitude of the Tatars towards the Bashkirs, and so forth) and must not only promote the actual equality, but also the development of the language and literature of the working people of the formerly oppressed nations so as to remove all traces of distrust and alienation inherited from the epoch of capitalism.
6

Insertion For The Final Draft
Of The Programme Section
On The National Question

On the question of who expresses the will of the nation on the matter of secession, the R.C.P. upholds the historical class view and takes into consideration the level of historical development of the nation concerned—on the way from the Middle Ages to bourgeois democracy, or from bourgeois to Soviet or proletarian democracy, etc. In any case, on the part of...[4]
7

 Preamble To The Military Section
Of The Programme

      The state of affairs in the’sphere of the military tasks
      and military activities of the Soviet Republic under the
      dictatorship of the proletariat is as follows.
As our Party long ago foresaw, the imperialist war could not end even with the simple conclusion of a durable peace between the bourgeois governments, let alone with a just peace. This petty-bourgeois illusion entertained by democrats, socialists and Social-Democrats has been fully dispelled by the course of events. The imperialist war inevitably had to be transformed, and is being transformed before our very eyes, into the civil war of the exploited working people, headed by the proletariat, against the exploiters, against the bourgeoisie.
The resistance of the exploiters, which grows simultaneously with the Intensification of the onslaught of the proletariat, and is particularly intensified by the victory of the proletariat in individual countries, and the international solidarity and organisation of the bourgeoisie inevitably cause the combination of civil war in individual countries and revolutionary wars between the proletarian countries and bourgeois countries fighting to retain the rule of capital. In view of the class character of such wars, the distinction drawn between defensive and offensive wars becomes utterly meaningless.
By and large, this development of international civil war, a process which has been taking place with exceptional rapidity before our very eyes since the end of 1918 is the legitimate product of the class struggle under capitalism and a legitimate step towards the victory of the international proletarian revolution.
For this reason, the R.C.P. emphatically rejects the hope of disarmament under capitalism as the reactionary philistine illusion of petty-bourgeois democrats, even though they call themselves socialists and Social-Democrats, and in opposition to this and all similar slogans which actually play into the hands of the bourgeoisie, it advances the slogan of arming the proletariat and disarming the bourgeoisie, the slogan of completely and ruthlessly suppressing the resistance of the exploiters, the slogan of fighting until victory over the bourgeoisie of the whole world is achieved both in civil wars at home and in international revolutionary wars.
The practical experience of more than a year’s military activity and of the formation of a proletarian revolutionary army after the incredible weariness and exhaustion of the entire mass of working people as a result of the war, has led the R.C.P. to the following main conclusions:
8

 First Paragraph Of Section
Of The Programme On The Courts

On the road to communism through the dictatorship of the proletariat, the Communist Party, rejecting democratic slogans, completely. abolishes also such organs of bourgeois rule as the old courts, and replaces them by the class courts of the workers and peasants. After taking all power into its hands, the proletariat puts forward, instead of the old vague formula, “Election of judges by the people”, the class slogan, “Election of judges from the working people by none but the working people”, and carries it into practice throughout the judicial system. In the election of judges from none but workers and peasants who do not employ wagelabour for profit, the Communist Party makes no distinction with regard to women but allows the two sexes completely equal rights both in electing judges and in exercising judicial functions. Having repealed the laws of the deposed governments, the Party gives the judges elected by Soviet electors the slogan: enforce the will of the proletariat, apply its decrees, and in the absence of a suitable decree; or if the relevant decree is inadequate, take guidance from your socialist sense of justice, ignoring the laws of the deposed governments.
9

      Section Of The Programme
      Dealing With Public Education

      In the sphere of public education, the object of the R.C.P. is
      to complete the work That began with the October Revolution in
      1917 to convert the school from an instrument of the class rule
      of the bourgeoisie into an instrument for the overthrow of that
      rule and for the complete abolition of the division of society
      into classes. The schools must become an instrument of the
      dictatorship of the proletariat, i.e., a vehicle not merely of
      the general principles of communism but also of the ideological,
      organisational and educational influence of the proletariat on
      the semi-proletarian and non-proletarian sections of the working
      people with the object of completely suppressing the resistance
      of the exploiters and of building the communist system.The
      immediate tasks in this field are, for the present, the
      following:
(1) the further development of the initiative of the workers
    and working peasants in the sphere of education with the all-round
    assistance of the Soviet government;
(2) securing complete command not only over a section, or the majority, of the school-teachers, as is the case at present, but over all school-teachers by, weeding out the incorrigible bourgeois counter-revolutionary elements and securing the conscientious application of communist principles; (policy)
(3) the implementation of free, obligatory general and polytechnical education (acquaintance with all the main branches of production theoretically and in practice) for all children of both sexes up to the age of 16.
(4) the closest connection between schooling and productive social labour of the child;
(5) the provision of food, clothing, books arid other teaching aids for all school children at the expense of the state;
(6) the working people must be drawn into active participation in the work of public education (the development of the public education councils, mobilisation of the educated, etc.);
or ad 2) (7) to secure the closest contact between schoolteachers and the agitation and propaganda machinery of the R.C.P.
Section Of The Programme Dealing With Religion
As regards religion, the policy of the R.C.P. is not to be confined to decreeing the separation of the church from the state and the school from the church, that is, to measures promised by bourgeois democrats but never fully carried out anywhere in the world because of the many and varied connections actually existing between capital and religious propaganda.
The Party’s object is to completely destroy the connection between the exploiting classes and organised religious propaganda and really liberate the working people from religious prejudices. For this purpose it must organise the most widespread scientific education and anti-religious propaganda. It is necessary, however, to take care to avoid hurting the religious sentiments of believers, for this only serves to increase religious fanaticism.
11
      Points From The Economic Section
      Of The Programme
    

      The Russian Communist Party, developing the general tasks of the
      Soviet government in greater detail, at present formulates them
      as follows.
In the Economic Sphere
The present tasks of Soviet power are:
(1) to continue steadily and finish the expropriation of the
    bourgeoisie and the conversion of the means of production and
    distribution into the property of the Soviet Republic, i.e., the
    common property of all working people, which has in the main been
    completed.
(2) To pay particularly great attention to the development and strengthening of comradely discipline among the working people and to stimulate their initiative and sense of responsibility in every field. This is the most-important if not the sole means of completely overcoming capitalism and the habits formed by the rule of the private ownership of the means of production. This aim can be achieved only by slow, persistent work to re-educate the masses; this re-education has not only become possible now that the masses have seen that the landowner, capitalist and merchant have really been eliminated, but is actually taking place in thousands of ways through the practical experience of the workers and peasants themselves. It is extremely important in this respect to work for the further organisation of the working people in trade unions; never before has this organisation developed as rapidly anywhere in the world as under Soviet power and it must be developed until literally all working people are organised in properly constituted centralised and disciplined trade unions.
8.[5] This same task of developing the productive forces calls for the immediate, extensive and comprehensive employment in science and technology of the specialists who have been left us as our heritage by capitalism, although, as a rule, they are imbued with a bourgeois world outlook and habits. The Party, in close alliance with the trade union organisations, must continue its former line—on the one hand, there must not be the slightest political concession to this bourgeois section of the population, and any counterrevolutionary attempts on its part must he ruthlessly suppressed, and, on the other hand, there must be a relentless struggle against the pseudo-radical but actually ignorant and conceited opinion that the working people are capable of overcoming capitalism and the bourgeois social system without learning from bourgeois specialists, without making use of their services and without undergoing the training of a lengthy period, of work side by side with them.
Although the ultimate aim of the Soviet government is to achieve full communism and equal remuneration for all kinds of work, it cannot, however, introduce this equality straightaway, at the present time, when only the first steps of the transition from capitalism to communism are being taken. For a certain period of time, therefore, we must retain the present higher remuneration for specialists in order to give them an incentive to work no worse, and even better, than they have worked before; and with the same object in view, we must not reject the system of paying bonuses for the most successful work, particularly organisational work.
It is equally necessary to surround the bourgeois specialist
    with a comradely atmosphere created by working hand in hand with
    the masses of rank-and-file workers led by politically-conscious
    Communists in order to promote mutual understanding and friendship
    between workers by hand and brain whom capitalism kept apart 

    

      The
      mobilization of  the entire able-bodied population by the Soviet
      government, with the trade unions participating, for certain
      public works must be much more widely and systematically practised
      than has hitherto been the case.

      In the sphere of distribution, the present task of Soviet power
      is to continue steadily replacing trade by the planned,
      organised and nation-wide distribution of goods. The goal is the
      organisation of the entire population in a single system of
      consumers’ communes that can distribute all essential
      products most rapidly, systematically, economically and with the
      least expenditure of labour by strictly centralising the entire
      distribution machinery.
To achieve this object it is particularly important in the
    present period, when there are transitional forms based on
    different principles, for the Soviet food supply organisation to
    make use of the co-operative societies, the only mass apparatus
    for systematic distribution inherited from capitalism.
Being of the opinion that in principle the only correct policy is the further communist development of this apparatus and not its rejection, the R.C.P. must systematically pursue the policy of making it obligatory for all members of the Party to work in the co-operatives and, with the aid of the trade unions, direct them in a communist spirit, develop the initiative and discipline of the working people who belong to them, endeavour to get the entire population to join them, and the co-operatives themselves to merge into one single co-operative that embraces the whole of the Soviet Republic. Lastly, and most important, the dominating influence of the proletariat over the rest of the working people must be constantly maintained, and everywhere the most varied measures must be tried with a view to facilitating and bringing about the transition from petty-bourgeois co-operatives of the old capitalist type to consumers’ communes led by proletarians and semi-proletarians.
(6) It is impossible to abolish money at one stroke in the first period of transition from capitalism to communism. As a consequence, the bourgeois elements of the population continue to use privately-owned currency notes—these tokens by which the exploiters obtain the right to receive public wealth—for the purpose of speculation, profit-making and robbing the working population. The nationalization of the banks is insufficient in itself to combat this survival of bourgeois robbery. The R.C.P. will strive as speedily as possible to introduce the most radical measures to pave the way for the abolition of money, first and foremost to replace it by savings-bank books, cheques, short-term notes entitling the holders to receive goods from the public stores, and so forth, to make it compulsory for money to be deposited in the banks, etc. Practical experience in paving the way for, and carrying out, these and similar measures will show which of them are the most expedient.
(7) In the sphere of finance, the R.C.P. will introduce a
    graduated income-and-property tax in all cases where it is
    feasible. But these cases cannot be numerous since private
    property in land, the majority of factories and other enterprises
    has been abolished. In the epoch of the dictatorship of the
    proletariat and of the state ownership of the principal means of
    production, the state finances must be based on the direct
    appropriation of a certain part of the revenue from the different
    state monopolies to meet the needs of the state. Revenue and
    expenditure can be balanced only if the exchange of commodities is
    properly organised, and this will be achieved by the organisation
    of consumers’ communes and the restoration of the transport
    system, which is one of the major immediate objects of the Soviet
    government.
12
      Agrarian Section Of The Programme
Soviet power, having completely abolished private property in land, has already started on the implementation of a whole series of measures aimed at the organisation of large-scale socialist agriculture. The most important of these measures are the organisation of state farms (i.e., large socialist farms), the encouragement of agricultural communes (i.e., voluntary associations of tillers of the land for large-scale farming in common), and societies and co-operatives for the collective cultivation of the land; cultivation by the state of all uncultivated lands, no matter whom they belong to; mobilisation by the state of all agricultural specialists for vigorous measures to raise farming efficiency, etc.
Regarding all these measures as the only way to raise the productivity of agricultural labour, which is absolutely imperative, the R.C.P. seeks to carry them out as fully as possible, to extend them to the more backward regions of the country, and to take further steps in this direction.
Inasmuch as the antithesis between town and country is one of the
      root causes of the economic and cultural backwardness of the
      countryside, one which in a period of so deep a crisis as the present
      confronts both town and country with the direct threat of ruin and
      collapse, the R.C.P. regards the eradication of this antithesis as
      one of the basic tasks of building communism and, alongside the above
      measures, considers it necessary extensively and systematically to
      enlist industrial workers for the communist development of
      agriculture, to promote the activities of the nation-wide Working
      Committee of Assistance set up by the Soviet government with this aim
      in view, and so on.

    

      In all its work in the countryside the R.C.P. will continue to
      rely on the proletarian and semi-proletarian sections of the
      rural poulatiori, first organising them into an independent
      force, setting up Poor Peasants’ Committees, Party cells
      in the villages, a specific type of trade union for rural
      proletarians and semi-proletarians, etc., exerting every effort
      to bring them closer to the urban proletariat and wresting them
      from the influence of the rural bourgeoisie and petty-property
      interests.
As far as the kulaks, the rural bourgeoisie, are concerned, the policy of the FLC.P. is one of decisive struggle against their attempts at exploitation and the suppression of their resistance to Soviet, communist, policy.
With regard to the middle peasants, the policy of the R.C.P. is to draw them into the work of socialist construction gradually and systematically. The Party sets itself the task of separating them from the kulaks, of winning them to the side of the working class by carefully attending to their needs, by combating their backwardness with ideological weapons and not with measures of suppression, and by striving in all cases where their vital interests are concerned to come to practical agreements with them, making concessions to them in determining the methods of carrying out socialist reforms.

Endnotes
[1]  The following documents are included under the general head “Draft Programme of the R.C.P.(B.)”; “Rough Draft of the Programme of the R.C.P.” and individual chapters and sections of the programme with Lenin’s amendments. The full text of the chapter “The Basic Tasks of the Dictatorship of the Proletariat in Russia” was first published in the Fourth (Russian) Edition of the Collected Works. In this edition, too, the “Draft Programme of the B..C.P. (Bolsheviks)", which constituted the first sections of the “Rough Draft of the Programthe of the R.C.P." with amendments and addenda by Lenin, and the “Insertion for the Final, Draft of the Programme Section on the National Question” were first published. Lenin’s” proposals for the Draft Programme formed the basis of the” Programme of the Communist Party adopted at the Eighth Congress of the R.C.P.(B.).
[2] See present edition, Vol. 24, pp. 45963 and Vol. 27, pp. 152-58 [Section 4]
[3]
    The manuscript remained unfinished. This passage, with amendments,
    was included in the Programme of the R.C.P .(B.) adopted
      by the Eighth Congress o(. the R.C.P:(B.) as Section 5 of the
    chapter “The General Political Sphere”
[4]This insertion was, included in toto as Section
    4 of the chapter. “In the Sphere of National
    Relations”.
[5]This point of the draft of 'the economic section of the programme was originally placed third; Lenin later recast it and made it point eight, under which number it was included in the Party
Programme. 

Collected Works Volume 29
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 







==========

## Eighth
    Congress of the R.C.P.(B.).








Eighth Congress of the R.C.P.(B.) March 18-23, 1919







V. I. Lenin
Eighth Congress of the R.C.P.(B.)[1]
March 18-23, 1919


First Published: Published in
      Pravda, March-April 1919: Published according to the book Eighth Congress of the
Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks), Verbatim Report, Kommunist Publishers, Moscow,
      1919; Verified with the shorthand notes and the Pravda
      text

      
Source: Lenin’s Collected
Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow,
      1972 Volume 29, pages 141-225

      
Translated: George Hanna

      
Transcription/HTML Markup: David
      Walters & Robert Cymbala

      
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive
      (www.marx.org) 2002; Permission is granted to copy and/or
      distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free
Documentation License.
    

Table of Contents
1. Political Report of the Central
Committee, March 7
1. Speech Opening The Congress. March
18
2. Report of the Central Committee. March
18
3. Report on the Party Programme. March
19
4. Speech Closing the Debate on the Party
Programme. March 19
5. Wireless Message of Greeting on Behalf of
the Congress to the Government of the Hungarian Soviet Republic. March
22
6. Report on Work In the Countryside. March
23
7. In Opposition to A Motion to Close the
Debate on the Report on Work In the Countryside. March 23
8. Resolution on the Attitude to the Middle
Peasants
9. Speech Closing the Congress. March
23

Endnotes
[1] This
      Congress of the R.C.P.(B.), held in Moscow, was attended by 301 delegates
      with the right to vote who represented 313,766 Party members and 102
      delegates with voice but no vote. Lenin opened the Congress with a short
      speech. The Congress agenda was: report of the Central Committee, the
      Programme of the R.C.P.(B.), the foundation of the Communist
      International, the war situation and war policy, work in the countryside,
      organisational problems, and other business.
Lenin delivered the report of the Central Committee and
      also reported on the Party Programme and work in the countryside.
In a resolution on the report of the Central Committee
      the Congress expressed its full “approval of the political
      activities of the Central Committee”.
In the sphere of military affairs the Congress adopted a
      decision to strengthen the regular Red Army, lead by Trotsky, and
      inculcate iron discipline, stressing especially the role of the
      proletarian hard core of the army and the role of the commissars and Party
      cells in the political and military training of the Red Army. The Congress
      pointed to the need, developed by Trotsky with Lenin’s support, to
      employ old army specialists and to make use of the highest achievements of
      the bourgeois art of war. The Congress vehemently rejected the proposal
      from the group known as the “army opposition” that was against
      the formation of a regular Red Army and defended the survivals of the
      guerrilla spirit in the army.
The Congress adopted a decision on Party and Soviet
      organisation and defeated the opportunist group headed by Sapronov and
      Osinsky who denied the leading role of the Party in the Soviets.
Owing to the large influx of new members into the Party
      the Congress decided to carry out the re-registration of the entire
      membership and to improve the Party’s social composition.
Among the members of the Central Committee elected by the
      Congress were Lenin, Dzerzhinsky, Kalinin and Stasova; among the
      alternative members were Artyom (Sergeyev), Vladimirsky and
      Yaroslavsky.


Collected Works Volume 29
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## Wireless Message of Greeting to the
    Government of the Hungarian Soviet Republic











Wireless Message of Greeting
to the Government of the Hungarian Soviet Republic March 22, 1919



V. I. Lenin
Wireless Message of Greeting
to the
Government of the Hungarian Soviet Republic
March 22, 1919


Delivered: 22 March, 1919
First Published: First published in Hungarian to the newspaper Népszara No. 70, March 23, 1919; First published In Russian 1927; Published according to the Russian translation
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, page 226
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002; Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License.

This is Lenin. Sincere greetings to the proletarian government of the Hungarian Soviet Republic, and especially to Comrade Bela Kun. I conveyed your greetings to the Congress of the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks). They were received with tremendous enthusiasm. We shall send you the decisions of the Moscow Congress of the Third, Communist International, as well as a report on the military situation, as soon as possible. It is absolutely necessary to maintain constant radio communication between Budapest and Moscow. Accept my communist greetings and hearty handshake, Lenin

Collected Works Volume 29
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## Record of Wireless Message
  to Bela Kun











Record Of Wireless Message To Bela Kun
March 23, 1919



V. I. Lenin
Record Of Wireless Message To Béla Kun
March 23, 1919


First Published: 1932; Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, page 227
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002; Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License.

Lenin to Béla Kun in Budapest
Please inform us what real guarantees you have that the new Hungarian Government will actually be a communist, and not simply a socialist, government, i.e., one traitor-socialists.
Have the Communists a majority in the government? When will the Congress of Soviets take place? What does the socialists' recognition of the dictatorship of the proletariat really amount to?
It is altogether beyond doubt that it would be a mistake merely to imitate our Russian tactics in all details in the specific conditions of the Hungarian revolution. I must warn you against this mistake, but I should like to know where you see real guarantees.
So that I may be certain that the answer has come to me from you personally, I ask you to indicate in what sense I spoke to you about the National Assembly when you last visited me in the Kremlin.
With communist greetings,
Lenin

Collected Works Volume 29
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## Reply to an Open Letter By a Bourgeois Specialist











Reply To An Open Letter By A Bourgeois Specialist



V. I. Lenin
Reply To An Open Letter By A Bourgeois Specialist


Written: 28 March, 1918
First Published: Pravda No. 67, March 
28, 1919; Published according to the Pravda text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, pages 228-232
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002; Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License.

 
 Today I received the following:
    

”An open letter of a ’specialist’ to Comrade Lenin.

  
      “I read in Izvestia your report on the
      specialists, and I cannot suppress a cry of
      indignation. Don’t you really understand that not a single
      honest specialist, if he has retained the least shred of
      self-respect, can agree to go to work merely for the sake of the
      animal comforts with which you are offering to provide him? Have
      you retired so deeply into the seclusion of the Kremlin that you
      fail to see the life that is going around you, that you do not
      see how many of the Russian specialists, though not government
      Communists, are real workers, who acquired their special
      knowledge at the cost of extreme effort not from the capitalists
      and not for the purpose of making money but in persistent
      struggle against the deadly conditions of student and academic
      life under the old system? These conditions have not been
      improved for them under the communist government (to me this
      does not coincide with my conception of the communist system)
      Against these absolutely genuine proletarians—even though
      they come from different classes—who have served the
      working people by word, deed and thought from the very first
      days of their conscious life—against these, whom you lump
      together in a single contaminated heap of
      ‘intellectuals’, you incite ignorant, upstart
      Communists, former policemen, minor officials and shopkeepers,
      who in the provinces often constitute a large section of the
      ‘local authorities’, and it is difficult to describe
      the horrors of the humiliation and suffering they are
      experiencing. Continuous denunciation and accusations of the
      absurdest description, fruitless but extremely humiliating house
      searches, threats of shooting, requisitions and confiscations,
      invasion of the most private sides of personal life (a commander
      of a unit quartered in an educational establishment at which I
      teach actually ordered me to sleep in one bed with my wife),
      these are the conditions under which many specialists in
      establishments of higher learning were compelled to work until
      very lately. But all these ‘petty-bourgeois’ have
      remained at their posts and faithfully fulfilled the moral
      obligations they undertook to preserve, no matter at what
      sacrifice,  culture and knowledge for those who humiliated and
      insulted them at the instigation of their leaders. They realised
      that their personal misfortunes and sorrows must not be confused
      with the question of building a new and better life; and this
      helped, and is helping them now, to bear it, and continue with
      their work. 
“But believe me, from among these people
    whom you, without discrimination, have christened bourgeois,
    counter-revolutionaries, saboteurs, and so forth, only because
    they conceive of the approach to the future socialist and
    communist system differently from the way you and your disciples
    conceive of it, you will not buy a single man at the price that
    you think of offering. After all, the ’specialists’
    who go to work for you in order to save their skins will not
    benefit the country in any way. A specialist is not a machine. He
    cannot be simply wound up and set going. Without inspiration,
    without the internal spark of life, without the urge to create,
    not a single specialist, will produce anything, no matter how
    highly he is paid. But a volunteer, working and creating among
    comrades and collaborators who respect him and regard him as a
    guide who knows his business, and not as a suspect to be kept
    under the surveillance of a communist commissar of the 1919 crop,
    will put his heart and soul into his work. 
“If you don’t want to have
    ’specialists’ working merely for the sake of their
    salary, if you want new, honest volunteers to join the specialists
    who are already co-operating with you in some places, not out of
    fear, but conscientiously, in spite of the fact that they disagree
    with you on principle on many questions, in spite of the
    humiliating conditions into which your tactics often place them,
    in spite of the unprecedented bureaucratic chaos that reigns in
    many Soviet offices and which sometimes wrecks even most vital
    undertakings—if you want all this, then first of all purge
    your Party and your government offices of the unscrupulous
    Mitlaüfer,[Casual
    fellow-travellers.—Editor] comb out these
    self-seekers, adventurers, scoundrels and bandits who, sheltering
    under the banners of communism, are either, owing to their
    despicable natures, grabbing public property, or, owing to their
    stupidity, are cutting at the roots of public life by their
    absurd, disruptive fussiness. 
“If you want to ’use’ the
    specialists, do not buy them, but learn to respect them as men,
    and not as livestock and machines that you need for a certain
    time. 
    
M. Dukelsky


      “Professor at Voronezh Agricultural Institute. President
      of the Central Board of State Enterprises in the Leather
      Industry.”
This is a wrathful letter, but I think it is sincere, and one I would like to answer.
After all is said and done, I think the author is governed mainly by personal irritation, which has robbed him of the ability to discuss events from the mass point of view, and from the point of view of their actual consecutiveness. 
According to the author, we Communists repelled the specialists by “christening” them with all sorts of bad names.
This was not the case.
 The workers and peasants set up the Soviet government after overthrowing the bourgeoisie and bourgeois parliamentarism. It is not difficult to see today that this was not a “gamble”, not an “act of folly” on the part of the Bolsheviks, but the beginning of a world-wide change of two eras in world history—the era of the bourgeoisie and the era of socialism, the era of capitalist parliamentarism and the era of the Soviet state institutions of the proletariat. If, a year or so ago, the majority of the intellectuals would not (and partly could not) see this, are we to blame? 
The sabotage was started by the intelligentsia and the government officials, the bulk of whom are bourgeois and petty bourgeois. These terms are a class characterisation, a historical appraisal, which may be right or wrong, but which must not be regarded as terms of abuse, or vituperation. It was inevitable that the workers and peasants should be enraged by the sabotage of the intelligentsia, and if anybody is to “blame” for this, it can only be the bourgeoisie and their willing and unwilling accomplices. 
Had we “incited” anybody against the “intelligentsia”, we would have deserved to be hanged for it. Far from inciting the people against the intelligentsia, we on the contrary, in the name of the Party, and in the name of the government, urged the necessity of creating the best possible working conditions for the intelligentsia. I have been doing this since April 1918, if not earlier. I do not know which issue of Izvestia the author refers to, but it is very strange for a man who is accustomed to study politics, that is to say, to analyse events, from the mass and not from the personal point of view, to hear that to advocate higher pay necessarily expresses the unworthy, or generally evil, desire to “buy”. I hope the respected author will forgive me for saying so, but,  on my word of honour, this reminded me of that literary character the “Muslin Miss”.[1] 
 Let us assume that the question is one of paying high salaries to a special, hand-picked group, that is, a group which formerly, for general social reasons, did not, and could not receive higher salaries. In that case, there might be grounds for assuming that the government’s object is to “buy” this group. But when we are discussing hundreds of thousands, if not millions, who always received higher salaries, how is it possible to regard the proposal that it is necessary, for a time, to pay a lower, but higher than the average, salary as a snare, or an “insult” unless one wishes to adopt a tone of furious irritation and carping criticism of everything. 
 Not only is his whole argument incongruous, but the author defeats himself when he relates, as of some great wrong done to him, as of some deep humiliation, the case when the commander of a unit quartered in a certain educational establishment ordered the professor to sleep in one bed with his wife. 
 Firstly, to the extent that the desire of intellectual people to have two beds, a bed for the husband and one for the wife, is legitimate (and it is undoubtedly legitimate), to that extent, it is necessary to have a salary higher than the average to satisfy that desire. The author of the letter cannot but know that on the “average” the number of beds in Russia was always less than one per Russian citizen. 
 Secondly, was the commander of the unit wrong in this case? If he was not rude, offensive, and did not deliberately humiliate the professor, and so forth (which might have been the case, and for which he should have been punished), if, I repeat, this was not the case, then, in my opinion, he was right. The men were worn out, they had not seen a bed, or probably a decent lodging in general, for months on end. They are defending the Socialist Republic under incredible difficulties, under inhuman conditions; did they not have a right to take a bed for a short time to rest in? The soldiers and their commander were right.
 We do not want to reduce the general conditions of life of the intellectuals to the average, at one stroke, and consequently we are opposed to reducing their salaries to the average. But everything must be subordinated to the needs of the war, and intellectuals must put up with some inconvenience so that the soldiers may be able to rest. This is not a humiliating, but a just demand. 
The author demands that intellectuals should be treated like comrades. He is right. We demand that too. The programme of our Party contains such a demand clearly, plainly and precisely formulated. If, on the other hand, groups of non-Party intellectuals, or of intellectuals who because of their party allegiance are politically hostile to the Bolsheviks, as clearly formulate the demand to their adherents, “be comradely towards weary soldiers, and towards over-worked workers who are enraged by centuries of exploitation”, then manual and non-manual workers will draw closer together at an extremely rapid rate. 
The author demands that we should purge our Party and government offices of “unscrupulous, casual fellow-travellers, of self-seekers, adventurers, scoundrels and bandits”. 
    
That is a just demand. We ourselves put it forward long ago, and are fulfilling it. We are not giving a free run to “newcomers” in our Party. The Party Congress even decided on a re-registration of members.[2] We shoot all bandits, self-seekers and adventurers that we catch, and will continue to do so. But if this process of purging is to proceed more thoroughly and quickly, sincere non-Party intellectuals must help us. When they form groups of people personally acquainted with each other, and in their name call for loyal service in Soviet offices, call upon them to “serve the working people”, to use the term of the open letter, then the birth pangs of the new social order will be much shortened and eased. 
    
N. Lenin
    

      March 27, 1919

Endnotes
[1] This expression was current in Russia in the nineteenth century; it was applied to young girls with limited interests brought up on patriarchal country estates.
[2] The Eighth Congress ordered the re-registration of all Party members throughout Russia; it was carried out between May and October 1919.

Collected Works Volume 29
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## On the Candidacy of
  H. I. Kalinin For the Post of Chair Man of the
  all-Russia Central Executive Committee











On The Candidacy Of M. I. Kalinin For The Post Of Chairman Of The All-Russia Central Executive Committee



V. I. Lenin
On The Candidacy Of M. I. Kalinin
For The Post Of Chairman Of The All-Russia Central Executive Committee
Speech At The Twelfth Session Of The All-Russia Central Executive Committee March 30, 1919


Delivered: 30 March, 1919
First Published: Brief report published in the newspaper Izvestia No. 70, April 1, 1919; First published in run In 1932; Published according to the verbatim report
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, pages 233-236
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002; Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License.

Comrades! To find a person who could take the place of Comrade Yakov Mildiailovich Sverdlov in full is an exceedingly difficult task, for it is next to impossible for any one man to he at once a leading Party worker, moreover one who knows the history of the Party, and an excellent judge of people capable of choosing leading functionaries for the Soviets. It would be impossible to expect any one comrade to assume all the functions that Comrade Sverdlov took care of alone—on this all were agreed when candidacies were discussed in the Party—and hence we shall have to entrust the various functions to whole collegiums that will meet daily and direct the different spheres of work. As far as the chairman is concerned, we must ensure that he expresses the Party line in respect of the peasantry.  
You know that our approach to the middle peasants as set forth at the Party Congress introduces no change in our general policy. The tasks we have outlined in regard to the middle peasants must be carried out once our primary problem—the suppression of the bourgeoisie—has been solved. The question of the attitude to the middle peasants is a more acute problem for us than for our comrades in Europe, and we must make sure that we have at the head of the Soviet state a comrade who can demonstrate that our decision in this matter will really be carried out.
I believe that we can and must find a comrade who will devote himself wholly to carrying out the line of the leading Party in respect of the middle peasants. We know that at present the problem of gathering and transmitting information is particularly acute. We know that the break-down of transport facilities and the existence of civil war, which at times interrupts communications between the centre and entire regions, not to speak of separate gubernias—we know that under the circumstances this problem requires special attention.
We know that we can solve this problem if we find a comrade with the necessary experience and knowledge of the life of the middle peasants, and I believe that the candidacy of which you read in today’s papers meets all these requirements. This is the candidacy of Comrade Kalinin.
Here we have a comrade who has been engaged in Party work for nearly twenty years. He is a peasant from Tver Gubernia, who has close connections with peasant farming which he constantly renews and freshens. Petrograd workers have witnessed his ability to approach wide sections of the working masses who had had no Party experience; where other propagandists and agitators failed to find the right, comradely approach to them, Comrade Kalinin succeeded. All this is especially important at the present time. Of course, the middle peasantry as a whole, all the best elements among them, are giving us the resolute support that will overcome all difficulties and put down the revolt of the rural kulaks and that insignificant minority of the rural masses who follow them. We know that our main task in a country of small peasants is to ensure an indestructible alliance of the workers and the middle peasants. Our agrarian measures—complete abolition of landed proprietorship and determined assistance to the middle peasants—have already produced results, and in the course of the past year have led to an increase in the number of middle peasants. But in the localities people have frequently been appointed to administrative posts who were not up to the job.
There have been cases of abuses, but we are not to blame for them. We know that we have (lone everything we could to enlist the intelligentsia, but there were political differences that kept us apart. We know that the epoch of bourgeois parliamentarism has ended, that the sympathy of the workers of the whole world is with Soviet power, and that the victory of Soviet power is inevitable, no matter how many proletarian leaders the bourgeoisie may kill, as they are doing in Germany. The sum total of their experience will, in the long run, inevitably bring the intelligentsia into our ranks, and we shall acquire the material with which we can govern. We shall see to it that alien elements who have attached themselves to Soviet power are removed—indeed, they are one cause of dissatisfaction which we are not afraid to admit is legitimate. We must pay maximum attention to the fight against this evil. At the Party Congress we decided firmly to make this line of conduct obligatory for all functionaries.
We must say that we see no way of introducing socialist farming other than through a series of comradely agreements with the middle peasants, to whom we must turn more and more often.
We know also that comrades who bore the brunt of the work in the period of the revolution and were completely engrossed in this work, were unable to approach the middle peasants as they should have, they could not avoid making mistakes, each of which was seized upon by our enemies, each of which gave rise to certain doubts and complicated the middle peasant’s attitude toward us.
That is why it is very important for this purpose to find a comrade possessing the qualities I have mentioned. We must help him with our organisational experience, so that the middle peasants should see that they have one of their own as the highest functionary in the whole Soviet Republic, so that the decision of our Party calling for a proper approach to the middle peasant and declaring our resolve to examine, study every step we make and test it in the light of the experience we have gained will not remain on paper.
We know that the numbers of our allies are growing, that they will increase many times over in the next few months, but for the time being the burden rests wholly on our country, which is greatly ruined and impoverished. The load is more than the middle peasant can carry. We must go to him and do everything we can, we must make him understand and show him in practice that we are firmly resolved to carry out the decisions of our Party Congress.
That is why the candidacy of a man like Comrade Kalinin ought to have the unanimous support of us all. His candidacy will enable us to organise practically a series of direct contacts between the highest representative of Soviet power and the middle peasants; it will help to bring us closer to them.
This aim cannot be achieved at once, but we have no doubt that the decision we propose to make will be the correct one, though we know that we have little practical experience in this respect. Let the highest representative of the Soviet Republic himself be the first, with our joint assistance, to begin acquiring this experience, gather the full sum of knowledge, and check up; then we can be certain that we shall solve the task facing us, that Russia will become not only the model of a country where the dictatorship of the proletariat has been firmly established and the bourgeoisie ruthlessly suppressed—this has already been done-but also the model of a country where the relations between the urban workers and the middle peasants are satisfactorily arranged oil the basis of comradely support and new experience; this is one of the main guarantees of the complete victory of the proletarian revolution.
That is why I take it upon myself to recommend to you this candidacy—the candidacy of Comrade Kalinin.

Collected Works Volume 29
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## Speeches on
  Gramophone Records









Speeches on Gramophone Records



V. I. Lenin
Speeches on Gramophone Records


Recorded: End of March 1919;
First Published: Published according to the gramophone records; 
Organization of these speeches was accomplished by Tsentropechat
the central agency of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee for
the Supply and Distribution of Periodicals between 1919 and 1921. 13 of
Lenin’s speeches were recorded.
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, 
 Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, pages 239-253
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft:
V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002; Permission is granted
to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the 
GNU Free Documentation License.
    

Contents

In Memory Of Comrade Yakov
Mikhailovich Sverdlov, Chairman Of The All-Russia Central
Executive Committee
The Third, Communist International
Communication On The Wireless Negotiations
With Béla Kun
An Appeal to the Red Army
The Middle Peasants
What Is Soviet Power?
How The Working People Can Be Saved
From The Oppression Of The Landowners And Capitalists For
Ever
Anti-Jewish Pogroms


Audio archive

Collected Works Volume 29
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive



==========

## 1. In Memory of
  Comrade Yakov Mikhailovich Sverdlov











In Memory Of Comrade Yakov Mikhailovich Sverdlov, Chairman Of The All-Russia Central Executive Committee



SPEECHES ON GRAMOPHONE RECORDS
V. I. Lenin
I
In Memory Of
 Comrade Yakov Mikhailovich Sverdlov
Chairman Of The All-Russia Central Executive Committee


Recorded: End of March 1919; 
First Published: Published according to the gramophone records; Organization of these speeches was accomplished by Tsentropechat the central agency of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee for the Supply and Distribution of Periodicals between 1919 and 1921. 13 of Lenin’s speeches were recorded.
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, page 239
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002; Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License.

All those who have worked day after day with Comrade Sverdlov, now realise full well that it was his exceptional organising talent which ensured for us that of which we have been so proud, and justly proud. He made it possible for us to carry on united, efficient, organised activities worthy of the organised proletarian masses, without which we could not have achieved success, and which answered fully the requirements of the proletarian revolution. The memory of Comrade Yakov Mikhailovich Sverdlov will serve not only as a symbol of the revolutionary's devotion to his cause, not only as the model of how to combine a practical, sober mind, practical ability, the closest contact with the masses and ability to guide them, but also a pledge that ever-growing masses of proletarians will march forward to the complete victory of the communist revolution.

Collected Works Volume 29
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## 2. The Third,
  Communist International











The Third, Communist International



SPEECHES ON GRAMOPHONE RECORDS
V. I. Lenin
2
The Third, Communist International

Recorded: End of March 1919; 
First Published: Published according to the gramophone records; Organization of these speeches was accomplished by Tsentropechat the central agency of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee for the Supply and Distribution of Periodicals between 1919 and 1921. 13 of Lenin’s speeches were recorded.
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, pages 240-241
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002; Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License.


In March of this year of 1919, an international congress of Communists was held in Moscow. This congress founded the Third, Communist International, an association of the workers of the whole world who are striving to establish Soviet power in all countries.
The First International, founded by Marx, existed from 1864 to 1872. The defeat of the heroic workers of Paris-of the celebrated Paris Commune-marked the end of this International. It is unforgettable, it will remain for ever in the history of the workers' struggle for their emancipation. It laid the foundation of that edifice of the world socialist republic which it is now our good fortune to be building.
The Second International existed from 1889 to 1914, up to the war. This was the period of the most calm and peaceful development of capitalism, a period without great revolutions. During this period the working-class movement gained strength and matured in a number of countries. But the workers' leaders in most of the parties had become accustomed to peaceful conditions and had lost the ability to wage a revolutionary struggle. When, in 1914, there began the war, that drenched the earth with blood for four years, the war between the capitalists over the division of profits, the war for supremacy over small and weak nations, these leaders deserted to the side of their respective governments. They betrayed the workers, they helped to prolong the slaughter, they became enemies of socialism, they went over to the side of the capitalists.
The masses of workers turned their backs on these traitors to socialism. All over the world there was a turn towards the revolutionary struggle. The war proved that capitalism was doomed. A new system is coming to take its place. The old word socialism had been desecrated by the traitors to socialism.
Today, the workers who have remained loyal to the cause of throwing off the yoke of capital call themselves Communists. All over the world the association of Communists is growing. In a number of countries Soviet power has already triumphed. Soon we shall see the victory of communism throughout the world; we shall see the foundation of the World Federative Republic of Soviets.

Collected Works Volume 29
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## 3. Communication on
  the Wireless Negotiations With Bela Run











Communication On The Wireless Negotiations
With Béla Kun



SPEECHES ON GRAMOPHONE RECORDS
V. I. Lenin
3
Communication On The Wireless Negotiations With Béla Kun

Recorded: End of March 1919; 
First Published: Published according to the gramophone records; Organization of these speeches was accomplished by Tsentropechat the central agency of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee for the Supply and Distribution of Periodicals between 1919 and 1921. 13 of Lenin’s speeches were recorded.
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, pages 242-243
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002; Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License.

I knew Comrade Béla Kun very well when he was
    still a prisoner of war in Russia; and he visited me many times to
    discuss communism and the communist revolution. Therefore, when
    news of the Hungarian communist revolution was received, and in a
    communication signed by Comrade Béla Kun at that, we wanted
    to speak to him and ascertain exactly how the revolution
    stood. The first communication we received about it gave us some
    grounds for fearing that, perhaps, the so-called socialists,
    traitor-socialists, had resorted to some deception, had got round
    the Communists, the more so that the latter were in prison. And
    so, the day after the first communication about the Hungarian
    revolution was received, I sent a wireless message to Budapest,
    asking Béla Kun to come to the apparatus, and I put a number
    of questions to him of such a nature as to enable me to make sure
    that it was really he who was speaking. I asked him what real
    guarantees there were for the character of the government and for
    its actual policy. Comrade Béla Kun’s reply was quite
    satisfactory and dispelled all our doubts. It appears that the
    Left Socialists had visited Béla Kun in prison to consult him
    about forming a government. And it was only these Left Socialists,
    who sympathised with the Communists, and also people from the
    Centre who formed the new government, while the Right Socialists,
    the traitorsocialists, the irreconcilables and incorrigibles, so
    to speak, left the Party, and not a single worker followed
    them. Later communications showed that the policy of the Hungarian
    Government was most firm and so Communist in trend “that
  while we began with workers” control of industry and
    only gradually began to socialise industry, Béla Kun, with
    his prestige, his conviction that he was backed by vast masses,
    could at once pass a law which converted all the industrial
    undertakings in Hungary that were run on capitalist lines into
    public property. Two days later we became fully convinced that the
    Hungarian revolution had at once, with extraordinary rapidity,
    taken the communist road. The bourgeoisie voluntarily surrendered
    power to the Communists of Hungary. The bourgeoisie demonstrated
    to the whole world that when a grave crisis supervenes, when the
    nation is in danger, the bourgeoisie is unable to govern. And
    there is only one government that is really a popular government,
    a government that is really beloved of the people-the government
    of the Soviets of Workers’, Soldiers’ and
    Peasants’ Deputies.
Long live Soviet power in Hungary!

Collected Works Volume 29
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## 4. An Appeal to the
  Red Army











An Appeal to the Red Army



SPEECHES ON GRAMOPHONE RECORDS
V. I. Lenin
4
An Appeal to the Red Army


Recorded: End of March 1919; 
First Published: Published according to the gramophone records; Organization of these speeches was accomplished by Tsentropechat the central agency of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee for the Supply and Distribution of Periodicals between 1919 and 1921. 13 of Lenin’s speeches were recorded.
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, pages 244-245
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002; Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License.

Comrades, Red Army men! The capitalists of Britain, America and France are waging war against Russia. They are taking revenge on the Soviet workers’ and peasants’ republic for having overthrown the power of the landowners and capitalists and thereby set an example to all the nations of the globe. The capitalists of Britain, France and America are helping with money and munitions the Russian landowners who are bringing troops from Siberia, the Don and North Caucasus against Soviet power for the purpose of restoring the rule of the tsar and the power of the landowners and capitalists. But this will not happen. The Red Army has closed its ranks, has risen up and driven the landowners’ troops and whiteguard officers from the Volga, has recaptured Riga and almost the whole of the Ukraine, and is marching towards Odessa and Rostov. A little more effort, a few more months of fighting the enemy, and victory will be ours. The Red Army is strong because it is consciously and unitedly marching into battle for the peasants’ land, for the rule of the workers and peasants, for Soviet power.
The Red Army is invincible because it has united millions of working peasants with the workers who have now learned to fight, have acquired comradely discipline, who do not lose heart, who become steeled after slight reverses, and are more and more boldly marching against the enemy, convinced he will soon be defeated.

      Comrades, Red Army men! The alliance of the workers and peasants
      of the Red Army is firm, close and insoluble.

      The kulaks, the very rich peasants, are trying to foment revolts
      against Soviet power, but they constitute an insignificant
      minority. They rarely succeed in fooling the peasants, and then
      not for long. The peasants know that only in alliance with the
      workers can they vanquish the landowners. Sometimes, in the
      rural districts people call themselves Communists who are
      actually the worst enemies of the working people, bullies who
      hang on to the authorities in pursuit of their own selfish aims,
      and who resort to deception, commit acts of injustice and wrong
      the middle peasant. The workers’ and peasants’
      government has firmly decided to fight against these people and
      clear them out of the countryside. The middle peasants are not
      enemies but friends of the workers, friends of Soviet
      power. The class-conscious workers and genuine Soviet people
      treat the middle peasants as comrades. The middle peasants do
      not exploit the labour of others, they do not grow rich at other
      people’s expense, as the kulaks do; the middle peasants
      work themselves, they live by their own labour. The Soviet
      government will crush the kulaks, will comb out of the villages
      those who treat the middle peasants unjustly and, come what may,
      will pursue the policy of alliance between the workers and all
      the working peasants-both poor and middle peasants.
This alliance is growing all over the world. The revolution is drawing nigh, it is everywhere maturing. A few days ago it was victorious in Hungary. In Hungary, Soviet power, workers’ government, has been established. This is what all nations will inevitably do.
Comrades, Red Army men! Be staunch, firm and united. March boldly forward against the enemy. Victory will be ours. The power of the landowners and the capitalists, broken in Russia, will be defeated throughout the world.
March 29

Collected Works Volume 29
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## 5. The Middle
    Peasants











The Middle Peasants



SPEECHES ON GRAMOPHONE RECORDS
V. I. Lenin
5
The Middle Peasants


Recorded: End of March 1919; 
First Published: Published according to the gramophone records; Organization of these speeches was accomplished by Tsentropechat the central agency of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee for the Supply and Distribution of Periodicals between 1919 and 1921. 13 of Lenin’s speeches were recorded.
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, pages 246-247
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002; Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License.

The most important question now confronting the Communist Party, the question on which most attention was concentrated at the last Party Congress, is that of the middle peasants.
Naturally, the first question usually asked is, what is a middle peasant?
Naturally, Party comrades have often related how they have been asked this question in the villages. The middle peasant, we say in reply, is a peasant who does not exploit the labour of others, who does not live on the labour of others, who does not take the fruits of other people's labour in any shape or form, but works himself, and lives by his own labour.
Under capitalism there were fewer peasants of this typo than there are now, because the majority of the peasants were in the ranks of the impoverished, and only an insignificant minority, then, as now, were in the ranks of the kulaks, the exploiters, the rich peasants.
The middle peasants have been increasing in number since the private ownership of land was abolished, and the Soviet government has firmly resolved at all costs to etablish relations of complete peace and harmony with them. It goes without saying that the middle peasant cannot immediately accept socialism, because he clings firmly to what he is accustomed to, he is cautious about all innovations, subjects what he is offered to a factual, practical test and does not decide to change his way of life until he is convinced that the change is necessary.
It is precisely for this reason that we must know, remember and put into practice the rule that when Communist workers go into rural districts they must try to establish comradely relations with the middle peasants, it is their duty to establish these comradely relations with them; they must remember that working peasants who do not exploit the labour of others are the comrades of the urban workers and that we can and must establish with them a voluntary alliance inspired by sincerity and confidence. Every measure proposed by the communist government must be regarded merely as advice, as a suggestion to the middle peasants, as an invitation to them to accept the new order.
Only by co-operation in the work of testing these measures in practice, finding out in what way they are mistaken, eliminating possible errors and achieving agreement with the middle peasant-only by such co-operation can the alliance between the workers and the peasants be ensured. This alliance is the main strength and the bulwark of Soviet power; this alliance is a pledge that socialist transformation will be successful, victory over capital will be achieved and exploitation in all its forms will be abolished.

Collected Works Volume 29
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## 6. What Is Soviet
    Power?











What Is Soviet Power?



SPEECHES ON GRAMOPHONE RECORDS
V. I. Lenin
6
What Is Soviet Power?


Recorded: End of March 1919; 
First Published: Published according to the gramophone records; Organization of these speeches was accomplished by Tsentropechat the central agency of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee for the Supply and Distribution of Periodicals between 1919 and 1921. 13 of Lenin’s speeches were recorded.
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, pages 248-249
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002; Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License.

What is Soviet power? What is the essence of this new power, which people in most countries still will not, or cannot, understand? The nature of this power, which is attracting larger and larger numbers of workers in every country, is the following: in the past the country was, in one way or another, governed by the rich, or by the capitalists, but now, for the first time, the country is being governed by the classes, and moreover, by the masses of those classes, which capitalism formerly oppressed. Even in the most democratic and freest republics, as long as capital rules and the land remains private property, the government will always be in the hands of a small minority, nine-tenths of which consist of capitalists, or rich men.
In this country, in Russia, for the first time in the world history, the government of the country is so organised that only the workers and the working peasants, to the exclusion of the exploiters, constitute those mass organisations known as Soviets, and these Soviets wield all state power. That is why, in spite of the slander that the representatives of the bourgeoisie in all countries spread about Russia, the word "Soviet" has now become not only intelligible but popular all over the world, has become the favourite word of the workers, and of all working people. And that is why, notwithstanding all the persecution to which the adherents of communism in the different countries are subjected, Soviet power must necessarily, inevitably, and in the not distant future, triumph all over the world.
We know very well that there are still many defects in the
    organisation of Soviet power in this country. Soviet

    power is not a miracle-working talisman. It does not, overnight,
    heal all the evils of the past- illiteracy, lack of culture, the
    consequences of a barbarous war, the aftermath of predatory
    capitalism. But it does pave the way to socialism. It gives those
    who were formerly oppressed the chance to straighten their backs
    and to an ever-increasing degree to take the whole government of
    the country, the whole administration of the economy, the whole
    management of production, into their own hands.
Soviet power is the road to socialism that was discovered by the masses of the working people, and that is why it is the true road, that is why it is invincible.

Collected Works Volume 29
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## 7. How the Working
    People Can Be Saved From the Oppression of the
    Landowners and Capitalists For Ever











How The Working People Can Be Saved From The Oppression Of The Landowners And Capitalists For Ever



SPEECHES ON GRAMOPHONE RECORDS
V. I. Lenin
7
How The Working People Can Be Saved
From The Oppression Of The Landowners
And Capitalists For Ever


Recorded: End of March 1919; 
First Published: Published according to the gramophone records; Organization of these speeches was accomplished by Tsentropechat the central agency of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee for the Supply and Distribution of Periodicals between 1919 and 1921. 13 of Lenin’s speeches were recorded.
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, pages 250-251
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002; Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License.

The enemies of the working people, the landowners and capitalists say that the workers and peasants cannot live without them. "If it were not for us," they say, "there would be nobody to maintain order, to give out work, and to compel people to work. If it were not for us everything would collapse, and the state would fall to pieces. We have been driven away, but chaos will bring us back again." But this sort of talk by the landowners and capitalists will not confuse, intimidate, or deceive the workers and peasants. An army needs the strictest discipline; nevertheless the class-conscious workers succeeded in uniting the peasants, succeeded in taking the old tsarist officers into their service, succeeded in building a victorious army.
The Red Army established unprecedentedly firm discipline-not by means of the lash, but based on the intelligence, loyalty and devotion of the workers and peasants themselves.
And so, to save the working people from the yoke of the landowners and capitalists for ever, to save them from the restoration of their power, it is necessary to build up a great Red Army of Labour. That army will be invincible if it is cemented by labour discipline. The workers and peasants must and will prove that they can properly distribute labour, establish devoted discipline and ensure loyalty in working for the common good, and can do it themselves, without the landowners and in spite of them, without the capitalists and in spite of them.
Labour discipline, enthusiasm for work, readiness for self-sacrifice, close alliance between the peasants and the workers-this is what will save the working people from the oppression of the landowners and capitalists for ever.

Collected Works Volume 29
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## 8. Anti-Jewish
    Pogroms











Anti-Jewish Pogroms



SPEECHES ON GRAMOPHONE RECORDS
V. I. Lenin
8
Anti-Jewish Pogroms


Recorded: End of March 1919; 
First Published: Published according to the gramophone records; Organization of these speeches was accomplished by Tsentropechat the central agency of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee for the Supply and Distribution of Periodicals between 1919 and 1921. 13 of Lenin’s speeches were recorded.
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, pages 252-253
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002; Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License.

Anti-Semitism means spreading enmity towards the Jews. When the accursed tsarist monarchy was living its last days it tried to incite ignorant workers and peasants against the Jews. The tsarist police, in alliance with the landowners and the capitalists, organised pogroms against the Jews. The landowners and capitalists tried to divert the hatred of the workers and peasants who were tortured by want against the Jews. In other countries, too, we often see the capitalists fomenting hatred against the Jews in order to blind the workers, to divert their attention from the real enemy of the working people, capital. Hatred towards the Jews persists only in those countries where slavery to the landowners and capitalists has created abysmal ignorance among the workers and peasants. Only the most ignorant and downtrodden people can believe the lies and slander that are spread about the Jews. This is a survival of ancient feudal times, when the priests burned heretics at the stake, when the peasants lived in slavery, and when the people were crushed and inarticulate. This ancient, feudal ignorance is passing away; the eyes of the people are being opened.
It is not the Jews who are the enemies of the working people. The enemies of the workers are the capitalists of all countries. Among the Jews there are working people, and they form the majority. They are our brothers, who, like us, are oppressed by capital; they are our comrades in the struggle for socialism. Among the Jews there are kulaks, exploiters and capitalists, just as there are among the Russians, and among people of all nations. The capitalists strive to sow and foment hatred between workers of different faiths, different nations and different races. Those who do not work are kept in power by the power and strength of capital. Rich Jews, like rich Russians, and the rich in all countries, are in alliance to oppress, crush, rob and disunite the workers.
Shame on accursed tsarism which tortured and persecuted the Jews. Shame on those who foment hatred towards the Jews, who foment hatred towards other nations.
Long live the fraternal trust and fighting alliance of the workers of all nations in the struggle to overthrow capital.

Collected Works Volume 29
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## Telephone Message to the
  all-Russia Extraordinary Commission











Telephone Message To The All-Russia Extraordinary Commission April 1, 1919



V. I. Lenin
Telephone Message To The All-Russia Extraordinary Commission
April 1, 1919


Call placed: 1 April, 1919
First Published: Izvestia No. 71, April 2, 1919; Published according to the Izvestia text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, page 254
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


The All-Russia Extraordinary Commission reports that information has been received from Petrograd to the effect that agents of Koichak, Denikin and the Allies made an attempt to blow up the Petrograd water main. In the cellars, explosives and an infernal machine were found, which a special unit took away to destroy, but as a result of a premature explosion the commander of the unit was killed and ton Red Army men were wounded.
In some places attempts are being made to blow up bridges and to dislocate railway traffic.
Attempts are being made to destroy the permanent way and cut off Red Moscow and Petrograd from food supplies.
The Socialist-Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks are taking an active part in fomenting strikes and in calling for the overthrow of Soviet power.
In view of this information, the Council of Defence orders you to take the most urgent measures to suppress every attempt to cause explosions, to wreck railways and to foment strikes.
The Council of Defence orders you to call upon all Extraordinary Commission workers to be vigilant, and also orders you to inform the Council of Defence of all measures you take.
V. Ulyanov (Lenin),
Chairman of the Council of Defence

Collected Works Volume 29
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 







==========

## Extraordinary Plenary
  Meeting of the Moscow Soviet of Workers’ and Red
  army Deputies











Extraordinary Plenary Meeting Of The Moscow Soviet Of Workers’ And Red Army Deputies April 3, 1919



V. I. Lenin
Extraordinary Plenary Meeting
Of The Moscow Soviet Of Workers’ And Red Army Deputies
April 3, 1919
 


Delivered: 3 April, 1919
First Published: Part I: Pravda Nos. 76 and 77, April 9 and 10, 1919; Published according to the verbatim report; Part 2: Pravda No. 73, April 4, 1919; Published according to the Pravda text, verified with the manuscriptSource: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, pages 255-274
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002.  Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


I
Report On The Domestic And Foreign Situation
Of The Soviet Republic
Comrades, I must commence my report on the domestic and foreign situation of the Soviet Republic by stating that in the coming few months, with the approach of spring, we shall again be faced with an extremely grave situation. I think that the conditions both of the Civil War and of the war against the Entente—I will deal with them when I speak of the international situation—enable us to say, even if we are very cautious, that the half-year, the middle of which we have now reached, will be the last difficult half year; the French and British capitalists will not be strong enough to launch another attack similar to the one they are now developing in full. On the other hand, all our Red Army’s achievements in the Ukraine and the Don, which we are able to consolidate, will greatly alleviate our internal situation, will provide grain and coal, food and fuel. For the time being, however, while the struggle is still going on and we are encountering enormous difficulties in collecting grain in the Ukraine with the roads now impassable owing to the spring thaw, the situation is extremely grave.
We have said more than once that the whole strength of Soviet power rests on the confidence and class-consciousness of the workers. We have more than once demonstrated that numerous as may be the enemies that surround us now, and the spies that the Entente sends into this country and who are assisted by people who are actually helping the whiteguards, probably without realising it, we have never for a moment shut our eyes to the fact that every word uttered here will be misinterpreted, that the agents of the whiteguards will carefully take note of our admissions. But we say: let them! We shall benefit far more from the straightforward and candid truth, because we are sure that although this truth is harsh, nevertheless, if it is clearly heard, every class-conscious worker, every working peasant, will draw the only correct conclusion that can be drawn from it.
In the long run, they will draw from it the only possible conclusion that our cause is close to victory all over the world, and desperately hard as the conditions of the masses of the working people may be, weary, starving and exhausted as they are by four years of imperialist war and another two years of the most frightful Civil War—grave and acute though the situation may be at the present time, we have the most serious chances of gaining victory not only in Russia, but all over the world. That is why, although the next four or five months will be very severe, we shall once again succeed in overcoming our difficulties, and thus prove to our enemies, prove to the combined capitalists of the whole world, that their attack on Russia must fail.
At the present moment they are undoubtedly operating according to a preconceived plan, making attempts in the West and the East to crush us by force of arms so as to save Krasnov’s doomed gangs. Yesterday we received news of the capture of Mariupol. Thus, Rostov is caught in a half-circle. In short, the Entente countries are exerting all their efforts to rescue Krasnov and to strike us a severe blow this very spring. They are undoubtedly operating in agreement with Hindenburg. A comrade from Latvia told us about the conditions under which our Lettish comrades are living. The greater part of the country has suffered misfortunes such as Moscow workers cannot conceive—the misfortunes of invasion and the repeated devastation of the countryside by hordes of moving troops. The Germans are now marching on Dvinsk in order to cut off Riga. In the North they are being assisted by the Estonian whiteguards using money sent by Britain, and with the aid of volunteers sent by the Swedes and Danes, who are entirely in the pay of the multimillionaires of Britain, France and America. They are operating according to a common plan which is quite clear to us; they are taking advantage of the fact that by their bloody sup pressions in Germany they have weakened the movement of the Spartacists and revolutionaries. And although they real ise that they are at their last gasp, they, nevertheless, find the situation sufficiently opportune to place some troops at Hindenburg’s disposal, to step up the attack on tormented and tortured Latvia from the west, and to threaten us. On the other band, Kolchak has achieved a series of victories in the east, and is thus paving the way for the last and most decisive onslaught of the Entente countries.
And as has always been the case, they are not confining
      themselves to an attack from without, they are operating inside
      this country by means of plots, rebellions, attempts at
      bomb-throwing and blowing up the water main in petrograd, which
      you read about in the newspapers, attempts to dismantle railway
      lines, such as those made not far from Samara, which is now the
      main line that supplies us with grain from the East. Part of
      this grain we lost; it was cap tured by Koichak. Attempts were
      made to damage the permanent way of the Kursk-Kharkov Railway,
      on which we were beginning to transport the coal the Red Army
      had recaptured in the Donets Basin. When all this is taken to
      gether, it becomes clear that the Entente countries, the French
      imperialists and multimillionaires, are making their last
      attempt to crush Soviet power by force of arms. 

    

      And the Mensheviks and the Right arid Loft Socialist
      Revolutionaries still fail to realise that the struggle is
      drawing to a close and that we are engaged in a most despe rate
      and relentless war; they continue to advocate either strikes or
      the cessation of the Civil War, which in any case is helping the
      whiteguards. I shall speak about them later on; at present I
      merely want to show that the situation i really grave. 

    

      This spring all the forces of the international capitalists want
      to fight the last battle with us. Fortunately, they are the
      forces of a decrepit, dying, hopelessly sick old
      man—international capitalism. But be that as it may, very
      big military forces have been mustered against us; Koichak, in
      particular, is now bringing up all his reserves against us, his
      gangs of volunteer whiteguards are of imposing dimensions, and
      he is receiving the assistance of Britain and America in the
      form of vast quantities of arms and munitions. That is why the
      present situation demands a clear realisation of the
      difficulties that face the Soviet Republic.
We are convinced that the masses of the working people
    understand what the war is about. They know that the next few
    months will decide the fate of our revolution, and to a large
    extent of the world revolution. They understand that the attempts
    of the capitalists to crush Soviet Russia have become so fierce,
    that they are attacking us so furiously, because they realise that
    in their own countries they are faced by the same enemy—the
    Bolshevik movement. The growth of the movement in those countries
    is equally rapid and irresistible.
Our difficulties in food and transport make our position
    particularly grave and compel us again and again to appeal for the
    aid of all class-conscious workers. For four years the transport
    system was gradually ruined by the imperialist war, and in Russia,
    a backward country, traces of this have not yet been removed, and
    it will take many months, if not years, of persevering effort to
    remove them. But it is impossible to work without fuel. Only
    lately have we begun to receive coal from the Donets Basin. You
    know that the British have robbed us of our Baku oil
    supplies. They have captured many of the ships in the Caspian Sea,
    they have occupied Grozny and are preventing us from using the
    oil. Neither industry nor the railways can work without fuel. We
    must exert our efforts to the utmost.
Once again we say to all our comrades that we must enlist
    larger forces for work on food supplies and transport. The
    transport situation is such that in Eastern Russia, beyond the
    Volga, we have accumulated millions of poods of grain10 to 20
    million poods have already been acquired and are in
    store—but cannot transport it. We lost part of this grain as
    Kolchak’s troops advanced, captured Ufa and compelled our
    forces to retreat. This loss is a very severe one, and we feel it
    very much. Transport work calls for the utmost exertion of effort;
    at every meeting the workers should ask themselves how they can
    help to improve transport. Cannot women do the work here in place
    of the men, and the men he   sent either to the repair shops or to
    help the railwaymen? The workers are the best judges of what
    should be done, because they know which men to put on which
    job. Practical people know best, and they must devise new ways and
    means of assisting. We hope, we are convinced, that our
    Commissariat of Railways, in conjunction with the Commissariat of
    Food, have already achieved a certain degree of success. No matter
    what lies our enemies may spread, this goods transport month
    during which passenger traffic is suspended has already brought
    about an improvement; but ten times more effort must be exerted to
    achieve greater success. Some figures were published in
    yesterday’s issue of Izvestia, the most important of which I
    will here quote. At the beginning of March, an average of 118
    carloads of food of which 25 consisted of grain, were arriving in
    Moscow every day. By the end of March, the average daily arrivals
    had increased to 209 carloads of food, of which 47 contained
    grain. This is an almost twofold increase. It proves that the
    stern measure of suspending passenger traffic is correct and
    justified, and shows that we have assisted the starving population
    of Moscow, Petrograd and of the whole industrial region. But this
    is by no means all that can be done. And later, when the roads
    become quite impassable, we shall be faced with a much more
    difficult and hungry time. That is why we say that in this field
    the most unrelaxing, energetic efforts must be made. Mainly, we
    must rely upon the masses of the workers and not count upon the
    intellectuals who, although they have come to work for us, have a
    large number of useless people among them.
We must also reckon with the situation in the Ukraine. During
    the year, when the entire Ukraine was occupied by the Germans, and
    the whole of the Don region was in a sorry state, we suffered a
    great deal. Now, however, our position is improving. In the
    Ukraine there are 258 million poods of grain, of which 100 million
    have already been earmarked for delivery. But the whole trouble is
    that the Ukrainian peasants have been frightfully intimidated by
    the Germans and by German looting. I have heard that the peasants
    there have been so intimidated by the Germans that although they
    know what the position of the Soviet Power is here, they still
    hesitate to seize the landed estates.

    Meanwhile, the time is approaching for spring field work; but
    the Ukrainian peasants have suffered the horrors of German looting
    to such an extent that to this day they are extremely
    irresolute. I must say that guerrilla warfare has been going on
    there all the time. In the South it is still going on. There are
    no regular troops there, owing to which complete victory has not
    yet been won. We have moved our regular troops in, but this is not
    enough. We must greatly intensify our efforts, and that is why I
    insist that at every meeting of workers the question of food
    supplies and the question of transport definitely must be
    raised. In the very near future we have to decide the question of
    how to relieve the situation, and how to utilise what is now
    available.
We must bear firmly in mind that only with the aid of the
    forces of the working class can we stand firmly on our feet, and
    achieve our brilliant victories; and that is why we must send the
    best forces of the proletariat to the front. We must send leading
    functionaries to the front and if some office suffers as a result
    of it, we shall, of course, sustain some loss, but it will not be
    fatal. If there is a shortage of workers in the army, however,
    that will certainly be fatal. A defect in our army up to now has
    been that it lacks cohesion and is not sufficiently organised; all
    help in this sphere must come from the workers, and on them we
    must place all our hopes. Only those workers who have gone through
    the whole struggle, who can relate all their experiences and all
    they have suffered can influence the army and turn the peasants
    into the politically-conscious fighters that we need.
That is why we have come here again and decided to call you all
    together to inform you of the serious state of our transport
    system, due to the general grave position that we are in. We
    stress the importance of our holding out for another three or four
    months, and that only then will complete victory be ours. But for
    this we need forces. Where are these forces to be found? Is it not
    clear that only the workers, those who have borne the whole burden
    of the chaos, bore the whole burden when the struggle changed to
    whiteguard invasions and thereby acquired great
    experience—is it not clear that only these workers, only
    these vanguard contingents, can help us? We know perfectly well
    that they are terribly exhausted, that they are worn out by the
    superhuman efforts they are called upon to make. We know all this,
    but nevertheless, we now say to you here that we must strain every
    nerve, we must concentrate our minds on rallying all forces to
    achieve a brilliant victory for the revolution. We are now
    entering the most difficult, the most trying period, and we must
    act like revolutionaries. We must recruit our forces from the
    masses of the working people.
Yesterday a meeting was held of the influential leaders f the
    trade union movement—both the Moscow and the national
    leaders. And at this meeting everybody agreed that it is
    necessary, at the present moment, to enlist for this work the
    middle stratum of workers, whom everybody has up to now regarded
    as being incapable of this type of work. Now, however, it is
    perfectly clear that we must send this middle stratum to relieve
    our exhausted functionaries. Before doing so, however, those who
    have been engaged in this work up to now must instruct the
    newcomers. We must husband our forces, and for a time we must send
    the middle stratum of workers to take the place of our leading
    functionaries. We must send tens of thousands of such workers into
    the field. We must not be afraid that they will not do the work as
    well as the experienced functionaries did. If we put them into
    responsible positions, then the mistakes that they may make at
    first will not have serious consequences. The important thing for
    us is to put them in the foremost responsible posts.There they
    will be able to exert an effort and develop their activities,
    because they will be able to operate confidently, they will know
    that they are backed by experienced leading workers who have
    already had a year’s experience of work in Russia. They will
    know that at critical moments these more experienced comrades will
    come to their aid and ease their task. This new stratum of workers
    will be able to do their work well if the advanced workers promote
    them to leading positions. We can do this without causing any
    damage, because this large stratum has a proletarian instinct, a
    proletarian understanding and sense of duty. We may rely upon it,
    and we may say that it will help us in a time of difficulty. It is
    a specific feature of Russia that in every critical situation she
    has always been able to find masses of people who could be moved
    forward, who Were a reserve in which she could find new forces
    when the old forces began to grow thin. Yes, the advanced workers
    are overtired, and the next contingent will not do the work so
    well; but that is not disastrous, we shall not suffer from it, we
    shall not ruin our cause if we send these new forces into the
    field, guide them, and not allow our cause to die.
Under these circumstances I must speak about the
    Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks. Lately, the Soviet
    government has begun to close down their newspapers and to arrest
    them. Some worker comrades, seeing this, say: “So those
    Bolsheviks”—I among that number—“who
    induced us to make certain concessions to the petty-bourgeois
    democrats were wrong. What was the use of making these concessions
    if we must now close down their newspapers and arrest them? Is
    this consistency?”
My answer is this. In a country like Russia, where agriculture
    is concentrated in the hands of the petty-bourgeois elements, we
    cannot hold out for long without the support of this
    petty-bourgeois stratum. At the present time, this stratum is
    marching towards the goal not by a straight road, but in
    zigzags. If I am pursuing an enemy who is retreating not by a
    straight road but in zigzags, then I, too, must proceed in zigzags
    in order to overtake him. To speak in the language of politics,
    the petty-bourgeois masses stand between labour and capital, and
    these masses must be beaten a hundred times to make them
    understand that the alternative is either the dictatorship of the
    bourgeoisie or the dictatorship of the working class. Those who
    are aware of this, understand the present situation. The workers
    understand it. Experience and a whole series of observations have
    taught them that only one or the other of these two systems of
    government is possible—either the absolute power of the
    working class, or the absolute power of the
    bourgeoisie—there can be no middle, or third, course. The
    working class learned this long ago from its strike and
    revolutionary struggle. The petty bourgeoisie cannot learn this at
    once; hundreds of everyday facts have failed to teach and accustom
    the petty bourgeoisie to this idea, and they continue to dream of
    uniting with the big bourgeoisie; for they cannot understand that
    either the dictatorship of the proletariat or the dictatorship of
    the bourgeoisie is inevitable.
Experience of Koichak taught the Socialist-Revolutionaries and
    Mensheviks that it was no accident that in the midst of a furious
    and desperate struggle conducted with foreign assistance,
    democracy had nothing to give. Two forces are operating upon
    them—and there are no other forces but these—either
    the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie, or the power and complete
    dictatorship of the working class; no middle course was ever of
    any use, nothing came of it anywhere. Nor did anything come of the
    Constituent Assembly. This the Socialist-Revolutionaries and
    Menshievjks and the petty bourgeoisie learned from their own
    experience.
When the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks said:
    “We shall abandon Koichak and all those who support him and
    the intervention of the Entente,” it was not only
    hypocrisy. It was not only a political ruse, although some of
    these people did think they would fool the Bolsheviks and get an
    opportunity to play the old game again. We saw through this ruse
    arid, of course, took measures against it. But when the Mensheviks
    and Socialist-Revolutionaries said this, it was not only hypocrisy
    and cunning; many of them did it in good faith. Among
    them there is not only the group of writers, but also a
    petty-bourgeois stratum of technicians, engineers, and so
    forth. When the Mensheviks announced that they were opposed to the
    intervention of the Entente, we Invited them to work with us, and
    they willingly accepted our invitation. But now we are quite right
    in persecuting them, persecuting the petty-bourgeois stratum,
    because this stratum is extremely obtuse. This was revealed in the
    Kerensky period and also by their present conduct. When they came
    to work for us they said they had abandoned politics, and would
    work willingly. We told them in reply that we needed Menshevik
    officials, because they were not embezzlers of state funds, and
    not Black Hundreds who worm their way into our ranks, call
    themselves Communists and do us mischief. If these people believe
    in the Constituent Assembly we tell them to go on believing, not
    only in the Constituent Assembly, but even in God, but do their
    work properly and keep out of politics. An increasing number of
    them realise that they have disgraced themselves in politics. They
    howled that Soviet power was a monstrous invention, possible only
    in barbarous Russia. They said that the dissolution of the
    Constituent Assembly was an act by barbarians whom tsarism had
    produced. And this was repeated in Europe. Now news comes from
    Europe that Soviet power is coming to take the place of bourgeois
    Constituent Assemblies all over the world. These are lessons that
    are being taught to all intellectuals who come to work for us. We
    now have twice as many civil servants working for us as we had six
    months ago. We have gained by accepting these civil servants who
    do their work better than Black Hundreds. When we invited them to
    come to work for us they said they were afraid of Kolchak, they
    preferred us, but would not help us, they said they would talk
    like pure parliamentarians, just as if they were sitting in a
    Constituent Assembly; and we shouldn’t dare to touch them,
    because they were democrats. But we say to these groups who talk
    about the Constituent Assembly that if they talk like that much
    longer we shall pack them off to Koichak and to
    Georgia. (Applause.) Polemics are started, and the opposition of a
    legal group takes shape. We shall allow no opposition. The
    imperialists of the whole world have got us by the throat, they
    are trying to defeat us by all the force of an armed attack and we
    must fight a life-and-death struggle. If you have come here to
    help us, then do so, but if you are going to publish newspapers
    and incite the workers to strike, and these strikes cause the
    death of our Red Army men at the front, and every day of a strike
    causes tens of thousands of our factory workers to suffer
    privations, pangs of hunger—the pangs which are causing us
    so much concernthen you may be right from the Constituent Assembly
    point of view, but from the standpoint of our struggle and the
    responsibility we bear, you are wrong, you cannot help us, so get
    out, go to Georgia, go to Kolchak, or else you will go to
    prison. And that is what we shall do with them.
Comrades, I hope we shall all unanimously adopt the resolution
    to be submitted to you at the end of the meeting. In it we have
    endeavoured to formulate the necessary instructions, the reasons
    for which I have given in my report.I should now like to deal with
    two questions—the position of the middle peasants, and the
    international situation, which is extremely important.
We discussed the question of the middle peasants at our Party
    Congress and decided on the line our Party should pursue towards
    them. Our Party elected to a responsible posts the post of
    Chairman of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee, a post
    which is all the more responsible for the fact that until recently
    it was occupied by that exceptionally talented organiser Comrade
    Sverdlov, for this post our Party chose Comrade Kalinin, a
    St. Petersburg worker who still has connections with the rural
    districts. There is a report in the newspapers today that a
    certain Comrade Kalinin was assassinated by the
    Socialist-Revolutionaries, but it is not this Kalinin. This shows
    what methods the Socialist-Revolutionaries resort to. Comrade
    Mikhail Ivanovich Kalinin is a middle peasant from Tver Gubernia,
    which he visits every year. The middle peasants constitute the
    largest stratum of the population, and their numbers have
    increased since our revolution owing to the fact that we abolished
    the landed estates. The peasantry benefited by our revolution
    because they seized all the landed estates and, as a consequence,
    the number of middle peasants greatly increased. If there is
    discontent among the middle peasants, we say that it is caused
    from above, and we must ascertain to what extent it is legitimate,
    considering our lack of forces. You, here in the capital, know how
    difficult it is to combat bureaucracy and red tape. We are obliged
    to employ the old civil servants because no other are
    available. They must be re-educated, taught; but this takes
    time. We may appoint new workers to responsible posts in the food
    supply organisations, but there is still an exceedingly large
    number of old civil servants in the State Control Commission, and
    we suffer from red tape and bureaucracy. We are trying to appoint
    new workers to take part in control in the Commissariat of
    Railways and to work side by side with the experts. This is the
    way we are combating bureaucracy and red tape. What effort it
    costs, even here in Moscow! And what is going on in the rural
    districts? There, people who call themselves members of the Party
    are often scoundrels, whose lawlessness is most brazen. And how
    often we have to contend with inexperienced people, who confuse
    the kulaks with the middle peasants! A kulak is one who lives on
    the labour of others, who robs others of the fruits of their
    labour, arid takes advantage of their poverty. The middle peasants
    do not exploit others and are not exploited themselves; they earn
    their livelihood on their small farms by their own labour. Not a
    single socialist in the world ever proposed that the small farmer
    should be deprived of his property. The small farmer will exist
    for many years to come. No decrees will have any effect here; we
    must. wait until the peasants have learned to be guided by
    experience. When they see that collective farming is far better,
    they will come over to our side. We must win their
    confidence. Here we must wage a struggle against abuses. We can
    fight only with the aid of the urban workers, because they have
    close connections with the peasants, and they can supply us with
    hundreds of thousands of functionaries. We know perfectly well
    that no appointments of comrades to high posts, no circulars, and
    no decrees will be of any avail, and that the workers of every
    group, of every circle, must set to work themselves—they
    have special connections with the rural districts.
I said that the first rule for the workers must be—exert
    all efforts to help to prosecute the war. The second rule should
    be—help the middle peasants by keeping in contact with them,
    so as not to allow a single serious enemy attack in the rural
    districts to go unpunished. We must point out that the urban
    workers are bringing assistance to the middle peasants, their
    comrades, because the middle peasants are also workers, but
    workers who have been reared under other conditions, who live
    isolated from each other in rural ignorance from which it is more
    difficult forthem to extricate themselves. And we must know that
    the perseverance of our comrades will establish contacts with the
    middle peasants. An infinitesimal number of peasants will become
    kulaks, will foment rebellion—that we know. That being the
    case, how can we help, how can we win the confidence of the middle
    peasants, how can we help them to combat all sorts of abuses? If
    we have done little in this field it is not our fault, for we had
    to fight the bourgeoisie. This has to be realised. Every worker
    must put the question this way—we, the workers as a whole,
    have contacts with the middle peasants, and we will utilise these
    contacts, and see to it that every middle peasant learns of our
    help not only from the appointment of Comrade Kalinin, but also
    from the fact that he is obtaining some real assistance, if only
    slight, if only in the form of slight but comradely advice. The
    peasants will now appreciate such assistance more than anything
    else. They must be made to understand why the difficulties of our
    position prevent us from giving them the assistance they need,
    assistance in the form of urban culture. The peasants need
    city-made goods, urban culture, and we must give them these
    things. Only when the proletariat gives the peasants this form of
    assistance will they realise that the help of the workers is
    different from that of the exploiters. To help the peasants to
    rise to the urban level—this is the task that every worker
    who has connections with the rural districts must set himself. The
    urban workers must say to themselves that now, in the spring, when
    the food situation has become particularly acute, they must go to
    the peasants’ assistance. And if everybody does even a tiny
    share of this work, we shall see that our edifice has not merely a
    faÃ§ade, and that our cause of safeguarding Soviet power will be
    achieved; for the peasants say: “Long live Soviet power,
    long live the Bolsheviks, but down with the communia!” They
    curse the “communia” that is being organised in a
    stupid way and forced upon them. They are suspicious of everything
    that is forced upon them, and quite rightly so. We must go to the
    middle peasants, we must help them, teach them, but only in the
    field of science and socialism. In the field of agriculture we
    must learn from them. There you have the task that confronts us
    directly.
We now come to the international situation. I say that the
    imperialists of Britain, France and America are making their last
    attempt to bring us to our knees, but they will fail. Difficult as
    the situation is, we can say with confidence that we shall defeat
    international imperialism. We shall defeat the multimillionaires
    of the whole world. There are two reasons why we shall beat
    them. First, because they are WII d beasts who are so absorbed in
    fighting among themselves, that they continue to bite each other
    and fail to see that they are on the brink of a precipice;
    secondly, because Soviet power is growing uninterruptedly all over
    the world. Not a day passes but what we read about this in the
    newspapers. Today we read a message wirelessed from an American
    press office in Lyons to the effect that the Committee of Ten has
    now been reduced, and that there are now only four—Wilson,
    Lloyd George, Clemenceau and Orlando. These are the leaders of
    four nations, but even they cannot reach an agreement. Britain and
    America do not want France to have the coal profits. They are wild
    beasts who have plundered the whole world and are now quarrelling
    over the prey. These four men have shut themselves up in close
    conclave so that, God forbid, rumours may not get about—they
    are all such great democrats—but they themselves set rumours
    afloat by sending out wireless messages about not agreeing to give
    up the coal profits. A French comrade who saw the French prisoners
    of war told me that these prisoners say: “We were told that
    we must go to Russia to fight the Germans because the Germans had
    destroyed our country. But now there is an armistice with Germany;
    whom are we going to fight?” They were not told a word about
    that. The number of people who are asking themselves this question
    is day by day growing into millions and millions. These people
    have experienced the horrors of the imperialist war, and they say:
    “What are we going to fight for?” In the past, the
    Bolsheviks taught them what they were fighting for in underground
    leaflets; but now the imperialists send out wireless messages
    saying that Britain does not agree to allow France to have the
    coal profits. Thus, as a French journalist expressed it, they are
    rushing from room to room in a vain effort to solve the
    problem. They are trying to decide who should get most, and they
    have been fighting each other for five months. These wild beasts
    have lost their self-control, and will go on fighting until
    nothing is left of them except their tails. And we say that our
    international position, which at first was so precarious that they
    could have crushed us in several weeks, is now, when they are
    quarrelling over the loot and are beginning to fly at each
    others’ throats—now our position is much better. They
    promised the soldiers that if they conquered Germany they would
    receive untold benefits. They are arguing whether to compel
    Germany to pay sixty or eighty milliard. This is an extremely
    important question of principle, an extremely interesting one,
    especially if the workers or peasants are told about it. But if
    they go on arguing for long they will not get even one
    milliard. This is what is most interesting!
That is why we say, without exaggerating in the least, not even
    as socialists, but simply and soberly weighing up the forces that
    are mustered against us, that the position of the Soviet Republic
    is improving day by day and hour by hour. Our enemies cannot agree
    among themselves. Five months have passed since they won their
    victory, but they have not concluded peace. Recently, the French
    Chamber again voted hundreds of millions for war
    preparations. They are digging their own grave, and there are
    people over there who will lower them into this grave and pile
    plenty of earth over them. (Applause.) This is because the Soviet
    movement is growing in all countries. And the Hungarian revolution
    has shown that when we say that we are fighting not only for
    ourselves, but for Soviet power all over the world, that blood of
    the Red Army men is being shed not only for the sake of our
    starving comrades, but for the victory of Soviet power all over
    the world—the example of Hungary has shown that this is not
    merely prophecies and promises, but the most actual and immediate
    reality.
In Hungary the revolution was most unusual in form. The
    Hungarian Kerensky, who over there is called Kdrolyi, voluntarily
    resigned, and the Hungarian compromisers—the Mensheviks and
    Socialist-Revolutionaries—realised that they must go to the
    prison where our Hungarian comrade Bela Kun, one of the best of
    the Hungarian Communists, was confined. They went to him and said:
    “You must take power!” (Applause.) The bourgeois
    government resigned. The bourgeois socialists, the Hungarian
    Mensheviks and SocialistRevolutionaries, merged with the Hungarian
    Bolshevik Party and formed a united party and a united
    government. Comrade B61a Kun, our comrade, and a Communist who had
    trodden the whole practical path of Bolshevism in Russia, said to
    me when I spoke to him by wireless: “I have not got a
    majority in the government, but I shall win because the masses are
    behind me, and we are convening a congress of Soviets.” This
    is a revolution of world—historical importance.
Up to now all the European workers have been told lies about
    Soviet Russia. They have been told that there is no government but
    sheer anarchy in Russia. The Bolsheviks are just a crowd of
    quarrelsome people. Recently, the French Minister, Pichon, said
    about Soviet Russia, “It is anarchy, they are violators,
    usurpers!” “Look at Russia,” said the Gerluau
    Mensheviks to their workers. “War, famine and ruin!

    Is this the sort of socialism you want?” And in this way
    they have been intimidating the workers. But Hungary was a example
    of a revolution born in a different way. Hungary will undoubtedly
    have to go through a severe struggle against the
    bourgeoisie—that is inevitable. But the fact is that when
    those beasts, the British and French imperialists, foresaw the
    possibility of revolution in Hungary they wanted to crush it, to
    prevent its birth. The difficulty of our position was that we had
    to give birth to Soviet power in opposition to patriotism. We had
    to break down this patriotism and conclude the Brest peace. This
    was a most desperate, furious and sanguinary operation. The
    bourgeoisie in the neighbouring countries realised who would have
    to govern. Who, if not the Soviet? It was like the old days when
    kings, kinglets and princes saw that their power was waning and
    they said, “We must have a constitution; let the bourgeoisie
    come and govern!” And if the king was feeble, he was given a
    pension, or a sinecure. What the kings or kinglets experienced
    fifty or sixty years ago, the world bourgeoisie is now
    experiencing. When the British and French imperialists submitted
    unprecedented demands to the Hungarian capitalists, the latter
    said, “We cannot fight. The people will not follow us; but
    we are Hungarian patriots and we want to resist. What kind of
    government should we have? A Soviet government.” The
    Hungarian bourgeoisie admitted to the world that it had resigned
    voluntarily and that the only power in the world capable of
    guiding the nation in a moment of crisis was Soviet
    power. (Applause.) That is why the Hungarian revolution, owing to
    its having been born in a totally different way from ours, will
    reveal to the whole world that which was concealed in
    Russia—i.e., that Bolshevism is bound up with a new,
    proletarian, workers’ democracy, that is taking the place of
    the old parliament. Time was when the workers were deceived and
    enslaved by capital. Today, world Soviet power is coming into
    being to take the place of the old bourgeois parliament; and this
    Soviet power has won the sympathies of all workers because it is
    the power of ,the working people, the power of millions who rule
    and govern themselves. Perhaps they govern badly, as we do in
    Russia, but our conditions are exceedingly difficult. In a country
    where the bourgeoisie will not offer such furious resistance, the
    tasks of the Soviet government will be easier; it will he able to
    operate without the violence, without the bloodshed that was
    forced upon us by the Kerenskys and the imperialists. We shall
    reach our goal even by this, more difficult, road. Russia may have
    to make greater sacrifices than other countries; this is not
    surprising considering the chaos that we inherited. Other
    countries will travel by a different, more humane road, but at the
    end of it lies the same Soviet power. That is why the example of
    Hungary is of decisive importance.
People learn from experience. It is impossible to prove merely
    by words that Soviet power is just. The example of Rusia alone was
    not sufficiently intelligible to the workers of all
    countries. They knew that there was a Soviet there, they were all
    in favour of the Soviet, but they were daunted by the horrors of
    the sanguinary struggle. The example of Hungary will be decisive
    for the proletarian masses, for the European proletariat and
    working peasants. In a moment of difficulty there is no one to
    rule the country but the Soviet government.
We remember what old people say, “The children have,
    grown up, they have made their way in the world, now we can
    die.” But we do not intend to die. We are marching to
    victory. But when we see children like Hungary, where Soviet power
    already exists, we say that we have done our work not only on a
    Russian, but also on an international scale; that we shall
    surmount all our desperate difficulties and win full victory, so
    that we shall live to see the day when the world Soviet republic
    will be added to the Russian and the Hungarian Soviet
    Republics. (Applause.)
2
Resolution On The Report On The Domestic And Foreign Situation Of The Soviet Republic

      The Soviet Republic, in the harsh but glorious struggle it is
      waging at the head of all peoples, is entering the most
      difficult period of its existence. The next few months will be
      months of crisis. The Entente is making its last, desperate
      effort to crush us by force of arms. The food situation is
      becoming extremely acute. The transport system is in a serious
      state.
Only the greatest effort can save us. Victory is nevertheless
    fully possible. The revolution in Hungary provides conclusive
    proof of the rapid growth of the Soviet movement in Europe, and of
    its impending victory. We have more allies in all countries than
    we ourselves imagine. To achieve the final victory we must hold on
    for another four or five months, which, perhaps, will be the
    bitterest and most dangerous. And in days like these, reckless men
    and adventurers who call themselves Mensheviks and Left and Right
    Socialist-Revolutionaries, while paying lip-service to Soviet
    power and protesting against the armed intervention of the
    Entente, are fomenting strikes or agitating for concessions to
    freedom to trade or for the cessation of the Civil War, forgetting
    that we have offered peace to all, and that our war is a just,
    legitimate and unavoidable war of defence. Obviously, by this sort
    of agitation they give most active and effective assistance to the
    whiteguards, who are making a last effort to force us into
    disaster. The meeting condemns these masked enemies of the
    people.
It declares to all those Mensheviks and
    Socialist-Revolutionaries who are really prepared to help us in
    our difficult struggle, that the workers’ and
    peasants’ government will grant them full liberty, and
    guarantee them all the rights of citizens of the Soviet
    Republic.
This meeting declares that the task of the Soviet Government at
    the present time is to wage relentless war upon those Mensheviks
    and Socialist-Revolutionaries who, like the literary and political
    groups, Vsegda Vperyod and Dyelo
    Naroda, are actually impeding our struggle and are the
    allies of our inveterate enemies. This meeting calls upon all
    working-class organisations, all proletarians, and all working
    peasants to exert every effort to repel the enemies of Soviet
    power, to defend that power and to improve the food supply and
    transport systems.
For this purpose, this meeting deems it necessary:
(1) To enlist members of the middle section—i.e., people
    who are less experienced than the advanced workers and
    peasants—to replace the weary advanced section.
(2) To engage still further contingents of the advanced and
    other sections of workers on food supplies, transport, and in the
    army.
(3) To enlist the largest possible number of politically
    conscious workers and peasants to work at the People’s
    Commissariat of Railways and at the State Control Commission, in
    order to improve the functioning of these bodies and to eliminate
    bureaucracy and red tape.
(4) To transfer the largest possible number of people from the
    starving cities to agricultural work in the rural
    districts—to vegetable gardens, to the Ukraine, to the Don
    region, and so forth, so as to increase the output of grain and
    other agricultural produce.
(5) To exert all efforts to help the middle peasants, to put a
    stop to the abuses from which they suffer so often, and to render
    them comradely assistance. Those Soviet officials who fail to
    understand this policy—which is the only correct
    policy—or who are unable to pursue it, must be immediately
    dismissed.
(6) The task that confronts everybody at the present time is to
    combat all signs of weariness, faint-heartedness and
    vacillation. We must imbue all hearts with courage and firmness,
    increase political consciousness, and strengthen comradely
    discipline.
The working class and the peasantry of Russia have borne
    incredible burdens. During the past few months their sufferings
    have been more acute than ever. But this meeting declares that the
    will of the workers is not broken, that the working class is still
    at its post, that it is convinced that it will overcome all
    difficulties, and that it will maintain at all costs the victory
    of the Soviet Socialist Republic in Russia, and throughout the
    world.

Collected Works Volume 29
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 







==========

## Letter to the Petroghad Workers on aid For the Eastern Front











Letter to the Petrograd Workers on Aid for the Eastern Front



V. I. Lenin
Letter To The Petrograd Workers
On Aid For The Eastern Front


Written: 10 April, 1919
First Published: Petrograclskaya Pravda No. 81, April 12, 1919; Published according to the newspaper text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, page 275
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002.  Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


To the Petrograd workers
Comrades, the situation on the Eastern Front has become
    extremely grave. Today, Koichak captured the Votkinsk Iron Works
    and Bugulma is in danger. Evidently, Koichak will advance still
    farther.
The danger is a serious one.
Today, the Council of People’s Commissars will decide on
    a number of urgent measures to assist the Eastern Front; we are
    increasing the work of agitation.
We request the Petrograd workers to do everything possible,
    to mobilise all forces to help the Eastern Front.
The soldier workers there will obtain food for themselves, and will be able to send food parcels to their families. The main thing, however, is that there the fate of the revolution is being decided.
By victory there, we shall bring the war to a close, for the Whites will get no more assistance from abroad. In the South, victory is near. We cannot withdraw forces from the South until we have won there completely.
Hence, help the Eastern Front!
Both the Soviet of Workers’ and Red Army Deputies and the trade unions must exert every effort to mobilise all forces and render all possible assistance to the Eastern Front.
I am certain, comrades, that the Petrograd workers will set an example to the whole of Russia.
With communist greetings,
Lenin

    

      Moscow, April 10, 1919

Collected Works Volume 29
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 







==========

## Theses of the Central Committee of the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks) on the Situation on the Eastern  Front











On The Situation On The Eastern Front; Theses Of The Central Committee Of The Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks)



V. I. Lenin
Theses Of The Central Committee Of The Russian Communist Party 
(Bolsheviks)
On The Situation On The Eastern Front


Written: 1 April, 1919
First Published: Pravda No, 79, April 12, 1919; Published According to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, paged 276-279
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License



Koichak’s victories on the Eastern Front are creating an extremely grave danger for the Soviet Republic. Our efforts must be exerted to the utmost to smash Kolchak.
The Central Committee therefore instructs all Party organisations to concentrate their efforts first and foremost on the following measures, which must be carried out by the Party organisations and, in particular, by the trade unions in order to enlist wider sections of the working class in the active defence of the country.
1. Support In every way the mobilisation ordered on April 11, 1919.
All the forces of the Party and the trade unions must be mobilised immediately so as to render, within the next few days, without the slightest delay, the most energetic assistance to the mobilisation decreed by the Council of People’s Commissars on April 10, 1919.
The mobilised men must at once be made to see the active participation of the trade unions and to feel that they have the support of the working class.
In particular, it must be made clear to every mobilised man that his immediate departure for the front will mean an improvement in his food situation; firstly, because of the better ration received by the soldiers in the grain-producing front-line zone; secondly, because of the fact that the food brought into the hungry gubernias will be distributed among fewer people; thirdly, because of the widely organised dispatch of food parcels by Red Army men in the front areas to their families at home.
The Central Committee demands of every Party and trade union organisation a weekly report, however brief, on what has been done to help mobilisation and the mobilised.
2. In the areas near the front, especially in the Voigaside region, trade union members must be armed to a man, and in the event of a shortage of arms, they must all be mobilised to render every possible aid to the Red Army, to replace casualties, etc.
Such towns as Pokrovsk, where the trade unions themselves decided to mobilise immediately 50 per cent of their members, should serve us as an example. The metropolitan cities and the large industrial centres must not lag behind Pokrovsk.
The trade unions everywhere must, using their own forces and means, carry out a check registration of their members in order that all who are not absolutely indispensable at home may be sent to fight for the Volga and the Urals territory.
3. The most serious attention must be given to intensifying agitational work, especially among those to be mobilised, those already mobilised and Red Army men. The usual methods of agitation—lectures, meetings, etc.—are not enough; agitation should be carried on among Red Army men by workers, singly or in groups; such groups of ordinary workers, members of trade unions, should be appointed specifically to barracks, Red Army units and factories. The trade unions must institute a check to see that every one of their members takes part in house-to-house agitation, distribution of leaflets and personal talks.
4. All male office workers are to be replaced by women, for which purpose a new registration, both Party and trade union, shall be carried out.
Special cards shall be introduced for all trade union members and all office workers, indicating the part they are personally taking in assisting the Red Army.
5. Aid Bureaus or Committees of Action, local and central, are to be instituted immediately through the trade unions, factory committees, Party organisations, co-operative societies, etc. Their addresses shall be published. The public shall be informed of them in the widest possible manner. Every man liable to mobilisation, every Red Army man, and every person desirous of leaving for the South, for the Don or the Ukraine for food supply work should know that there is an aid bureau or a committee of action nearby; that it is accessible to every worker and peasant and he can obtain advice or instruction there, that contact with the army authorities will he facilitated for him, etc.
It shall be the special task of these bureaus to help to equip the Red Army. We can greatly increase the strength of our army if we improve the supply of arms, clothing, etc. And among the population there are still considerable quantities of arms which have been hidden or are not being used for the army. There are still considerable factory stocks of goods of various kinds needed by the army, and they must be quickly found and dispatched to the army. The army organisations in charge of supplies should be given immediate, broad and effective assistance by the general public. Every effort must be devoted to this matter.
6, The trade unions must organise the extensive enlistment of peasants, especially of peasant youths in the non-agricultural gubernias, for the ranks of the Red Army, for the formation of food detachments and for the food army in the Don and the Ukraine.
This activity can and should be expanded to many times Its present volume; it helps both to assist the hungry population of the metropolitan cities and the non-agricultural gubernias and to strengthen the Red Army.
7. As regards the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries, the Party line in the present situation is to imprison those who assist Koichak, whether deliberately or unwittingly. In our republic of working people we shall not tolerate anybody who does not help us by deeds in the fight against Kolchak. Among the Mensheviks and the Socialist-Revolutionaries there are people who are willing to render such help. These people should be encouraged and given practical jobs, principally in the way of technical assistance to the Red Army in the rear, and their work must be strictly supervised.
The Central Committee appeals to all Party organisations and all trade unions to set to work in a revolutionary way, and not confine themselves to the old stereotyped methods.
We can defeat Koichak. We can gain an early and final victory, because our victories in the South and the international situation, which is daily improving and changing in our favour, guarantee our ultimate triumph.
We must exert every effort, display revolutionary energy, and Koichak will be rapidly defeated. The Volga, the Urals and Siberia can and must be defended and regained.
Central Committee of the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks)

Collected Works Volume 29
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 







==========

## Plenary Meeting of the
  all-Russia Central Council of Trade Unions











Plenary Meeting Of The All-Russia Central Coucncil Of Trade Unions



V. I. Lenin
 Plenary Meeting Of The All-Russia Central Coucncil Of Trade Unions
April 11, 1919[1]


Delivered: 11 April, 1919
First Published: Brief report published in Izvestia No. 80, April 13, 1919; First published In full in 1932; Published according to the verbatim report
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, paged 281-301
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


I
Report on the Tasks of the Trade Unions
      In The Mobilisation For The Eastern Front

      Comrades, you, of course, are all familiar with the decree
      published today on the mobilisation in the nonagri-cultural
      gubernias, and there is no need for me to deal at length with
      the reasons for this decree at a meeting like this; we may take
      it that you are well aware from what you have read in the
      newspapers that Kolchak’s
      victories on the Eastern Front have suddenly made our position
      extremely grave.
You are aware that, in view of the situation at the front, all
      government instructions have for a long time been directed towards
      concentrating our main forces on the Southern
      Front. Krasnov’s forces were concentrated in such large
      numbers on the Southern Front, and the avowedly
      counter-revolutionary Cossacks, who since 1905 have remained as
      monarchist as ever, were so strongly entrenched there, that
      without a victory on the Southern Front, the consolidation of
      Soviet proletarian power at the centre would have been
      impossible. It was in the South, in the Ukraine, that the Allied
      imperialists attempted to launch an offensive, and wanted to
      convert the Ukraine into a springboard against the Soviet
      Republic, making the Southern Front still more important for us;
      consequently, we have no reason to repent of having concentrated
      our attention and our forces on the Southern Front. I think that
      we were not mistaken in so doing. The latest news about the
      capture of Odessa, and the news received today about the capture
      of Simferopol and Eupatoria show the situation there; this region,
      which has played the decisive role throughout the war, has now
      been cleared.
You know perfectly well what tremendous effort it is costing to
      continue the Civil War after four years of imperialist war, how
      weary the masses are, how incredibly vast the sacrifices which the
      workers have been making during two years of Civil War. You know
      that this war is imposing an immense strain upon us. This
      concentration of all forces on the Southern Front greatly weakened
      the Eastern Front. We were unable to send reinforcements there and
      the army on the Eastern Front endured incredible hardships and
      sustained heavy losses. It fought for months, and a number of
      comrades working there sent us telegrams stating that it was
      becoming exceedingly difficult for the embattled Red Army to bear
      such an extremely heavy strain; the strength of our forces on the
      Eastern Front had been over-taxed. Meanwhile, Kolchak, by means of
      tsarist or “big stick” discipline, had mobilised the
      Siberian peasants. He weeded all men who had seen active service
      out of his army, and succeeded in concentrating there the old
      officers, as leaders, and the counter-revolutionary
      bourgeoisie. Relying o these, he has lately achieved successes on
      the Eastern Front which place the Volga in jeopardy; it must be
      admitted that to force him back we shall have to go all
      out. Forces must be sent from here, for we cannot shift any from
      the South; that would mean leaving the field to the main enemy,
      who has not yet been completely smashed.
Since our victories in the South and in the Don region, and
      because of the international situation, our general position has
      been improving daily. Not a day passes but what we receive news
      which indicates that our international situation is improving.
Three months ago, the British, French and American capitalists
      not only appeared to be, but actually were, a tremendous force,
      which, of course, could have crushed us had they at that time been
      in a position to use their vast material resources against
      us—they could have but did not and now it is obvious that
      they cannot. Their recent defeat in Odessa clearly shows that vast
      as the material resources of the imperialists were, from the
      purely military point of view, their campaign against Russia has
      collapsed completely. If we bear in mind that there are Soviet
      Republics in the heart of Europe, and that the growth of the
      
      Soviet form of government is becoming irresistible, we may say
      without exaggeration, taking an absolutely sober view of the
      situation, that our victory on an international scale is
      absolutely certain.
If this were all, we could speak calmly, but in view of
      Kolchak’s recent successes, it must be said that several
      months of strenuous effort still lie ahead of us before we can
      defeat his forces. There can be no doubt that we shall fail if we
      stick to the old methods; during the eighteen months of Soviet
      power our methods have become so familiar, sometimes even routine,
      that as a result, the energy of the advanced section of the
      working class has been largely exhausted. We do not shut our eyes
      to the extreme weariness that is felt among certain sections of
      the working class, and to the increasing difficulty of the
      struggle, but now our prospects are much simpler and clearer. Even
      those who do not side with Soviet power, and who regard themselves
      as rather important figures in politics, clearly see that on an
      international scale our victory is certain.
We have to go through one more phase of fierce civil war
      against Koichak. We have therefore decided that the All-Russia
      Central Council of Trade Unions—a most authoritative body,
      which unites the broad masses of the proletariat—should, on
      its part, propose a number of most rigorous measures which should
      help us to finish off the war within the next few months. This is
      quite feasible, because our international situation is improving,
      we need have no doubts on that score. The European and American
      rear is in the best possible state for us, although five months
      ago we could not even dream of such a thing. We might say that
      Messrs. Wilson and Clemenceau have set out to help us. The cables
      which every day bring us news about their quarrels, about their
      desire to slam the door in each other’s faces, show that
      these gentlemen are at each other’s throats.
But the more clear it becomes that the victory of our cause on
      an international scale is certain, the more desperate and fierce
      become the efforts of the Russian landowners, capitalists and
      kulaks who fled across the Urals. This disreputable crowd is
      fighting desperately. You, of course, have read in the newspapers
      about how far white-guard terror has gone in Wa; there is no doubt
      that these whiteguard elements, these bourgeois, are staking
      everything on a last attempt. The bourgeoisie are desperate. They
      believe that by their desperate attack they will compel us to
      divert part of our forces from the decisive Southern Front. We
      shall not do that, and we say openly to the workers that this
      involves ever greater efforts in the East.
Permit me to propose a number of practical measures which, in
      my opinion, should create a regrouping of forces and set the trade
      unions new and definite tasks, and which I consider essential in
      view of the situation I have briefly outlined to you. There is no
      need for me to deal with this any further, you are all aware of
      it. It is possible in this situation—looking at it most
      soberly—to put an end to the war, both internal and
      international, within the next few months. But during those few
      months we shall have to bend every effort. The first task that
      should be set to the trade unions is the following:
“1. Support in every way the mobilisation ordered on
      April 11, 1919.
“All the forces of the Party and the trade unions must be
      mobilised Immediately so as to render, within the next few days,
      without the slightest delay, the most energetic assistance to the
      mobilisation decreed by the Council of People’s Commissars
      on April 10, 1919.
“The mobilised men must at once be made to see the active
      participation of the trade unions and to feel that they have the
      support of the working class.
“In particular, it must be made clear to every mobilised
      man that his immediate departure for the front will mean an
      improvement in his food situation; firstly, because of the better
      ration received by the soldiers in the grain-producing front-line
      zone; secondly, because of the fact that the food brought into the
      hungry gubernias will be distributed among fewer people; thirdly,
      because of the widely organised dispatch of food parcels by Red
      Army men in the front areas to their families at home
      ....”
Of course, I have referred to the food situation here only very
      briefly; but you all realise that this is our main, internal
      difficulty, and were it not for the possibility of linking up the
      mobilisation with our rapid advance in the areas near the front
      and the grain-producing districts, with the organisation of the
      units there, and not here, were it not for this possibility, the
      mobilisation would be hopeless; that is to say, it would be no use
      hoping for success. But at present we have this possibility. The
      mobilisation is to take place mainly in the non-agricultural
      gubernias, in the districts where the workers and peasants are
      suffering most from hunger. We can shift them primarily to the
      Don—the whole of the Don region is now in our hands, the
      fight against the Cossacks has been going on for a long tune; we
      shall be able to improve the food supplies of our advanced units
      on the spot, and also organise the sending home of food
      parcels. Steps have already been taken in this direction, and
      permission has been given to send food parcels weighing twenty
      pounds twice a month. An agreement on this point has been
      reached. Thus, the privilege we were obliged to grant last year in
      the form of the right to carry one-and-a-half poods[2] can be
      compared with this wider measure, namely, the sending of food
      parcels, by means of which the men of the Red Army will be able to
      support their families at home.
By developing activities of this nature we shall combine
      assistance to the front with an improvement in the food situation
      in the chief non-agricultural districts, which are suffering most
      in this respect. Naturally, the dispatch of men to the Don will be
      linked up with the movement of men to the Volgaside area, where
      the enemy has now inflicted such a severe blow on us that beyond
      the Volga, in the East, we have already lost several million poods
      of grain that had been collected. There, the war is directly an
      out-and-out war for grain. The task of the trade unions is to see
      to it that this mobilisation is not carried out on the ordinary
      lines, but that it should be combined with trade union assistance
      to the Soviets. The thesis I have just read to you does not define
      this concretely enough. I think that this all-round assistance
      should be at first embodied in a series of tentative measures,
      which should be followed by definite instructions and a practical
      plan showing how, the trade unions, by mobilising all their
      forces, should promote the mobilisation in such a way that it
      assumes the character of a major political measure rather than a
      mere military and food supply measure, in such a way that it is
      made the task of a working class which realises that we can end
      the war within the next few months, because on an International
      scale we are assured of the arrival of fresh allies. Only
      proletarian organisations, only trade unions, can do this. I
      cannot enumerate the practical measures, I think that only the
      trade unions can do it. They can carry out the task, making
      allowances for specific local conditions, and organising the whole
      business on a practical basis. Our job is to give the main
      political directions to the working class, which must rally once
      again and take cognisance of this bitter truth; there will be new
      burdens to bear, but this is at the same time a truth that
      indicates the real and practical way to overcome our difficulties
      as quickly as possible. By sending large numbers of workers to the
      fertile South, we shall reinforce our forces there, and if the
      whiteguard and landowners’—forces count on being able
      by their victories in the East to compel us to weaken the South, I
      think we shall prove to them that they are mistaken. I am quite
      sure that we shall not weaken the South and shall be able to
      provide support for the East. The enemy has mobilised the young
      men of Siberia and has avoided taking men who had seen active
      service—he is afraid of them and has mobilised the Siberian
      peasants. That is his last effort, his last resource. He has no
      support and no manpower. The Allies were unable to help him. It
      was beyond their power.
That is why I appeal to the representatives of the trade union
      movement to devote the greatest possible attention to this
      question and to see to it that the mobilisation is not carried out
      on the old lines. This must be a huge working-class political
      campaign; it is not merely a military and food supply campaign,
      but also a great political campaign.
      
      If the situation is weighed up soberly in the light of factors
      of the war and of class relationships, nobody can doubt that the
      issue should be settled within the next few months. To achieve
      this, the trade unions must not confine themselves to activity
      within the old limits. If they do they will be unable to carry
      out this task, which requires activity on a wider scale. They
      must act not only as trade unionists, but also as
      revolutionaries deciding the basic question of the Soviet
      Republic, a question similar to the one decided in
      October—that of bringing the imperialist war to a close
      and launching socialist construction. Today, the trade unions
      must work as revolutionaries, on a mass scale; they must not
      keep within the old limits in settling the practical question of
      ending the Civil War in Russia. The end is very near, but it is
      extremely difficult. To proceed:
“2. In the areas near the front, especially in the
      Volga-side region, trade union members must be armed to a man, and
      in the event of a shortage of arms, they must all be mobilised to
      render every possible aid to the Red Army, to replace casualties,
      etc.
“3. The most serious attention must be given to
      intensifying agitational work, especially among those to he
      mobilised, those already mobilised and Red Army men. The usual
      methods of agitation—lectures, meetings, etc.—are not
      enough; agitation should b carried on among Red Army men by
      workers, singly or in groups; such groups of ordinary workers,
      members of trade unions, should be appointed specifically to
      barracks, Red Army units and factories. The trade unions must
      institute a check to see that every one of their members takes
      part in house-to-house agitation, distribution of leaflets and
      personal talks.”
We, of course, have grown somewhat unaccustomed to the methods
      of agitation we employed in the old days when we as a party were
      persecuted, or were fighting for power. Political power has placed
      a vast state machine in our hands, and through it agitation has
      been organised on new lines. During the past eighteen months it
      has been conducted on a different scale; but you know that because
      of the chaos we inherited from the imperialist war and which was
      intensified by the Civil War, and the terrible difficulties caused
      by the invasion of a number of Russian gubernias, our agitation
      has not done all that it should have done. Compared with past
      agitation it has done wonders but it is not all that is needed,
      and things have not been carried through to the end. Vast masses
      of peasants and workers are practically untouched by our
      agitation. That is why we must not keep within the old limits;
      under no circumstances must we depend on our having state Soviet
      organisations for this purpose. If we were to rely on that, we
      would not be able to solve our problem. In this respect we should
      recall the past, pay more attention to personal initiative arid
      say that if this personal initiative is developed on a mass scale,
      we shall do more than we did in the past, because the working
      class, even though most of its members are exhausted, has now
      instinctively understood the nature of the task. Even the
      Merisheviks and the Socialist-Revolutionaries who owing to their
      political ideology fought tooth and nail to prevent themselves
      from understanding the situation, who hid behind an iron fence and
      failed to understand reality—even these people now realise
      that all over the world the struggle is going on between the old
      bourgeois system and the new Soviet system. Ever since the German
      revolution revealed its real character, ever since the German
      Government showed that all it could do was murder the best leaders
      o the proletariat with the support of the social-patriots of the
      majority, and ever since Soviet power triumphed in a number of
      European countries, this question has been settled in
      practice. The question is—Soviet power or the old bourgeois
      order? It has been settled in practice on a historical scale. The
      workers’ instinct decided the issue; this must be embodied
      in agitation increased tenfold.
We cannot increase food supplies when there is no food; we
      cannot increase the number of professional agitators and
      intellectuals tenfold when none are available. This we cannot
      do. But we can tell the broad masses of the workers that today
      they are not what they were until yesterday. If you set out to
      conduct personal agitation you will win by sheer weight of
      numbers.
And we shall have a mobilisation that is not an ordinary one,
      but is a real campaign to decide the ultimate fate of the working
      class which realises that only the next few months separate us
      from the last and decisive battle—not in the sense that this
      is meant in song and verse, but in the literal sense of the word,
      for we have weighed up our practical forces in other spheres and
      not only insofar as concerns the whiteguards.
During this year we have made a practical estimate of our
      forces relative to international imperialism. At one time the
      Germans tried to throttle us, but we knew that they were hampered,
      that the British and French imperialists were hanging on to them
      with one hand. At one time we had the British arid French against
      us. They had both hands free. Had they attacked us in December
      1918, we could not have held out; we have now stood up to them for
      several more trying months and we know that their bourgeois order
      is decaying. Even their best troops were not fit for anything but
      to retreat before units of insurgents operating in the
      Ukraine. Our reasoning, therefore, is perfectly clear, and the
      working class has instinctively realised that we are on the eve of
      the last battle, that the next few months will decide whether we
      shall achieve final victory, or whether we shall have to go
      through fresh difficulties.
I shall read to you those of the other measures that are
      outlined here:
“4. All male office workers are to be replaced by women,
      for which purpose a new registration, both Party and trade union,
      shall be carried out ....
“5. Aid Bureaus or Committees of
Action, local and central, are to be instituted immediately
      through the trade unions, factory committees, Party organisations,
      co-operative societies, etc. Their addresses shall be
      published. The public shall be informed of them in the widest
      possible manner. Every man liable to mobilisation, every Red Army
      man, and every person desirous of leaving for the South, for the
      Don or the Ukraine for food supply work should know that there is
      an aid bureau or a committee of action nearby; that it is
      accessible to every worker and peasant and he can obtain advice or
      instruction there, that contact with the army authorities will be
      facilitated for him, etc.
“It shall be the special task of these bureaus to help
      to equip the Red Army. We can greatly increase the
      strength of our army if we improve the supply of arms, clothing,
      etc. And among the population there are still considerable
      quantities of arms which have been hidden or are not being used
      for the army. There are still considerable factory stocks of goods
      of various kinds needed by the army, and they must be quickly
      found and dispatched to the army.. The army organisations in
      charge of supplies should be given immediate, broad and effective
      assistance by the general public. Every effort must be devoted to
      this matter.”
I shall now touch upon the several different periods of our war
      tasks. Our first war problem we tackled by guerrilla, irregular
      insurrections such as the comrades in—Ukraine are now
      resorting to. There is not so much a regular war in the Ukraine as
      a guerrilla movement and spontaneous insurrection. It results in
      very rapid attacks and creates extreme chaos in the midst of which
      the job of using stocks of food is one of incalculable
      difficulty. There is no old machinery, not even of the kind that
      we inherited from the Smolny period of our rule—and that was
      bad enough, and worked against us rather than for us. But why is
      there no such machinery in the Ukraine? Because it has not yet
      passed out of the phase of partisan warfare and spontaneous
      insurrection into the regular army phase, which is always
      characteristic of the consolidated power of every class, including
      the proletariat. We created our machinery after several months of
      untold difficulties.
We set up special food supply organisations. For a time we made
      some use of the services of the food supply experts, keeping them
      under Party supervision; now, however, we have everywhere army
      organisations in charge of supplies. When a period of extreme
      exertion of effort sets in, we say that we shall not revert to the
      old partisan methods, we have suffered enough from them; we urge
      that members of the working class shall be enlisted into the
      existing organised bodies, the regular organisations for supplying
      the Red Army. The working class In the mass can do that. You know
      that chaos reigns in the matter of equipment, in the matter of
      finding this equipment, of dispatching it, and so forth. Here help
      is needed in the work of supplying the Red Army. Our army exports
      say that we shall make progress if we mobilise a large number of
      soldiers who will speedily and finally decide the issue on the
      Eastern Front. But this is being held up mainly by the shortage of
      supplies, which is not surprising in view of the state of ruin we
      inherited from the imperialist war and the Civil War. But this
      means that we must appreciate and understand the new situation
      with its new tasks. A year ago we began to establish regular
      organisations, but this is not enough; these regular organisations
      must receive the assistance of the mass movement, of the mass
      energy of the working class. Here we have an approximate outline
      of what the trade unions could do in this matter. The trade unions
      alone can do this, because they are closest to industry, and head
      the largest section of the workers, a section numbering
      millions. This task calls for a change in the tempo and the
      character of their activities for the next few months. In this way
      we shall be certain of complete victory within a few months.
“6. The trade unions must organise the extensive
      enlistment of peasants, especially of peasant youths in the nou
      agricultural gubernias, for the ranks of the Red Army, for the
      formation of food detachments and for the food army in the Don and
      the Ukraine.
“This activity can and should be expanded to many times
      its present volume; it helps both to assist the hungry population
      of the metropolitan cities and the non-agricultural gubernias and
      to strengthen the Red Army.”
I have already said that our food supply and war tasks are
      closely connected, and you understand perfectly well that they
      must be. They must be linked up. One cannot be carried out without
      the other.
“7. As regards the Mensheviks and
      Socialist-Revolutionaries, the Party line in the present situation
      is to imprison those who assist Koichak, whether deliberately or
      unwittingly. In our republic of working people we shall not
      tolerate anybody who does not help us by deeds in the fight
      against Kolchak. Among the Mensheviks and
      Socialist-Revolutionaries there are people who are willing to
      render such help. These people should be encouraged and given
      practical jobs, principally in the way of technical assistance to
      the Red Army in the rear, and their work must be strictly
      supervised ....”
In this respect we must say that lately we have been through an
      exceedingly severe and unpleasant experience. You know that the
      leading groups of the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries
      looked at the matter in this way”In spite of everything, we
      want to remain parliamentarians and condemn the Bolsheviks and
      Kolchak’s followers alike.” We had to tell them
      politely that this is not the time for parliaments. Our enemies
      are trying to get us by the throat, and we are fighting the last
      and decisive battle. We shall not joke with them. When they foment
      strikes like this, they commit a heinous crime against the working
      class. Every strike costs the lives of thousands and thousands of
      Red Army men as we can see. The cessation of arms production in
      Tula means the death of thousands of workers and peasants; to
      deprive us of a number of factories in Tula means depriving
      thousands of workers of their lives. We say that we are fighting,
      we are spending our last ounce of strength, we regard this war as
      the only just and 1egitihate war. We have lit the torch of
      socialism at home and all over the world. We shall fight
      ruthlessly against anyone who hinders this struggle in the
      slightest. He who is not for us is against us. But what if there
      are people—and we know that there are such among the
      Mensheviks—who cannot, or will not understand what is taking
      place in Russia? Who are not yet convinced that although in Russia
      the “wicked” Bolsheviks made such a revolution, in
      Germany, the birthpangs of the revolution are immeasurably more
      severe? The democratic republic there—what is it? What is
      German freedom? It is freedom to murder the genuine leaders of the
      proletariat—Karl Liebknecht, Rosa Luxemburg, and scores of
      others. In this way the Scheidemann gang is only putting off the
      hour of its defeat. Obviously, those people cannot govern. Since
      November 9 there have been five months of freedom in the German
      Republic, and either the Scheidemann gang or their accomplices
      have been in power. But you know there is more squabbling among
      them than ever. This example proves that the only alternative is
      either the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie or the dictatorship of
      the proletariat. The fact that there is no middle course is shown,
      for example, by what we read today in the Frankfurter
  Zeitung. It says that the example of Hungary shows we
      must go forward to socialism. Hungary has proved that the
      bourgeoisie voluntarily surrenders power to the Soviets when they
      know that the country is in such a desperate position that nothing
      can save it, that nothing can lead the people along the difficult
      path of salvation but the Soviets. And to those who, wavering
      between the old and the new, say that although ideologically they
      do not recognise the dictatorship of the proletariat they are,
      nevertheless, prepared to assist oviet power and keep their
      convictions to themselves because they understand that in the
      midst of fierce war we must not argue, but fight—to those
      people we say: “If you want to engage in politics, meaning
      by politics that you, in front of the. weary and tormented masses,
      will freely criticise Soviet power, not realising that in this way
      you are helping Kolchak—we say there will be ruthless war
      against you.” It is not easy to grasp the significance of
      and carry out such a policy at one stroke. We cannot
      
      pursue the same policy with regard to all of them. We tell them
      that if they want to engage in their politics, we shall provide
      a place for them in prison, or in other countries which are
      willing to receive them. We shall make these countries a present
      of several hundred Menshevjks. Or do you, at last, want to offer
      to help Soviet power, because otherwise there will be several
      more years of untold disaster, and in the end Soviet power will
      be victorious anyway. To people who talk like that we must give
      every encouragement; and we must give them practical work to
      do. This policy cannot be defined so easily
      
      and at one stroke as a policy which proceeds in one, single
      direction. But I am sure that every worker who has had practical
      experience of what the burden of war means, who knows what
      supplying the Red Army means, who knows the horrors every Red
      Army man at the front must go through—every worker will
      fully appreciate this lesson in jolitics. That is why I ask you
      to adopt these theses, and to concentrate all the efforts of the
      trade unions on the task of putting them into operation as
      speedily and vigorously as possible.
    
2
Reply To A Question On The Tula Strike

      I have no definite information about Tula and cannot speak as
      authoritatively on this matter as the preceding comrades
      did. But I do know the political physiognomy of the newspaper
      Vsegda Vperyod! This Is nothing more nor less than
      incitement to strike. It is aiding and abetting our enemies, the
      Mensbeviks, who are fomenting strikes. Somebody asked me if this
      had been proved. My reply is that if I were a barrister, a
      solicitor, or a member of Parliament, I would be obliged to
      present proof. But I am not the first, the second, or the third,
      and so I do not intend to and there is no reason why I
      should. Even supposing the Menshevik Central Committee is better
      than the Mensheviks in Tula who have been definitely exposed as
      fomentors of strikes—in fact I have no doubt some of the
      regular members of the Menshevik Committee are better—in a
      political struggle, when the whiteguards are trying to get us by
      the throat, is it possible to draw distinctions? Have we time
      for it? Facts are facts. Let us suppose that they were not
      aiding and abetting, but were weak and yielded to the Right
      Mensheviks; so what of it? The Right Mensheviks foment strikes,
      and Martov, or others, condemned these Rights in the
      newspapers. What does this teach us? We get a note saying
      “I, too, condemn, but”... (A voice: “What
      else can they do?”). They can do what the Bolshevik Party
      does take their stand, not in words, but in deeds. Does not
      propaganda abroad take advantage of the conduct of the
      Mensheviks here? Did not the Berne Conference support all the
      imperialists when they said that the Bolsheviks were usurpers?
      We say—you have taken this stand at a
      
      
      time when Kolchak’s gangs are striking a blow that is
      causing the death of thousands of Red Army men in a country
      which the imperialists of the whole world are trying to
      crush. In two years’ time, perhaps, after we have beaten
      KoJchak, we shall examine this matter, but not now. Now we must
      fight in order to defeat the enemy within the next few months;
      and you know what this enemy will do to the workers. You know
      this from what happened at 
      
      Ivashchenkovo.[3] You know what Koichak is doing.

      3
Speech Closing The Discussion
Comrades, one of the speakers, who was called the speaker for
      the Opposition, demanded in a resolution that we should turn to
      our Constitution. When I heard that I wondered whether the speaker
      was not confusing our Constitution with the Scheidemann
      Constitution. Scheidemann’s, like that of all democratic
      republics, promises all citizens all sorts of liberties. Bourgeois
      republics have promised this to everybody for hundreds and
      thousands of years. You know what became of these bourgeois
      republics; you know that on a world-wide scale they have all
      collapsed. The vast majority of the workers side with the
      Communists. The word “Sovietist”, which does not exist
      in the Russian language, is heard everywhere in the world. And we
      can say that no matter what country we go to, if we say the word
      “Sovietist”, everybody will understand us and follow
      our lead. Clause 23 of the Constitution says:

      ”Guided by the interests of the working class as a whole,
      the R.S.F.S.R, deprives individual persons and individual groups
      of rights used to the detriment of the socialist
      revolution.”

      We did not promise liberties right and left; on the contrary,
      we, in our Constitution, which has been translated into all
      languages—into German, English, Italian and
      French—said definitely that we shall deprive socialists of
      their liberties if they use them to the detriment of the
      socialist revolution, if they are used to cover up liberties for
      the capitalists. That is why this reference to the Constitution
      was wrong even from the formal point of view. We have openly
      stated that in the transition period, the period of fierce
      struggle, we not only refrain from promising liberties right and
      left, but say in advance that we shall deprive of their
      liberties those citizens who hinder the socialist
      revolution. Who will judge whether they do so or not? The
      proletariat will.
Attempts have been made here to turn the question into one of
      parliamentary struggle. I have always said: parliamentarism is an
      excellent thing, but these are not parliamentary times. Hearing
      the government declare that the situation is grave, Comrade
      Lozovsky says that this is exactly the time for the people to
      present scores of demands. That is what all parliamentarians did
      in the “good old days”; but this is not the time for
      that sort of thing. I know that we suffer from a host of defects,
      I know that in Hungary Soviet power will be better than in this
      country. But when we are told in a period of mobilisation that
      this, that and the other are proposed, and that we should bargain
      over it, I say that these old parliamentary methods are useless;
      the class-conscious workers have already rejected them. This is
      not what we want.
We defined our main line as class struggle against the kulaks,
      against the rich elements who are opposed to us. Success in this
      being assured, we say that we must now establish more correct
      relations with the middle peasants. This is a very difficult
      job. In a period of grave danger you must help Soviet power,
      such. as it is. We shall not change within the next few
      months. Here there is not and cannot be any middle course. Any
      attempt to create this middle course by artificial parliamentary
      methods would be stepping on to slippery ground. When one speaker
      said that the peasants are all opposed to us, this was one of
      those “little” exaggerations which in practice
      encourage the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks. The
      vast majority of the people know that by far most of the peasants
      are with us. For the first time they have Soviet power. Even the
      slogans of the insurrection (in which only an insignificant
      section of the peasant masses was involved) were “For Soviet
      power. For the Bolsheviks. Down with the cornmunia”. We say
      that the fight against this will be a very stubborn one, because
      the intelligentsia are sabotaging us on the sly. We have been
      obliged to take a larger number of bad elements than good. Since
      the better elements of the intelligentsia turned their backs on
      us, we were obliged to take those that are not so good.
Comrade Romanov proposed a resolution which he himself
      formulated after his comrades had been arrested. “We demand
      freedom for all...” they declare. (Lenin reads the
resolution.) The workers later resumed work, but this cost us
      several thousands of lost days and several thousands of lives of
      Red Army men, workers and peasants, on the Eastern Front.
I ask calmly and categorically which is better, to imprison
      several scores or hundreds of instigators, guilty or innocent,
      deliberate or unwitting, or lose thousands of Red Army men and
      workers? The first is better. I don’t care. whether I am
      accused of committing every mortal sin imaginable and of violating
      liberties, I plead guilty, but the interests of the workers will
      be furthered. At a time like this, when the people are exhausted,
      politically conscious elements should help them to hold on for the
      next few months. It was not we who were victorious in Odessa. It
      is ridiculous to think that we were victorious. We captured Odessa
      because their soldiers refused to go into battle. I received a
      telegram from the Northern Front saying, “Send the British
      prisoners of war to the front.” The comrades here say that
      the British are wailing and saying they will not go back into the
      army. What does that show? Their troops refuse to go into
      battle. They are ten times stronger than we are, and yet they
      refuse to fight.
That is why, when we are told that we promised a lot, but have
      done nothing, we say that we have done the main thing. We promised
      to start a revolution which will become a world revolution; it has
      begun, and it now stands so firmly on its feet that our
      international position is splendid. We fulfilled our main promise
      and, evidently, the vast majority f the class-conscious workers
      realise this. They realise that now only a few months separate us
      from victory over the capitalists all over the world. What are we
      to do in these few months if certain elements are exhausted; what
      should we do, play with them, incite them or, on the contrary,
      help the exhausted to hold out for those few months that will
      decide the fate of the entire war. You can see that in the South
      we shall get the war over in less than a few months, we shall
      finish it off completely and release the army for the East. It is
      obvious, therefore, that the plans or the Entente—of the
      British, French and Americans—have gone awry. In Odessa,
      they had ten thousand men and a fleet—that is what the
      position was. This is not a matter of parliamentarism, or of
      concessions—on this we make no promises and undertake no
      obligations. We put the question this way—when the people
      are war weary, and are hard pressed by hunger, what should the
      class-conscious proletariat, the class-conscious section of the
      workers do? Permit people to play on this weariness, for it is
      beoming a game. If we say stop the war, the ignorant masses will
      vote for it, but the class-conscious section of the masses says
      that we can bring the war to a close within the next few
      months. The weary must be encouraged, sustained and led. The
      comrades themselves see that every class-conscious worker leads
      scores of tired people. We say this and we demand it. This is
      exactly what the dictatorship of the proletariat means—one
      class leads the other, because it is more organised, more solid
      and more class-conscious. The ignorant masses fall to every bait,
      and because of their weariness are ready to yield to anything. But
      the class-conscious section says that we must hold out, because in
      a few months we shall be victorious all over the world. This is
      how the matter stands. I take the liberty of thinking that the
      time has not yet come for parliamentary debates. We must make
      another big effort to achieve victory, and this time final
      victory, within the next few months.

Endnotes
[1]
      Following Lenin s report to this Plenary Meeting on the tasks of
      the trade unions in connection with the mobilisation for the
      Eastern Front, Lenin’s  Theses of the
  Central Committee of the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks) on
  the Situation on the Eastern Front were adopted and were
      next day published in Pravda.
[2]
      The Moscow Soviet (August 24) and the Petrograd Soviet (September
      5, 1918) passed decisions permitting factory and office workers of
      those cities, in view of the grave food situation, to transport up
      to one-and-a-half poods of foodstuffs for their personal use. A
      resolution of the Council of People’s Commissars made these
      decisions effective until October 1, 1918.
[3]
      Lenin refers to the whiteguards’ brutal treatment of workers
      from the Sergievsky Plant and the Tomylovo Artillery Warehouses at
      the station of Ivashehenkovo, near Samara, on October 1 and 2,
      1918. On the approach of Red Army units the workers decided to
      prevent the whiteguards from removing factory equipment. With the
      aid of the Czechoslovaks the whiteguards broke the resistance of
      the workers and shot over a thousand of them.

Collected Works Volume 29
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## Foreword to Henri Guildeaux’s Pamphlet Socialism and Syndicalism in France During the War











Foreword To Henri Guilbeaux’s Pamphlet Socialism and Syndicalism In France



V. I. Lenin
Foreword To Henri Guilbeaux’s Pamphlet
Socialism and Syndicalism In France
During The War


Delivered: 13 April, 1919
First Published: Published in French in 1919; First published in Russian in 1920;Published according to the Russian version of the pamphlet
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, paged 302-303
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License



Comrade Guilbeaux’s pamphlet is very well timed. The history of the socialist and trade union movements in a number of countries during the war should be summarised for all countries. This history shows as clearly as possible the slow but steady turn to the left, the progress towards revolutionary thinking and revolutionary action by the working class. This history discloses, on the one hand, the deep-going roots of the Third, Communist International, the preparations made for it, specific within each nation, depending upon its concrete historical features. A knowledge of the deep roots of the Third International is essential for an understanding of the inevitability of the International and of the difference in the paths leading the various national socialist parties to it.
On the other hand, the history of the socialist and trade union movements during the war shows us the beginning of the collapse of bourgeois democracy and bourgeois parliamentarism, the beginning of a turn from bourgeois democracy to Soviet, or proletarian, democracy. This tremendous epochal change is what many, very many socialists simply cannot understand yet, tied as they are by the chains of routine, philistine worship of what exists and existed yesterday, philistine blindness which prevents their seeing what is being brought into existence by the history of dying capitalism in all countries.
Comrade Guilbeaux undertook the task of writing an essay on the history of the French socialist and trade union movements during the war. The clear and accurate enuineration of the facts gives the reader a vivid illustration of the beginning of a great turn, of the turning of the tide in the history of socialism. One may be certain that Gnilbeaux’s pamphlet will not only be most widely circulated among all class-conscious workers, but that it will also lead to the publication of a number of similar pamphlets on the wartime history of socialism and the working-class movement in other countries.
N. Lenin
      
    

      Moscow, April 13, 1919

Collected Works Volume 29
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## Speech Delivered at the
  First the First Moscow Soviet Commanders’
  Courses











Speech Delivered At The First Moscow Soviet Commanders’ Courses April 15, 1919



V. I. Lenin
Speech Delivered At The First Moscow
Soviet Commanders’ Courses
April 15, 1919
Brief Newspaper Report


Delivered: 15 April, 1919
First Published: Pravda No. 83, April 17, 1919; Published according to the Pravda text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, page 304
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002; Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License.

Lenin recalled the words of a certain German general who said that if the soldiers knew what they were fighting for, there would be no war. The situation was different in our times. The Red Army had a great and definite task to perform-to emancipate the working class. The workers’ and peasants’ Red Army was growing and gaining strength day by day. This growth was due to the fact that the workers and peasants were profoundly conscious of their aims. And although they had suffered a number of reverses on the Eastern Front, they still had to halt Kolchak and defeat him. And they would do it. Krasnov’s gangs had more than once created a serious situation for Soviet Russia, but in spite of the help they had been receiving from the whole of the bourgeois world, these gangs had been routed, and would soon suffer complete defeat. That had been achieved only because of the political consciousness of the workers and peasants. “In accepting this Red Flag from the District Committee,” continued Lenin, “you must firmly and resolutely carry it forward. Every day brings us news to the effect that the Red Flag of liberty has been raised, now in one place, now in another. You have seen the formation of the Soviet Republic of Hungary, of Soviet Bavaria and of the Third, Communist International; and soon you will see the formation of the World Federative Republic of Soviets.
“Long live the World Federative Republic of Soviets!
“Long live the Red Army!
“Long live our Red Commanders!” (Stormy applause.)

Collected Works Volume 29
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 







==========

## The Third International and Its Place In History











The Third International and Its Place in History



V. I. Lenin
The Third International and Its Place in History


Written: 15 April, 1919
First Published: Published in May 1919; Published according to the manuscript.
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, pages 305-313
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002; Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License.

 The imperialists of the Entente countries are blockading Russia in an effort to cut off the Soviet Republic, as a seat of infection, from the capitalist world. These people, who boast about their “democratic” institutions, are so blinded by their hatred of the Soviet Republic that they do not see how ridiculous they are making themselves. Just think of it, the advanced, most civilised and “democratic” countries, armed to the teeth and enjoying undivided military sway over the whole world, are mortally afraid of the ideological infection coming from a ruined, starving, backward, and even, they assert, semi-savage country!
 This contradiction alone is opening the eyes of the working masses in all countries and helping to expose the hypocrisy of the imperialists Clemanceau, Lloyd George, Wilson and their governments.
 We are being helped, however, not only by the capitalists’ blind hatred of the Soviets, but also by their bickering among themselves, which induces them to put spokes in each other’s wheels. They have entered into a veritable conspiracy of silence, for they are desperately afraid of the spread of true information about the Soviet Republic in general, and of its official documents in particular. Yet, Le Temps, the principal organ of the French bourgeoisie, has published a report on the foundation in Moscow of the Third, Communist International.
 For this we express our most respectful thanks to the principal organ of the French bourgeoisie, to this leader of French chauvinism and imperialism. We are prepared to send an illuminated address to Le Temps in token of our appreciation of the effective and able assistance it is giving us.
 The manner in which Le Temps compiled its report on the basis of our wireless messages clearly and fully reveals the motive that prompted this organ of the money-bags. It wanted to have a dig at Wilson, as if to say, “Look at the people with whom you negotiate!” The wiseacres who write to the order of the money-bags do not see that their attempt to frighten Wilson with the Bolshevik bogey is becoming, in the eyes of the working people, an advertisement for the Bolsheviks. Once more, our most respectful thanks to the organ of the French millionaires!
 The Third International has been founded in a world situation that does not allow prohibitions, petty and miserable devices of the Entente imperialists or of capitalist lackeys like the Scheidemanns in Germany and the Renners in Austria to prevent news of this International and sympathy for it spreading among the working class of the world. This situation has been brought about by the growth of the proletarian revolution, which is manifestly developing everywhere by leaps and bounds. It has been brought about by the Soviet movement among the working people, which has already achieved such strength as to become really international.
 The First International (1864-72) laid the foundation of an international organisation of the workers for the preparation of their revolutionary attack on capital. The Second International (1889-1914) was an international organisation of the proletarian movement whose growth proceeded in breadth, at the cost of a temporary drop in the revolutionary level, a temporary strengthening of opportunism, which in the end led to the disgraceful collapse of this International.
 The Third International actually emerged in 1918, when the long years of struggle against opportunism and social-chauvinism, especially during the war, led to the formation of Communist Parties in a number of countries. Officially, the Third International was founded at its First Congress, in March 1919, in Moscow. And the most characteristic feature of this International, its mission of fulfilling, of implementing the precepts of Marxism, and of achieving the age-old ideals of socialism and the working-class movement—this most characteristic feature of the Third International has manifested itself immediately in the fact that the new, third, “International Working Men’s Association” has already begun to develop, to a certain extent, into a union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
 The First International laid the foundation of the proletarian, international struggle for socialism.
 The Second International marked a period in which the soil was prepared for the broad, mass spread of the movement in a number of countries.
 The Third International has gathered the fruits of the work of the Second International, discarded its opportunist, social-chauvinist, bourgeois and petty-bourgeois dross, and has begun to implement the dictatorship of the proletariat.
 The international alliance of the parties which are leading the most revolutionary movement in the world, the movement of the proletariat for the overthrow of the yoke of capital, now rests on an unprecedentedly firm base, in the shape of several Soviet republics, which are implementing the dictatorship of the proletariat and are the embodiment of victory over capitalism on an international scale.
 The epoch-making significance of the Third, Communist International lies in its having begun to give effect to Marx’s cardinal slogan, the slogan which sums up the centuries-old development of socialism and the working-class movement, the slogan which is expressed in the concept of the dictatorship of the proletariat.
 This prevision and this theory—the prevision and theory of a genius—are becoming a reality.
 The Latin words have now been translated into the languages of all the peoples of contemporary Europe—more, into all the languages of the world.
 A new era in world history has begun.
 Mankind is throwing off the last form of slavery: capitalist, or wage, slavery.
 By emancipating himself from slavery, man is for the first time advancing to real freedom.
 How is it that one of the most backward countries of Europe was the first country to establish the dictatorship of the proletariat, and to organise a Soviet republic? We shall hardly be wrong if we say that it is this contradiction between the backwardness of Russia and the “leap” she has made over bourgeois democracy to the highest form of democracy, to Soviet, or proletarian, democracy—it is this contradiction that has been one of the reasons (apart from the dead weight of opportunist habits and philistine prejudices that burdened the majority of the socialist leaders) why people in the West have had particular difficulty or have been slow in understanding the role of the Soviets.
 The working people all over the world have instinctively grasped the significance of the Soviets as an instrument in the proletarian struggle and as a form of the proletarian state. But the “leaders”, corrupted by opportunism, still continue to worship bourgeois democracy, which they call “democracy” in general.
 Is it surprising that the establishment of the dictatorship of the proletariat has brought out primarily the “contradiction” between the backwardness of Russia and her “leap” over bourgeois democracy? It would have been surprising had history granted us the establishment of a new form of democracy without a number of contradictions.
 If any Marxist, or any person, indeed, who has a general knowledge of modern science, were asked whether it is likely that the transition of the different capitalist countries to the dictatorship of the proletariat will take place in an identical or harmoniously proportionate way, his answer would undoubtedly be in the negative. There never has been and never could be even, harmonious, or proportionate development in the capitalist world. Each country has developed more strongly first one, then another aspect or feature or group of features of capitalism and of the working-class movement. The process of development has been uneven.
 When France was carrying out her great bourgeois revolution and rousing the whole European continent to a historically new life, Britain proved to be at the head of the counter-revolutionary coalition, although at the same time she was much more developed capitalistically than France. The British working-class movement of that period, however, brilliantly anticipated much that was contained in the future Marxism.
 When Britain gave the world Chartism, the first broad, truly mass and politically organised proletarian revolutionary movement, bourgeois revolutions, most of them weak, were taking place on the European continent, and the first great civil war between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie had broken out in France. The bourgeoisie defeated the various national contingents of the proletariat one by one, in different ways in different countries.
 Britain was the model of a country in which, as Engels put it, the bourgeoisie had produced, alongside a bourgeois aristocracy, a very bourgeois upper stratum of the proletariat.
[1] For several decades this advanced capitalist country lagged behind in the revolutionary struggle of the proletariat. France seemed to have exhausted the strength of the proletariat in two heroic working-class revolts of 1848 and 1871 against the bourgeoisie that made very considerable contributions to world-historical development. Leadership in the International of the working-class movement then passed to Germany; that was in the seventies of the nineteenth century, when she lagged economically behind Britain and France. But when Germany had out stripped these two countries economically, i.e., by the second decade of the twentieth century, the Marxist workers’ party of Germany, that model for the whole world, found itself headed by a handful of utter scoundrels, the most filthy blackguards—from Scheidemann and Noske to David and Legien—loathsome hangmen drawn from the workers’ ranks who had sold themselves to the capitalists, who were in the service of the monarchy and the counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie.
 World history is leading unswervingly towards the dictatorship of the proletariat, but is doing so by paths that are anything but smooth, simple and straight.
 When Karl Kautsky was still a Marxist and not the renegade from Marxism he became when he began to champion unity with the Scheidemanns and to support bourgeois democracy against Soviet, or proletarian, democracy, he wrote an article—this was at the turn of the century—entitled “The Slavs and Revolution”. In this article he traced the historical conditions that pointed to the possibility of leadership in the world revolutionary movement passing to the Slavs.
 And so it has. Leadership in the revolutionary proletarian International has passed for a time—for a short time, it goes without saying—to the Russians, just as at various periods of the nineteenth century it was in the hands of the British, then of the French, then of the Germans.
 I have had occasion more than once to say that it was easier for the Russians than for the advanced countries to begin the great proletarian revolution, but that it will be more difficult for them to continue it and carry it to final victory, in the sense of the complete organisation of a socialist society.
 It was easier for us to begin, firstly, because the unusual—for twentieth-century Europe—political backwardness of the tsarist monarchy gave unusual strength to the revolutionary onslaught of the masses. Secondly, Russia’s backwardness merged in a peculiar way the proletarian revolution against the bourgeoisie with the peasant revolution against the landowners. That is what we started from in October 1917, and we would not have achieved victory so easily then if we had not. As long ago as 1856, Marx spoke, in reference to Prussia; of the possibility of a peculiar combination of proletarian revolution and peasant war.
[2] From the beginning of 1905 the Bolsheviks advocated the idea of a revolutionary-democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and the peasantry. Thirdly, the 1905 revolution contributed enormously to the political education of the worker and peasant masses, because it familiarised their vanguard with “the last word” of socialism in the West and also because of the revolutionary action of the masses. Without such a “dress rehearsal” as we had in 1905, the revolutions of 1917—both the bourgeois, February revolution, and the proletarian, October revolution—would have been impossible. Fourthly, Russia’s geographical conditions permitted her to hold out longer than other countries could have done against the superior military strength of the capitalist, advanced countries. Fifthly, the specific attitude of the proletariat towards the peasantry facilitated the transition from the bourgeois revolution to the socialist revolution, made it easier for the urban proletarians to influence the semi-proletarian, poorer sections of the rural working people. Sixthly, long schooling in strike action and the experience of the European mass working-class movement facilitated the emergence—in a profound and rapidly intensifying revolutionary situation—of such a unique form of proletarian revolutionary organisation as the Soviets.
 This list, of course, is incomplete; but it will suffice for the time being.
 Soviet, or proletarian, democracy was born in Russia. Following the Paris Commune a second epoch-making step was taken. The proletarian and peasant Soviet Republic has proved to be the first stable socialist republic in the world. As a new type of state it cannot die. It no longer stands alone.
 For the continuance and completion of the work of building socialism, much, very much is still required. Soviet republics in more developed countries, where the proletariat has greater weight and influence, have every chance of surpassing Russia once they take the path of the dictatorship of the proletariat.
 The bankrupt Second International is now dying and rotting alive. Actually, it is playing the role of lackey to the world bourgeoisie. It is a truly yellow International. Its foremost ideological leaders, such as Kautsky, laud bourgeois democracy and call it “democracy” in general, or—what is still more stupid and still more crude—“pure democracy”.
 Bourgeois democracy has outlived its day, just as the Second International has, though the International performed historically necessary and useful work when the task of the moment was to train the working-class masses within the framework of this bourgeois democracy.
 No bourgeois republic, however democratic, ever was or could have been anything but a machine for the suppression of the working people by capital, an instrument of the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie, the political rule of capital. The democratic bourgeois republic promised and proclaimed majority rule, but it could never put this into effect as long as private ownership of the land and other means of production existed.
 “Freedom” in the bourgeois-democratic republic was actually freedom for the rich. The proletarians and working peasants could and should have utilised it for the purpose of preparing their forces to overthrow capital, to overcome bourgeois democracy, but in fact the working masses were, as a general rule, unable to enjoy democracy under capitalism.
 Soviet? or proletarian, democracy has for the first time in the world created democracy for the masses, for the working people, for the factory workers and small peasants.
 Never yet has the world seen political power wielded by the majority of the population, power actually wielded by this majority, as it is in the case of Soviet rule.
 It suppresses the “freedom” of the exploiters and their accomplices; it deprives them of “freedom” to exploit, “freedom” to batten on starvation, “freedom” to fight for the restoration of the rule of capital, “freedom” to compact with the foreign bourgeoisie against the workers and peasants of their own country.
 Let the Kautskys champion such freedom. Only a renegade from Marxism, a renegade from socialism can do so.
 In nothing is the bankruptcy of the ideological leaders of the Second International, people like Hilferding and Kautsky, so strikingly expressed as in their utter inability to understand the significance of Soviet, or proletarian, democracy, its relation to the Paris Commune, its place in history, its necessity as a form of the dictatorship of the proletariat.
 The newspaper Die Freiheit, organ of the “Independent” (alias middle-class, philistine, petty-bourgeois) German Social-Democratic Party, in its issue No. 74 of February 11, 1919, published a manifesto “To the Revolutionary Proletariat of Germany”.
 This manifesto is signed by the Party executive and by all its members in the National Assembly, the German variety of our Constituent Assembly.
 This manifesto accuses the Scheidemanns of wanting to abolish the Workers’ Councils, and proposes—don’t laugh!—that the Councils be combined with the Assembly, that the Councils be granted certain political rights, a certain place in the Constitution.
 To reconcile, to unite the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie and the dictatorship of the proletariat! How simple! What a brilliantly philistine idea!
 The only pity is that it was tried in Russia, under Kerensky, by the united Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries, those petty-bourgeois democrats who imagine themselves socialists.
 Anyone who has read Marx and failed to understand that in capitalist society, at every acute moment, in every serious class conflict, the alternative is either the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie or the dictatorship of the proletariat, has understood nothing of either the economic or the political doctrines of Marx.
 But the brilliantly philistine idea of Hilferding, Kautsky and Co. of peacefully combining the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie and the dictatorship of the proletariat requires special examination, if exhaustive treatment is to be given to the economic and political absurdities with which this most remarkable and comical manifesto of February 11 is packed. That will have to be put off for another article.[3]

 Moscow, April 15, 1919

Endnotes
[1] Marx and Engels, Selected Correspondence, Moscow, 1965, p. 110.
[2]
 Marx and Engels, Selected Correspondence, Moscow, 1965, p. 92. 
 
[3]
 See pp. 392-401 of this volume.


Collected Works Volume 29
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 







==========

## Speech at a Meeting of the
  Railwaymen of Moscow Junction











Speech At A Meeting Of The Railwaymen Of Moscow Junction
April 16, 1919



V. I. Lenin
Speech At A Meeting Of 
The Railwaymen Of Moscow Junction
April 16, 1919


Delivered: 16 April, 1919
First Published: Pravda No. 85, April 23, 1919; Published according to the Pravda text.
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, pages 314-319
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


Comrades, we all know that our country is now passing through difficult times. We have had to declare a mobili-sation to repel the last onslaught of the counter-revolu-tionaries and of international imperialism. At the present time we need the effective assistance of the masses of the working people themselves to carry out this mobilisation successfully.
Comrades, all of you, of course, know perfectly well what colossal difficulties the war is causing and what enormous sacrifices it demands, particularly at the present time, when the country has to face the food difficulties and transport chaos as a result of the war. Owing to this, the sufferings that the masses of the working people have to bear as a consequence of this war have now become more acute than ever.
But we have every reason to think and assert that our position has improved, and that we shall surmount all our difficulties. We are not, however, harbouring any illusions. We know that at the present time our enemies, the capital-ists of Britain, France and America, who are obviously working jointly with the Russian capitalists, are making a last effort to overthrow Soviet power. We see that the representatives of the landowners and the capitalists have been conferring in Paris for a long time now. We see that day after day and hour after hour they have greater hopes that Soviet power will collapse. But we also see that to this day, five months after their victory over Germany, they have failed to conclude peace. Why? Because they are quarrelling among themselves over the division of the dainty morsels—who is to get Turkey, who is to get Bul-garia, how is Germany to be plundered, which titbits Brit-ain, France and America are to have, how many billions to take in the form of indemnities from the Germans? It is obvious that they will get nothing from Germany, because that country has been ruined by the war, and the masses of the working people there are more and more vigorously resisting the oppression of the bourgeois government.
Comrades, because of all this we may be sure that at the present time, in view of Kolchak’s victory on the East-ern Front, there has been a fresh burst of hope on the part of the Russian and foreign capitalists. But even though Kolchak may succeed in winning partial victories, they will never realise their hopes in respect of the Soviet Rus-sian Republic.
We know that after their victory over Germany, the Al-lies were left with capital, an army millions strong, and a navy that knows no rival. Immediately after the defeat of Germany they had every opportunity of utilising all these forces for the purpose of conquering the Soviet Rus-sian Republic. All that the Allied imperialists did in South Russia, their landing on the Black Sea coast and their occupation of Odessa, was directed against Soviet power.
But what do we see today, five months later? Did they not have military forces, a million-strong army, and a navy? Why did they have to retreat before the badly armed army of Ukrainian workers and peasants?
Because there is disaffection among their troops; this is proved by the information we have received, and which has been corroborated. A war for the division of capitalists’ profits cannot be waged for four years with impunity. And now they have defeated Wilhelm, upon whom they put all the blame, they are unable to continue the war. We know that in the military sense the Entente countries were, and strictly speaking, still are, immeasurably stronger than we are. Nevertheless, we say that they have lost the war against us. This is not merely our imagination, or enthusiasm on our part, it has been proved by the events in the Ukraine. They cannot fight after all countries have been exhausted
by war, worn out by it, when it is becoming obvious to everybody that the war is being continued only for the purpose of preserving the power of capital over the working people. The Allies are still postponing the inevitable con-clusion of peace with Russia, for the sake of which we have taken a number of steps, and have even offered terms that will be most burdensome for us. But we know that heavy financial burdens are immeasurably easier to bear than the continuation of the war, which deprives us of the younger generation of the workers and peasants. The imperialist governments know they cannot wage war against us. They know what the advance of Kolchak, who has mobilised several tens of thousands of young Siberian peasants, is really worth. He dared not recruit men who have seen active service, for he knew that they would not follow him, and he is able to keep control over these peasant lads only by brutal discipline and deception.
That is why we say with absolute conviction, although our position has become more acute, that we are in a posi-tion to bring this war to a close within the next few months and the Allies will be compelled to conclude peace with us. They are relying on Kolchak, they are counting on the food difficulties causing the collapse of Soviet power; nothing of the kind, we say. Of course, our food situation is by no means an easy one, and we know that still greater difficulties lie ahead. Nevertheless, we say that our position is nowhere near as bad as it was last year. At that time, last spring, the food shortage and the transport chaos were a greater threat than now.
 In the first half of 1918 our food supply organisations were able to procure only twenty-eight million poods of grain, but in the second half of that year they obtained sixty-seven million poods. The first half of the year is always more difficult and the food shortage more severe. Last year, when the whole of the Ukraine was under the heel of the Germans, when Krasnov in the Don region re-ceived scores of carloads of military supplies from the Germans, and when the Czechoslovaks had captured the Volga area, the food situation was incomparably worse.
Now, the Russian Socialist Soviet Republic has been joined by others. The Latvian Republic has recently con-solidated its position. There is disaffection among the German troops who advanced so rapidly, and the German soldiers say that. they will not fight to restore the power of the barons. And the Ukraine, which Petlyura’s gang captured for a short, period, has now been entirely cleared of them and our Red troops are marching on to Bessarabia. We know that the international position of the Soviet Republic is becoming more stable every day, we may say, every hour. You all know that Soviet power has been es-tablished in Hungary, too, that a Soviet Republic has been set up there, and when it became evident that the Allies intended to plunder the country the bourgeoisie resigned and its place was taken by the workers.
Now, with the conquest of the Ukraine and the consoli-dation of Soviet power in the Don region, we are gaining strength. We can now say that we have sources of grain and food, and an opportunity of obtaining fuel from the Donets Basin. We are convinced, that, although the most difficult months are approaching, although the food crisis is more acute and our transport system is worn out and ruined, we shall nevertheless get over this crisis. In the Ukraine there are huge stocks of grain, surpluses that are difficult to take all at once; partisan warfare is still raging there, and the peasants, intimidated by the brutal rule of the Germans, are afraid to seize the landed estates. The first organisational steps in the Ukraine are difficult, just as they were here in the period when the Soviet government had its headquarters at Smolny.
We must send no less than three thousand railwaymen and a number of peasants from starving North Russia to the Ukraine. The Ukrainian Government has already issued a decree fixing the exact amount of grain that we may take at once at a hundred million poods.
According to our information, in one of the districts of the Donets Basin there are also a million poods of grain at a distance of not more than ten versts from the railway.
Last year we had no such stocks, no such resources, but we have them now. This shows that if we exert all our efforts for a short time we shall be able to bring the war to a close within the next few months. We have decisive preponderance in the South. The Allies—the French and British—have lost their campaign and have discovered that with the insignificant number of troops at their com-mand they cannot wage war against the Soviet Republic. The lies that they spread about us are being dispelled; nobody now believes the fairy-tale that the Bolsheviks overthrew the former government by force and are main-taming power by force. Everybody knows that the Soviet Republic is gaining strength every day.
We are mobilising you now because the outcome of the war depends on this mobilisation. We have every reason for stating that it will decide this issue in our favour, and the imperialists will be compelled to accept our offer of peace because their strength is waning day by day.
Comrades, this is why the Soviet government has decided to strain every nerve, to mobilise mainly the workers and the peasants of the non-agricultural gubernias. We think that this mobilisation, assuming we make a rapid advance at the front, will enable us also to improve the food situa-tion, for it will reduce the number of consumers in the non-agricultural gubernias, where the famine is more acute. The tens of thousands of men who will be sent to the front-and we are fighting in the most fertile and well-fed districts of the country—will be able to obtain food for themselves, and if we develop the parcel post system, they will be able immediately to assist their families at home to a no less and perhaps even to a larger extent than under the pood-and-a-half system.
The possibility of bringing the war to a speedy close depends on this mobilisation; and on this mobilisation we base our hopes that Kolchak’s advance will be checked and his forces routed. We do not want to weaken our forces in the South where they are winding up their victory over the remnants of Krasnov’s gangs because we want to make sure of our hold over this most fertile district. We have captured almost the whole of the Don region; in the North Caucasus there are even larger stocks of grain which we are sure of getting hold of if we do not weaken the Southern Front.
Comrades, for the first time in the history of the world we are waging a war in which the workers and peasants, knowing, feeling and seeing that the burden of war is im-mense, suffering the pangs of starvation in a country which is surrounded by the imperialists like a besieged fortress, understand that they are fighting for the land and factories. A nation in which the majority of the workers and peasants realise, feel and see that they are fighting for their own Soviet power, for the rule of the working people, for the cause whose victory will ensure them and their children all the benefits of culture, of all that has been created by human labour—such a nation can never he vanquished. And we are convinced, comrades, that this mobilisation will he carried through much better than previous mobilisations, that you will support it, that iii addition to speakers at meetings, every one of you, and every one of your friends, will become a propagandist and go to his fellow-workers in the factories and on the railways and explain to them in plain language why it is necessary now to exert all efforts so as to crush the enemy within the next few months. The masses themselves will rise, they will all become agitators to a man, and create an invincible force that will ensure the existence of the Soviet Republic not only in Russia, but all over the world.

Collected Works Volume 29
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 







==========

## The Fight against
  Kolchak. Speech at a Conference of Moscow Factory
  Committees and Trade Unions











The Fight Against Kolchak



V. I. Lenin
The Fight Against Kolchak
Speech At A Conference Of Moscow Factory Committees And Trade Unions
April 17, 1919
Newspaper Report


Delivered: 23 June, 1919
First Published: Izvestia No, 84, April 18, 1919; Published according to the Izvestia text 
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, pages 320-323
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


Lenin, in a vigorous speech, called upon the Moscow proletariat to take a direct part in the fight against Kolchak. Kolchak’s latest offensive, he said, was undoubtedly instigated by the imperialist powers of the Entente. The fact that the Entente was directing all the movements of the whiteguards in the border regions was proved by the telegram received from Comrade Stuka the day before to the effect that the Germans in Courland had stopped their offensive, but the Soviet Government in Latvia could not conclude peace with them because France, Britain and America were demanding that the Germans remain in Courland and continue the war. The German generals were willing to obey the victors, but the German soldiers emphatically refused to fight. The Allies’ last card had been beaten. The victories in the South had shown that the Allies lack the forces with which to wage war against the Soviet Republic, or rather, they had lost control over their forces. The Allies’ gamble in the South had ended in a shameful act of plunder when they fled from Odessa. The “enlightened” Allies accused the Soviets of committing acts of robbery and violence, but themselves robbed the Soviets of their merchant fleet which they took from Odessa without any right or justification, thereby downing the civil population to starvation. This was an act of revenge for the collapse of their imperialist plans. The Republic had wound up the Southern and Crimean fronts and was on the verge of winding up the Don Front. According to the latest information received, the Red Army was forty versts from Novocherkassk and victory was assured.
Kolchak’s offensive had been instigated by the Allies in order to divert Soviet forces from the Southern Front and give the remnants of the whiteguard forces and Petlyura’s gangs in the South an opportunity to recuperate, but the plan would fail. The Soviets would not withdraw a single regiment, or a single company, from the Southern Front.
A new army would be organised for the Eastern Front, and for this purpose mobilisation had been ordered. This mobilisation would be the last. It would enable the Soviets to put an end to Kolcliak, i.e., to put an end to the war, and this time for good.
The mobilisation had been ordered solely for the nonagricultural, industrial gubernias. In drawing up the plan for this mobilisation attention had been paid not only to the interests of the war, but also to the interests of agriculture and food supplies. People were being transferred from the starving gubernias to the grain-producing regions. To a large extent this mobilisation would relieve the food situation in the metropolitan cities and the northern gubernias. All mobilised men would be allowed to send their families at home two food parcels a month, and in this way the working population would be able to obtain bread from their relatives at the front. According to the report of the Commissar for Posts and Telegraphs, food parcels played an important part in supplying food for the towns; in one day 37 carloads of food parcels had arrived. This measure would undoubtedly be more effective and more palpable than the pood-and-a-half experiment made last year.
The mobilisation had been properly conceived and planned, but to he successful it would have to be carried out in an unbureaucratic way. It had to be borne in mind that the mobilisation would be of decisive importance, and every effort had to be made to carry it out. Every class-conscious working man and every class-conscious working woman would have to take a direct part in it. Conferences and mass meetings were not enough. What was needed was individual agitation. Every man liable to mobilisation should be personally visited. Every one of them should be convinced individually that the ending of the war depended on his courage, his determination and his devotion.
The proletarian revolution was spreading to all countries of the world, continued Lenin. The fact that the Allies had practically abandoned open military intervention in Russia’s affairs was due to their inability to control their own armies, which had instinctively felt the effects of the Russian revolution. They were afraid of their own soldiers and workers, whom they were trying to shield from the influence of the Russian revolution. Lately, even newspaper reports of the successes of Bolshevism had been prohibited in the Allied countries. In Italy, a barrier had been set up to keep out even private letters from Russia. Lenin said that the other day he had received a letter from the well-known Italian socialist, Morgan, who had been very moderate at the Zimmerwald Conference. This letter had been sent through secret channels and was written on tiny scraps of paper, like Party correspondence in tsarist times.
In this secret letter, Morgan wrote: “On behalf of the Italian Party I send most hearty greetings to the Russian comrades and to the Soviet government..” (Stormy applause.)
Everybody knew that the bourgeois government had voluntarily resigned in Hungary, voluntarily released Béla Kun from prison; he was a Hungarian army officer, a Communist, who had been a prisoner of war in Russia, had fought actively in the ranks of the Russian Communists, and had taken part in the suppression of the Left SocialistRevolutionary insurrection in July last year. This formerly persecuted, slandered and tormented Hungarian Bolshevik had become practically the leader of the Hungarian Soviet Government. Compared with Russia, Hungary was a small country; but the Hungarian revolution would, perhaps, play a more important role in history than the Russian revolution. The people in that cultured country were taking into account the entire experience of the Russian revolution. They were firmly applying the principle of socialisation, and owing to the ground having been better prepared there, the edifice of socialism was being built more systematically and successfully.
And at that very moment when it could be said with certainty that the cause of international imperialism was lost for ever, danger was looming in the East in the shape of Kolchak’s brutal and desperate whiteguard hordes. This had got to be stopped. By putting an end to Koichak they would put an end to the war for good. All efforts must be exerted. Every class-conscious proletarian would have to take part in the mobilisation. Every class-conscious working man and working woman would have to devote every spare moment to the work of individual agitation. They would not have to submit to this strain for long; a few months, or a few weeks, perhaps; but it would be the last and final effort, for victory was certain.

Collected Works Volume 29
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 







==========

## Speech at the First
  all-Russia Congress of Communist Students











Speech At The First All-Russia Congress Of Communist Students



V. I. Lenin
Speech At 
The First All-Russia Congress Of Communist Students
April 17, 1919[1]


Delivered: 23 June, 1919
First Published: 1923 
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, page 324
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


It gives me great pleasure to greet you. I do not know how many gubernias are represented here, or where you have come from. The important thing is that the youth, the communist youth, are organising. The important thing is that the youth are gathering together to learn to build the new type of school. Now you have a new type of school. The old, bureaucratic school, which you hated and detested, and with which you had no ties, no longer exists. We have planned our work for a very long period. The future society we are striving for, the society in which all must work, the society in which there will be no class distinctions, will take a long time to build. At present we are only laying the foundations of this future society, but you will have to build it when you grow up. At present, work as your strength permits; do not undertake tasks that are too much for you; be guided by your seniors. Once again I greet this Congress and wish your labours every success.
Endnotes
[1] This Congress took place in Moscow between April 15 an April 21, 1919, and was attended by about 200 delegates representing 8,000 members of the Union of Communist Students. The Congress passed a resolution to merge the Union. of Communist Students with the Young Communist League. An instruction confirmed by the Central Committee of the R.C.P.(B.) on May 11, 1919 made the Russian Young Communist League responsible for work among the working-class and peasant youth and among the student youth.

Collected Works Volume 29
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 






==========

## Message of Greetings to the Bavarian Soviet Republic











Message Of Greetings To The Bavarian Soviet Republic



V. I. Lenin
Message Of Greetings
To The Bavarian Soviet Republic


Delivered: 27 April, 1919
First Published: Pravda No. 111, April 22, 1930; Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, pages 325-326
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


We thank you for your message of greetings, and on our part whole heartedly greet the Soviet Republic of Bavaria. We ask you insistently to give us more frequent, definite information on the following. What measures have you taken to fight the bourgeois executioners, the Scheidernanns and Co.; have councils of workers and servants been formed in the different sections of the city; have the workers been armed; have the bourgeoisie been disarmed; has use been made of the stocks of clothing and other items for immediate and extensive aid to the workers, and especially to the farm labourers and small peasants; have the capitalist factories and wealth in Munich and the capitalist farms in its environs been confiscated; have mortgage and rent payments by small peasants been cancelled; have the wages of farm labourers and unskilled workers been doubled or trebled; have all paper stocks and all printing-presses been confis-cated so as to enable popular leaflets and newspapers to be printed for the masses; has the six-hour working day with two or three-hour instruction in state administration been introduced; have the bourgeoisie in Munich been made to give up surplus housing so that workers may be immediately moved into comfortable flats; have you taken over all the banks; have you taken hostages from the ranks of the bourgeoisie; have you introduced higher rations for the workers than for the bourgeoisie; have all the workers been mobilised for defence and for ideological propaganda in the neighbouring villages? The most urgent and most extensive implementation of these and similar measures, coupled with the initiative of workers’, farm labourers’ and— ;acting apart from them— ;small peasants’ councils, should strengthen your position. An emergency tax must be levied on the bourgeoisie, and an actual improvement effected in the condition of the workers, farm labourers and small peasants at once and at all costs.
With sincere greetings and wishes of success.
Lenin

Collected Works Volume 29
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 







==========

## Telegram to the Chairman of  the Council of People’s  Commissars of the Ukraine











Chairman Of The Council Of People’S Commissars Of The Ukraine



V. I. Lenin
Telegram To The
Chairman Of The Council Of People’S Commissars Of The Ukraine


Written: Late April, 1919
First Published: First published in the Fourth (Russian) Edition of the
Collected Works; Published according to the manuscript

Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, page 327
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


The resolution passed by the Ekaterinoslav Socialist-Revolutionaries shows that those scoundrels are advocates of the kulaks. There must be a newspaper campaign against them on the grounds of their defence of the kulaks and their slogan “oppose centralisation”; it must be required of them that they expose the kulaks and struggle against the free sale of grain by peasants. In the government they must be tied down by precise directives and kept under strict surveillance and in the event of there being the slightest deviation from the government’s policy on food, co-operatives and finances and on the question of the closest collaboration with Russia, preparations must be made to expel them in disgrace. Keep me more frequently informed.

Lenin


Collected Works Volume 29
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 







==========

## Three Speeches Delivered In
  Red Square











Three May Day Speeches Delivered In Red 
Square



V. I. Lenin
Three Speeches Delivered In Red 
      Square
May Day, 1919
Newspaper Reports


Delivered: May Day, 1919
First Published: Speech 1: Published in lzvestia No. 93, May 3, 1919; Published according to the Izvestia text; Speeches 2 & 3: Published in Vecherniye Izvestia Moshovskogo Sovieta No. 230.; 1919; Published according to the newspaper text 
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, pages 328-331
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


Lenin’s appearance among the demonstrators
    was greeted with a lengthy ovation. After greeting the Moscow and
    world proletariat, Lenin compared the May Day celebrations of the
    previous year with the present celebrations. In the course of the
    year, he said, the political situation had changed considerably in
    favour of Soviet power. On May the First the year before they had
    been threatened by German imperialism, it had been routed and
    dispersed.
The conditions under which the proletarian festival was being
    celebrated had changed in other countries as well. The workers in
    all countries were taking the path of struggle against
    imperialism. The emancipated working class was triumphantly
    celebrating its festival freely and openly not only in Soviet
    Russia, but also in Soviet Hungary, and ill Soviet Bavaria.
“And we can say with certainty,” continued Lenin,
    “that not only in Red Moscow, in Red Petrograd and in
    Budapest, but in all large proletarian centres, the workers, who
    have come out into the streets today riot merely to take the air
    but to demonstrate their strength, are talking about the
    significance of Soviet power and of the early triumph of the
    proletariat.”
Going on to deal with the threats of Anglo-French
    imperialism, Lenin said that considering that Anglo-French
    imperialists had been compelled to retire from the battle-field in
    the Ukraine, where small units of insurgents were operating, they
    would certainly be unable to resist the united forces of Soviet
    Russia, Hungary and Bavaria. Their withdrawal from Odessa and the
    Crimea had shown that the British and French soldiers did not wish
    to fight against Soviet Russia, and this was the pledge of Soviet
    victory.
Lenin then read a telegram he had received from Comrade Kamenev
    to the effect that Sevastopol had been entirely cleared of French
    forces.
“Thus, today,” he said, “the Red Flag of the
      proletariat, which is celebrating its day of liberation from the
      imperialist gangs, is flying over liberated Sevastopol.”
      (Lengthy ovation. Shouts of “Hurrah”
      repeated for a long time.)

    

      Dealing with the Kolchak danger, Lenin said that the latest
      reports from the front gave them grounds to believe that victory
      over Koichak was quite near. Tens and hundreds of thousands of
      men were being sent to the front, and these would completely
      destroy Koichak’s gangs.
In conclusion, Lenin expressed his confidence in the final
    victory of Soviet power all over the world and exclaimed:
    “Long live the world Soviet republic! Long live
    communism!”
2
“The majority of those here present are no older than 30
      to 35 years of age,” said Lenin, “and they will live
      to see the full bloom of communism, from which we are still
      remote.”
Pointing to the children, Lenin said that they, who were
    taking. part in the celebration of the festival of the
    emancipation of labour, would fully enjoy the fruits of the
    labours and sacrifices of the revolutionaries.
“Our grandchildren will examine the documents and other
    relics of the epoch of the capitalist system with amazement. It
    will be difficult for them to picture to themselves how the trade
    in articles of primary necessity could remain in private hands,
    how factories could belong to individuals, how some men could
    exploit others, how it was possible for those who did not work to
    exist. Up to now the story of what our children would see in the
    future has sounded like a fairy-tale; but today, comrades, you
    clearly see that the edifice of socialist society, of which we
    have laid the foundations, is not a utopia. Our children will
    build this edifice with oven greater zeal.” (Stormy
    applause.)
    
Published in Vecherniye Izvestia
      .3Ioskuvsiogo Savieta No. 230, May 2, 1919; Published according to
      the newspaper text
3

      Speech At The Unveiling Of A Monument
      To Stepan Razin On Lobnoye 
      Mesto[1]


(Stormy applause). Comrades, we are today celebrating
      May Day in company with proletarians throughout the world who
      thirst for the overthrow of capital. This Lobnoye Mesto is a
      reminder of how many centuries of torment were suffered by the
      working people under the yoke of the oppressors, for the power
      of capital never could be maintained except by the force and
      oppression that even in past times aroused indignation. This
      monument is erected to one who represented the rebellious
      peasants. On this spot he laid down his life in the struggle for
      freedom. Russian revolutionaries have made many sacrifices in
      the struggle against capital. The best of the proletarians and
      the peasants, the freedom fighters, perished, bmit it was not in
      the fight for the sort of freedom capital offers, freedom in
      which the banks, private factories and profiteering are
      retained. Down with such freedom! What we need is real freedom
      and that is possible only when society consists entirely of
      working people. To achieve such freedom much labour and many
      sacrifices will be required. We shall do everything possible to
      achieve that great aim, to build socialism. (Stormy
      applause).

Endnotes
[1]
    Lobnoye Mesto is a round stone dais in Red Square. Royal edicts
    and death sentences were announced from it in the sixteenth and
    seventeenth centuries. In 1671, Stepan Razin, leader of the
    peasant revolt of 1667-71, was executed
    there—Editor.

Collected Works Volume 29
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 







==========

## First all-Russia Congress on
  adult Education











First All-Russia Congress on Adult Education, May 6-19, 1919



V. I. Lenin
First All-Russia Congress on Adult Education
May 6-19, 1919


Delivered: 6 May & 19 May, 1919
First Published: Published in the pamphlet: N. Lenin, Two Speeches at the First All-Russia Congress on Adult Education, Moscow, 1919; Published according to the pamphlet  
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, pages 333-376
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


1
Speech Of Greeting 
May 6
 Comrades, it gives me pleasure to greet the Congress on adult education. You do not, of course, expect me to deliver a speech that goes deeply into this subject, like that delivered by the preceding speaker, Comrade Lunacharsky, who is well-informed on the matter and has made a special study of it. Permit me to confine myself to a few words of greeting and to the observations I have made and thoughts that have occurred to me in the Council of People’s Commissars when dealing more or less closely with your work. I am sure that there is not another sphere of Soviet activity in which such enormous progress has been made during the past eighteen months as in the sphere of adult education. Undoubtedly, it has been easier for us and for you to work in this sphere than in others. Here we had to cast aside the old obstacles and the old hindrances. Here it was much easier to do something to meet the tremendous demand for knowledge, for free education and free development, which was felt most among the masses of the workers and peasants; for while the mighty pressure of the masses made it easy for us to remove the external obstacles that stood in their path, to break up the historical bourgeois institutions which bound us to imperialist war and doomed Russia to bear the enormous burden that resulted from this war, we nevertheless felt acutely how heavy the task of re-educating the masses was, the task of organisation and instruction, spreading knowledge, combating that heritage of ignorance, primitiveness, barbarism and savagery that we took over. In this field the struggle had to be waged by entirely different methods; we could count only on the prolonged success and the persistent and systematic influence of the leading sections of the population, an influence which the masses willingly submit to, but often we are guilty of doing less than we could do. I think that in taking these first steps to spread adult education, education, free from the old limits and conventionalities, which the adult population welcomes so much, we had at first to contend with two obstacles. Both these obstacles we inherited from the old capitalist society, which is clinging to us to this day, is dragging us down by thousands and millions of threads, ropes and chains.
The first was the plethora of bourgeois intellectuals, who very often regarded the new type of workers’ and peasants’ educational institution as the most convenient field for testing their individual theories in philosophy and culture, and in which, very often, the most absurd ideas were hailed as something new, and the supernatural and incongruous were offered as purely proletarian art and proletarian culture.[1] (Applause.) This was natural and, perhaps, pardonable in the early days, and the broad movement cannot be blamed for it. I hope that, in the long run, we shall try to get rid of all this and shall succeed.
The second was also inherited from capitalism. The broad masses of the petty-bourgeois working people who were thirsting for knowledge, broke down the old system, but could not propose anything of an organising or organised nature. I had opportunities to observe this in the Council of People’s Commissars when the mobilisation of literate persons and the Library Department were discussed, and from these brief observations I realised the seriousness of the situation in this field. True, it is not quite customary to refer to something bad in a speech of greeting. I hope that you are free from these conventionalities, and will not be offended with me for telling you of my somewhat sad observations. When we raised the question of mobilising literate persons, the most striking thing was the brilliant victory achieved by our revolution without immediately emerging from the limits of the bourgeois revolution. It gave freedom for development to the available forces, but these available forces were petty bourgeois and their watch- word was the old one—each for himself and God for all—the very same accursed capitalist slogan which can never lead to anything but Kolchak and bourgeois restoration. If we review what we are doing to educate the illiterate, I think we shall have to draw the conclusion that we have done very little, and that our duty in this field is to realise that the organisation of proletarian elements is essential. It is not the ridiculous phrases which remain on paper that matter, but the introduction of measures which the people need urgently and which would compel every literate person to regard it his duty to instruct several illiterate persons. This is what our decree says[2]; but in this field hardly anything has been done.
When another question was dealt with in the Council of People’s Commissars, that of the libraries, I said that the complaints we are constantly hearing about our industrial backwardness being to blame, about our having few books and being unable to produce enough—these complaints, I told myself, are justified. We have no fuel, of course, our factories are idle, we have little paper and we cannot produce books. All this is true, but it is also true that we cannot get at the books that are available. Here we continue to suffer from peasant simplicity and peasant helplessness; when the peasant ransacks the squire’s library he runs home in the fear that somebody will take the books away from him, because he cannot conceive of just distribution, of state property that is not something hateful, but is the common property of the workers and of the working people generally. The ignorant masses of peasants are not to blame for this, and as far as the development of the revolution is concerned it is quite legitimate, it is an inevitable stage, and when the peasant took the library and kept it hidden, he could not do otherwise, for he did not know that all the libraries in Russia could be amalgamated and that there would be enough books to satisfy those who can read and to teach those who cannot. At present we must combat the survivals of disorganisation, chaos, and ridiculous departmental wrangling. This must be our main task. We must take up the simple and urgent matter of mobilising the literate to combat illiteracy. We must utilise the books that are available and set to work to organise a network of libraries which will help the people to gain access to every available book; there must be no parallel organisations, but a single, uniform planned organisation. This small matter reflects one of the fundamental tasks of our revolution. If it fails to carry out this task, if it fails to set about creating a really systematic and uniform organisation in place of our Russian chaos and inefficiency, then this revolution will remain a bourgeois revolution because the major specific feature of the proletarian revolution which is marching towards communism is this organisation—for all the bourgeoisie wanted was to break up the old system and allow freedom for the development of peasant farming, which revived the same capitalism as in all earlier revolutions.
Since we call ourselves the Communist Party, we must understand that only now that we have removed the external obstacles and have broken down the old institutions have we come face to face with the primary task of a genuine proletarian revolution in all its magnitude, namely, that of organising tens and hundreds of millions of people. After the eighteen months’ experience that we all have acquired in this field, we must at last take the right road that will lead to victory over the lack of culture, and over the ignorance and barbarism from which we have suffered all this time. (Stormy applause.)
2
Deception Of The People With Slogans 
                     Of Freedom And Equality
May 19

 Comrades, instead of an appraisal of the current situation, which I think some of you expect today, permit me to answer the most important political questions—not only theoretical, of course, but also practical—which now loom before us, characterise the entire stage of the Soviet revolution and give rise to most controversy; they give rise to most of attacks by people who think they are socialists, and they cause most confusion in the minds of people who think they are democrats and who are particularly fond of accusing us of violating democracy. It seems to me that these general political questions are too often, even constantly, to be found in all present-day propaganda and agitation, and in all anti-Bolshevik literature—when, of course, this literature rises slightly above the level of the downright lying, slander and vituperation of all organs of the bourgeois press. If we take the literature of a slightly higher level I think we shall find that the fundamental questions are the relations between democracy and dictatorship, the tasks of the revolutionary class in a revolutionary period, the tasks of the transition to socialism in general, and the relations between the working class and the peasantry; I think that these questions serve as the main basis for all present-day political controversies, and although it may sometimes seem to you that it is something of a digression from the immediate topics af the day, the explanation of these issues should be our chief duty. I can not, of course, undertake to cover all these questions in a short lecture. I have chosen some, which I should like to talk to you about. 

I
 The first point I have chosen is that of the difficulties of every revolution, of every transition to a new system. If you examine the attacks that are made against the Bolsheviks by people who think that they are socialists and democrats—and as examples of such I can quote the groups of writers in Vsegda Vperyod!  and Dyelo Naroda, newspapers which in my opinion have quite rightly been suppressed in the interests of the revolution, and the representatives of which most often resort to theoretical criticism in attacks of the type natural for organs which our authorities regard as counter-revolutionary—if you examine the attacks on Bolshevism made by this camp, you will find that a constant accusation is the following: “The Bolsheviks promised you, the working people, bread, peace and freedom; but they have not given you bread, or peace, or freedom, they have deceived you, and they have deceived you by abandoning democracy.” I shall deal with the departure from democracy separately. At present I will take the other side of this accusation—“The Bolsheviks promised bread, peace and freedom, but the Bolsheviks gave you a continuation of the war, an exceptionally fierce and stubborn struggle, a war of all the imperialists, of the capitalists of all the Entente countries—which means of the most civilised and advanced countries—against tormented, tortured, backward and weary Russia.” And these accusations, I repeat, you will find in both the newspapers I have mentioned; you will hear them made in conversation with every bourgeois intellectual who, of course, thinks that he is not bourgeois; you will constantly hear them in conversation with every philistine. And so I ask you to give some thought to this sort of accusation.
Yes, the Bolsheviks did set out to make a revolution against the bourgeoisie, to overthrow the bourgeois government violently, to break away from all the traditional customs, promises and commandments of bourgeois democracy; they did set out to wage a most desperate and violent struggle and war to crush the propertied classes; they did this to extricate Russia, and then the whole of mankind, from the imperialist slaughter and to put an end to all war. Yes, the Bolsheviks did set out to make a revolution in order to achieve all this, and, of course, they have never thought of abandoning this fundamental and main object. Nor is there any doubt that the attempts to emerge from this imperialist slaughter, to smash the rule of the bourgeoisie, prompted all the civilised countries to attack Russia; for such is the political programme of France, Britain and America, no matter how much they insist that they have abandoned the idea of intervention. No matter how much the Lloyd Georges, Wilsons and Clemenceaus may assure us that they have abandoned the idea of intervention, we know that they are lying. We know that the Allied warships which left, and were compelled to leave, Odessa and Sevastopol, are now blockading the Black Sea coast, and are even giving artillery cover to that part of the Crimean Peninsula, near Kerch, where the volunteers[3] are concentrated. They say: “We cannot surrender this to you. Even if the volunteers fail to cope with you, we cannot surrender this part of the Crimean Peninsula, because, if we did, you would be masters of the Azov Sea, you will cut us off from Denikin and prevent us from sending supplies to our friends.” Or take the offensive now developing against Petrograd. Yesterday one of our destroyers fought against four enemy destroyers. Is it not clear that this is intervention? Is not the British navy taking part in it? Is not the same thing happening in Archangel and Siberia? The fact is that the whole civilised world is now fighting against Russia.
The question is, did we contradict ourselves when we called upon the working people to make a revolution, promising them peace, and brought things to the pitch that the whole civilised world is now attacking weak, weary, backward and ruined Russia? Or are those who have the presumption to hurl such a reproach at us acting in contradiction to the elementary concepts of democracy and socialism? That is the question. To present this question in its theoretical, general form, I shall draw an analogy. We talk about the revolutionary class, the revolutionary policy of the people, but I suggest you take an individual revolutionary. Take, for example, Chernyshevsky, and appraise his activities. What would be the appraisal of an absolutely ignorant man? Probably he would say: “Well, the man wrecked his own life, found himself in Siberia, and achieved nothing.” This is a sample. If we were to hear an argument like this from some unknown person we would say: “At best it comes from a man who is hopelessly ignorant and who is, perhaps, not to blame for being so ignorant that he cannot understand the importance of the activities of an individual revolutionary in the general chain of revolutionary events; or else it comes from a scoundrel, a supporter of reaction, who is deliberately trying to frighten the working people away from the revolution.” I took the example of Chernyshevsky because, no matter which trend the people who call themselves socialists may belong to, there cannot be any serious disagreement in their appraisal of this individual revolutionary. Everybody will agree that if an individual revolutionary is appraised from the point of view of the outwardly useless and often fruitless sacrifices he has made and the nature of his activities and their connection with the activities of preceding and succeeding revolutionaries is ignored—if the importance of his activities is appraised from this point of view, it is due either to complete ignorance, or to a vicious and hypocritical defence of the interests of reaction, oppression, exploitation and class tyranny. On this point there can be no disagreement.
Now I ask you to carry your thoughts from the individual revolutionary to the revolution of a whole nation, of a whole country. Has any Bolshevik ever denied that the revolution can be finally victorious only when it embraces all, or at all events, some of the most important advanced countries? We have always said that. Did we ever say that it was possible to emerge from the imperiarist war simply by the men sticking their bayonets into the ground? I deliberately use this expression which, in the Kerensky period, I personally, and all our comrades, constantly used in resolutions, speeches and newspaper articles. We said: The war cannot be brought to a close by the men sticking their bayonets into the ground. If there are Tolstoyans who think otherwise, they must be pitied as people who have taken leave of their senses, and you can expect nothing better from them.
We said that emergence from this war may involve us in a revolutionary war. We said this from 1915 onwards, and then later, in the Kerensky period. Of course, revolutionary war is also war, just as arduous, sanguinary and painful. And when the revolution develops on a world scale it inevitably arouses resistance on the same world scale. The situation now being such that all the civilised countries in the world are fighting against Russia, we must not be surprised that extremely ignorant peasants are accusing us of failing to keep our promises. Nothing else is to be expected from them. In view of their absolute ignorance, we cannot blame them. Indeed, how can you expect a very ignorant peasant to understand that there are different kinds of wars, that there are just and unjust wars, progressive and reactionary wars, wars waged by advanced classes and wars waged by backward classes, wars waged for the purpose of perpetuating class oppression and wars waged for the purpose of eliminating oppression? To understand this one must be familiar with the class struggle, with the principles of socialism, and at least a little bit familiar with the history of revolution. You cannot expect this from an ignorant peasant.
But when a man who calls himself a democrat, or a socialist, gets up on a platform to make a public statement— irrespective of what he calls himself, Menshevik, Social-Democrat, Socialist-Revolutionary, true socialist, adherent of the Berne International, there are lots of titles of this sort, titles are cheap—when such an individual gets up and charges us with having promised peace and called forth war, what answer should be made to him? Are we to assume that he is as ignorant as the ignorant peasant who cannot distinguish one kind of war from another? Are we to assume that he does not see the difference between the imperialist war, which was a predatory war, and which has now been utterly exposed as such—since the Treaty of Versailles only those who are totally incapable of reasoning and thinking, or who are totally blind, can fail to see that it was a predatory war on both sides—are we to assume that there is even one literate person who fails to see the difference between that predatory war and the war we are waging and which is assuming world-wide dimensions, because the world bourgeoisie have realised that they must fight their last decisive battle? We cannot assume any of this. And that is why we say that anybody who claims to be a democrat, or a socialist, of whatever shade, is a supporter of the bourgeoisie if he in one way or another, directly or indirectly, spreads among the people the accusation that the Bolsheviks are dragging out the Civil War, which is an arduous and painful war, whereas they promised peace; and this is how we shall answer him, and we shall take our stand against him just as we do against Kolchak. Such is our answer. Such is the entire issue.
The gentlemen of Dyelo Naroda express astonishment and say: “But we are opposed to Kolchak; what terrible injustice to persecute us!”
It is a great pity, gentlemen, that you refuse to be logical and do not wish to understand the simple ABC of politics from which certain definite deductions must be made. You say that you are opposed to Kolchak. I take up the newspapers Vsegda Vperyod!  and Dyelo Naroda and read the philistine arguments of this type, these moods that are so numerous and that prevail among the intelligentsia. I say that every one of you who spreads such accusations among the people is supporting Kolchak, because he does not understand the elementary, fundamental difference, which every literate person sees, between the imperialist war which we smashed, and the Civil War in which we have become involved. We never concealed from the people the fact that we were taking this risk. We are straining every nerve to defeat the bourgeoisie in this Civil War and to prevent all possibility of class oppression. There has never been, nor can there ever be, a revolution that was guaranteed against a long and arduous struggle, and perhaps filled with the most desperate sacrifices. Those who are unable to distinguish between the sacrifices made in the course of a revolutionary struggle for the sake of its victory, when all the propertied, all the counter-revolutionary classes are fighting against the revolution, those who cannot distinguish between these sacrifices and the sacrifices involved in a predatory war waged by the exploiters, are either abysmally ignorant—and such people ought to be made to learn their ABC, before giving them adult education they ought to be given the most elementary.education—or they are out-and-out Kolchak-supporting hypocrites, whatever they may call themselves, or under whichever title they may try to disguise themselves. And these accusations against the Bolsheviks are the most common and widespread. They are really linked up with the broad masses of the working people, because the ignorant peasants find it difficult to understand; they suffer from all war, no matter what the war is about. I am not surprised when I hear an ignorant peasant say: “We had to fight for the tsar, we fought for the Mensheviks, and now we have to fight for the Bolsheviks.” This does not surprise me. Indeed, war is war, and entails endless heavy sacrifices. “The tsar said that it was a war for freedom and liberation from a yoke; the Mensheviks said that it was a war for freedom and liberation from a yoke. And now the Bolsheviks say the same thing. They all say the same thing; how can we sort this all out?” 

    

 Indeed, how can an ignorant peasant sort it all out? Such a man still has to learn elementary politics. But what can we say about a man who uses such words as “revolution”, “democracy”, and “socialism”, and claims that these words should be used with understanding. He cannot juggle with such words unless he wants to be a political faker, for the difference between a war between two groups of robbers and a war waged by an oppressed class which has risen in revolt against all robbery is an elementary, radical and fundamental difference. The issue is not one of a certain party, class or government justifying war—the real point at issue is the nature of the war, its class content, which class is waging it, and what policy is embodied in it.
II
 I shall now leave the question of appraising the arduous and difficult period we are now passing through, and which is inevitably connected with the revolution, for another political issue, which also comes up in all debates, and also gives rise to confusion. This is the question of a bloc with the imperialists, of an alliance, an agreement with the imperialists.
Probably you have read in the newspapers the names of the Socialist-Revolutionaries Volsky and, I believe, Svyatitsky, who recently wrote in Izvestia, and issued their manifesto. They regard themselves as Socialist-Revolutionaries who cannot possibly be accused of having supported Kolchak. They left Kolchak, they suffered at the hands of Kolchak, and on coming over to us they rendered us a service against Kolchak. That is true. But examine the arguments these citizens advance. See how they appraise the question of a bloc with the imperialists, of an alliance, or agreement, with the imperialists. I had occasion to read their arguments when the authorities combating counter-revolution confiscated their writings, and when I had to examine their papers to be able to judge correctly the extent of their association with Kolchak. These are undoubtedly the best of the Socialist-Revolutionaries. In their writings I found the following argument, “What do you mean? You want us to repent; you are waiting for us to repent. Never! We have nothing to repent of! You accuse us of having entered into a bloc, an agreement with the Entente, with the imperialists. But did you Bolsheviks not enter into an agreement with the German imperialists? What is the Brest peace? Is not the Brest peace an agreement with imperialism? You entered into an agreement with German imperialism at Brest; we entered into an agreement with French imperialism; we are quits, we have nothing to repent of!”
This argument, which I found in the writings of the persons I have mentioned and of their colleagues, is one that I also find when I call to mind the newspapers I mentioned and when I try to sum up my impressions of philistine conversations. We constantly hear arguments of this kind, it is one of the chief political arguments we have to deal with. I therefore ask you to examine and analyse this argument, and to study it theoretically. What does it amount to? Are those right who say: “We democrats and socialists were in a bloc with the Entente; you were in a bloc with Wilhelm, you concluded the Brest peace. We have no grounds for mutual reproach. We are quits”? Or are we right when we say that those who not merely in words but in deeds are in agreement with the Entente against the Bolshevik revolution are supporters of Kolchak? Although they may deny it a thousand times, although they have personally deserted Kolchak and have proclaimed to the whole people that they are opposed to him, their very roots, the whole nature and significance of their arguments and their deeds make them Kolchak supporters. Who is right? This is the fundamental question of the revolution; and some thought must be given to this.
To explain this point, permit me to draw another analogy, this time, however, not with an individual revolutionary, but with an individual man in the street. Let us suppose that you were riding in an automobile and suddenly your car is surrounded by bandits who point a revolver at your head. Let us suppose that after this you surrender your money and weapons to the bandits, and even let them take the car and ride off. Well? You have given the bandits weapons and money. That is a fact. Now let us suppose that another citizen gave these bandits weapons and money so as to take part in their attacks on peaceful citizens.
In both cases an agreement is reached, whether written or verbal makes no difference. We can picture to ourselves a man giving up his revolver, his weapons and his money, without uttering a word. The nature of the agreement is clear: “I give you my revolver, my weapons and money, and you give me the opportunity to rid myself of your pleasant company.” (Laughter.) The agreement is a fact. It is also possible for a tacit agreement to be concluded by the man who gives the bandits weapons and money to enable them to rob other people and afterwards give him part of the loot. This, too, is a tacit agreement.
Now I ask you, could any literate person fail to distinguish between these two agreements? You will say that if a man is unable to distinguish between these two agreements and says, “You gave the bandits money and weapons and so don’t accuse other people of banditism; what right have you to accuse other people of banditism?”—such a man must be a cretin. If you were to meet such a literate person you would have to admit, or at least 999 out of 1,000 would admit, that he had taken leave of his senses, and that it is useless to discuss political, or even criminal, subjects with such a man.
I now ask you to carry your thoughts from this example to the comparison between the Brest peace and the agreement with the Entente. What was the Brest peace? Was it not an act of violence on the part of bandits who had at tacked us when we were honestly proposing peace and were calling upon all nations to overthrow their own bourgeoisie? It would have been ridiculous had we started by trying to overthrow the German bourgeoisie! We denounced this treaty before the whole world as a most predatory, plundering treaty, we condemned it and at first even refused to sign it, as we counted on the assistance of the German workers. But when the robbers put a revolver to our heads we said, take the weapons and the money, we will settle accounts with you later on by other means. We know that German imperialism has another enemy, whom blind people have not noticed, namely, the German workers. Can this agreement with imperialism be put on a par with the agreement entered into by democrats, socialists and Socialist-Revolutionaries—don’t laugh, the more radical the title the more resonant it sounds—with the agreement they entered into with the Entente to fight against the workers of their own country? But that is what they did, and are doing to this day. The most influential Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries, those with European reputations, are living abroad even today, and they are in alliance with the Entente. I do not know whether this is a written agreement; probably not, clever people do such things on the quiet. But it is obvious that such an agreement exists, since they are being made such a fuss of, are given passports, and wireless messages are being sent all over the world stating that Axelrod delivered a speech today, that Savinkov, or Avksentyev, will deliver a speech tomorrow, and that Breshkovskaya will speak the day after tomorrow. Is this not an agreement, even if a tacit one? But is it the same kind of agreement with the imperialists as we concluded? Outwardly it resembles ours as much as the act of a man who gives weapons and money to bandits resembles any act of this nature, irrespective of its object and character, at all events, irrespective of the object for which I give the bandits money and weapons: whether it is to get rid of them when they attack me and I find myself in a position where if I do not give them my revolver they will kill me; or I give the bandits money and weapons for the purpose of robbery, of which I am aware, and in the proceeds of which I am to share.
“I, of course, call this liberating Russia from the dictatorship of tyrants. I, of course, am a democrat, because I support the famous Siberian or Archangel democracy, and am fighting, of course, for a Constituent Assembly. Don’t dare to suspect that I am pursuing some evil object. And even if I am rendering assistance to those bandits, the British, French and American imperialists, I am doing so only in the interests of democracy, of the Constituent Assembly, of government by the people, of the unity of the working classes of the population, and in order to overthrow those tyrants and usurpers, the Bolsheviks!”
Noble aims, no doubt. But has not everybody who engages in politics heard that politics are not judged by bare statements but by real class content? Which class do you serve? If you are in agreement with the imperialists, are you participating in imperialist banditism or not?
In my “Letter to American Workers”, I spoke, among other things, about the American revolutionary people fighting to liberate themselves from England in the eighteenth century, when they were waging one of the first and greatest wars for real liberation in human history, one of the few really revolutionary wars in human history—and this great revolutionary American people, in fighting for their liberation, entered into agreements with the bandits of Spanish and French imperialism, who at that time had colonies in neighbouring parts of America. In alliance with these bandits, the American people fought the English and liberated themselves from them. Have you ever met any literate person anywhere in the world, have you seen any socialists, Socialist-Revolutionaries, representatives of democracy, or whatever it is they call themselves—even the Mensheviks—have you ever heard that any of these have the temerity publicly to blame the American people for this, to say that they violated the principle of democracy, freedom, and so forth? Such a crank has not yet been born. But today, we get people here who call themselves by these titles, and even claim a right to belong to the same International that we belong to, and say that it is merely a piece of Bolshevik mischievousness—and everybody knows that the Bolsheviks are mischievous—to organise their own International and refuse to join the good, old, common to all, united, Berne International!
And there are people who say: “We have nothing to repent of. You entered into an agreement with Wilhelm, we entered into an agreement with the Entente, we are quits!”
I say that if these people have even an elementary knowledge of politics they are Kolchak supporters, no matter how much they personally may have denied this, no matter how much they personally are sick and tired of Kolchak, no matter how much they have suffered at his hands and in spite of their having come over to our side. They are Kolchak supporters because it is impossible to imagine that they do not see the difference between an agreement one is compelled to make in the course of the struggle against the exploiters—and which the exploited classes have been compelled to make over and over again throughout the history of the revolution—and the conduct of our most influential alleged democrats, representatives of our”socialist” intelligentsia, some of whom yesterday and some today entered into agreements with the bandits and robbers of international imperialism against a section—as they say—a section of the working classes of their own country. These are Kolchak people, and the only relations possible with them are those between conscious revolutionaries and Kolchak supporters. 
III
 I now come to the next question, that of our attitude towards democracy in general.
I have already said that the democrats and socialists plead democracy as the most common justification, the most common defence of the political stand taken against us. The most emphatic supporter of this point of view in European literature is, as you, of course, know, Kautsky, the ideological leader of the Second International, and to this day a member of the Berne International. “The Bolsheviks have chosen a method which violates democracy; the Bolsheviks have chosen the method of dictatorship. Hence, their cause is unjust,” he says. This argument has been repeated a thousand and a million times, it occurs constantly in all periodicals, including the newspapers I have mentioned. It is being constantly repeated by all intellectuals, and sometimes the ordinary man in the street sub-consciously repeats it in his arguments. “Democracy means freedom, it means equality, it means settling questions by a majority. What can be higher than freedom, equality, and majority decisions? Since you Bolsheviks have departed from this, and even have the presumption to say publicly that you stand above freedom, equality and majority decisions, you must not be surprised, nor must you complain, when we call you usurpers and tyrants!”
We are not in the least surprised at this, for what we desire most of all is clarity; and the only thing we rely on is that the advanced section of the working people should really be conscious of its position. Yes, we said, and say it all the time in our programme, in the programme of our Party, that we shall not allow ourselves to be deceived by such high-sounding slogans as freedom, equality and the will of the majority, and that we shall treat as aiders and abettors of Kolchak those who call themselves democrats, adherents of pure democracy, adherents of consistent democracy and who, directly or indirectly, oppose it to the dictatorship of the proletariat.
Get this clear—you must get it clear. Are the pure democrats guilty of merely preaching pure democracy, defending it from the usurpers, or are they guilty of being on the side of the propertied classes, on the side of Kolchak?
We shall begin our examination with the question of freedom. Needless to say, for every revolution, socialist or democratic, freedom is a very, very important slogan. But our programme says that if freedom runs counter to the emancipation of labour from the yoke of capital, it is a deception. And every one of you who has read Marx—and, I think, even every one who has read at least one popular exposition of Marx’s theories—knows that Marx devoted the greater part of his life, the greater part of his literary work, and the greater part of his scientific studies to ridiculing freedom, equality, the will of the majority, and all the Benthams who wrote so beautifully about these things, and to proving that these phrases were merely a screen to cover up the freedom of the commodity owners, the freedom of capital, which these owners use to oppress the masses of the working people.
At the present time, when things have reached the stage of overthrowing the rule of capital all over the world, or at all events in one country; in this historical epoch, when the struggle of the oppressed working people for the complete overthrow of capital and the abolition of commodity production stands in the forefront, we say that all those who in such a political situation talk about “freedom in general”, who in the name of this freedom oppose the dictatorship of the proletariat are doing nothing more nor less than aiding and abetting the exploiters, for unless freedom promotes the emancipation of labour from the yoke of capital, it is a deception, as we openly say in our Party programme. Perhaps this is superfluous from the point of view of the outward structure of the programme, but it is most fundamental from the point of view of our propaganda and agitation, from the point of view of the principle of the proletarian struggle and proletarian power. We know perfectly well that we have to contend against world capital; we know perfectly well that at one time it was the task of world capital to create freedom, that it overthrew feudal slavery, that it created bourgeois freedom. We know perfectly well that this was epoch-making progress. And yet we say that we are opposing capitalism in general, republican capitalism, democratic capitalism, free capitalism; and, of course, we know that it will raise tho standard of liberty against us. But to this we have our answer, and we deemed it necessary to give this answer in our programme—all freedom is deception if it runs counter to the emancipation of labour from the yoke of capital.
But, perhaps, this is not the case? Perhaps there is no contradiction between freedom and the emancipation of labour from the yoke of capital? Take the West-European countries that you have visited, or at least have read about. Every book you read describes their system as the freest system. And now, these civilised countries of Western Europe—France and Britain—and America have raised this standard, are marching against the Bolsheviks “in the name of freedom”. Only the other day—we now get French newspapers but rarely because we are completely surrounded, but we do get wireless information, because, after all, they cannot blockade the air, and we intercept foreign wireless messages—the other day I had the opportunity of reading a wireless message that was sent out by the predatory government of France to the effect that in fighting the Bolsheviks and supporting their opponents, France was remaining true to her “lofty ideals of freedom”. We hear this sort of thing at every step, it is the general tone of their polemics against us.
But what do they mean by freedom? By freedom these civilised Frenchmen, Englishmen and Americans mean, say, freedom of assembly. The constitution should contain the clause: “Freedom of assembly for all citizens.” “This,” they say, “is the substance, this is the principal manifestation of freedom. But you Bolsheviks have violated freedom of assembly.”
To this we answer indeed, the freedom that you British, French and American gentlemen preach is a deception if it runs counter to the emancipation of labour from the yoke of capital. You have forgotten a detail, you civilised gentlemen. You have forgotten that your freedom is inscribed in a constitution which sanctions private property. That is the whole point.
In your constitution you have freedom side by side with private property. The fact that you recognise freedom of assembly, of course, marks vast progress compared with the feudal system, with medievalism, with serfdom. All socialists admitted this when they took advantage of the freedom of bourgeois society to teach the proletariat how to throw off the yoke of capitalism.
But your freedom is only freedom on paper, but not in fact. By that I mean that the large halls that are to be found in big cities—like this hall, for example—belong to the capitalists and landowners, and are sometimes called “Assembly Rooms for the Gentry”. You may freely assemble in these halls, citizens of the Russian Democratic Republic, but remember that they are private property and, pardon me for saying so, you must respect private property, otherwise you will be Bolsheviks, criminals, murderers robbers and mischief-makers. But we say: “We shall change all this. We shall first convert these Assembly Rooms into premises for workers’ organisations and then begin to talk about freedom of assembly.” You accuse us of violating freedom. But we say that all freedom is deception if it is not subordinated to the task of emancipating labour from the yoke of capital. The freedom of assembly inscribed in the constitutions of all bourgeois republics is a deception because in order to assemble in a civilised country, which after all has not abolished winter, has not changed its climate, it is necessary to have premises in which to assemble, and the best of these premises are private property. First, we shall confiscate the best premises and then begin to talk about freedom.
We say that to grant freedom of assembly to the capitalists would be a heinous crime against the working people; it would mean freedom of assembly for counter-revolutionaries. We say to the bourgeois intellectual gentlemen, to the gentlemen who advocate democracy—you lie when you throw in our face the accusation of violating freedom. When your great bourgeois revolutionaries made a revolution in England in 1649, and in France in 1792-93, they did not grant freedom of assembly to the royalists. The French revolution is called great because it did not suffer from the flabbiness, half-heartedness and phrase mongering which distinguished many of the revolutions of 1848, but was an effective revolution which, after overthrowing the royalists, completely crushed them. And we shall do the same thing with the capitalist gentlemen; for we know that in order to emancipate the working people from the yoke of capital we must deprive the capitalists of freedom of assembly; their “freedom” must be abolished, or curtailed. This will help to emancipate labour from the yoke of capital; it will help the cause of that true freedom under which there will be no buildings inhabited by single families, and which belong to private individuals, such as landowners, capitalists, or to joint-stock companies. When that time comes, when people have forgotten that it was possible for public buildings to be somebody’s property, we shall be in favour of complete “freedom”. When the world is inhabited only by those who work, and when people have forgotten that it was possible for idlers to have been members of society—this will not be very soon, and the bourgeois and bourgeois intellectual gentlemen are to blame for the delay—we shall then be in favour of freedom of assembly for all. At the present time, however, freedom of assembly would mean freedom of assembly for the capitalists, for counter-revolutionaries. We are fighting against them, we are resisting them, and we say that we deprive them of this freedom.
We are marching into battle—this is the meaning of the dictatorship of the proletariat. Gone is the time of naïve, utopian, fantastic, mechanical and intellectual socialism, when people imagined that it was sufficient to convince the majority, that it was sufficient to paint a beautiful picture of socialist society to persuade the majority to adopt socialism. Gone, too, is the time when it was possible to entertain oneself and others with these children’s fairy-tales. Marxism, which recognises the necessity for the class struggle, asserts that mankind can reach the goal of socialism only through the dictatorship of the proletariat. The word dictatorship is a cruel, stern, bloody and painful one; it is not a word to play with. Socialists advance this slogan because they know that the exploiters will surrender only after a desperate and relentless struggle, and that they will try to cover up their own rule by means of all sorts of high-sounding words.
Freedom of assembly—what can be loftier, what can be finer than this term? Is the development of the working people and of their mentality conceivable without freedom of assembly? Are the principles of humanity conceivable without freedom of assembly? But we say that the freedom of assembly inscribed in the constitution of Great Britain and the United States of America is a deception because it ties the hands of the masses of the working people during the whole period of their transition to socialism; it is a deception because we know perfectly well that the bourgeoisie will do all in their power to overthrow this new government, which is so unusual, and which seems so “monstrous” at first. Those who have thought about the class struggle and have anything like a clear and definite idea of the relations between the workers in revolt and the bourgeoisie, who have been overthrown in one country, but have not yet been overthrown in all countries, and who, because they have not been overthrown everywhere, are rushing into the struggle with greater ferocity than ever, will agree that it cannot be otherwise.
It is precisely after the bourgeoisie is overthrown that the class
      struggle assumes its acutest forms. And we have no use for those
      democrats and socialists who deceive themselves and deceive
      others by saying: “The bourgeoisie have been overthrown,
      the struggle is all over.” The struggle is not over, it
      has only just started, because, to this day, the bourgeoisie
      have not reconciled themselves to the idea that they have been
      overthrown. On the eve of the October Revolution they were very
      nice and polite, and Miiyukov, Chernov and the Novaya
Zhizn people said jestingly: “Now, please,
      Bolshevik gentlemen, form a Cabinet, take power yourselves for a
      few weeks, that would be a great help to us!” This is
      exactly what Chernov wrote on behalf of the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries, what Milyukov wrote in Rech,
      and what the semi-Menshevik Novaya Zhizn wrote. They
      spoke in jest because they did not take matters seriously. But
      now they see that matters are serious, and the British, French
      and Swiss bourgeoisie, who thought that their “democratic
      republics” were armour which protected them, see and
      realise that matters have become serious, and now they are all
      arming. If only you could see what is going on in free
      Switzerland, how, literally, every bourgeois is arming, how they
      are forming a White Guard, because they know that it is now a
      matter of preserving the privileges which enable them to keep
      millions of people in a state of wage-slavery. The struggle has
      now assumed world-wide dimensions, and therefore, anybody who
      opposes us with such catchwords as “democracy”, and
      “freedom”, takes the side of the propertied classes,
      deceives the people, for he fails to understand that up to now
      freedom and democracy have meant freedom and democracy for
the propertied classes and only crumbs from their table
      for the propertyless. 

    

      What is freedom of assembly when the working people are crushed
      by slavery to capital and by toil for the benefit of capital? It
      is a deception; and in order to achieve freedom for the working
      people it is first of all necessary to overcome the resistance
      of the exploiters, and since I am faced with the resistance of a
      whole class, it is obvious that I cannot promise this class
      either freedom, equality, or majority decisions. 

IV

 I shall now pass from freedom to equality. This is a much more profound subject. This brings us to a still more serious, a more painful question, one that gives rise to considerable dlsagreement.
The revolution in its course sweeps away one exploiting class after another. First, it swept away the monarchy, and by equality implied an elected government, a republic. Proceeding further it swept away the landowners; and you know that the keynote of the entire struggle against the medieval system, against feudalism, was the slogan “equality”. All are equal irrespective of social-estate; all are equal, millionaires and paupers alike. This is what the great revolutionaries of the period that has gone into history as the period of the great French Revolution said, thought and sincerely believed. The slogan of the revolution against the landowners was equality, and by equality was meant that the millionaires and the workers should have equal rights. The revolution developed. It said that “equality”—we did not specify this in our programme, for one cannot go on repeating the same thing endlessly; it is as clear as what we said about freedom—that equality is a deception if it runs counter to the emancipation of labour from the yoke of capital. That is what we say, and it is absolutely true. We say that a democratic republic with present-day equality is a fraud, a deception; here there is no equality, nor can there be. It is prevented by the private ownership of the means of production and money, capital. It is possible, at one stroke, to confiscate privately owned mansions and fine buildings, it is possible in a relatively short period to confiscate capital and the means of production. But try to abolish the private ownership of money.
 Money is congealed social wealth, congealed social labour. Money is a token which enables its owner to take tribute from all the working people. Money is a survival of yesterday’s exploitation. That is what money is. Can it be abolished at one stroke? No. Even before the socialist revolution the socialists wrote that it is impossible to abolish money at one stroke, and our experience corroborates this. There must be very considerable technical and, what is much more difficult and much more important, organisational achievement before we can abolish money; and until then we must put up with equality in words, in the constitution; we must put up with a situation in which everybody who possesses money practically has the right to exploit. We could not abolish money at one stroke. We say that for the time being money will remain and remain for a fairly long time in the transition period from the old capitalist system to the new socialist system. Equality is a deception if it runs counter to the emancipation of labour from the yoke of capital.
Engels was a thousand times right when he said that the concept of equality is a most absurd and stupid prejudice if it does not imply the abolition of classes.[4] Bourgeois professors attempted to use the concept equality as grounds for accusing us of wanting all men to be alike. They themselves invented this absurdity and wanted to ascribe it to the socialists. But in their ignorance they did not know that the socialists—and precisely the founders of modern scientific socialism, Marx and Engels—had said: equality is an empty phrase if it does not imply the abolition of classes. We want to abolish classes, and in this sense we are for equality. But the claim that we want all men to be alike is just nonsense, the silly invention of an intellectual who sometimes conscientiously strikes a pose, juggles with words, but says nothing—I don’t care whether he calls himself a writer, a scholar, or anything else.
But we say that our goal is equality, and by that we mean the abolition of classes. Then the class distinction between workers and peasants should be abolished. That is exactly our object. A society in which the class distinction between workers and peasants still exists is neither a communist society nor a socialist society. True, if the word socialism is interpreted in a certain sense, it might be called a socialist society, but that would be mere sophistry, an argument about words. Socialism is the first stage of communism; but it is not worth while arguing about words. One thing is clear, and that is, that as long as the class distinction between workers and peasants exists, it is no use talking about equality, unless we want to bring grist to the mill of the bourgeoisie. The peasantry constitute a class of the patriarchal era, a class which has been reared by decades and centuries of slavery; and throughout all these decades the peasants existed as small proprietors, first, under the heel of other classes, and later, formally free and equal, but as property-owners and the owners of food products.
This brings us to the question which most of all rouses the ire of our enemies, which most of all creates doubt in the minds of inexperienced and thoughtless people, and which separates us most of all from those would-be democrats and socialists who are offended because we do not recognise them as such, but call them supporters of the capitalists, perhaps due to their ignorance, but supporters of the capitalists all the same.
Their social conditions, production, living and economic conditions make the peasant half worker and half huckster.
This is a fact. And you cannot get away from this fact until you have abolished money, until you have abolished exchange. And for this years and years of the stable rule by the proletariat is needed; for only the proletariat is capable of vanquishing the bourgeoisie. We are told: “You are violators of equality, you have violated eguality not only with the exploiters—’with this I am inclined to agree’, some Socialist-Revolutionary or Menshevik who does not know what he is talking about may say—but you have violated equality between the workers and the peasants, you have violated the equality of ’labour democracy’, you are criminals!” In answer to this we say: “Yes, we have violated equality between the workers and peasants, and we assert that you who stand for this equality are supporters of Kolchak.” Recently I read a splendid article by Comrade Germanov, in Pravda, in which he deals with the theses drawn up by Citizen Sher, one of the most “socialistic” of the Menshevik Social-Democrats. These theses were submitted to one of our co-operative organisations, and they are of such a nature that they deserve to be engraved on a tablet and hung up in every volost executive committee with an inscription underneath stating: “This is Kolchak’s man.”
I know perfectly well that Citizen Sher and his friends will call me a slanderer for this, and perhaps something worse. Nevertheless, I invite those people who have learned the ABC of political economy and of politics to make a very careful study to see who is right and who is wrong. Citizen Sher says that the Soviet government’s food policy, and its econonlic policy in general, is all wrong; that it is necessary, gradually at first, and then to an increasing degree, to grant freedom to trade in food products, and to safeguard private property.
I say that this is Kolchak’s economic programme, his economic basis. I assert that anybody who has read Marx, especially the first chapter of Capital, anybody who has read at least Kautsky’s popular outline of Marx’s theories entitled The Economic Theories of Karl Marx, must come to the conclusion that in the midst of a proletarian revolution against the bourgeoisie, at a time when landowner and capitalist property is being abolished, when the country that has been ruined by four years of imperialist war is starving, freedom to trade in grain would mean freedom for the capitalists, freedom to restore the rule of capital. This is Kolchak’s economic programme, for Kolchak does not rest on air.
It is rather silly to denounce Kolchak only because of the atrocities he committed against the workers, or even because he flogged schoolmistresses for sympathising with the Bolsheviks. This is a vulgar defence of democracy, a silly accusation against Kolchak. Kolchak operates with the means he has at hand. But what is his economic basis? His basis is freedom of trade. This is what he stands for; and this is why all the capitalists support him. But you say: “I have left Kolchak, I do not support him.” This stands to your credit, of course; but it does not prove that you have a head on your shoulders and are able to think. This is the answer we give to these people, without casting any slur on the honour of the Socialist-Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks who deserted Kolchak when they realised that he is a tyrant. But if such people, in a country which is fighting a desperate struggle against Kolchak, continue to fight for the “equality of labour democracy”, for freedom to trade in grain, they are still supporting Kolchak, the only trouble being that they do not understand this and cannot reason logically.
Kolchak—it does not matter whether his name is Kolchak or Denikin, their uniforms may be different, but their natures are the same—is able to hold out because, having captured a region rich in grain, he grants freedom to trade in grain and permits the free restoration of capitalism. This was the case in all revolutions, and this will be the case in this country if we abandon the dictatorship of the proletariat for the sake of the “freedom” and “equality” of the democratic, Socialist-Revolutionary, Left Menshevik and other gentlemen, sometimes including the anarchists—the number of titles is infinite. In the Ukraine at the present time, every gang chooses a political title, each more free and democratic than the other, and there is a gang to every uyezd.
The “advocates of the interests of the working peasantry”, mainly the Socialist-Revolutionaries, propose equality between the workers and the peasants. Others, like Citizen Sher, have studied Marxism, but they still do not understand that there can be no equality between the workers and the peasants in the period of transition from capitalism to socialism, and that those who promise this should be regarded as advocating Kolchak’s programme, even if they do so unwittingly. I assert that anybody who gives some thought to the actual conditions prevailing in this completely ruined country will understand this.
The “socialists” who assert that in this country we are in the period of the bourgeois revolution, constantly accuse us of having introduced “consumers’” communism. Some of them say it is communism for soldiers, and imagine that they are superior to this, imagine that they have risen above this “base” form of communism. But these are simply people who juggle with words. They have seen books, studied hooks, repeat what is in books, but they understand nothing about what the books say. There are scholars, and even very learned scholars, like that. They have read in books that socialism represents the highest development of production. Kautsky does nothing else but repeat this sort of thing even now. The other day I read in a German newspaper, which got here by accident, a report of the last Congress of Workers’ Councils in Germany. Kautsky was one of the rapporteurs at this Congress, and in his report he emphasised—not he personally, but his wife; he was sick, and so his wife read the report—in this report he emphasised that socialism represents the highest development of production, that without production neither capitalism nor socialism was possible, and that this the German workers did not understand.
Poor German workers. They are fighting Scheidemann and Noske, fighting against the butchers, striving to overthrow the power of Scheidemann and Noske, the butchers who continue to call themselves Social-Democrats, and they think civil war is going on! Liebknecht was murdered, and so was Rosa Luxemburg. All the Russian bourgeois say—and this was stated in an Ekaterinodar newspaper: “This is what ought to be done to our Bolsheviks!” This is exactly what this paper stated. Those who understand what is going on know perfectly well that this is the opinion of the entire world bourgeoisie. We must defend ourselves. Scheidemann and Noske are waging civil war against the proletariat. War is war. The German workers think that they are in a state of civil war and all other questions are of minor importance. The first task is to feed the workers. Kautsky thinks that this is “soldiers’” or “consumers’” communism, and that it is necessary to develop production! . . .
Oh, how clever you are, gentlemen! But how can production be developed in a country that is being plundered and ruined by the imperialists, and which lacks coal, raw materials and machinery? “Develop production!” There is not a meeting of the Council of People’s Commissars, or of the Council of Defence that does not share out the last millions of poods of coal or oil, and find ourselves in a terrible fix when the commissars take the last scraps and even then no one has enough, and we have to decide which factory to close down, in which place to leave the workers without work—a painful question, but one we are compelled to decide because we have no coal. The coal is in the Donets Basin; the coal has been destroyed by the German invaders. This is a typical state of affairs. Take Belgium or Poland. The same thing is happening everywhere as a consequence of the imperialist war. Hence, unemployment and starvation are likely to last many years, for some flooded mines take many years to restore. And yet we are told that socialism means increasing output. You have read books, good, kind gentlemen, you have written books, but you don’t understand a scrap of what is in the books. (Applause.)
Of course, if it were a case of capitalist society in peace time, peacefully developing into socialism, there would be no more urgent task before us than that of increasing output. But the little word “if” makes all the difference. If only socialism had come into being peacefully, in the way the capitalist gentlemen did not want to see it born. But there was a slight hitch. Even if there had been no war, the capitalist gentlemen wonld have done all in their power to prevent such a peaceful evolution. Great revolutions, even when they commence peacefully, as was the case with the great French Revolution, end in furious wars which are instigated by the counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie. Nor can it be otherwise, if we look at it from the point of view of the class struggle and not from the point of view of philistine phrase-mongering about liberty, equality, labour democracy and the will of the majority, of all the dull-witted, philistine phrase-mongering to which the Mensheviks, Socialist-Revolutionaries and all these “democrats” treat us. There can be no peaceful evolution towards socialism. In the present period, after the imperialist war, it is ridiculous to expect peaceful evolution, especially in a ruined country. Take France. France is one of the victors, and yet the production of grain there has dropped to half. In Britain they are saying that they are now paupers—I read this in an English bourgeois newspaper. And yet the Communists in a ruined country are blamed because industry is at a standstill! Whoever says this is either an utter idiot—even if he thrice calls himself a leader of the Berne International—or else a traitor to the workers.
The primary task in a ruined country is to save the working people. The primary productive force of human society as a whole, is the workers, the working people. If they survive, we shall save and restore everything.
We shall have to put up with many years of poverty, retrogression to barbarism. The imperialist war has thrown us back to barbarism; but if we save the working people, if we save the primary productive force of human society—the workers—we shall recover everything, but if we fail to save them, we shall perish, so that those who are now shouting about “consumers’”, or “soldiers’”, communism, who look down upon others with contempt and imagine that they are superior to these Bolshevik Communists, are, I repeat, absolutely ignorant of political economy, and pick out passages from books like a scholar whose head is a card index box filled with quotations from books, which he picks out as he needs them; but if a new situation arises which is not described in any book, he becomes confused and grabs the wrong quotation from the box.
At the present time, when the country is ruined, our main and fundamental task is to save the lives of the workers, to save the workers, for the workers are dying because the factories are at a standstill, and the factories are at a standstill because there is no fuel, and because our production is all artificial, industry is isolated from raw material sources. It is the same thing all over the world. Raw materials for the Russian cotton mills must be transported from Egypt, America, or the nearer Turkestan. Try to obtain these when the counter-revolutionary gangs and the British forces have captured Ashkhabad and Krasnovodsk. Try to obtain them from Egypt or America when the railways lie in ruins, when they are at a standstill because there is no coal.
We must save the workers even if they are unable to work. If we keep them alive for the next few years we shall save the country, save society and socialism. If we don’t, we shall slip back into wage-slavery. This is how things stand with the socialism that springs not from the imagination of a peaceful simpleton who calls himself a Social-Democrat, but from actual reality, from the fierce, desperately fierce class struggle. This is a fact. We must sacrifice everything to save the lives of the workers. And in the light of this, when people come to us and say they are in favour of the equality of labour democracy, whereas the Communists do not even allow equality between the workers and peasants, our answer is: the workers and peasants are equal as working people, but the well-fed grain profiteer is not the equal of the hungry worker. This is the only reason why our Constitution says that the. workers and peasants are not equal.
Do you say that they ought to be equal? Let us weigh and count it up. Take sixty peasants and ten workers. The sixty peasants possess surplus stocks of grain. They are clothed in rags, but they have bread. Take the ten workers. After the imperialist war they, too, are in rags, but they are also exhausted, they have no bread, fuel or raw materials. The factories are idle. Well, are they equal? Should the sixty peasants have the right to decide and the ten workers be obliged to obey? The great principle of equality, unity of labour democracy and deciding by a majority vote!
That is what they tell us. And we tell them that they are mere clowns who confuse the hunger problem and obscure it with their high-sounding phrases.
We ask you whether the workers in a ruined country where the factories are idle ought to submit to the decision of the majority of peasants when the latter refuse to deliver their surplus stocks of grain. Have they the right to take these surplus stocks, by force, if necessary, if there is no other way? Give us a straightforward answer! But when we get right down to brass tacks they begin to twist and wriggle.
Industry is ruined in all countries, and it will remain in that state for several years, because it is easy to set fire to factories or to flood mines, it is easy to blow up railway wagons and to wreck locomotives—any fool can do that, even if he calls himself a German or French officer, and is very efficient, especially when he has good instruments for causing explosions, good fire-arms, and so forth. But it is a very difficult matter to restore it all. That will take years.
The peasantry constitute a special class. As working people they are hostile to capitalist exploitation; but at the same time they are property-owners. For centuries the peasant has been brought up to believe that the grain is his and he is at liberty to sell it. “This is my right,” each one thinks, “because it is the fruit of my labour, my sweat and blood.” This mentality cannot be changed overnight. It can be changed only as a result of a long and stern struggle. Whoever imagines that socialism can be achieved by one person convincing another, and that one a third, is at best an infant, or else a political hypocrite; and, of course, the majority of those who speak on political platforms belong to the latter category.
The whole point is that the peasants are accustomed to having the right to trade in grain. After we had abolished the capitalist institutions we found that there was still another force which kept capitalism going—the force of habit. And the more resolutely we abolished the institutions on which capitalism was based, the more strongly we felt the effects of this other force on which capitalism was based—the force of habit. Under favourable circumstances, institutions can be smashed at one stroke; but habit, never, no matter how favourable circumstances may be. Although we have given all the land to the peasants, have liberated them from landed proprietorship, and have swept away everything that held them in bondage, they nevertheless continue to think that “freedom” means freedom to trade in grain; and they regard as tyranny the compulsory surrendering of surplus stocks of grain at fixed prices. Why, what do you mean by “surrender”? they ask indignantly, especially since our grain supply apparatus is still defective because the entire bourgeois intelligentsia is on the side of Sukharevka.[5] Naturally, this machinery has to rely on people who are only just learning, at best—if they are conscientious and devoted to their task—will learn their business in a few years, and until that time the machinery will be defective, and sometimes all sorts of rascals who call themselves Communists will find their way into it. This danger threatens every ruling party, the victorious proletariat of every country, for it is impossible either to break the resistance of the bourgeoisie or to build up efficient machinery overnight. We know perfectly well that the machinery of the Commissariat of Food is still bad. Recently a scientific statistical investigation was made into the food conditions of the workers in the non-agricultural gubernias. The investigation showed that the workers obtain half their food from the Commissariat of Food and the other half from the profiteers; for the first half they pay one-tenth of their total expenditure on food, and for the other half they pay nine-tenths.
The first half of the food supplies, collected and delivered by the Commissariat of Food, is badly collected, of course, but it is collected on socialist and not on capitalist lines. It is collected by defeating the profiteers, and not by compromising with them; it is collected by sacrificing all other interests in the world, including the interests of the formal “equality” which the Mensheviks, Socialist-Revolutionaries and Co. make so much fuss about, to the interests of the starving workers. You keep your “equality”, gentlemen, and we shall keep our hungry workers we have saved from starvation. No matter how much the Mensheviks may accuse us of violating “equality”, the fact is that we have solved half our food problem in spite of unprecedented and incredible difficulties. And we say that if sixty peasants have surplus stocks of grain and ten workers are starving, we must not talk about “equality” in general, or about “the equality of working people”, but say that it is the bounden duty of the sixty peasants to submit to the decisions of the ten workers and to give them, or at least to loan them, their surplus stocks of grain.
The science of political economy, if anybody has learned anything from it, the history of revolution, the history of political evolution throughout the whole of the nineteenth century show that the peasants follow the lead of either the workers or the bourgeoisie. Nor can they do otherwise. Some democrats may, of course, take exception to this, others may think that, being a malicious Marxist, I am slandering the peasants. They say the peasants constitute the majority, they are working people, and yet cannot follow their own road. Why?
If you don’t know why, I would say to such citizens, read the elements of Marx’s political economy in Kautsky’s popular exposition, think about the evolution of any of the great revolutions of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, about the political history of any country in the nineteenth century, and you will learn why. The economics of capitalist society are such that the ruling power can be only capital or the proletariat which has overthrown capital.
There are no other forces in the economics of this society.
A peasant is half worker and half huckster. He is a worker because he earns his bread by the sweat of his brow and is exploited by the landowners, capitalists and merchants. He is a huckster because he sells grain, an article of necessity, an article for which a man will give up all his possessions if there is a shortage of it. Hunger is no man’s friend. People will pay a thousand rubles, any sum of money, will give up all their property, for bread.
The peasant cannot be blamed for this; he is living under a commodity economy and has been for scores and hundreds of years, and is accustomed to exchange grain for money. You cannot change a habit or abolish money overnight. To abolish money you must organise the distribution of products for hundreds of millions of people, and this is something that must take many years. And so, as long as the commodity system exists, as long as there are starving workers side by side with well-fed peasants who are concealing their surplus stocks of grain, the antagonism of workers’ and peasants’ interests will persist. And whoever attempts to use phrases like “freedom”, “equality” and “labour democracy” to brush aside this real antagonism created by the actual state of affairs, is at best a mere phrase-monger, and at worst a hypocritical champion of capitalism. If capitalism defeats the revolution it will do so by taking advantage of the ignorance of the peasants, by bribing them and luring them with the prospect of a return to freedom of trade. Actually, the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries side with capitalism against socialism.
The economic programme of Kolchak, Denikin and all the Russian whiteguards is freedom to trade. They understand this, and it is not their fault that Citizen Sher does not. The economic facts of life do not change because a certain party does not understand them. The slogan of the bourgeoisie is freedom to trade. Efforts are made to beguile the peasants by asking them whether it would not be better to live in the good old way? Whether it would not be better to live freely by the free sale of the fruits of farm labour? What could be fairer? This is what those who consciously support Kolchak say, and they are right from the point of view of the interests of capital. To restore the power of capital in Russia it is necessary to rely on tradition—on the prejudices of the peasants as against their common sense, on their old habits of trading on the open market, and it is necessary forcibly to crush the resistance of the workers. There is no other way. The Kolchaks are right from the point of view of capital; their economic and political programme ties up neatly, there are no loose ends; they know there is a connection between freedom for peasants to trade and shooting down the workers. They are connected even though Citizen Sher is unaware of it. Freedom to trade in grain is the economic programme of Kolchak; the shooting of tens of thousands of workers—as occurred in Finland—is a necessary means of realising this programme, because the workers will not voluntarily surrender their gains. The connection cannot be broken, yet the Mensheviks and Social-Revolutionaries, who are totally ignorant of economic science and politics, who, being terrified philistines, have forgotten the ABC of socialism, are trying to make us forget this connection by talking about “equality” and “freedom”, by shouting about our violating the principle of equality of “labour democracy” and saying that our Constitution is “unfair”.
The vote of one worker is equal to several peasant votes. Is that unfair?
No, in the period when it is necessary to overthrow capital it is quite fair. I know where you have borrowed your conception of fairness from; you have borrowed it from yesterday’s capitalist era. The equality, the freedom of commodity owners—that is your conception of fairness. A petty-bourgeois survival of petty-bourgeois prejudices—that is what your fairness, your equality, your labour democracy amount to. We, however, subordinate fairness to the interests of defeating capital. And capital can be defeated only by the united efforts of the proletariat.
Can tens of millions of peasants be firmly united against capital, against freedom of trade, overnight? No, economic conditions would prevent it even if the peasants were quite free and much more cultured. It cannot be done because different economic conditions and long years of preparation are needed for this. And who will make these preparations? Either the proletariat or the bourgeoisie.
Owing to their economic status in bourgeois society the peasants must follow either the workers or the bourgeoisie. There is no middle way. They may waver, become confused, conjure up all sorts of things; they may blame, swear, curse the “bigoted” representatives of the proletariat and the “bigoted” representatives of the bourgeoisie and say that they are the minority. You may curse them, talk loud about the majority, about the broad universal character of your labour democracy, about pure democracy. There is no end to the number of words you can string together, but they will only serve to obscure the fact that if the peasants do not follow the lead of the workers they will follow the lead of the bourgeoisie. There is not, nor can there be, a middle course. And those people who in this most difficult period of transition in history, when the workers are hungry and their industry is at a standstill, do not help the workers to take grain at a fairer but not a “free” price, not at a capitalist, hucksters’ price, are carrying out the Kolchak programme no matter how much they may deny this to themselves, and no matter how sincerely they may be convinced that they are carrying out their own programme conscientiously. 

V

 I will now deal with the last question on my list, that of the defeat and victory of the revolution. Kautsky, whom I mentioned to you as the chief representative of the old, decayed socialism, does not understand the tasks of the dictatorship of the proletariat. He reproached us, saying that a decision taken by a majority might have ensured a peaceful issue. A decision by a dictatorship is a decision taken by military means. Hence, if you do not win by force of arms you will be vanquished and annihilated, because in civil war no prisoners are taken, it is a war of extermination. This is how terrified Kautsky tried to “terrify” us.
Quite right. What you say is true. We confirm the correctness of your observation and there is nothing more to be said. Civil war is more stern and cruel than any other war. This has been the case throughout history since the time of the civil wars in ancient Rome; wars between nations always ended in a deal between the propertied classes, and only during civil war does the oppressed class exert efforts to exterminate the oppressing class, to eliminate the economic conditions of this class’s existence.
I ask you, what is the “revolutionary” worth who tries to scare those who have started the revolution with the prospect that it might suffer defeat? There has never been, there is none, there will not be, nor can there be a revolution which did not stand some risk of defeat. A revolution is a desperate struggle of classes that has reached the peak of ferocity. The class struggle is inevitable. One must either reject revolution altogether or accept the fact that the struggle against the propertied classes will be sterner than all other revolutions. Among socialists who are at all intelligent there was never any difference of opinion on this point. A year ago, when I analysed the apostasy that lay behind Kautsky’s statements I wrote the following. Even if—this was in September last year—even if the imperialists were to overthrow the Bolshevik government tomorrow we would not for a moment repent that we had taken power. And not a single class-conscious worker who represents the interests of the masses of the working people would repent, or have any doubt that, in spite of it all, our revolution had triumphed; the revolution triumphs if it brings to the forefront the advanced class which strikes effectively at exploitation. Under such circumstances, the revolution triumphs even if it suffered defeat. This may sound like juggling with words; but to prove the truth of it, let us take a concrete example from history.
Take the great French Revolution. It is with good reason that it is called a great revolution. It did so much for the class that it served, for the bourgeoisie, that it left its imprint on the entire nineteenth century, the century which gave civilisation and culture to the whole of mankind. The great French revolutionaries served the interests of the bourgeoisie although they did not realise it for their vision was obscured by the words “liberty, equality and fraternity”; in the nineteenth century, however, what they had begun was continued, carried out piecemeal and finished in all parts of the world.
In a matter of eighteen months our revolution has done ever so much more for our class, the class we serve, the proletariat, than the great French revolutionaries did.
They held out in their own country for two years, and then perished under the blows of united European reaction, under the blows of the united hordes of the whole world, who crushed the French revolutionaries, reinstated the legitimate monarch in France, the Romanov of the period, reinstated the landowners, and for many decades later crushed every revolutionary movement in France. Nevertheless, the great French Revolution triumphed.
Everybody who studies history seriously will admit that although it was crushed, the French Revolution was nevertheless triumphant, because it laid down for the whole world such firm foundations of bourgeois democracy, of bourgeois freedom, that they could never be uprooted.
In a matter of eighteen months our revolution has done ever so much more for the proletariat, for the class which we serve, for the goal towards which we are striving—the overthrow of the rule of capital—than the French Revolution did for its class. And that is why we say that even if we take the hypothetically possible worst contingency, even if tomorrow some lucky Kolchak were to exterminate the Bolsheviks to the last man, the revolution would still be invincible. And what we say is proved by the fact that the new type of state organisation produced by this revolution has achieved a moral victory among the working class all over the world and is already receiving its support. When the prominent French bourgeois revolutionaries perished in the struggle they were isolated, they were not supported in other countries. All the European states turned against them, chief among them England, although it was an advanced country. After only eighteen months of Bolshevik rule, our revolution succeeded in making the new state organisation which it created, the Soviet organisation, comprehensible, familiar and popular to the workers all over the world, in making them regard it as their own.
 I have shown you that the dictatorship of the proletariat is an inevitable, essential and absolutely indispensable means of emerging from the capitalist system. Dictatorship does not mean only force, although it is impossible without force, but also a form of the organisation of labour superior to the preceding form. That is why in my brief speech of greeting at the opening of the Congress I emphasised this fundamental, elementary and extremely simple task of organisation; and that is why I am so strongly opposed to all these intellectual fads and “proletarian cultures”. As opposed to these fads I advocate the ABC of organisation. Distribute grain and coal in such a way as to take care of every pood—this is the object of proletarian discipline. Proletarian discipline is not discipline maintained by the lash, as it was under the rule of the serf-owners, or discipline maintained by starvation, as it is under the rule of the capitalists, but comradely discipline, the discipline of the labour unions. If you solve this elementary and extremely simple problem of organisation, we shall win, for then the peasants—who vacillate between the workers and the capitalists, who cannot make up their minds whether to side with the people of whom they are still suspicious, but can not deny that these people are creating a more just organisation of production under which there will be no exploitation, and under which “freedom” of trade in grain will be a crime against the state, who cannot make up their minds whether to side with these people or with those who, as in the good old days, promise freedom to trade which is alleged to mean also freedom to work in any way one pleased—the peasants, I say, will whole-heartedly side with us. When the peasants see that the proletariat is organising its state power in such a way as to maintain order—and the peasants want this and demand it, and they are right in doing so, although this desire for order is connected with much that is confused and reactionary, and with many prejudices—they, in the long run, after considerable vacillation, will follow the lead of the workers. The peasants-cannot simply and easily pass from the old society to the new overnight. They are aware that the old society ensured “order” by ruining the working people and making slaves of them. But they are not sure that the proletariat can guarantee order. More cannot be expected of these downtrodden, ignorant and disunited peasants. They will not believe words and programmes. And they are quite right not to believe words, for otherwise there would be no end to frauds of every kind. They will believe only deeds, practical experience. Prove to them that you, the united proletariat, the proletarian state, the proletarian dictatorship, are able to distribute grain and coal in such a way as to husband every pood, that you are able to arrange matters so that every pood of surplus grain and coal is distributed not by the profiteers, shall not profit the heroes of Sukharevka, but shall be fairly distributed, supplied to starving workers, even to sustain them during periods of unemployment when the factories and workshops are idle. Prove that you can do this. This is the fundamental task of proletarian culture, of proletarian organisation. Force can be used even if those who resort to it have no economic roots, but in that case, history will doom it to failure. But force can be applied with the backing of the advanced class, relying on the loftier principles of the socialist system, order and organisation. In that case, it may suffer temporary failure, but in the long run it is invincible.
If the proletarian organisation proves to the peasants that it can maintain proper order, that labour and bread are fairly distributed and that care is being taken to husband every pood of grain and coal, that we workers are able to do this with the aid of our comradely, trade union discipline, that we resort to force in our struggle only to protect the interests of labour, that we take grain from profiteers and not from working people, that we want to reach an understanding with the middle peasants, the working peasants, and that we are ready to provide them with all we can at present—when the peasants see all this, their alliance with the working class, their alliance with the proletariat, will be indestructible. And this is what we aim at.
But I have digressed somewhat from my subject and must return to it. Today, in all countries, the word “Bolshevik” and the word “Soviet” have ceased to be regarded as queer terms, as they were only recently, like the word “Boxer”, which we repeated without understanding what it meant. The word “Bolshevik” and the word “Soviet” are now being repeated in all the languages of the world. Every day the class-conscious workers see that the bourgeoisie of all countries release a flood of lies about Soviet power in the millions of copies of their newspapers, but they learn from this vituperation. Recently I read some American newspapers. I read the speech of a certain American parson who said that the Bolsheviks were immoral, that they had nationalised women, that they are robbers and plunderers. And I also read the reply of the American Socialists. They are distributing at five cents a copy the Constitution of the Soviet Republic of Russia, of this “dictatorship”, which does not provide “equality of labour democracy’’. They reply by quoting a clause of the Constitution of these “usurpers”, “robbers” and “tyrants” who disrupt the unity of labour democracy. Incidentally, in welcoming Breshkovskaya on the day she arrived in America, the leading capitalist newspaper in New York carried a headline in letters a yard long stating: “Welcome, Granny!” The American Socialists reprinted this and wrote: “She is in favour of political democracy—is there anything surprising, American workers, in the fact that the capitalists praise her?” She stands for political democracy. Why should they praise her? Because she is opposed to the Soviet Constitution. “Well,” said the American Socialists, “here is a clause from the Constitution of these robbers.” And they always quote the same clause which says that those who exploit the labour of others shall not have the right to elect or be elected. This clause from our Constitution is known all over the world. And it is because Soviet power frankly states that all must be subordinated to the dictatorship of the proletariat, that it is a new type of state organisation—it is precisely for this reason that it has won the sympathies of the workers all over the world. This new state organisation is being born in travail because it is far more difficult, a million times more difficult, to overcome our disruptive, petty-bourgeois laxity than to suppress the tyrannical landowners or the tyrannical capitalists, but the effort bears a million times more fruit in creating the new organisation which knows no exploitation. When proletarian organisation solves this problem, socialism will triumph completely. And it is to this that you must devote all your activities both in the schools and in the field of adult education. Notwithstanding the extremely difficult conditions that prevail, and the fact that the first socialist revolution in history is taking place in a country with a very low level of culture, notwithstanding this, Soviet power has already won the recognition of the workers of other countries. The phrase “dictatorship of the proletariat” is a Latin phrase, and the working people who heard it for the first time did not know what it meant, and did not know how it could be instituted. Now this Latin phrase has been translated into the modern languages and we have shown that the dictatorship or the proletariat is Soviet power, the government under which the workers organise themselves and say that their organisation is superior to every other. No idler, no exploiter can belong to this organisation. This organisation has but one object, and that is, to overthrow capitalism. No false slogans, no fetishes like “freedom”, and “equality”, will deceive us. We recognise no freedom, no equality, no labour democracy if it conflicts with the cause of emancipating labour from the yoke of capital. This is what we incorporated in the Soviet Constitution, and we have already won for it the sympathies of the workers of all countries. They know that in spite of the difficulty with which the new order is being born, and in spite of the severe trials and even defeats which may fall to the lot of some of the Soviet republics, no power on earth can compel mankind to turn back. (Stormy applause.)

Endnotes
[1] This refers to the views of A. Bogdanov and others that had been implanted in the Proletcult (Proletarian Culture) literary and art organisations. Bogdanov and his supporters propagandised the philosophical views (Machism) in the guise of “proletarian culture”, denied the leading role of the Party and the Soviet state in cultural development, separated the development of Soviet culture from the general tasks of socialist construction and denied the need to make use of cultural achievements of the past. They tried to give the Proletcult organisations a position that made them independent of the Party and of Soviet power. Lenin spoke resolutely against attempts to implant these theories in the Proletcult organisations. The Central Committee of the R.C.P.(B.) and the Communist group at the First All-Russia Congress of Proletcult Organisations in October 1920 took a decision to subordinate Proletcult organisations to the People’s Commissariat of Education, making them departments of that Commissariat. The Central Committee of the R.C.P.(B.) condemned the anti-Marxist, bourgeois tendencies in the Proletcult organisations in a letter headed “On the Proletcult Organisations”. The organisations began to decline in 1922.
[2] This was a decree on ”The Mobilisation of the Literate and the Organisation of Propaganda of the Soviet System” issued by the Council of People’s Commissars on December 10, 1918. 
[3] This refers to whiteguard units of officer volunteers. 
[4] Frederick Engels, Anti-Dühring, Moscow, 1959, pp. 147-48. 
[5] Sukharevka—the name of a market that once existed in Moscow. During the Civil War it was here that profiteers sold their goods. The word “Sukharevka” is used in the broader sense of “freedom to trade in food”.

Collected Works Volume 29
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 







==========

## Foreword to the Published Speech ’Deception of the People With Slogans of Freedom and Equality’











Forward to “Deception of the People with Slogans of Freedom and Equality”



V. I. Lenin
Forward to 
“Deception of the People with Slogans of Freedom and Equality”


Delivered: 23 June, 1919
First Published: Published in the pamphlet N. Lenin, Two Speeches at the First All-Russia Congress on Adult Education, Moscow, 1919; Published according to the pamphlet.
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, pages 377-381
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


The question I dealt with in my speech at the Congress on adult education on May 19—the question of equality in general and the equality of the worker and the peasant in particular—is undoubtedly one of the most pressing and “painful” questions of our time, and one that touches upon the most deep-seated prejudices of the petty bourgeois, the small proprietor, the petty commodity owner, every philistine and nine-tenths of the intelligentsia (including the Menshevik and Socialist-Revolutionary intelligentsia).
Deny the equality of the worker and the peasant! How terrible! Of course, this is something all the friends of the capitalists, all of their hangers-on, and the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries first of all, are trying to seize upon in order to “irritate” the peasant, to “stir him up”, to incite him against the workers, against the Communists. Such attempts are inevitable, but since they are founded on lies, they are doomed to disgraceful failure.
Peasants are sober-minded, business-like, practical people. Things must be explained to them in a practical light, through simple, everyday examples. Is the peasant who has a surplus of grain justified in hiding this surplus until prices reach exorbitant, profiteering levels, without any regard for the workers who are going hungry? Or is the state authority, which is in the hands of the workers, justified in taking over all surplus grain not at profiteering, huckstering, exorbitant prices, but at a fixed price set by the state?
That is the point at issue That is the whole thing in a nutshell. To avoid facing up to this fact the various swindlers who, like the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries, are working for the capitalists, for the return of undivided power to them, are resorting to empty phrase-mongering about “equality” and the “unity of labour democracy”.
The peasant must make his choice:
either freedom to trade in grain, which means speculation in grain, freedom for the rich to grow richer, freedom for the poor to be pauperised and to starve, return of undivided power to the landowners and capitalists, dissolution of the alliance of the peasants and the workers,
or delivery of grain surpluses at a fixed price to the state, i.e., the united workers’ authority, which means an alliance between the peasants and the workers to get rid of the bourgeoisie altogether and to eliminate any possibility of their rule being restored.
Such is the choice.
The richer peasants, the kulaks, will choose the first alternative; they will want to try their luck in alliance with the capitalists and landowners against the workers, against the poor, but such peasants are a minority in Russia. The majority of the peasants will prefer an alliance with the workers against the restoration of capitalist rule, against “freedom for the rich to grow richer”, against “freedom for the poor to starve”, against the deceitful camouflage of this accursed capitalist “freedom” (freedom to starve to death) with flowery words about “equality” (the equality of the well-fed, who have a surplus of grain, and the starving).
Our task is to fight the—cunning capitalist deception which the Mensheviks and the Socialist-Revolutionaries practise by means of resounding and flowery phrase-mongering about “freedom” and “equality”.
Peasants! Unmask the wolves in sheep’s clothing who praise “freedom”, “equality”, and “unity of labour democracy” and thereby actually champion the “freedom” of the landowner to oppress the peasants, the “equality” of the wealthy capitalist and the worker or the semi-starved peasant, the “equality” of the well-fed man who hides his surplus grain and the worker who is tormented by hunger and unemployment because the country has been ruined by war. Such wolves in sheep’s clothing are the working people’s worst enemies; whether they call themselves Mensheviks, Socialist-Revolutionaries, or non-party they are in reality friends of the capitalists.
“The workers and peasants are equal as working people, but the well-fed grain profiteer is not the equal of the hungry worker.” “We are fighting only to protect the interests of labour, we take grain from profiteers, and not from working people.” “We want to reach an understanding with the middle peasants, the working peasants”—this is what I said in my speech, this is the crux of the matter, this is the real truth which is confused by loud-sounding phrases about “equality”. Moreover, the vast majority of the peasants know that this is the truth, that the workers’ state fights the profiteers and the rich while rendering every assistance to the working people and the poor, whereas both the landowner’ state (under a monarchy) and the capitalist state (under the freest and most democratic republic) have always and everywhere, in all countries, helped the rich to rob the working people, helped the speculators and the rich to grow richer at the expense of the poor who become poorer.
This is a truth every peasant knows. And hence the greater their awareness, the sooner and more resolutely the majority of the peasants will make their choice and declare for alliance with the workers, for agreement with the workers’ government, against the landowner or capitalist state; for Soviet power against the “Constituent Assembly” or the “democratic republic”; for agreement with the Bolshevik Communists, against any support for the capitalists, Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries! 
 
    

 To the “learned” gentlemen, to the democrats, socialists, Social-Democrats, Socialist-Revolutionaries, etc., we say: you all pay lip-service to the “class struggle”, but actually you close your eyes to it at the very time when it is growing especially acute. And to do that means to side with capital, with the bourgeoisie, against the working people.
He who recognises the class struggle must also recognise that in a bourgeois republic, even in the freest and most democratic bourgeois republic, “freedom” and “equality” never were, and never could be, anything but an expression of the equality and freedom of the commodity owners, the equality and freedom of capital. Marx, in all of his writings and especially in his Capital (which you all recognise in words ), made this clear thousands of times; he ridiculed the abstract conception of “freedom and equality” and the vulgarisers, the Benthams who closed their eyes to the facts, and he revealed the material roots of these abstractions.
Under the bourgeois system (i.e., as long as private property in land and in the means of production persists) and under bourgeois democracy, “freedom and equality” remain purely formal, signifying in practice wage-slavery for the workers (who are formally free and equal) and the undivided rule of capital, the oppression of labour by capital. This is the ABC of socialism, my learned gentlemen—and you have forgotten it.
It follows from this ABC that during the proletarian revolution, when the class struggle has sharpened to the point of civil war, only fools and traitors will seek to get away with empty talk about “freedom”, “equality” and “unity of labour democracy”. Actually everything depends on the outcome of the struggle between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie, and the intermediate, middle classes (including the entire petty bourgeoisie, and hence the entire peasantry) inevitably vacillate between the two camps.
The issue is this—which of the main forces, the proletariat or the bourgeoisie, these intermediate sections will join. There cannot be any third way; he who has not understood this from reading Marx’s Capital has understood nothing in Marx, understood nothing in socialism, but is in fact a philistine and a petty bourgeois who blindly follows in the wake of the bourgeoisie. On the other hand, he who has understood all this, will not allow himself to be deceived by empty phrases about “freedom” and “equality”, but will think and speak of practical things, that is, of the concrete conditions for a rapprochement between the peasants and the workers, their alliance against the capitalists, agreement between them against the exploiters, the rich and the profiteers.
The dictatorship of the proletariat is not the end of class struggle but its continuation in new forms. The dictatorship of the proletariat is class struggle waged by a proletariat that is victorious and has taken political power into its hands against a bourgeoisie that has been defeated but not destroyed, a bourgeoisie that has not vanished, not ceased to offer resistance, but that has intensified its resistance. The dictatorship of the proletariat is a specific form of class alliance between the proletariat, the vanguard of the working people, and the numerous non-proletarian strata of the working people (petty bourgeoisie, small proprietors, the peasantry, the intelligentsia, etc.), or the majority of these strata, an alliance against capital, an alliance whose aim is the complete overthrow of capital, complete suppression of the resistance offered by the bourgeoisie as well as of attempts at restoration on its part, an alliance for the final establishment and consolidation of socialism. It is a specific kind of alliance which takes shape in a specific situation, namely, amidst fierce civil war; it is an alliance between firm supporters of socialism and its vacillating allies, sometimes “neutrals” (in which case instead of an agreement on struggle the alliance becomes an agreement on neutrality); an alliance between economically, politically, socially, and spiritually different classes. Only the corrupt heroes of the corrupt Berne or yellow International, people like Kautsky, Martov and Co., can evade examination of the concrete forms, conditions, and tasks of this alliance by resorting to platitudes about “freedom”, “equality”, and “unity of labour democracy”, that is, by snatching fragments from the ideological baggage of the era of commodity economy. 
N. Lenin

    

      June 23, 1919

Collected Works Volume 29
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 







==========

## Telegram to the Council of People’s Commissars of the Ukraine











Telegram To The Council Of People’s Commissars
Of The Ukraine



V. I. Lenin
Telegram To The Council Of People’s Commissars
Of The Ukraine


Wired: 8 May, 1919
First Published: 1942; Published according to the manuscript 
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, pages 328-331
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


Kiev


The Central Committee of the Party has discussed the critical situation, the almost catastrophic situation, in the Donets Basin and on the Manych, and proposes urgently that the Kiev Council of Defence bend all efforts to accel-erate and step up military aid to the Donets Basin, appoint a number of the best comrades to exercise daily, unflagging supervision over the fulfilment of these measures and, espe-cially, carry out the immediate universal mobilisation of the workers of Odessa, Ekaterinoslav, Nikolayev, Kharkov and Sevastopol as reinforcements for the Southern Front; lastly, make Podvoisky and Antonov personally responsible for the Makhno group. Bear in mind that the defeat of the revolution is inevitable unless Rostov is speedily captured.
On behalf of the C.C.,
Lenin, Stalin

Collected Works Volume 29
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 







==========

## Addendum to the Draft appeal to German Workers and to Peasants Who Do Not Exploit the Labour of Others











>Addendum To The Draft Appeal To German Workers And To Peasants Who Do Not Exploit The Labour Of Others



V. I. Lenin
Addendum To The Draft Appeal To
German Workers And To Peasants
Who Do Not Exploit The Labour Of Others


Written: 11 May, 1919
First Published: 1949; in the journal Bolshevik No. 4; Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, pages 383-384
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


Proletarians throughout the world are showing increasing sympathy for Soviet power and there is a growing conviction that only Soviet power, the power of the working people, and not bourgeois parliament arism, even in the most democratic republic, is capable of emancipating labour from the yoke of capital, the nations from enmity and wars, and manki nd from the lawlessness of savage imperialism.
This conviction will break a road for itself, cost what it may. In all countries the workers are becoming convinced that they cannot save themselves from imperialism and wars unless they break with the bourgeoisie, unless they defeat them and overthrow their power, unless they ruthlessly suppress the resistance of the exploiters. A beginning can be made only in one’s own country. The Russian Soviet system has met with the sympathy of the working masses throughout the world, and everyone except the exploiters and their lackeys now sees that Soviet power is the one hope of deliverance; this is because we Russian workers and peasants have earned their confidence by having broken with the bourgeoisie, overthrown them and suppressed their resistance, because we have driven out of the ranks of the working people those leaders of traitor-socialism who, like the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries, entered into a direct and indirect alliance with the imperialist bourgeoisie, with Kerensky, etc.
As long as the German workers tolerate a government of such traitors to socialism, scoundrels and bourgeois lackeys as the Scheidemnanns and all their party there will be no question of saving the German people; the German people will remain the actual slaves of the bourgeoisie and will be accomplices in their crimes—all the “socialist platitudes” and all the “democratic” and “republican” rhetoric notwith-standing— in the same way as the “saialists” of the Entente who are at present members of the Borne yellow International and who answer the atrocities of the Entente with hypocritical well-wishing, kindly empty phrases or compliments paid to Wilson, etc., still remain traitors to socialism, scoundrels and accomplices in the atrocities and crimes of the French, British and American bourgeoisie.
It is inevitable that the German workers will break with the traitors to socialism, the Scheidemanns and their party. It is inevitable that they will break with the senility, hesitancy, lack of ideology and character of the so-called Independents who were dependent on the Scheidemanns yesterday and who today depend on their fear of going over resolutely to the side of Soviet power. The bourgeoisie may slaughter hundreds of leaders and thousands of workers but they are powerless to prevent this break-away.

Collected Works Volume 29
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 







==========

## Telegram to J. V. Stalin











Telegram To J. V. Stalin



V. I. Lenin
Telegram To J. V. Stalin


Wired: 20 May, 1919
First Published: 1938; Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, pages 383-384
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License



      Stalin,
      Smolny,
      Petrograd

    

    May 20, 1919

    

      Have received both notes. Have made detailed
      arrangements with Sklyansky for unflagging supervision over
      fulfilment. I hope that the universal mobilisation of Petrograd
      men will be followed by their attack and not by sitting in
      barracks.

    
Lenin

Collected Works Volume 29
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 






==========

## Speech at the Universal
  Military Training Festival











Speech At The Universal Military Training Festival



V. I. Lenin
Speech At
The Universal Military
  Training Festival
May 25, 1919[1]
Brief Newspaper Report

Deliver: 25 May, 1919
First Published: Izvestia No. 113, May 27, 1919; Published
 according to the Izvestia text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English
 Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, pages 383-384
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002.
 Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License

Today we are celebrating the universal military training of the working
 people.
Up to now, matters military have been an instrument of the exploitation of the proletariat
 by the capitalists and landowners. And to this day capitalists all over Europe are holding
 out with the aid of the remnants of their old armies, commanded by bourgeois officers. But
 this most reliable prop of the bourgeoisie will collapse when the workers take up the rifle,
 when they begin to form their own, vast proletarian army, when they begin to train soldiers
 who know what they are fighting for, who will defend the workers and peasants, their
 factories and workshops, and prevent the landowners and capitalists from coming back to
 power.
Today’s festival demonstrates the successes we have achieved, the new force that is
 springing up from the working class. This parade convinces us that Soviet power has won the
 sympathies of the workers of all countries, that the fraternal alliance of world Soviet
 republics will take the place of world wars.
Permit me to introduce to you a Hungarian comrade, Tibor Szamuely, Commissar for Military
 Affairs of the Hungarian Soviet Republic.
Long live the Hungarian proletariat!
Long live the world communist revolution!

Endnotes
[1] 
 This speech was delivered at a parade on Red Square, Moscow, of workers’ regiments, communist battalions and students of Moscow army schools. The parade was held in celebration of the
 first anni-versary of the introduction of universal military training launched in accordance
 with a decree of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee dated April 23 1918; the training
 applied to workers and also to easants who did not exploit the labour of others. In the
 course of a year hundreds of thousands of working people received army training and were sent
 to reinforce the ranks of the Red Army.

Collected Works Volume 29
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## Greetings to the Hungarian Workers












Greetings to the Hungarian Workers



V. I. Lenin
Greetings to the Hungarian Workers


Written: 27 May, 1919
First Published: Pravda No. 115, May 29, 1919; Published  according to the manuscript 
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, pages 387-391
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License



  Comrades, the news we have been receiving from the Hungarian Soviet leaders fills us with enthusiasm and pleasure. Soviet government has been in existence in Hungary for only a little over two months, yet as regards organisation the Hungarian proletariat already seems to have excelled us. That is understandable, for in Hungary the general cultural level of the population is higher; further more, the proportion of industrial workers to the total population is immeasurably greater (in Budapest there are three million of the eight million population of present-day Hungary), and, lastly, in Hungary the transition to the Soviet system, to the dictatorship of the proletariat, has been incomparably easier and more peaceful.
  This last circumstance is particularly important. The majority of the European socialist leaders, of both the social-chauvinist and Kautskyite trends, have become so much a prey to purely philistine prejudices, fostered by decades of relatively “peaceful” capitalism and the bourgeois parliamentary system, that they are unable to understand that Soviet power and the dictatorship of the proletariat mean. The proletariat cannot perform its epoch-making liberating mission unless it removes these leaders from its path, unless it sweeps them out of its way. These people believed, or half-believed, the bourgeois lies about Soviet power in Russia and were unable to distinguish the nature of the new, proletarian democracy—democracy for the working people, socialist democracy, as embodied in Soviet government—from bourgeois democracy, which they slavishly worship and call “pure democracy” or “democracy” in general.
 These blind people, fettered by bourgeois prejudices, failed to understand the epoch-making change from bourgeois to proletarian democracy, from bourgeois to proletarian dictatorship. They confused certain specific features of Russian Soviet government, of the history of its development in Russia, with Soviet government as an international phenomenon.
  The Hungarian proletarian revolution is helping even the blind to see. The form of transition to the dictatorship of the proletariat in Hungary is altogether different from that in Russia—voluntary resignation of the bourgeois government, instantaneous restoration of working-class unity, socialist unity on a communist programme. The nature of Soviet power is now all the clearer; the only form of rule which has the support of the working people and of the proletariat at their head that is now possible anywhere in the world is Soviet rule, the dictatorship of the proletariat.
  This dictatorship presupposes the ruthlessly severe, swift and resolute use of force to crush the resistance of the exploiters, the capitalists, landowners and their underlings. Whoever does not understand this is not a revolutionary, and must be removed from the post of leader or adviser of the proletariat.
  But the essence of proletarian dictatorship is not in force alone, or even mainly in force. Its chief feature is the organisation and discipline of the advanced contingent of the working people, of their vanguard; of their sole leader, the proletariat, whose object is to build socialism, abolish the division of society into classes, make all members of society working people, and remove the basis for all exploitation of man by man. This object cannot be achieved at one stroke. It requires a fairly long period of transition from capitalism to socialism, because the reorganisation of production is a difficult matter, because radical changes in all spheres of life need time, and because the enormous force of habit of running things in a petty-bourgeois and bourgeois way can only be overcome by a long and stubborn struggle. That is why Marx spoke of an entire period of the dictatorship of the proletariat as the period of transition from capitalism to socialism.[1] 
 Throughout the whole of this transition period, resistance to the revolution will be offered both by the capitalists and by their numerous myrmidons among the bourgeois intellectuals, who will resist consciously, and by the vast mass of the working people, including the peasants, who are shackled very much by petty-bourgeois habits and traditions, and who all too often will resist unconsciously. Vacillations among these groups are inevitable. As a working man the peasant gravitates towards socialism, and prefers the dictatorship of the workers to the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie. As a seller of grain, the peasant gravitates towards the bourgeoisie, towards freedom of trade, i.e., back to the “habitual”, old, “time-hallowed” capitalism.
  What is needed to enable the proletariat to lead the peasants and the petty-bourgeois groups in general is the dictatorship of the proletariat, the rule of one class, its strength of organisation and discipline, its centralised power based on all the achievements of the culture, science and technology of capitalism, its proletarian affinity to the mentality of every working man, its prestige with the disunited, less developed working people in the countryside or in petty industry, who are less firm in politics. Here phrase-mongering about “democracy” in general, about “unity” or the “unity of labour democracy”, about the “equality” of all “men of labour”, and so on and so forth—the phrase-mongering for which the now petty-bourgeois social-chauvinists and Kautskyites have such a predilection—is of no use whatever. Phrase-mongering only throws dust in the eyes, blinds the mind and strengthens the old stupidity, conservatism, and routine of capitalism, the parliamentary system and bourgeois democracy.
  The abolition of classes requires a long, difficult and stubborn class struggle, which, after the overthrow of capitalist rule, after the destruction of the bourgeois state, after the establishment of the dictatorship of the proletariat, does not disappear (as the vulgar representatives of the old socialism and the old Social-Democracy imagine), but merely changes its forms and in many respects becomes fiercer.
  The proletariat, by means of a class struggle against the resistance of the bourgeoisie, against the conservatism, routine, irresolution and vacillation of the petty bourgeoisie, must uphold its power, strengthen its organising influence, “neutralise” those groups which fear to leave the bourgeoisie and which follow the proletariat too hesitantly, and consolidate the new discipline, the comradely discipline of the working people, their firm bond with the proletariat, their unity with the proletariat—that new discipline, that new basis of social ties in place of the serf discipline of the Middle Ages and the discipline of starvation, the discipline of “free” wage-slavery under capitalism.
  In order to abolish classes a period of the dictatorship of one class is needed, the dictatorship of precisely that oppressed class which is capable not only of overthrowing the exploiters, not only of ruthlessly crushing their resistance, but also of breaking ideologically with the entire bourgeois-democratic outlook, with all the philistine phrase-mongering about liberty and equality in general (in reality, this phrase-mongering implies, as Marx demonstrated long ago, the “liberty and equality” of commodity owners, the “liberty and equality” of the capitalist and the worker ).
  More, classes can be abolished only by the dictatorship of that oppressed class which has been schooled, united, trained and steeled by decades of the strike and political struggle against capital—of that class alone which has assimilated all the urban, industrial, big-capitalist culture and has the determination and ability to protect it and to preserve and further develop all its achievements, and make them available to all the people, to all the working people—of that class alone which will be able to bear all the hardships, trials, privations and great sacrifices which history inevitably imposes upon those who break with the past and boldly hew a road for themselves to a new future—of that class alone whose finest members are full of hatred and contempt for everything petty-bourgeois and philistine, for the qualities that flourish so profusely among the petty bourgeoisie, the minor employees and the “intellectuals”—of that class alone which “has been through the hardening school of labour” and is able to inspire respect for its efficiency in every working person and every honest man.
  Hungarian workers! Comrades! You have set the world an even better example than Soviet Russia by your ability to unite all socialists at one stroke on the platform of genuine  proletarian dictatorship. You are now faced with the most gratifying and most difficult task of holding your own in a rigorous war against the Entente. Be firm. Should vacillation manifest itself among the socialists who yesterday gave their support to you, to the dictatorship of the proletariat, or among the petty bourgeoisie, suppress it ruthlessly. In war the coward’s legitimate fate is the bullet.
  You are waging the only legitimate, just and truly
    revolutionary war, a war of the oppressed against the oppressors,
    a war of the working people against the exploiters, a war for the
    victory of socialism. All honest members of the working class all
    over the world are on your side. Every month brings the world
    proletarian revolution nearer.
Be firm! Victory will be yours!
Lenin

    
 
      May 27, 1919


Endnotes
[1]  Karl Marx, “Critique of the Gotha Program” (see Marx and Engels, Selected Works, Vol. II, Moscow, 1962, pp. 32-33). 

Collected Works Volume 29
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 







==========

## The Heroes of the Berne International











The Heroes Of The Berne International



V. I. Lenin
The Heroes Of The Berne International

Deliver: 25 May, 1919
First Published: June 1919; Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English
 Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, pages 392-401
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002.
 Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License

In my article, The Third International and Its Place in History (The Communist International No. 1, May 1, 1919, p. 38 of the Russian edition), I pointed to one of the outstanding symptoms of the ideological bankruptcy of members of the old, putrid, Berne International. This bankruptcy of the theoreticians of the reactionary socialism which did not understand the dictatorship of the proletariat found expression in the proposal made by the German “independent” Social-Democrats to join, unite, combine the bourgeois parliament with a form of Soviet power.
Kautsky, Hilferding, Otto Bauer and Co., the most outstanding
    theoreticians of the old International, did not realise that they
    were proposing to combine the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie with
    the dictatorship of the proletariat! The men who made names for
    themselves and won the sympathies of the workers by their advocacy
    of the class struggle and by the proofs they advanced of its
    necessity, failed to realise—at the crucial moment of the
    struggle for socialism—that they were betraying the whole
    doctrine of the class struggle, were renouncing it completely and
    actually deserting to the camp of the bourgeoisie by their attempt
    to combine the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie with the
    dictatorship of the proletariat. This sounds incredible, but it is
    a fact.
By way of a rare exception, we have managed to receive in
    Moscow a fairly large number of foreign newspapers, although not
    of consecutive dates, so that we are now able to retrace in
    greater detail—although not in complete detail, of
    course—the history of the vacillation of those gentlemen,
    the “Independents”, on the most important theoretical
    and practical question of the present day. This is the question of
    the relation between dictatorship (of the proletariat) and
    democracy (bourgeois), or between Soviet power and bourgeois
    parliamentarisin.
In his pamphlet Die Diktatur des Proletariats (Wien,
    1918) Herr Kautsky wrote that “the Soviet form of
    organisation is one of the most important phenomena of our
    time. It promises to acquire decisive importance in the great
    decisive battles between capital and labour towards which we are
    marching” (p. 33 of Kautsky’s pamphlet). And he added
    that the Bolsheviks made a mistake in converting the Soviets from
    “a combat organisation of one class”
    into “a state organisation” and thereby
    “destroying democracy” (ibid.).
In my pamphlet The
    Proletarian Revolution and the Renegade Kautsky
    (Petrograd and Moscow, 1918) I examined this argument of
    Kautsky’s in detail and showed him to be completely
    oblivious of the fundamental tenets of Marxism on the state; for
    the state (every state, including the most democratic republic) is
    nothing more nor less than a machine in the hands of one class for
    the suppression of another. To describe the Soviets as the combat
    organisation of a class, and deny them the right to convert
    themselves into a “state organisation”, is
    actually tantamount to renouncing the ABC of socialism,
    proclaiming, or advocating, that the bourgeois machine for the
    suppression of the proletariat (that is, the bourgeois-democratic
    republic, the bourgeois state) should remain inviolate; it is
    actual desertion to the camp of the bourgeoisie.
The absurdity of Kautsky’s position is so glaring, the
    pressure exerted by the masses of the workers who are demanding
    Soviet power is so strong, that Kautsky and his followers have
    been obliged to make an ignominious retreat; they have got
    themselves into a muddle, for they lack the courage honestly to
    admit their mistake.
On February 9, 1919, Freiheit (Freedom), the organ of
    the “Independent” (of Marxism, but absolutely
    dependent on petty-bourgeois democracy) Social-Democrats of
    Germany, contained an article by Herr Hilferding. In this article
    the author is already demanding that the Workers’
    Councils should be converted into a state organisation, but that
    they should exist side by side with the bourgeois
    parliament, the National Assembly, and together with it. On
    February 11, 1919, in an appeal to the German proletariat, this
    slogan was accepted by the entire Independent Party (and
    consequently, also by Flerr Kautsky, who thereby contradicted the
    statements he had made in the autumn of 1918L
This attempt to combine the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie
    with the dictatorship of the proletariat is a complete
    renunciation of Marxism and of socialism in general; forgotten are
    the experiences of the Russian Mensheviks and
    Socialist-Revolutionaries who from May 6, 1917 to October 25, 1917
    (old style) made the “experiment” of combining the
    Soviets as a “state organisation” with the
    bourgeois state and failed ignominiously.
At the Party Congress of the Independents (held at the
    beginning of March 1919) the entire Party accepted this supremely
    sagacious proposal to combine Workers’ Councils with
    bourgeois parliamentarism. But Freiheit No. 178, of April
    13, 1919 (Supplement) reported that the “Independent”
    group at the Second Congress of Workers’ Councils had
    proposed the following resolution:

      “The Second Congress of Workers’ Councils takes its
      stand on the Workers’ Council system. Accordingly, the
      political and economic structure of Germany shall be based on
      the Councils (fibteorganisation). The Councils are the elected
      representative bodies of the working population in all spheres
      of political and economic life.”

      In addition to this, the same group submitted to the Congress a
      draft of “directives” (Richtlinien) in
      which we read the following:
“All political power is concentrated in the
    hands of the Congress of Workers’ Councils ....”
    “The right to elect and be elected to the Councils shall be
    enjoyed by all, irrespective of sex, who perform socially
    necessary and useful labour and do not exploit the labour of
    others ....”

      ..We see, therefore, that the “independent” leaders
      have turned out to be paltry philistines who are entirely
      dependent upon the philistine prejudices of the most backward
      section of the proletariat. In the autumn of 1918, these
      leaders, through their mouthpiece Kautsky, completely rejected
      the idea of the Workers’ Councils being converted into
      state organisations. In March 1919, following in the wake of the
      masses of the workers, they surrender this position. In April
      1919, they throw the decision of their Congress overboard and go
      over entirely to the position of the Communists: “All
      Power to the Workers’ Councils.”
Leaders of this type are not worth very much. There is no need
    to have leaders to serve as an index of the temper of the most
    backward section of the proletariat which marches in the rear and
    not ahead of the vanguard. And considering the spineless way in
    which they change their slogans, such leaders are worthless. They
    cannot he trusted. They will always be mere ballast, a
    minus quantity in the working-class movement.
The most “Left” of these leaders, a certain Herr Däumig,

      argued as follows at the Party Congress (cf. Freiheit of March 9):
“Däumig stated that nothing stands
    between him and the demand of the Communists for ’All Power
    to the Workers’ Councils’. But he must protest against
    the putschism practised by the Communist Party and against the
    Byzantinism they display towards the masses instead of educating
    them. Putschist, isolated action cannot lead to progress
    ....”
By putschisin the Germans mean what the old revolutionaries in
    Russia, some fifty years ago, called “flashes”,
    “pyrotechnics”, i.e., small conspiracies, attempts at
    assassination, revolts, etc.
By accusing the Communists of being “putschists”,
    Herr Dhumig merely betrays his own “Byzantinism”, his
    own servility to the philistine prejudices of the petty
    bourgeoisie. The “Leftism” of a gentleman of this
    type, who repeats a “fashionable” slogan because he
    fears the masses but does not understand the mass
    revolutionary movement is not worth a brass farthing.
A powerful wave of spontaneous strikes is sweeping across
    Germany. The proletarian struggle is evidently grow—big in
    intensity to a degree unprecedented even in Russia in 1905, when
    the strike movement rose to heights that had never been reached
    before anywhere in the world. Anybody who speaks of
    “pyrotechnics” in face of such a movement proves that
    he is a hopeless vulgariser and a slave to philistine
    prejudices. 

    

      Those philistine gentlemen headed by Däumig are
    probably dreaming of a revolution (that is, if any idea of
    revolution ever enters their heads) in which the masses will all
    rise at once, fully organised.

    

      Such revolutions never happen, nor can they happen. Capitalism
      would not be capitalism if it did not keep millions of working
      people, the vast majority of them, in a state of oppression,
      wretchedness, want and ignorance. Capitalism cannot collapse
      except fis a result of a revolution which, in the course of
      struggle, rouses masses who had not hitherto been affected by
      the movement. Spontaneous outbreaks become inevitable as the
      revolution matures. There has never been a revolution in which
      this has not, been the case, nor can there be such a
      revolution,
Herr Däumig lies when he says that the Communists pander to
    spontaneity; it is the same sort of lie that we heard so often
    from the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries. The Communists
    do not pander to spontaneity, they are not in
    favour of isolated outbreaks. The Communists urge the masses to
    take organised, integrated, united, opportune and mature
    action. The philistine slander of Dumig, Kautsky and Co. cannot
    refute this fact.
But the philistines cannot understand that the Communists quite
    rightly regard it as their duty to be with the fighting masses
    of the oppressed and not with the philistine heroes who stand
    aloof from the struggle, timidly waiting to see how things turn
    out. Mistakes are inevitable when the masses are fighting, but the
    Communists remain with the masses, see these mistakes,
    explain them to the masses, try to get them rectified, and strive
    perseveringly for the victory of class-consciousness over
    spontaneity. It is better to be with the fighting masses, who, in
    the course of the struggle, gradually learn to rectify their
    mistakes, than with the paltry intellectuals, philistines, and
    Kautskyites, who hold aloof until “complete victory”
    is achieved—this is the truth that the Däumigs cannot
    understand.
The worse for them. They have already gone down in the history
    of the world proletarian revolution as cowardly philistines,
    reactionary sniveliers, yesterday the servants of. the
    Scheidemanris and today the advocates of “social
    peace”, and it does not matter whether that advocacy is
    concealed by the combination of the Constituent Assembly with the
    Workers’ Councils or by profound condemnation of
    “putschism”.
Herr Kautsky has broken the record for substituting reactionary
    philistine snivelling for Marxism. He does nothing else but bewail
    what is taking place, complain, weep, express horror, and urge
    conciliation! All his life this Knight of the Rueful Countenance
    has been writing about the class struggle and about
    socialism; but when the class stiuggle reached maximum intensity,
    reached the threshold of socialism, our pundit lost his nerve,
    burst into tears, and turned out to be a common or garden
    philistine. In issue No. 98 of the organ of the Vienna traitors to
    socialism, of the Austerlitzes, Renners and Bauers (A
    rbeiterzeitung [Workers’ Gazette], April 9, 1919,
    Vienna, morning edition), Kautsky for the hundredth, if not the
    thousandth time, sums up all his lamentations in the following
    words:
Economic thinking and economic
    understanding,” he wails, “has been knocked out of the
    heads of all classes ....” “The long war has
    accustomed large sections of the proletariat to treat economic
    conditions with absolute contempt and to place all their
    confidence in the almighty power of violence ....”
These are the two “favourite points” of this
    “extremely learned” man! The “cult of
    violence” and the break-down of industry—this is what
    has driven him to the usual, age-old, typical whining and
    snivelling of the philistine instead of analysing the
    real conditions of the class struggle. “We
    expected”, he writes, “that the revolution would come
    as the product of the proletarian class struggle ...”,
    “but the revolution came as a consequence of the collapse of
    the prevailing system in Russia and Germany in the
    war..,.”
In other words, this pundit “expected” a peaceful
    revolution! This is superb!
But Herr Kautsky has lost his nerve to such a degree that he
    has forgotten what he himself wrote when he was a Marxist, namely,
    that in all probability a war would provide the occasion for
    revolution. Today, instead of calmly and fearlessly investigating
    what changes must inevitably take place in the form of
    the revolution as a consequence Of the war, our
    “theoretician” bewails the collapse of his
    “expectations”! 

    

      “... Large sections of the
      proletariat ignore economic conditions!”
What utter piffle! How familiar the Menshevik press of Kerensky
    days made this philistine refrain to us!
The economist Kautsky has forgotten that when a country has
    been ruined by war and brought to the brink of disaster, the main,
    the fundamental, the root “economic condition” is to
    save the workers. If the working class is saved from
    death from starvation, saved from perishing, it will be possible
    to restore disrupted production. But in order to save the working
    class it is necessary to have the dictatorship of the proletariat,
    which is the only means of preventing the burdens and consequences
    of the war from being thrust upon the shoulders of the
    workers.
The economist Kautsky has “forgotten” that the
    question of how the burdens of defeat are to be distributed is
    determined by the class struggle, and that amidst the
    conditions prevailing in an absolutely exhausted, ruined, starving
    and dying country, the class struggle must inevitably
    assume a different form. It is no longer a class struggle for a
    share of the results of production, it is not a struggle to take
    charge of production (for production is at a standstill, there is
    no coal, the railways have been wrecked, the war has knocked
    people out of their groove, the machines are worn out, and so on
    and so forth) but a struggle to save the workers from
    starvation. Only simpletons, even if very
    “learned” ones, can “condemn”, under such
    circumstances, “consumers’, soldiers” communism
    and superciliously remind the workers of the importance of
    production.
The first and foremost task is to save the workers. The
    bourgeoisie want to retain their privileges, to thrust all the
    consequences of the war upon the workers, and this means starving
    the workers to death.
The working class wants to save itself from starvation, and for
    this it is necessary to smash the bourgeoisie, first to
    ensure consumption, even the most meagre, otherwise it will be
    impossible to drag out even an existence of
    semi-starvation, it will be impossible to hold out until
    industry can be restarted.
“Think of production!” says the well-fed
    bourgeoisie to the starving and exhausted workers. And Kautsky,
    repeating the capitalists’ refrain in the guise of
    “economic science”, becomes completely a lackey of the
    bourgeoisie.
But the workers say that the bourgeoisie, too, should be put on
    a semi-starvation ration, so that the working people might
    recuperate somewhat, so that the working people may be saved
    from death. “Consumers’ communism” is a
    means of saving the workers. The workers must be saved, no matter
    at what sacrifice! Half a pound each for the capitalists, a pound
    each for the workers—this is the way out of this period of
    starvation and ruin. Consumption by the starving workers is the
    basis of, and the condition for, the restoration of industry.
Clara Zetkin was quite right when she told Kautsky that he was
    “slipping into bourgeois political economy. Production
    is for man, and not man for production ....”

    

      Independent Herr Kautsky revealed the same dependence upon
      petty-bourgeois prejudices when he bewailed the “cult of
      violence”. When, as far back as 1914, the Bolsheviks
      argued that the imperialist war would become civil war, Herr
      Kautsky said nothing, but he remained in the same party with
      David and Co. who denounced this forecast (and slogan) as
      “madness”. Kautsky failed entirely to understand
      that the imperialist war would inevitably be transformed into
      civil war; and now he is blaming both combatants in the civil
      war for his own lack of understanding! Is this not a perfect
      example of reactionary philistine stupidity?
But while in 1914, failure to understand that the imperialist
    war must inevitably be transformed into civil war was only
    philistine stupidity, today, in 1919, it is something worse. It is
    treachery to the working class; for the civil war in Russia,
    Finland, Latvia, Germany and Hungary, is a fact. Kautsky
    admitted hundreds and hundreds of times in his former writings
    that there are periods in history when the class struggle is
    inevitably transformed into the civil war. There is one now, but
    Kautsky is found in the camp of the vacillating, cowardly, petty
    bourgeoisie.
“. . . .The spirit that inspires
    Spartacus is virtually the spirit of
      Ludendorff . Spartacus is not only encompassing the
    doom of its own cause, but is also causing an intensification
    of the policy of violenceon the part of the Majority
    Socialists, Noske is the antipode of Spartacus . . . .
These words of Kautsky’s (quoted from his article in the
    Vienna Arbeiterzeitung) are so infinitely stupid, base
    and despicable that it is sufficient to point to them without
    making any comment.The party which tolerates such leaders must be
    rotten to the core. In the light of these words of
    Kautsky’s, the Borne International, to which Herr Kautsky
    belongs, must be appraised on its merits as a yellow
    International.

      As a curiosity we shall also quote the argument advanced by Herr
      Haase, in an article entitled “The International at
      Amsterdam” (Freiheit, May 4, 1919). Herr Haase
      boasts of having proposed a resolution on the colonial question
      which states that “it is the function of an alliance of
      nations organised on the lines proposed by the International
      before the advent of socialism ... [please note this!
      ][Interpolations in square brackets in
      quoted passages have been introduced by Lenin unless otherwise
      stated.—Editor.];... to administer the
      colonies primarily in the interests of the natives, and
      then in the interests of all the nations that are united
      in the alliance of nations ....”
A gem, is it not? According to the resolution proposed by this
    pundit, before the advent of socialism, the
    colonies will be administered not by the
    bourgeoisie, but by some sort of benevolent, just, sentimental
    “alliance of nations”! Is this not tantamount to
    whitewashing the most disgusting capitalist hypocrisy? And these
    are the “Lefts” in the Berne International ....

      So that the reader may make a more striking comparison between
      the stupidity, baseness and despicableness of the writings of
      Haase, Kautsky and Co. and the real situation in Germany, I
      shall cite one other brief passage.
The well-known capitalist, Waither Rathenau, recently wrote a
    book entitled, Der neue Stoat (The New State). It is
    dated March 24, 1919. Its value as a theoretical work is nil. But
    as an observer, Waither Rathenau is compelled to admit the
    following.
“We are a nation of poets and thinkers, but
    in our auxiliary occupations [im IVebenberuf] we are
    philistines ......
“Only the extreme monarchists and the
    Spartacists now have ideals ....”
...“The unvarnished truth is that we are
    heading for dictatorship, proletarian or pretorian.(pp. 29, 52,
    65).
Evidently this bourgeois considers himself as
    “independent” of the bourgeoisie as Kautsky and Haase
    imagine they are of the petty bourgeoisie and of
    philistinisin.
But Walther Rathenau towers head and shoulders above Karl
    Kautsky, for the latter snivels, and like a coward hides from the
    “unvarnished truth”, whereas the former frankly admits
    it.

      May 28, 1919

Collected Works Volume 29
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## Telegram to J. V. Stalin











Telegram To J. V. Stalin May 29, 1919



V. I. Lenin
Telegram To J. V. Stalin


Written: 29 May, 1919
First Published:  1938; Published according to the signed original
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, page 402
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002; Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License.

Stalin,
      Smolny,
      Petrograd
The circumstances of the whiteguard offensive
    against Petrograd, taken in their totality, compel one to assume
    the existence of organised treason behind our lines or, perhaps,
    even at the front. This is the only explanation for the attack
    with relatively small forces, the rapid advance and the frequent
    blowing-up of bridges on the main lines leading to Petrograd. It
    seems that the enemy is confident that we have no organised armed
    forces of any importance to resist him and that he can depend on
    help from the hinterland (the fire in the artillery magazines in
    Novo-Sokolniki, the destruc-tion of bridges, today’s news of
    the revolt at Oredezh). Please pay greater attention to these
    circumstances and take extraordinary measures to expose the plots.

    
Lenin

Collected Works Volume 29
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 







==========

## Beware of Spies!











Beware Of Spies!



V. I. Lenin
Beware Of Spies!


Written: 31 May, 1919
First Published: Pravda No. 116, May 31, 1919; Published according to the Pravda text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, page 403
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002; Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License.

Death to spies!
The whiteguards’ advance on Petrograd has made it
    per-fectly clear that in the vicinity of the front line, in every
    large town, the Whites have a wide organisation for espionage,
    subversion, the blowing-up of bridges, the engineering of revolts
    in the rear and the murder of Communists and prominent members of
    workers’ organisations.
Every man should be on the watch.
Everywhere vigilance must be redoubled and a series of measures evolved and carried out with the greatest strictness to track down and capture spies and whiteguard conspirators.
Railwaymen and political workers in all military units without exception must, in particular, redouble their precautions.
All class-conscious workers and peasants must rise up in defence of Soviet power and must fight the spies and whiteguard traitors. Let every man be on the watch and in regular contact, organised on military lines, with the committees of the Party, with the Extraordinary Commission and with the most trusted and experienced comrades among the Soviet officials.
V. Ulyanov (Lenin),
      Chairman of the Council of Workers’ and Peasants’ Defence

    

      F. Dzerzhinsky, 
      People’s Commissar of the Interior

Collected Works Volume 29
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 







==========

## Draft C.C. Directives on army Unity











Draft C.C. Directives On Army Unity



V. I. Lenin
Draft C.C. Directives On Army Unity


Written:May, 1919
First Published: 1942; Published accordingto a typewritten copy
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, pages 404-405
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002; Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License.

Whereas:
(1) The R,S.F.S.R., in alliance with the fraternal Soviet
    Republics of the Ukraine, Latvia, Estonia, Lithuania and
    Byelorussia, is compelled to wage a war of defence against the
    common enemy, world imperialism and the Black-Hun-dred, whiteguard
    counter-revolution which imperialism supports;
(2) an essential condition for success in that war is a single
      command for all contingents of the Red Army, the strictest
      centralisation of the command of all the forces and resources of
      the socialist republics, especially of the entire army supply
      apparatus and also of railway transport which is an
      important-material factor in the war, being of primary
      importance both for the conduct of operations and for the supply
      of munitions, equipment and provisions to the Red Army, 

    

      the C.C. of the R.C.P. resolves:
(1) to recognise as absolutely essential for the duration of
    the socialist war of defence the unification of everything
    connected with supplies for the Red Army under the single guidance
    of the Council of Defence and other central bodies of the
    R.S.F.S.R.;
(2) to recognise as absolutely essential for the duration of
    the socialist war of defence the unification of railway transport
    and the management of the railway network through-out the entire
    territory of fraternal socialist republics under the guidance and
    management of the People’s Com-missariat of Railways of the
    R.SF.S.R.;
(3) to recognise as incompatible with the interests of defence
    the existence of separate bodies supplying the Red Army and
    separate commissariats of railways in the frater-nal Soviet
    republics, and to insist on their being changed for the duration
    of the war into branches of the R.S.F.SR. bodies supplying the Red
    Army and of the People’s Commis-sariat of Railways of the
    R.S,F.S.R. that shall be under the jurisdiction of and fully
    subordinated to the central R.S.F.S.R. bodies supplying the Red
    Army and the People’s Commissariat of Railways of the
    R.S.F.S.R.;
(4) to recognise as subject to annulment all decrees
    concern-ing Red Army supplies and railway transport or concern-ing
    the management of the railway network wherever they contradict the
    orders and decrees of the R.SF.S.R. regulating supplies for the
    Red Army and the management of railway transport and the railway
    network of the R.S.F.S.R.
Lenin, Stalin
    

Collected Works Volume 29
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 







==========

## Telegram to J. V. Stalin











Telegram To J. V. Stalin



V. I. Lenin
Telegram To J. V. Stalin


Written: 4 June, 1919
First Published: 1938; Published according to the manuscript
Translated: George Hanna
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, page 406
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002; Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License.

Stalin
Smolny,
Petrograd

If the situation on the Petrograd Front is favourable bend all efforts for a speedy and decisive offensive, because troops are greatly needed in other places.
Lenin

Collected Works Volume 29
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 







==========

## Draft Decision of the C.C. R.C.P.(B.) on the Petrograd Front











Draft Decision Of The C.C. R.C.P. (B.) on The Petrograd Front



V. I. Lenin
Draft Decision Of The C.C. R.C.P. (B.)
On The Petrograd Front


Written:10 June, 1919
First Published: First two points published in 1941; First published in full in the Fourth (Russian) Edition of the Collected Works; Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, page 407
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002; Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License.

The C.C. resolves:
(1) to recognise the priority importance of the Petrograd Front and to be guided by this in allocating troops, etc.;
(2) to dispatch two-thirds of the division withdrawn from the Eastern Front to Petrograd and one-third to the Southern Front;
(3) to instruct the Organising Bureau to adopt the most rigorous emergency measures to step up the removal of Communists from work in the Soviets (central and local) and their transfer to war work, especially in the hinterland and directly behind the front line (combating desertion, army supplies, stores, accelerating mobilisation, etc.);
(4) a similar instruction is given the Council of Defence and the Council of People’s Commissars.

Collected Works Volume 29
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 







==========

## A Great Beginning. Heroism of the Workers In the Rear. “Communist Subbotniks”











A Great Beginning Heroism Of The Workers In The Rear ”Communist subbotniks”



V. I. Lenin
A Great Beginning
Heroism Of The Workers In The Rear
“Communist subbotniks”


Written: 28 June, 1919
First Published: July 1919 as a separate pamphlet in Moscow; Signed: N. Lenin; Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, pages 409-434
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


 The press reports many instances of the heroism of
    the Red Army men. In the fight against Kolchak, Denikin and other
    forces of the landowners and capitalists, the workers and peasants
    very often display miracles of bravery and endurance, defending
    the gains of the socialist revolution. The guerrilla spirit,
    weariness and indiscipline are being overcome; it is a slow and
    difficult process, but it is making headway in spite of
    everything. The heroism of the working people making voluntary
    sacrifices for the victory of socialism—this is the
    foundation of the new, comradely discipline in the Red Army, the
    foundation on which that army is regenerating, gaining strength
    and growing. 
 
      The heroism of the workers in the rear is no less worthy of
      attention. In this connection, the communist
      subbotniks organised by the workers on their own
      initiative are really of enormous significance. Evidently, this
      is only a beginning, but it is a beginning of exceptionally
      great importance. It is the beginning of a revolution that is
      more difficult, more tangible, more radical and more decisive
      than the overthrow of the bourgeoisie, for it is a victory over
      our own conservatism, indiscipline, petty-bourgeois egoism, a
      victory over the habits left as a heritage to the worker and
      peasant by accursed capitalism. Only when this victory
      is consolidated will the new social discipline, socialist
      discipline, be created; then and only then will a reversion to
      capitalism become impossible, will communism become really
      invincible. 

Pravda in its issue of May 17 published an article by
      A. J. entitled: “Work in a Revolutionary Way. A
      Communist Saturday ”. This article is so important
      that we reproduce it here in full.
    

      “Work In A Revolutionary Way 
      “A Communist Saturday
“The letter of the Russian Communist
      Party’s Central Committee on working in a revolutionary
way was a powerful stimulus to communist organisations and to
      Communists. The general wave of enthusiasm carried many communist
      railway workers to the front, but the majority of them could not
      leave their responsible posts or find new forms of working in a
      revo1utionary way. Reports from the localities about the tardiness
      with which the work of mobilisation was proceeding and the
      prevalence of red tape compelled the Moscow-Kazan Railway district
      to turn its attention to the way the railway was functioning. It
      turned out that, owing to the shortage of labour and low
      productivity of labour, urgent orders and repairs to locomotives
      were being held up. At a general meeting of Communists and
      sympathisers of the Moscow-Kazan Railway district held on May 7,
      the question was raised of passing from words to deeds in helping
      to achieve victory over Kolchak. The following resolution was
      moved: 
    
“’In view of the grave domestic and
    foreign situation, Communists and sympathisers, in order to gain
    the upper hand over the class enemy must spur themselves on again
    and deduct an extra hour from their rest, i.e., lengthen their
    working day by one hour, accumulate these extra hours and put in
    six extra hours of manual labour on Saturday for the purpose of
    creating real values of immediate worth. Since Communists must not
    grudge their health and life for the gains of the revolution, this
    work should be performed without pay. Communist Saturdays
    are to be introduced throughout the district and to continue until
    complete victory over Kolchak has been achieved.’ 
    
“After some hesitation, the resolution was
    adopted unanimously. 
    
“On Saturday, May 10, at 6 p.m., the
    Communists and sympathisers turned up to work like soldiers,
    formed ranks, and without fuss or bustle were taken by the foremen
    to the various jobs. 
    
“The results of working in in a
    revolutionary way are evident. The accompanying table gives
    the place, of work and the character of the work performed.



  Place of work 

  Character of work 

    Number employed 
  
    Hours worked 
  
    Work performed 
  

    Per person 
  
    Total 
  


    Moscow: Main locomotive 
    shops 
  
    Loading materials for the line, devices for 
    repairing locomotives and carriage parts for Perovo, Murom, 
    Alatyr and Syzran 
  48 21 55 3 4
    240 
    
    63 
    
    20 
  
    Loaded 7,500 poods

    Unloaded 1,800 poods



    Moscow. 
    Passenger depot 
  
    Complex current repairs to 
    locomotives 
  
    26 
  
    5 
  
    130 
  
    Repairs done on 1 1/2 locomotives 
  


    Moscow. 
    Shunting yards 
  
    Current repairs to locomotives 
  
    24 
  
    6 
  
    144 
  
    2 locomotives completed and parts to be
    repaired dismantled on 4 
  


    Moscow. 
    Carriage 
    department 
  
    Current repairs to passenger
    carriages 
  
    12 
  
    6 
  
    72 
  
    2 third-class carriages 
  


    Perovo. Main carriage 
    workshop 
  
      Carriage repairs and minor repairs on Saturday and Sunday 
    46 23 5 5230 115 
      12 box carriages and two flat carriages
Total205--1,014 
    4 locomotives and 16 carriages turned out and 9,300 poods unloaded and loaded 

“The total value of the work performed at
      ordinary rates of pay is five million rubles; calculated at
      overtimes rate it would be fifty per cent higher.

    
“The productivity of labour in loading
      wagons was 270 per cent higher than that of regular workers, The
      productivity of labour on other jobs was approximately the
      same. 
“Jobs (urgent) were done which had been held up for periods ranging from seven days to three months owing to the shortage of labour and to red tape. 
    
“The work was done in spite of the state of disrepair (easily remedied) of implements, as a result of which certain groups were held up from thirty to forty minutes. 
    
“The administration left in charge of the work could hardly keep pace with the men in finding new jobs for them, and perhaps it was only a slight exaggeration when an old foreman said that as much work was done at this communist Saturday as would have been done in a week by non-class-conscious and slack workers. 
    
“In view of the fact that many non-Communists, sincere supporters of the Soviet government, took part in the work, and that many more are expected on future Saturdays, and also in view of the fact that many other districts desire to follow the example of the communist railway workers of the Moscow-Kazan Railway, I shall deal in greater detail with the organisational side of the matter as seen from reports received from the localities. 
    
“Of those taking part in the work some ten per cent were Communists permanently employed in the localities. The rest were persons occupying responsible and elective posts, from the commissar of the railway to commissars of individual enterprises, representatives of the trade union, and employees of the head office and of the Commissariat of Railways. 
    
“The enthusiasm and team spirit displayed during work were extraordinary. When the workers, clerks and head office employees without even an oath or argument, caught hold of the forty-pood wheel tire of a passenger locomotive and, like industrious ants, rolled it into place, one’s heart was filled with fervent joy at the sight of this collective effort, and one’s conviction was strengthened that the victory of the working class was unshakable. The international bandits will not crush the victorious workers; the internal saboteurs will not live to see Kolchak. 
    
“When the work was finished those present witnessed an unprecedented scene: a hundred Communists, weary, but with the light of joy in their eyes, greeted their success with the solemn strains of the Internationale. And it seemed as if the triumphant strains of the triumphant anthem would sweep over the walls through the whole of working-class Moscow and that like the waves caused by a stone thrown into a pool they would spread through the whole of working-class Russia and shake up the weary and the slack.
    
”A. J.” 
    
Appraising this remarkable “example worthy of emulation”, Comrade N. R. in an article in Pravda of May 20 under that heading, wrote: 
“Cases of Communists working like this are not rare. I know of similar cases at an electric power station, and on various railways On the Nikolayevskaya Railway, the Communists worked overtime several nights to lift a locomotive that had fallen into the turn-table pit. In the winter, all the Communists and sympathisers on the Northern Railway worked several Sundays clearing the track of snow; and the communist cells at many goods stations patrol the stations at night to prevent stealing. But all this work was casual and unsystematic. The comrades on the Moscow-Kazan line are making this work systematic and permanent, and this is new. They say in their resolution, ’until complete victory over Kolchak has been achieved’, and therein lies the significance of their work. They are lengthening the working day of every Communist and sympathiser by one hour for the duration of the state of war; simultaneously, their productivity of labour is exemplary. 
    
“This example has called forth, and is bound to call forth, further emulation. A general meeting of the Communists and sympathisers on the Alexandrovskaya Railway, after discussing the military situation and the resolution adopted by the comrades on the Moscow-Kazan Railway, resolved: (1) to introduce ’subbotniks’ for the Communists and sympathisers on the Alexandrovskaya Railway, the first subbotnik to take place on May 17; (2) to organise the Communists and sympathisers in exemplary, model teams which must show the workers how to work and what can really be done with the present materials and tools, and in the present food situation. 
    
“The Moscow-Kazan comrades say that their example has made a great impression and that they expect a large number of non-Party workers to turn up next Saturday. At the time these lines are being written the Communists have not yet started working overtime in the Alexandrovskaya Railway workshops, but as soon as the rumour spread that they were to do so the mass of non-Party workers stirred themselves. ’We did not know yesterday, otherwise we would have worked as well!’ ’I will certainly come next Saturday,’ can be heard on all sides. The impression created by work of this sort is very great. 
    
“The example set by the Moscow-Kazan comrades should be emulated by all the communist cells in the rear; not only the communist cells at Moscow Junction, but the whole Party organisation in Russia. In the rural districts too, the communist cells should in the first place set to work to till the fields of Red Army men and thus help their families. 
    
“The comrades on the Moscow-Kazan line finished their first communist subbotnik by singing the Internationale. If the communist organisations throughout Russia follow this example and consistently apply it, the Russian Soviet Republic will successfully weather the coming severe months to the mighty strains of the Internationale sung by all the working people of the Republic. . . . 
    
“To work, communist comrades!” 
    
On May 23, 1919, Pravda reported the following:
“The first communist ’subbotnik’ on the Alexandrovskaya Railway took place on May 17. In accordance with the resolution adopted by their general meeting, ninety-eight Communists and sympathisers worked five hours overtime without pay, receiving in return only the right to purchase a second dinner, and, as manual labourers, half a pound of bread to go with their dinner.” 
    
 
 Although the work was poorly prepared and organised the productivity of labour was nevertheless from two to three times higher than usual. 
 
 Here are a few examples. 
 
 Five turners turned eighty spindles in four hours. The productivity is 213 per cent of the usual level. 
 
 Twenty unskilled workers in four hours collected scrap materials of a total weight of 600 poods, and seventy laminated carriage springs, each weighing 31 1/2 poods, making a total of 850 poods. Productivity, 300 per cent of the usual level. 
“The comrades explain this by the fact that ordinarily their work is boring and tiresome, whereas here they worked with a will and with enthusiasm. Now, however, they will be ashamed to turn out less in regular working hours than they did at the communist subbotnik.” 
    
“Now many non-Party workers say that they would like to take part in the subbotniks. The locomotive crews volunteer to take locomotives from the ’cemetery’, during a subbotnik, repair them and set them going. 
    
“It is reported that similar subbotniks are to be organised on the Vyazma line.”

 
      How the work is done at these communist subbotniks is
      described by Comrade A. Dyachenko in an article in
      Pravda of June 7, entitled “Notes of a
      subbotnik Worker”. We quote the main passages
      from this article.




“A comrade and I were very pleased to go
    and do our ’bit’ in the subbotnik arranged by
    a decision of the railway district committee of the Party; for a
    time, for a few hours, I would give my head a rest and my muscles
    a bit of exercise. . . . We were detailed off to the railway
    carpentry shop. We got there, found a number of our people
    exchanged greetings, engaged in banter for a bit, counted up our
    forces and found that there were thirty of us. . . . And in front
    of us lay a ’monster’, a steam boiler weighing no less
    than six or seven hundred poods; our job was to
    ’shift’ it, i.e., move it over a distance of a quarter
    or a third of a verst, to its base. We began to have our
    doubts. . . . However, we started on the job. Some comrades placed
    wooden rollers under the boiler, attached two ropes to it, and we
    began to tug away. . . . The boiler gave way reluctantly, but at
    length it budged. We were delighted. After all, there were so few
    of us. . . . For nearly two weeks this boiler had resisted the
    efforts of thrice our number of non-communist workers and nothing
    could make it budge until we tackled it. . . . We worked for an
    hour, strenuously, rhythmically to the command of our
    ’foreman’—’one, two, three’, and the
    boiler kept on rolling. Suddenly there was confusion, and a number
    of our comrades went tumbling on to the ground in the funniest
    fashion. The rope ’let them down’. . . . A
    moment’s delay, and a thicker rope was made
    fast. . . . Evening. It was gettine dark, but we had yet to
    negotiate a small hillock, and then our job would soon be
    done. Our arms ached, our palms burned, we were hot and pulled for
    all we were worth—and were making headway. The
    ’management’ stood round and somewhat shamed by our
    success, clutched at a rope. ’Lend a hand, it’s time
    you did!’ A Red Army man was watching our labours; in his
    hands he held an accordion. What was he thinking? Who were these
    people? Why should they work on Saturday when everybody was at
    home? I solved his riddle and said to him: ’Comrade, play us
    a jolly tune. We are not raw hands, we are real
    Communists. Don’t you see how fast the work is going under
    our hands? We are not lazy, we are pulling for all we are
    worth!’ In response, the Red Army man carefully put his
    accordion on the ground and hastened to grab at a rope end. . . . 
    
“Suddenly Comrade U. struck up the workers’ song ’Dubinushka’, ’anglichanin mudrets’, he sang, in an excellent tenor voice and we all joined in the refrain of this labour shanty: ’Eh, dubinushka, ukhnem, podyornem, podyornem. . . .’ 
    
“We were unaccustomed to the work, our muscles were weary, our shoulders, our backs ached . . . but the next day would be a free day, our day of rest, and we would be able to get all the sleep we wanted. The goal was near, and after a little hesitation our ’monster’ rolled almost right up to the base. ’Put some boards under, raise it on the base, and let the boiler do the work that has long been expected of it.’ We went off in a crowd to the ’club room’ of the local Party cell. The room was brightly lit; the walls decorated with posters; rifles stacked around the room. After lustily singing the Internationale we enjoyed a glass of tea and ’rum’, and even bread. This treat, given us by the local comrades, was very welcome after our arduous toil. We took a brotherly farewell of our comrades and lined up. The strains of revolutionary songs echoed through the slumbering streets in the silence of the night and our measured tread kept time with the music. We sang ’Comrades, the Bugles Are Sounding’, ’Arise Ye Starvelings from Your Slumbers’, songs of the International and of labour. 
    
“A week passed. Our arms and shoulders were back to normal and we were going to another ’subbotnik’, nine versts away this time, to repair railway waggons. Our destination was Perovo. The comrades climbed on the roof of an ’American’ box waggon and sang the Internationale well and with gusto. The people on the train listened to the singing, evidently in surprise. The wheels knocked a measured beat, and those of us who failed to get on to the roof clung to the steps pretending to be ’devil-may-care’ passengers. The train pulled in. We had reached our destination. We passed through a long yard and were warmly greeted by the commissar, Comrade G. 
    
“’There is plenty of work, but few to do it! Only thirty of us, and in six hours we have to do average repairs to a baker’s dozen of waggons! Here are twin-wheels already marked. We have not only empty waggons, but also a filled cistern. . . . But that’s nothing, we’ll “make a job of it”, comrades!’ 
    
“Work went with a swing. Five comrades and I were working with hoists. Under pressure of our shoulders and two hoists, and directed by our ’foreman’, these twin-wheels, weighing from sixty to seventy poods apiece, skipped from one track to another in the liveliest possible manner. One pair disappeared, another rolled into place. At last all were in their assigned places, and swiftly we shifted the old worn out junk into a shed. . . . One, two, three—and, raised by a revolving iron hoist, they were disloged from the rails in a trice. Over there in the dark, we heard the rapid strokes of hammers; the comrades, like worker bees, were busy on their ’sick’ cars. Some were carpentering, others painting, still others were covering roofs, to the joy of the comrade commissar and our own. The smiths also asked for our aid. In a portable smithy a rod with a coupling hook was gleaming white hot, it had been bent by careless shunting. It was laid on the anvil scattering white sparks, and, under the experienced direction of the smith, our trusty hammers beat it back into its proper shape. Still red-hot and spitting sparks, we rushed it on our shoulders to where it had to go. We pushed it into its socket. A few hammer strokes and it was fixed. We crawled under the waggon. The coupling system is not as simple as it looks; there are all sorts of contraptions with rivets and springs. . . . 
    
“Work was in full swing. Night was falling. The torches seemed to burn brighter than before. Soon it would be time to knock off. Some of the comrades were taking a ’rest’ against some tires and ’sipping’ hot tea. The May night was cool, and the new moon shone beautifully like a gleaming sickle in the sky. People were laughing and joking. 
    
“’Knock off, Comrade G., thirteen waggons are enough!’ 
    
“But Comrade G. was not satisfied. 
    
“We finished our tea, broke into our songs of triumph, and marched to the door. . . . 
    
 
 The movement of “communist subbotniks” is not confined to Moscow. Pravda of June 6 reported the following:
“The first communist subbotnik in Tver took place on May 31. One hundred and twenty-eight Communists worked on the railway. In three and a half hours they loaded and unloaded fourteen waggons, repaired three locomotives, cut up ten sagenes of firewood and performed other work. The productivity of labour of the skilled communist workers was thirteen times above normal.” 
    
 
      Again, on June 8 we read in Pravda:
    

      “Communist Subbotniks”
    
 
      “Saratou, June 5. In response to the appeal of their MOSCOW comrades, the communist railway workers here at a general Party meeting resolved: to work five hours overtime on Saturdays without pay in order to support the national economy.”
 
I have given the fullest and most detailed information about the communist subbotniks because in this we undoubtedly observe one of the most important aspects of communist construction, to which our press pays insufficient attention, and which all of us have as yet failed properly to appreciate. 
 
 Less political fireworks and more attention to the simplest but living facts of communist construction, taken from and tested by actual life—this is the slogan which all of us, our writers, agitators, propagandists, organisers, etc., should repeat unceasingly. 
 
 It was natural and inevitable in the first period after the proletarian revolution that we should be engaged primarily on the main and fundamental task of overcoming the resistance of the bourgeoisie, of vanquishing the exploiters, of crushing their conspiracy (like the “slave-owners’ conspiracy” to surrender Petrograd, in which all from the Black Hundreds and Cadets to the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries were involved[1]). But simultaneously with this task, another task comes to the forefront just as inevitably and ever more imperatively as time goes on, namely, the more important task of positive communist construction, the creation of new economic relations, of a new society. 
 
 As I have had occasion to point out more than once, among other occasions in the speech I delivered at a session of the Petrograd Soviet on March 12, the dictatorship of the proletariat is not only the use of force against the exploiters, and not even mainly the use of force. The economic foundation of this use of revolutionary force, the guarantee of its effectiveness and success is the fact that the proletariat represents and creates a higher type of social organisation of labour compared with capitalism. This is what is important, this is the source of the strength and the guarantee that the final triumph of communism is inevitable. 
 
 The feudal organisation of social labour rested on the discipline of the bludgeon, while the working people, robbed and tyrannised by a handful of landowners, were utterly ignorant and downtrodden. The capitalist organisation of social labour rested on the discipline of hunger, and, not withstanding all the progress of bourgeois culture and bourgeois democracy, the vast mass of the working people in the most advanced, civilised and democratic republics remained an ignorant and downtrodden mass of wage-slaves or oppressed peasants, robbed and tyrannised by a handful of capitalists. The communist organisation of social labour the first step towards which is socialism, rests, and will do so more and more as time goes on, on the free and conscious discipline of the working people themselves who have thrown off the yoke both of the landowners and capitalists. 
 
 This new discipline does not drop from the skies, nor is it born from pious wishes; it grows out of the material conditions of large-scale capitalist production, and out of them alone. Without them it is impossible. And the repository, or the vehicle, of these material conditions is a definite historical class, created, organised, united, trained, educated and hardened by large-scale capitalism. This class is the proletariat. 
 
 If we translate the Latin, scientific, historico-philosophical term “dictatorship of the proletariat” into simpler language, it means just the following: 
 
 Only a definite class, namely, the urban workers and the factory, industrial workers in general, is able to lead the whole mass of the working and exploited people in the struggle to throw off the yoke of capital, in actually carrying it out, in the struggle to maintain and consolidate the victory, in the work of creating the new, socialist social system and in the entire struggle for the complete abolition of classes. (Let us observe in parenthesis that the only scientific distinction between socialism and communism is that the first term implies the first stage of the new society arising out of capitalism, while the second implies the next and higher stage.) 
 
 The mistake the “Berne” yellow International makes is that its leaders accept the class struggle and the leading role of the proletariat only in word and are afraid to think it out to its logical conclusion. They are afraid of- that inevitable conclusion which particularly terrifies the bourgeoisie, and which is absolutely unacceptable to them. They are afraid to admit that the dictatorship of the proletariat is also a period of class struggle, which is inevitable as long as classes have not been abolished, and which changes in form, being particularly fierce and particularly peculiar in the period immediately following the overthrow of capital. The proletariat does not cease the class struggle after it has captured political power, but continues it until classes are abolished—of course, under different circumstances, in different form and by different means. 
 
 And what does the “abolition of classes” mean? All those who call themselves socialists recognise this as the ultimate goal of socialism, but by no means all give thought to its significance. Classes are large groups of people differing from each other by the place they occupy in a historically determined system of social production, by their relation (in most cases fixed and formulated in law) to the means of production, by their role in the social organisation of labour, and, consequently, by the dimensions of the share of social wealth of which they dispose and the mode of acquiring it. Classes are groups of people one of which can appropriate the labour of another owing to the different places they occupy in a definite system of social economy. 
 
 Clearly, in order to abolish classes completely, it is not enough to overthrow the exploiters, the landowners and capitalists, not enough to abolish their rights of ownership; it is necessary also to abolish all private ownership of the means of production, it is necessary to abolish the distinction between town and country, as well as the distinction between manual workers and brain workers. This requires a very long period of time. In order to achieve this an enormous step forward must be taken in developing the productive forces; it is necessary to overcome the resistance (frequently passive, which is particularly stubborn and particularly difficult to overcome) of the numerous survivals of small-scale production; it is necessary to overcome the enormous force of habit and conservatism which are connected with these survivals. 
 
 The assumption that all “working people” are equally capable of doing this work would be on empty phrase, or the illusion of an antediluvian, pre-Marxist socialist; for this ability does not come of itself, but grows historically, and grows only out of the material conditions of large-scale capitalist production. This ability, at the beginning of the road from capitalism to socialism, is possessed by the proletariat alone. It is capable of fulfilling the gigantic task that confronts it, first, because it is the strongest and most advanced class in civilised societies; secondly, because in the most developed countries it constitutes the majority of the population, and thirdly, because in backward capitalist countries, like Russia, the majority of the population consists of semi-proletarians, i.e., of people who regularly live in a proletarian way part of the year, who regularly earn a part of their means of subsistence as wage-workers in capitalist enterprises. 
 
 Those who try to solve the problems involved in the transition from capitalism to socialism on the basis of general talk about liberty, equality, democracy in general equality of labour democracy, etc. (as Kautsky, Martov and other heroes of the Berne yellow International do), thereby only reveal their petty-bourgeois, philistine nature and ideologically slavishly follow in the wake of the bourgeoisie. The correct solution of this problem can be found only in a concrete study of the specific relations between the specific class which has conquered political power, namely, the proletariat, and the whole non-proletarian, and also semi-proletarian, mass of the working population—relations which do not take shape in fantastically harmonious, “ideal” conditions, but in the real conditions of the frantic resistance of the bourgeoisie which assumes many and diverse forms. 
 
 The vast majority of the population—and all the more so of the working population—of any capitalist country, including Russia, have thousands of times experienced, themselves and through their kith and kin, the oppression of capital, the plunder and every sort of tyranny it perpetrates. The imperialist war, i.e., the slaughter of ten million people in order to decide whether British or German capital was to have supremacy in plundering the whole world, has greatly intensified these ordeals, has increased and deepened them, and has made the people realise their meaning. Hence the inevitable sympathy displayed by the vast majority of the population, particularly the working people, for the proletariat, because it is with heroic courage and revolutionary ruthlessness throwing off the yoke of capital, overthrowing the exploiters, suppressing their resistance, and shedding its blood to pave the road for the creation of the new society, in which there will be no room for exploiters. 
 
 Great and inevitable as may be their petty-bourgeois vacillations and their tendency to go back to bourgeois “order”, under the “wing” of the bourgeoisie, the non-proletarian and semi-proletarian mass of the working population cannot but recognise the moral and political authority of the proletariat, who are not only overthrowing the exploiters and suppressing their resistance, but are building a new and higher social bond, a social discipline, the discipline of class-conscious and united working people, who know no yoke and no authority except the authority of their own unity, of their own, more class-conscious, bold, solid, revolutionary and steadfast vanguard. 
 
 In order to achieve victory, in order to build and consolidate socialism, the proletariat must fulfil a twofold or dual task: first, it must, by its supreme heroism in the revolutionary struggle against capital, win over the entire mass of the working and exploited people; it must win them over, organise them and lead them in the struggle to overthrow the bourgeoisie and utterly suppress their resistance. Secondly, it must lead the whole mass of the working and exploited people, as well as all the petty-bourgeois groups, on to the road of new economic development, towards the creation of a new social bond, a new labour discipline, a new organisation of labour, which will combine the last word in science and capitalist technology with the mass association of class-conscious workers creating large-scale socialist industry. 
 
 The second task is more difficult than the first, for it cannot possibly be fulfilled by single acts of heroic fervour; it requires the most prolonged, most persistent and most difficult mass heroism in plain, everyday work. But this task is more essential than the first, because, in the last analysis, the deepest source of strength for victories over the bourgeoisie and the sole guarantee of the durability and permanence of these victories can only be a new and higher mode of social production, the substitution of large-scale socialist production for capitalist and petty-bourgeois production. 
 
 “Communist subbotniks” are of such enormous historical significance precisely because they demonstrate the conscious and voluntary initiative of the workers in developing the productivity of labour, in adopting a new labour discipline, in creating socialist conditions of economy and life. 
 
 J. Jacoby, one of the few, in fact it would be more correct to say one of the exceptionally rare, German bourgeois democrats who, after the lessons of 1870-71, went over not to chauvinism or national-liberalism, but to socialism, once said that the formation of a single trade union was of greater historical importance than the battle of Sadowa.[2] This is true. The battle of Sadowa decided the supremacy of one of two bourgeois monarchies, the Austrian or the Prussian, in creating a German national capitalist state. The formation of one trade union was a small step towards the world victory of the proletariat over the bourgeoisie. And we may similarly say that the first communist subbotnik, organised by the workers of the Moscow-Kazan Railway in Moscow on May 10, 1919, was of greater historical significance than any of the victories of Hindenhurg, or of Foch and the British, in the 1914-18 imperialist war. The victories of the imperialists mean the slaughter of millions of workers for the sake of the profits of the Anglo-American and French multimillionaires, they are the atrocities of doomed capitalism, bloated with over-eating and rotting alive. The communist subbotnik organised by the workers of the Moscow Kazan Railway is one of the cells of the new, socialist society, which brings to all the peoples of the earth emancipation from the yoke of capital and from wars. 
 
 The bourgeois gentlemen and their hangers-on, including the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries, who are wont to regard themselves as the representatives of “public opinion”, naturally jeer at the hopes of the Communists, call those hopes “a baobab tree in a mignonette pot”, sneer at the insignificance of the number of suhbotniks compared with the vast number of cases of thieving, idleness, lower productivity, spoilage of raw materials and finished goods, etc. Our reply to these gentlemen is that if the bourgeois intellectuals had dedicated their knowledge to assisting the working people instead of giving it to the Russian and foreign capitalists in order to restore their power, the revolution would have proceeded more rapidly and more peacefully. But this is utopian, for the issue is decided by the class struggle, and the majority of the intellectuals gravitate towards the bourgeoisie. Not with the assistance of the intellectuals will the proletariat achieve victory, but in spite of their opposition (at least in the majority of cases), removing those of them who are incorrigibly bourgeois, reforming, re-educating and subordinating the waverers, and gradually winning ever larger sections of them to its side. Gloating over the difficulties and setbacks of the revolution, sowing panic, preaching a return to the past—these are all weapons and methods of class struggle of the bourgeois intellectuals. The proletariat will not allow itself to be deceived by them. 
 
 If we get down to brass tacks, however, has it ever happened in history that a new mode of production has taken root immediately, without a long succession of setbacks, blunders and relapses? Half a century after the abolition of serfdom there were still quite a number of survivals of serfdom in the Russian countryside. Half a century after the abolition of slavery in America the position of the Negroes was still very often one of semi-slavery. The bourgeois intellectuals, including the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries, are true to themselves in serving capital and in continuing to use absolutely false arguments—before the proletarian revolution they accused us of being utopian; after the revolution they demand that we wipe out all traces of the past with fantastic rapidity! 
 
 We are not utopians, however, and we know the real value of bourgeois “arguments”; we also know that for some time after the revolution traces of the old ethics will inevitably predominate over the young shoots of the new. When the new has just been born the old always remains stronger than it for some time, this is always the case in nature and in social life. Jeering at the feebleness of the young shoots of the new order, cheap scepticism of the intellectuals and the like—these are, essentially, methods of bourgeois class struggle against the proletariat, a defence of capitalism against socialism. We must carefully study the feeble new shoots, we must devote the greatest attention to them, do everything to promote their growth and “nurse” them. Some of them will inevitably perish. We cannot vouch that precisely the “comrnunist subbotniks” will play a particularly important role. But that is not the point. The point is to foster each and every shoot of the new; and life will select the most viable. If the Japanese scientist, in order to help mankind vanquish syphilis, had the patience to test six hundred and five preparations before he developed a six hundred and sixth which met definite requirements then those who want to solve a more difficult problem, namely, to vanquish capitalism, must have the perseverance to try hundreds and thousands of new methods, means and weapons of struggle in order to elaborate the most suitable of them. 
 
 The “communist subbotniks” are so important because they were initiated by workers who were by no means placed in exceptionally good conditions, by workers of various specialities, and some with no speciality at all, just unskilled labourers, who are living under ordinary, i.e., exceedingly hard, conditions. We all know very well the main cause of the decline in the productivity of labour that is to be observed not only in Russia, but all over the world; it is ruin and impoverishment, embitterment and weariness caused by the imperialist war, sickness and malnutrition. The latter is first in importance. Starvation—that is the cause. And in order to do away with starvation, productivity of labour must be raised in agriculture, in transport and in industry. So, we get a sort of vicious circle: in order to raise productivity of labour we must save ourselves from starvation, and in order to save ourselves from starvation we must raise productivity of labour. 
 
 We know that in practice such contradictions are solved by breaking the vicious circle, by bringing about a radical change in the temper of the people, by the heroic initiative of the individual groups which often plays a decisive role against the background of such a radical change. The unskilled labourers and railway workers of Moscow (of course, we have in mind the majority of them, and not a handful of profiteers, officials and other whiteguards) are working people who are living in desperately hard conditions. They are constantly underfed, and now, before the new harvest is gathered, with the general worsening of the food situation, they are actually starving. And yet these starving workers, surrounded by the malicious counter-revolutionary agitation of the bourgeoisie, the Mensheviks and the Socialist-Revolutionaries, are organising “communist subbotniks”, working overtime without any pay, and achieving an enormous increase in the productivity of labour in spite of the fact that they are weary, tormented, and exhausted by malnutrition. Is this not supreme heroism? Is this not the beginning of a change of momentous significance? 
 
 In the last analysis, productivity of labour is the most important, the principal thing for the victory of the new social system. Capitalism created a productivity of labour unknown under serfdom. Capitalism can be utterly vanquished, and will be utterly vanquished by socialism creating a new and much higher productivity of labour. This is a very difficult matter and must take a long time; but it has been started, and that is the main thing. If in starving Moscow, in the summer of 1919, the starving workers who had gone through four trying years of imperialist war and another year and a half of still more trying civil war could start this great work, how will things develop later when we triumph in the civil war and win peace? 
 
 Communism is the higher productivity of labour—compared with that existing under capitalism—of voluntary, class-conscious and united workers employing advanced techniques. Communist subbotniks are extraordinarily valuable as the actual beginning of communism ; and this is a very rare thing, because we are in a stage when “only the first steps in the transition from capitalism to communism are being taken” (as our Party Programme quite rightly says). 
 
 Communism begins when the rank-and-file workers display an enthusiastic concern that is undaunted by arduous toil to increase the productivity of labour, husband every pood of grain, coal, iron and other products, which do not accrue to the workers personally or to their “close” kith and kin, but to their “distant” kith and kin, i. e., to society as a whole, to tens and hundreds of millions of people united first in one socialist state, and then in a union of Soviet republics. 
 
 In Capital, Karl Marx ridicules the pompous and grandiloquent bourgeois-democratic great charter of liberty and the rights of man, ridicules all this phrase-mongering about liberty, equality and fraternity in general, which dazzles the petty bourgeois and philistines of all countries, including the present despicable heroes of the despicable Berne International. Marx contrasts these pompous declarations of rights to the plain, modest, practical, simple manner in which the question is presented by the proletariat—the legislative enactment of a shorter working day is a typical example of such treatment.[3] The aptness and profundity of Marx’s observation become the clearer and more obvious to us the more the content of the proletarian revolution unfolds. The “formulas” of genuine communism differ from the pompous, intricate, and solemn phraseology of the Kautskys, the Mensheviks and the Socialist-Revolutionaries and their beloved “brethren” of Berne in that they reduce every thing to the conditions of labour. Less chatter about “labour democracy”, about “liberty, equality and fraternity”, about “government by the people”, and all such stuff; the class conscious workers and peasants of our day see through these pompous phrases of the bourgeois intellectual and discern the trickery as easily as a person of ordinary common sense and experience, when glancing at the irreproachably “polished” features and immaculate appearance of the “fain fellow, dontcher know”, immediately and unerringly puts him down as “in all probability, a scoundrel”. 
 
 Fewer pompous phrases, more plain, everyday work, concern for the pood of grain and the pood of coal! More concern about providing this pood of grain and pood of coal needed by the hungry workers and ragged and barefoot peasants not by haggling, not in a capitalist manner, but by the conscious, voluntary, boundlessly heroic labour of plain working men like the unskilled labourers and railwaymen of the Moscow-Kazan line. 
 
 We must all admit that vestiges of the bourgeois-intellectual phrase-mongering approach to questions of the revolution are in evidence at every step, everywhere, even in our own ranks. Our press, for example, does little to fight these rotten survivals of the rotten, bourgeois-democratic past; it does little to foster the simple, modest, ordinary but viable shoots of genuine communism. 
 
 Take the position of womem In this field, not a single democratic party in the world, not even in the most advanced bourgeois republic, has done in decades so much as a hundredth part of what we did in our very first year in power. We really razed to the ground the infamous laws placing women in a position of inequality, restricting divorce and surrounding it with disgusting formalities, denying recognition to children born out of wedlock, enforcing a search for their fathers, etc., laws numerous survivals of which, to the shame of the bourgeoisie and of capitalism, are to be found in all civilised countries. We have a thousand times the right to be proud of what we have done in this field. But the more thoroughly we have cleared the ground of the lumber of the old, bourgeois laws and institutions, the clearer it is to us that we have only cleared the ground to build on but are not yet building. 
 
 Notwithstanding all the laws emancipating woman, she continues to be a domestic slave, because petty housework crushes, strangles, stultifies and degrades her, chains her to the kitchen and the nursery, and she wastes her labour on barbarously unproductive, petty, nerve-racking, stultifying and crushing drudgery. The real emancipation of women, real communism, will begin only where and when an all-out struggle begins (led by the proletariat wielding the state power) against this petty housekeeping, or rather when its wholesale transformation into a large-scale socialist economy begins. 
 
 Do we in practice pay sufficient attention to this question, which in theory every Communist considers indisputable? Of course not. Do we take proper care of the shoots of communism which already exist in this sphere? Again the answer is no. Public catering establishments, nurseries, kindergartens—here we have examples of these shoots, here we have the simple, everyday means, involving nothing pompous, grandiloquent or ceremonial, which can really emancipate women, really lessen and abolish their inequality with men as regards their role in social production and public life. These means are not new, they (like all the material prerequisites for socialism) were created by large-scale capitalism. But under capitalism they remained, first, a rarity, and secondly—which is particularly important—either profit-making enterprises, with all the worst features of speculation, profiteering, cheating and fraud, or “acrobatics of bourgeois charity”, which the best workers rightly hated and despised. 
 
 There is no doubt that the number of these institutions in our country has increased enormously and that they are beginning to change in character. There is no doubt that we have far more organising talent among the working and peasant women than we are aware of, that we have far more people than we know of who can organise practical work, with the co-operation of large numbers of workers and of still larger numbers of consumers, without that abundance of talk, fuss, squabbling and chatter about plans, systems, etc., with which our big-headed “intellectuals” or half-baked “Communists” are “affected”. But we do not nurse these shoots of the new as we should. 
 
 Look at the bourgeoisie. How very well they know how to advertise what they need! See how millions of copies of their newspapers extol what the capitalists regard as “model” enterprises, and how “model” bourgeois institutions are made an object of national pride! Our press does not take the trouble, or hardly ever, to describe the best catering establishments or nurseries, in order, by daily insistence, to get some of them turned into models of their kind. It does not give them enough publicity, does not describe in detail the saving in human labour, the conveniences for the consumer, the economy of products, the emancipation of women from domestic slavery, the improvement in sanitary conditions, that can be achieved with exemplary communist work and extended to the whole of society, to all working people. 
 
 Exemplary production, exemplary communist subbotniks, exemplary care and conscientiousness in procuring and distributing every pood of grain, exemplary catering establishments, exemplary cleanliness in such-and-such a workers’ house, in such-and-such a block, should all receive ten times more attention and care from our press, as well as from every workers’ and peasants’ organisation, than they receive now. All these are shoots of communism, and it is our common and primary duty to nurse them. Difficult as our food and production situation is, in the year and a half of Bolshevik rule there has been undoubted progress all along the line : grain procurements have increased from 30 million poods (from August 1,1917 to August 1, 1918) to 100 million poods (from August 1, 1918 to May 1, l919); vegetable gardening has expanded, the margin of unsown land has diminished, railway transport has begun to improve despite the enormous fuel difficulties, and so on. Against this general background, and with the support of the proletarian state power, the shoots of communism will not wither; they will grow and blossom into complete communism. 

 
 We must give very great thought to the significance of the “communist subbotniks”, in order that we may draw all the very important practical lessons that follow from this great beginning. 
 
 The first and main lesson is that this beginning must be given every assistance. The word “commune” is being handled much too freely. Any kind of enterprise started by Communists or with their participation is very often at once declared to be a “commune”, it being not infrequently forgotten that this very honourable title must be won by prolonged and persistent effort, by practical achievement in genuine communist development. 
 
 That is why, in my opinion, the decision that has matured in the minds of the majority of the members of the Central Executive Committee to repeal the decree of the Council of People’s Commissars, as far as it pertains to the title “consumers’ communes”,[4] is quite right. Let the title be simpler—and, incidentally, the defects and shortcomings of the initial stages of the new organisational work will not be blamed on the “communes”, but (as in all fairness they should be) on bad Communists. It would be a good thing to eliminate the word “commune” from common use, to prohibit every Tom, Dick and Harry from grabbing at it, or to allow this title to be borne only by genuine communes, which have really demonstrated in practice (and have proved by the unanimous recognition of the whole of the surrounding population) that they are capable of organising their work in a communist manner. First show that you are capable of working without remuneration in the interests of society, in the interests of all the working people, show that you are capable of “working in a revolutionary way”, that you are capable of raising productivity of labour, of organising the work in an exemplary manner, and then hold out your hand for the honourable title “commune”! 
 
 In this respect, the “communist subbotniks” are a most valuable exception; for the unskilled labourers and railwaymen of the Moscow-Kazan Railway first demonstrated by deeds that they are capable of working like Communists and then adopted the title of “communist subbotniks” for their undertaking. We must see to it and make sure that in future anyone who calls his enterprise, institution or undertaking a commune without having proved this by hard work and practical success in prolonged effort, by exemplary and truly communist organisation, is mercilessly ridiculed and pilloried as a charlatan or a windbag. 
 
 That great beginning, the”communist subbotniks”, must also be utilised for another purpose, namely, to purge the Party. In the early period following the revolution, when the mass of “honest” and philistine-minded people was particularly timorous, and when the bourgeois intellectuals to a man, including, of course, the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries, played the lackey to the bourgeoisie and carried on sabotage, it was absolutely inevitable that adventurers and other pernicious elements should hitch themselves to the ruling party. There never has been, and there never can be, a revolution without that. The whole point is that the ruling party should be able, relying on a sound and strong advanced class, to purge its ranks. 
 
 We started this work long ago. It must be continued steadily and untiringly. The mobilisation of Communists for the war helped us in this respect: the cowards and scoundrels fled from the Party’s ranks. Good riddance! Such a reduction in the Party’s membership means an enormous increase in its strength and weight. We must continue the purge, and that new beginning, the”communist subbotniks”, must be utilised for this purpose: members should be accepted into the Party only after six months’, say, “trial”, or “probation”, at “working in a revolutionary way”. A similar test should be demanded of all members of the Party who joined after October 25, 1917, and who have not proved by some special work or service that they are absolutely reliable, loyal and capable of being Communists. 
 
 The purging of the Party, through the steadily increasing demands it makes in regard to working in a genuinely communist way, will improve the state apparatus and will bring much nearer the final transition of the peasants to the side of the revolutionary proletariat. 
 
 Incidentally, the “communist subbotniks” have thrown a remarkably strong light on the class character of the state apparatus under the dictatorship of the proletariat. The Central Committee of the Party drafts a letter on “working in a revolutionary way”.[5] The idea is suggested by the Central Committee of a party with from 100,000 to 200,000 members (I assume that that is the number that will remain after a thorough purging; at present the membership is larger). 
 
 The idea is taken up by the workers organised in trade unions. In Russia and the Ukraine they number about four million. The overwhelming majority of them are for the state power of the proletariat, for proletarian dictatorship. Two hundred thousand and four million—such is the ratio of the “gear-wheels”, if one may so express it. Then follow the tens of millions of peasants, who are divided into three main groups: the most numerous and the one standing closest to the proletariat is that of the semi-proletarians or poor peasants; then come the middle peasants, and lastly the numerically very small group of kulaks or rural bourgeoisie. 
 
 As long as it is possible to trade in grain and to make profit out of famine, the peasant will remain (and this will for some time be inevitable under the dictatorship of the proletariat) a semi-working man, a semi-profiteer. As a profiteer he is hostile to us, hostile to the proletarian state; he is inclined to agree with the bourgeoisie and their faithful lackeys, up to and including the Menshevik Sher or the Socialist-Revolutionary B. Chernellkov, who stand for freedom to trade in grain. But as a working man, the peasant is a friend of the proletarian state, a most loyal ally of the worker in the struggle against the landowner and against the capitalist. As working men, the peasants, the vast mass of them, the peasant millions, support the state “machine” which is headed by the one or two hundred thousand Communists of the proletarian vanguard, and which consists of millions of organised proletarians. 
 
 A state more democratic, in the true sense of the word, one more closely connected with the working and exploited people, has never yet existed.
 
 It is precisely proletarian work such as that put into “communist subbotniks” that will win the complete respect and love of peasants for the proletarian state. Such work and such work alone will completely convince the peasant that we are right, that communism is right, and make him our devoted ally, and, hence, will lead to the complete elimination of our food difficulties, to the complete victory of communism over capitalism in the matter of the production and distribution of grain, to the unqualified consolidation of communism.
 
 June 28, 1919 

Endnotes
[1] This refers to the plot to surrender Petrograd that was led by a spy and sabotage organisation which included Constitutional-Democrats, Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries. The organisation was headed by the “national centre” functioning on the instructions of foreign espionage agencies. On June 13, 1919, the conspirators raised a counter-revolutionary revolt at the Krasnaya Gorka (Red Hill) and Seraya Loshad (Grey Horse) forts. The revolt was quickly suppressed by Soviet troops. 
 

[2]
Sadowa was a village in Bohemia near the town of Koniggratz (now Hradec Kralove, Czechoslovakia), where a battle was fought on July 3, 1866, the battle ended in the victory of the Prussian over the Austrian forces and settled the outcome of the Austro-Prussian war.
[3] 
 See Karl Marx, Capital, Moscow, 1959, Vol. 1, p. 302.
[4] By a decree of the Council of People’s Commissars of March 16, 1919, the consumers’ co-operatives were reorganised as “consumers’ communes”. This name led to a misunderstanding of the decree among the peasants of some districts. In view of this the All-Russia Central Executive Committee, while approving the decree in a decision of lune 30, 1919, changed the name from “consumers’ communes” to “consumers’ societies”, a name to which the public were accutomed. 
[5] See pp. 276-79 of this volume.




Collected Works Volume 29
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## Telegram to J. V. Stalin











Telegram To J. V. Stalin



V. I. Lenin
Telegram To J. V. Stalin


Written:30 June, 1919
First Published: First published In 19’2; Published according to the telegraph form
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, page 435
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002; Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License.

Smolny, Petrograd
    
Ekaterinoslav captured. Desperate munitions situation in the
    South Since you have received three million cartridges and the
    stocks at Vidlitsa7’ you must exercise the greatest economy
    of cartridges and other munitions.

      Lenin

    

      Written June 30, 1919
    

Collected Works Volume 29
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 







==========

## All Out For the Fight
  against  Denikin!











All Out for the Fight Against Denikin!



V. I. Lenin
 All Out for the Fight Against Denikin!
Letter of the Central Committee of the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks) to 
      Party Organisations


Written: No later than 3 July, 1919
First Published: Published in the Bulletin of the C.C., R.C.P.(B.) No. 4, July 9, 1919; Published according to the Bulletin, verified with a typewritten copy bearing Lenin’s corrections
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, pages 436-455
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License



Main Task of the Moment 
The Truth About Kolchak and Denikin Must Be Explained to 
the People
Work Among Men Called Up for Service
Work Among  the Deserters
Direct Aid to the Army
Curtailment of Work Not for the War
Work in the Front Zone
Attitude Towards Military Experts 
The Fight Against Counter-Revolution in the Rear
The Population Must Be Mobilised for War to a Man
“Work in a Revolutionary Way”

Comrades, 

      This is one of the most critical, probably even the most
      critical moment for the socialist revolution. Those who defend
      the exploiters, the landowners and capitalists, in Russia and
      abroad (primarily in Britain and France) are making a desperate
      effort to restore the power of those who seize the results of
      the people’s labour, the landowners and exploiters of
      Russia, in order to bolster up their power, which is waning all
      over the world. The British and French capitalists have failed
      in their plan to conquer the Ukraine using their own troops;
      they have failed in their support of Kolchak in Siberia; the Red
      Army, heroically advancing in the Urals with the help of the
      Urals workers who are rising to a man, is nearing Siberia to
      liberate it from the incredible tyranny and brutality of the
      capitalists who rule there. Lastly, the British and French
      imperialists have failed in their plan to seize Petrograd by
      means of a counter-revolutionary conspiracy with the
      participation of Russian monarchists, Cadets, Mensheviks and
      Socialist-Revolutionaries (not excluding even Left
      Socialist-Revolutionaries). 
The foreign capitalists are now making a desperate effort to
    restore the yoke of capital by means of an onslaught by Denikin,
    whom they have supplied with officers, shells, tanks, etc., etc.,
    as they once did Kolchak. 
All the forces of the workers and peasants, all the forces of
    the Soviet Republic, must be harnessed to repulse Denikin’s
    onslaught and to defeat him, without checking the Red Army’s
    victorious advance into the Urals and Siberia.  That is the

 Main Task Of The Moment  

      All Communists first and foremost, all sympathisers with them,
      all honest workers and peasants, all Soviet officials must
      pull themselves together like soldiers and concentrate
      to the maximum their work, their efforts and their
      concern directly on the tasks of the war, on the speedy
      repulse of Denikin’s attack, curtailing and rearranging
      all their other activities to allow for this task. 
The Soviet Republic is besieged by the enemy. It must become
    a single military camp, not in word but in deed. 
All the work of all institutions most be adapted to the war and
    placed on a military footing! 
Collegiate methods are essential for the conduct of the affairs
    of the workers’ and peasants’ state. But any expansion
    of these methods, any distortion of them resulting in red tape and
    irresponsibility, any conversion of collegiate bodies into
    talk-shops is a supreme evil, an evil which must be halted at all
    costs as quickly as possible and by whatever the means. 
Collegiate methods must not exceed an absolutely indispensable
    minimum in respect both to the number of members in the committees
    and to the efficient conduct of work; “speechifying”
    must be prohibited, opinions must be exchanged as rapidly as
    possible and confined to information and precisely formulated
    practical proposals. 
Whenever there is the slightest possibility, such methods must
    be reduced to the briefest discussion of only the most important
    questions in the narrowest collegiate bodies, while the
    practical management of institutions, enterprises,
    undertakings or tasks should be entrusted to one comrade,
    known for his firmness, resolution, boldness and ability to
    conduct practical affairs and who enjoys the greatest
    confidence. At any rate, and under all circumstances without
    exception, collegiate management must be accompanied by the
    priciest definition of the personal responsibility of
    every individual for a precisely defined job. To
    refer to collegiate methods as an excuse for irresponsibility is a
    most dangerous evil, threatening all who have not had very
    extensive experience in efficient collective work; in the army  it
    all too often leads to inevitable disaster, chaos, panic, division
    of authority and defeat. 
A no less dangerous evil is organisational fuss or
    organisational fantasies. The reorganisation of work necessitated
    by the war must under no circumstances lead to the reorganisation
    of institutions, still less to the hasty formation of new
    institutions. That is absolutely impermissible and would only lead
    to chaos. The reorganisation of work should consist in suspending
    for a time institutions which are not absolutely essential, or in
    reducing their size to a certain extent. But all war work must be
    conducted entirely and exclusively through already
    existing military institutions, by improving, strengthening,
    expanding and supporting them. The creation of special
    “defence committees” or “revcoms”
    (revolutionary or revolutionary military committees) is
    permissible, first, only by way of exception, secondly, only with
    the approval of the military authority concerned or the superior
    Soviet authority, and, thirdly, only provided this last condition
    is complied with. 

  The Truth About Kolchak And Denikin 
      Must Be Explained To The People 
    
Kolchak and Denikin are the chief, and the only serious,
    enemies of the Soviet Republic. If it were not for the help they
    are getting from the Entente (Britain, France, America) they would
    have collapsed long ago. It is only the help of the Entente which
    makes them strong. Nevertheless, they are still forced to deceive
    the people, to pretend from time to time that they support
    “democracy”, a “constituent assembly”,
    “government by the people”, etc. The Mensheviks and
    Socialist-Revolutionaries are only too willing to be duped. 
The truth about Kolchak (and his double, Denikin) has now been
    revealed in full. The shooting of tens of thousands of
    workers. The shooting even of Mensheviks and
    Socialist-Revolutionaries. The flogging of peasants of entire
    districts. The public flogging of women. The absolutely unbridled
    power of the officers, the sons of landowners. Endless
    looting. Such is the truth about Kolchak and Denikin. Increasing
    numbers of people even among the Mensheviks and
    Socialist-Revolutionaries, who themselves betrayed the workers and
    sided with Kolchak and Denikin, are forced to admit this
    truth. 
All our agitation and propaganda must serve to inform the
    people of the truth. It must be explained that the alternative is
    either Kolchak and Denikin or Soviet power, the power
    (dictatorship) of the workers. There is no middle course; there
    can be no middle course. Particular use must be made of the
    testimony of non-Bolshevik eyewitnesses, of Mensheviks,
    Socialist-Revolutionaries, and non-party people who have
    been in the areas overrun by Kolchak or Denikin. Let every
    worker and peasant know what the issue of the struggle is, what
    awaits him in the event of a victory for Kolchak or Denikin. 

  Work Among Men Called Up For Service
    

      One of our chief concerns must now be work among those liable to
      mobilisation, in aid of mobilisation, and among those already
      mobilised. Wherever mobilised men are concentrated, or where
      there are garrisons, and especially training depots, etc., every
      single Communist and sympathiser must be brought into
      action. They must all without exception unite and work, some
      daily, others, say, four or eight hours per week, in aid of
      mobilisation and among mobilised men, among the soldiers of the
      local garrison; it must be done in a properly organised manner,
      of course, each person being assigned appropriate work by the
      local Party organisation and the military authorities. 
Non-party people or members of parties other than the Communist
    Party are naturally not in a position to carry on ideological work
    against Denikin or Kolchak. But to release them for that reason
    from all work would be impermissible. Every means must be sought
    that would compel the whole population (and the wealthier
    sections, both in town and country, in the first place) to
    contribute their share, in one form or another, to help
    mobilisation or the mobilised. 
Measures to further the quickest and most effective training of
    the mobilised should form a special category of aid. The Soviet
    government is calling up all ex-officers,  non-commissioned
    officers, etc. The Communist Party, as well as all sympathisers
    and all workers, must assist the workers’ and
    peasants’ state, first, by helping to round up all
    ex-officers, non-commissioned officers, etc., who do not report
    for service, and, secondly, by organising, under the control of
    the Party organisation or attached to it, groups of those who have
    had theoretical or practical (e.g., in the imperialist war)
    military training and who are capable of doing their share. 
Work Among Deserters
    

      An obvious change for the better has latterly taken place in the
      fight against desertion. In a number of gubernias
      deserters have begun to return to the army en masse; it is no
      exaggeration to say that deserters are flocking to the Red
      Army. The reasons are, first, that Party comrades are working
      more efficiently and systematically, and, secondly, the
      peasants’ growing realisation that Kolchak and Denikin
      mean the restoration of a regime which is worse than the
      tsarist, the restoration of slavery for the workers and
      peasants, and of floggings, robbery and insults on the part of
      the officers and scions of the nobility. 
We must therefore everywhere lay special stress on the work
    among deserters to bring them back into the army, and must
    spare no effort in this work. That is one of the primary
    and urgent tasks of the day. 
Incidentally, the fact that deserters can be influenced by
    persuasion and that the persuasion can be effective shows
    that the workers’ state has a special attitude
    towards the peasants, and in this it differs from the landowner or
    capitalist state The rule of the bludgeon or the rule of
    hunger—that is what constitutes the sole source of
    discipline of the latter two forms of state. A different
    source of discipline is possible in the case of the workers’
    state, or the dictatorship of the proletariat—that of
    persuasion of the peasants by the workers, a comradely alliance
    between them. When you hear the accounts of eyewitnesses that in
    such-and-such a gubernia (Ryazan, for instance) thousands
    upon thousands of deserters are returning voluntarily, that the
    appeal at meetings to “comrades deserters” sometimes
    has a success  which beggars all description, you begin to realise
    how much untapped strength there is in this comradely
    alliance between workers and peasants. The peasant has his
    prejudice, which makes him inclined to support the
    capitalist, the Socialist-Revolutionary, and “freedom to
    trade”, but he also has his sound judgement, which
    is impelling him more and more towards an alliance with the
    workers. 

 Direct Aid To The Army
    

      What our army needs most is supplies—clothing,
      foot wear, arms, shells. With the country impoverished as it is,
      an immense effort has to be made to satisfy the army’s
      needs, and it is only the assistance which the capitalist
      robbers of Britain, France and America are so lavishly rendering
      Kolchak and Denikin that saves them from inevitable disaster due
      to shortage of supplies. 
But impoverished though Russia is, she still has endless
    resources which we have not yet utilised, and often have shown
    no ability to utilise. There are still many undisclosed
    or uninspected military stores, plenty of production
    potentialities which are being overlooked, partly owing to the
    deliberate sabotage of officials, partly owing to red tape,
    bureaucracy, inefficiency and incompetence—all those
    “sins of the past” which so inevitably and so
    drastically weigh upon every revolution which makes a
    “leap” into a new social order. 
Direct aid to the army in this respect is particularly
    important. The institutions in charge of it are particularly in
    need of “fresh blood”, of outside assistance, of the
    voluntary, vigorous and heroic initiative of the workers
    and peasants in the localities. 
We must appeal as widely as possible to the initiative of all
    class-conscious workers and peasants, and of all Soviet officials;
    we must test in different localities and in different fields of
    work different forms of assistance to the army in this
    respect. “Work in a revolutionary way” is far less in
    evidence here than in other spheres, yet “work in a
    revolutionary way” is needed here far more. 
The collection of arms from the population is an integral part
    of this work. It is natural that plenty of arms should  have been
    hidden by the peasants and the bourgeoisie in a country which has
    been through four years of imperialist war followed by two
    people’s revolutions—it was inevitable that this
    should happen. But we must combat it with all our might
    now, in face of Denikin’s menacing onslaught whoever
    conceals or helps to conceal arms is guilty of a grave crime
    against the workers and peasants and deserves to be shot, for he
    is responsible for the death of thousands upon thousands of the
    finest Red Army men, who not infrequently perish only because of a
    shortage of arms at the fronts. 
The Petrograd comrades succeeded in unearthing thousands and
    thousands of rifles when they conducted mass searches in a
    strictly organised way. The rest of Russia must not lag behind
    Petrograd and must at all costs over take and outstrip it. 
On the other hand, there is no doubt that the largest numbers
    of rifles are hidden by the peasants, and often without the least
    evil intention, but solely from an ingrained distrust of any
    “state”, etc. If we have been able to do much, very
    much (in the best gubernias) by means of
    persuasion, skilful agitation and a proper approach to
    get deserters to return to the Red Army voluntarily, there can be
    no doubt that just as much, if not more, can be done, and should
    be done, to secure a voluntary return of arms. 
Workers and peasants, look for concealed rifles and turn them
    over to the army! By doing so you will save yourselves from being
    massacred, shot, flogged wholesale and robbed by Kolchak and
    Denikin! 

  Curtailment Of Work Not For The War
    

      To carry out even a part of the work briefly outlined above we
      shall need more and more workers, drawn, moreover, from the
      ranks of the most reliable, devoted and energetic
      Communists. But where are they to come from, bearing in mind the
      universal complaints about the dearth of such workers and the
      over-fatigue they are suffering from? 
There can be no doubt that these complaints are largely
    justified. If anyone were to gauge exactly how thin is that
    stratum of advanced workers and Communists who with the support
    and sympathy of the worker and peasant masses  have administered
    Russia in these last twenty months, it would seem truly
    incredible. Yet we administered with signal success, building
    socialism, overcoming unparalleled difficulties, and vanquishing
    enemies, directly or indirectly connected with the bourgeoisie,
    that raised their heads everywhere. We have already vanquished all
    enemies except one—the Entente, the all-powerful imperialist
    bourgeoisie of Britain, France and America. And we have broken one
    of the arms of this enemy too—Kolchak. We are only
    threatened by his other arm—Denikin. 
Fresh labour-power for the administration of the state and to
    carry out the tasks of the dictatorship of the proletariat are
    rapidly emerging in the shape of the worker and peasant youth who
    are most earnestly, zealously and fervidly learning, digesting the
    new impressions of the new order, throwing off the husk of old,
    capitalist and bourgeois democratic prejudices, and moulding
    themselves into even firmer Communists than the older
    generation. 
But however rapidly this new stratum may be emerging, however
    rapidly it may be learning and maturing in the fire of the Civil
    War and the frantic resistance of the bourgeoisie, all the same it
    cannot, in the next few months, supply us with a trained
    staff for the administration of the state. Yet it is precisely the
    next few months, the summer and autumn of 1919, that count, for it
    is essential to decide the struggle against Denikin, and
    it must be done immediately. 
In order to obtain a large number of well-trained workers to
    strengthen the war effort we must reduce in size a whole
    number of branches and institutions, not doing war work, or,
    rather, those not directly connected with the war, but doing
    Soviet work; we must reorganise on these lines (i.e., on
    the lines of reduction) all institutions and enterprises which are
    not absolutely indispensable. 
Take, as a case in point, the Scientific and Technological
    Department of the Supreme Economic Council. This is a highly
    valuable institution, one indispensable for the building of
    full-scale socialism and to account for and distribute all our
    scientific and technological forces properly. But is such an
    institution absolutely indispensable? Of course not. To assign to
    it people who could and should be immediately employed in urgent
    and absolutely indispensable communist work in the army
    or directly for the army would, at the present juncture,
    be a downright crime. 
There are quite a number of such institutions and departments
    of institutions in the centre and in the localities. In our
    efforts to achieve socialism in full we had to begin to set up
    such institutions immediately. But we would be fools or criminals,
    if, in the face of Denikin’s formidable attack, we were
    unable to reform our ranks in such a way as to
    suspend or reduce everything that is not
    absolutely indispensable. 
We must not give way to panic or succumb to the organisational
    urge and must not reorganise any institutions nor close them down
    altogether nor—which is particularly harmful when being done
    in haste—must we begin to build new institutions. What we
    must do is to suspend for three, four or five months
    all institutions or departments of institutions, both in
    the centre and in the localities, which are not absolutely
    indispensable, or, if it is not possible to suspend them
    altogether, reduce them for the same (approximately)
    period, reduce them to the greatest possible extent, in other
    words, reduce the work to an absolutely indispensable
    minimum. 
Inasmuch as our main purpose is to secure at once a large
    number of well-trained, experienced, devoted and tested Communists
    or socialist sympathisers for military work, we can incur the risk
    of temporarily leaving many of the heavily curtailed institutions
    (or departments of institutions) without a single
    Communist, of placing them exclusively in the hands of
    bourgeois executives. That is not a big risk, for it is only
    institutions which are not absolutely indispensable that are
    involved, and while there will certainly be a loss from the
    weakening of their (semi-suspended) activities, it will not be a
    great loss, and one which at any rate will not be fatal to
    us. Whereas insufficient energy in strengthening war work, and
    strengthening it immediately and considerably, may prove fatal to
    us. This must be clearly understood and all the necessary
    conclusions drawn from it. 
If every manager of a government department or of a division of
    a government department in every gubernia, uyezd,  etc.,
    if every Communist nucleus, without losing a moment, asks, is
    such-and-such an institution, such-and-such a department
    absolutely indispensable, shall we perish if we suspend it or
    reduce its activities by nine-tenths and leave no Communists in it
    at all?—if the posing of this question is followed by speedy
    and resolute reduction of work and withdrawal of Communists
    (together with their absolutely reliable assistants among the
    sympathisers or non-party people), in a very short time we shall
    have hundreds upon hundreds of persons for work in the political
    departments of the army, as commissars, etc. And then we shall
    have a very good chance of defeating Denikin, just as we have
    defeated the much stronger Kolchak. 

Work In The Front Zone
    

      The front zone in the Russian Socialist Federative Soviet
      Republic has greatly increased in the past few weeks and has
      undergone an extremely rapid change. This is a harbinger or
      concomitant of the decisive moment of the war, of its
      approaching concluding phase. 
On the one hand, a vast front zone west of the Urals and in the
    Ural Mountains proper has become our front zone owing to the
    victories of the Red Army, the disintegration of Kolchak, and the
    growth of revolution in Kolchakia. On the other hand, an even
    larger zone near Petrograd and in the South has become a
    front zone owing to our losses, owing to the immense advance made
    by the enemy towards Petrograd and the advance from the South into
    the Ukraine and towards the centre of Russia. 
Work in the front zone is assuming cardinal importance. 
In the Cis-Urals area, where the Red Army, is rapidly
    advancing, there is a natural desire among army
    workers—commissars, members of political departments,
    etc.—as well as among local workers and peasants, to settle
    down in the newly won localities for constructive Soviet work, a
    desire which is the more natural, the greater the war fatigue and
    the more distressful the picture of the destruction wrought by
    Kolchak. But nothing could be more dangerous than to yield to this
    desire. It would threaten to weaken our offensive, to retard it,
    and to increase Kolchak’s chances of  recovering his
    strength. It would be a downright crime against the revolution on
    our part. 
Under no circumstances must a single extra worker be taken from
    the Eastern Army for local work![Unless there
    is urgent need none at all should be taken, but people should be
    transferred from the central gubernias! ] Under no
    circumstances can the offensive be weakened! The only chance we
    have of complete victory is for the entire population of the Urals
    area, who have experienced the horrors of Kolchak
    “democracy”, to take part in it to a man, and to
    continue the offensive into Siberia until the complete
    victory of the revolution in Siberia. 
Let organisational work in the Cis-Urals and the Urals area be
    delayed, let it proceed less intensively, being done by local,
    young, inexperienced and weak forces alone. We shall not perish
    from that. But if we weaken the offensive against the
    Urals and Siberia we shall perish. We must
    strengthen that offensive with the forces of the
    insurgent workers in the Urals, with the forces of the Cis-Urals
    peasants, who have now learned to their cost the meaning of the
    “constituent” promises of the Menshevik Maisky and the
    Socialist-Revolutionary Chernov, and the real meaning of these
    promises, i.e., Kolchak. 
To weaken the offensive against the Urals and Siberia would be
    to betray the revolution, to betray the cause of the emancipation
    of the workers and peasants from the Kolchak yoke. 
It should be remembered in connection with the work in the
    front zone which has only just been liberated that the main task
    there is to make not only the workers, but the peasants as well,
    put their faith in Soviet power, to explain to them in practice
    that Soviet power means the power of the workers and peasants, and
    at once to take the right course, the course adopted by the Party
    from the experience of twenty months of work. We must not repeat
    in the Urals the mistakes which were sometimes made in Great
    Russia and which we are rapidly learning to avoid. 
In the front zone outside Petrograd and in that vast front zone
    which has been growing so rapidly and menacingly in the Ukraine
    and in the South, absolutely everything  must be put on a war
    footing, and all work, all efforts, all thoughts subordinated to
    the war and only the war. Otherwise it will be impossible to
    repulse Denikin’s attack. That is clear. And this must be
    clearly understood and fully put into practice. 
Incidentally. A feature of Denikin’s army is the large
    number of officers and Cossacks in it. This is an element which,
    having no mass force behind it, is extremely likely to engage in
    swift raids, in gambles, in desperate ventures, with the object of
    sowing panic and causing destruction for destruction’s
    sake.
In fighting such a foe military discipline and military
    vigilance of the highest degree are necessary. To be caught
    napping or to lose one’s head means losing everything. Every
    responsible Party and Soviet worker must bear this in mind.
Military discipline in military and all other matters! 
Military vigilance and strictness, and firmness in the adoption
    of all measures of precaution!

  Attitude Towards Military Experts
    
The vast conspiracy hatched at Krasnaya Gorka and whose purpose
    was the surrender of Petrograd has again brought forward and with
    particular emphasis the question of the military experts and of
    combating counter-revolution in the rear. There can be no doubt
    that the aggravation of the food and war situation is inevitably
    stimulating, and will continue to stimulate in the immediate
    future, still greater efforts by the counter-revolutionaries (in
    the Petrograd plot there participated the League of Regeneration,
    Cadets, Mensheviks and Right Socialist-Revolutionaries; the Left
    Socialist-Revolutionaries also participated, as a separate group,
    it is true, but they did participate nevertheless). Nor can there
    be any doubt that the military experts, like the kulaks, the
    bourgeois intellectuals, the Mensheviks and the
    Socialist-Revolutionaries, will in the near future give a bigger
    proportion of traitors. 
But it would be an irreparable mistake and unpardonable
    weakness of character to raise on this account the question  of
    changing the fundamental principles of our army policy. Hundreds
    and hundreds of military experts are betraying us and will betray
    us; we will catch them and shoot them, but thousands and tens of
    thousands of military experts have been working for us
    systematically and for a long time, and without them we could not
    have formed the Red Army, which has grown out of the guerrilla
    force of evil memory, and has been able to score brilliant
    victories in the East. Experienced people who head our War
    Department rightly point out that where the Party policy in regard
    to the military experts and the extirpation of the guerrilla
    spirit has been adhered to most strictly, where discipline is
    firmest, where political work among the troops and the work of the
    commissars is conducted most thoroughly, there, generally
    speaking, the number of military experts inclined to betray us is
    the lowest, there the opportunities for those who are so inclined
    to carry out their designs are the slightest, there we have no
    laxity in the army, there its organisation and morale are best,
    and there we have the most victories. The guerrilla spirit, its
    vestiges, remnants and survivals have been the cause of
    immeasurably greater misfortune, disintegration, defeats,
    disasters and losses in men and military equipment in our army and
    in the Ukrainian army than all the betrayals of the military
    experts. 
Our Party Programme, both on the general subject of bourgeois
    experts, and on the particular problem of one of their varieties,
    the military experts, has defined the policy of the Communist
    Party with absolute precision. Our Party is waging and will
    continue to wage “a relentless struggle against the
    pseudo-radical but actually ignorant and conceited opinion that
    the working people are capable of overcoming capitalism and the
    bourgeois social system without learning from bourgeois
    specialists, without making use of their services and without
    undergoing the training of a lengthy period of work side
    by side with them”. 
 At the same time, of course, the Party does not make the
    “slightest political concession to this bourgeois section of
    the population”, the Party suppresses and will continue
    “ruthlessly to suppress any counter-revolutionary attempts
    on its part”. Naturally, whenever such an
    “attempt” is made or becomes more or less probable,
    its “ruthless  suppression” requires other qualities
    than the deliberateness, the cautiousness of an apprentice, which
    are demanded for lengthy training, and which the latter
    inculcates. The contradiction between the attitude of people
    engaged in the “lengthy period of work side by side”
    with the military experts, and the attitude of people absorbed in
    the direct task of “ruthlessly suppressing a
    counter-revolutionary attempt” of military experts might
    easily lead, and does lead, to friction and conflict. The same
    applies to the necessary changes of personnel, the shifting around
    sometimes of large numbers of military experts which is
    necessitated by instances of counter-revolutionary
    “attempts”, and all the more by large-scale
    conspiracies. 
We settle, and will continue to settle, such friction and
    conflicts in the Party way, demanding the same of all the Party
    organisations and insisting that not the slightest damage to
    practical work, not the slightest delay in the adoption of
    essential measures, not a shadow of hesitation in the observance
    of the established principles of our military policy be
    tolerated. 
If some of our Party bodies adopt an incorrect tone towards the
    military experts (as was recently the case in Petrograd), or if in
    some cases “criticism” of military experts turns into
    direct hindrance to the systematic and persistent work of
    employing them, the Party immediately rectifies, and will rectify,
    such mistakes. 
The chief and principal means of rectifying them is to
    intensify political work in the army and among the mobilised, to
    improve the work of the commissars in the army, to have more
    highly qualified commissars, to raise their level, to have them
    carry out in practice that which the Party Programme
    demands and which only too often is carried out far too
    inadequately, i.e., “the concentration of all-round
    control over the commanders (of the army) in the hands of the
    working class”. Criticism of the military experts by
    outsiders, attempts to correct matters by “lightning
    raids” are too easy, and therefore hopeless and harmful. All
    those who recognise their political responsibility, who take the
    defects of our army to heart, let them join its ranks, either as
    privates or commanders, as political workers or commissars; let
    each work—every Party member will find a place  suited to
    his abilities—inside the army organisation for its
    improvement. 
The Soviet government has long been paying the greatest
    attention to making it possible for workers, and also peasants,
    Communists in particular, to master the art of war in all
    seriousness. This is being done at a number of establishments,
    institutions and courses, but still far too little is being
    done. There is still a lot of room here for personal initiative
    and personal energy. Communists, in particular, should
    persistently study the handling of machine guns, artillery,
    armoured vehicles, etc., for here our backwardness is more
    telling, here the enemy’s superiority,  with his larger
    number of officers, is greater, here it is possible for an
    unreliable military expert to do grave harm, here the role of the
    Communist is important in the extreme. 

 The Fight Against Counter-Revolution In The Rear
    

      Counter-revolution is raising its head in our rear and in our
      midst just as it did in July of last year. 
Counter-revolution has been defeated, but by no means
    destroyed, and is naturally taking advantage of Denikin’s
    victories and of the aggravation of the food shortage. And, as
    always, in the wake of direct and open counter-revolution, in the
    wake of the Black Hundreds and the Cadets, whose strength lies in
    their capital, their direct connections with Entente imperialism,
    and their understanding of the inevitability of dictatorship and
    their ability to exercise it (on Kolchak lines)—in their
    wake follow the wavering, spineless Mensheviks, Right
    Socialist-Revolutionaries and Left Socialist-Revolutionaries, who
    embellish their deeds with words. 
There should be no illusions on this score! What is the
    “nutritive medium” which engenders
    counter-revolutionary activities, outbreaks, conspiracies and so
    forth we know full well. The medium is the bourgeoisie, the
    bourgeois intelligentsia, the kulaks in the countryside, and,
    everywhere, the “non-party” public, as well as the
    Socialist-Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks. We must redouble, we
    must increase tenfold our watch over this medium. We  must
    multiply tenfold our vigilance, because counter-revolutionary
    attempts from this quarter are absolutely inevitable, precisely at
    the present moment and in the near future. For this reason, too,
    repeated attempts to blow up bridges, to foment strikes, to engage
    in every kind of espionage and the like, are natural. All
    precautions of the most intense, systematic, repeated, wholesale
    and unexpected kind are essential in all centres without exception
    where the “nutritive medium” of the
    counter-revolutionaries has the least chance of existing. 
In regard to the Mensheviks and the Right and Left
    Socialist-Revolutionaries, we must draw a lesson from our most
    recent experience. Among their “periphery”, among the
    public which gravitates towards them, there is an undoubted
    shifting away from Kolchak and Denikin towards Soviet power. We
    have taken cognisance of this shift, and every time it has assumed
    any real shape we, on our part, have taken a step to meet it. This
    policy of ours we shall not change under any circumstances, and
    generally speaking, there will no doubt be an increase in the
    number of “migrants” from the type of Menshevism and
    Socialist-Revolutionarism which leans towards Kolchak and Denikin
    to the type of Menshevism and Socialist-Revolutionarism which
    leans towards Soviet power. 
But at the present juncture the petty-bourgeois democrats,
    headed by the Socialist-Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks,
    spineless and wavering as always, are watching to  see which way
    the wind blows, and are swinging in the direction of the victor,
    Denikin. This is especially true of the “political
    leaders” of the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries of the
    Mensheviks (of the type of Martov and Co.), of the Right
    Socialist-Revolutionaries (of the type of Chernov and Co.), and of
    their “literary groups” in general, whose members,
    apart from all else, are deeply offended at their political
    bankruptcy, and for whom hazardous ventures against Soviet power,
    therefore, have an attraction that is hardly likely to be
    eradicated. 
We must not allow ourselves to be deceived by the words and
    ideology of their leaders, by their personal integrity or
    hypocrisy. This is important from the standpoint of their
    individual biographies. But it is not important from  the
    standpoint of politics, i.e., of the relations between classes, of
    the relations between millions of people. Martov and Co.,
    “in the name of the Central Committee”, solemnly
    condemn their “activists” and threaten (eternally
    threaten!) to expel them from the party. But this by no means does
    away with the fact that the “activists” are the
    strongest of all among the Mensheviks, hide behind them, and carry
    on their work on behalf of Kolchak and Denikin. Volsky and
    Co. condemn Avksentyev, Chernov and Co., but this does not in the
    least prevent the latter from being stronger than Volsky, nor does
    it prevent Chernov from saying, “If it is not we who are to
    overthrow the Bolsheviks, and not now, then who is, and
    when?” The Left Socialist-Revolutionaries may “work
    independently” without any agreement with the reactionaries,
    with the Chernovs, but actually they are just as much allies of
    Denikin and pawns in his game as the late Left
    Socialist-Revolutionary Muravyov, the ex-commander-in-chief, who
    for “ideological” reasons opened the front to the
    Czechoslovaks and to Kolchak. 
Martov, Volsky and Co. fancy themselves “superior”
    to both contending sides; they fancy themselves capable of
    creating a “third side”. 
This desire, even when it is sincere, still remains the
    illusion of the petty-bourgeois democrat, who to this day, seventy
    years after 1848, has still not learned the most elementary thing,
    namely, that in a capitalist environment only the dictatorship of
    the bourgeoisie or the dictatorship of the proletariat is
    possible, and that no third course can exist. Martov and Co. will
    evidently die with this illusion. That is their affair. And it is
    our affair to remember that in practice vacillations on the part
    of these people are inevitable, today in the direction of Denikin,
    tomorrow in the direction of the Bolsheviks. And today we must do
    the task of this day. 
Our task is to put the question bluntly. What is better? To
    ferret out, to imprison, sometimes even to shoot hundreds of
    traitors from among the Cadets, non-party people, Mensheviks and
    Socialist-Revolutionaries, who “come out” (some with
    arms in hand, others with conspiracies, others still with
    agitation against mobilisation, like the Menshevik printers and
    railwaymen, etc.) against Soviet power,  in other
    words, in favour of Denikin ? Or to allow matters to
    reach such a pass that Kolchak and Denikin are able to slaughter,
    shoot and flog to death tens of thousands of workers and peasants?
    The choice is not difficult to make. 
That is how the question stands, and not otherwise. 
Whoever has not yet understood this, whoever is capable of
    whining over the “iniquity” of such a decision, must
    be given up as hopeless and held up to public ridicule and
    shame. 

  The Population Must Be Mobilised 
      For War To A Man
    
 The Soviet Republic is a fortress besieged by world
    capital. We can concede the right to use it as a refuge from
    Kolchak, and the right to live in it generally, only to those who
    take an active part in the war and help us in every way. Hence our
    right and our duty to mobilise the whole population for the war to
    a man, some for army work in the direct meaning of the term,
    others for subsidiary activities of every kind in aid of the
    war. 
To carry this out in full, an ideal organisation is
    required. And since our government organisation is very far from
    perfect (which is not in the least surprising in view of its
    youth, its novelty and the extraordinary difficulties which
    accompany its development), to attempt at once and on a wide scale
    anything complete or even very considerable in this sphere would
    be a most dangerous indulgence in fantastic organisational
    schemes. 
But much can be done in a partial way to bring us nearer to
    this ideal, and the “initiative” shown by our Party
    workers and Soviet officials in this respect is very, very far
    from enough. 
It will suffice here to raise this question and to draw the
    attention of comrades to it. There is no need to give any specific
    instructions or proposals. 
Let us only observe that the petty-bourgeois democrats who
    stand nearest to the Soviets and who call themselves, by force of
    habit, socialists—some of the “Left” Mensheviks
    and the like, for example—are particularly disposed to wax
    indignant at the”barbaric”, in their opinion, practice
    of taking hostages. 
Let them wax indignant, but unless this is done war can not be
    waged, and when the danger grows acute the use of this means must
    be extended and multiplied in every sense. Not infrequently, for
    instance, Menshevik or yellow printers, higher railway employees
    or secret profiteers, kulaks, the wealthy sections of the urban
    (and rural) population and similar elements look upon defence
    against Kolchak and Denikin with an infinitely criminal and
    infinitely brazen attitude of indifference which grows into
    sabotage. Lists of such groups must be drawn up (or they must be
    compelled themselves to form groups in which each answers for
    everybody), and they must not only be put to work digging
    trenches, as is sometimes practised, but assigned to the most
    diverse and comprehensive duties for material aid to the Red
    Army. 
The fields of the Red Army men will be better cultivated, the
    supply of food, tobacco and other necessities to the Red Army men
    will be better arranged, the danger to the lives of thousands upon
    thousands of workers and peasants resulting from a single
    conspiracy, etc., will be considerably reduced if we employ this
    method more widely, more comprehensively and more skilfully.

 “Work In A Revolutionary Way”
    

      Summing up what was said above, we arrive at a simple
      conclusion. What is demanded immediately and in the course of
      the next few months of all Communists, of all class-conscious
      workers and peasants, of everyone who does not want to see
      Kolchak and Denikin win, is an extraordinary accession of
      energy; what is needed is “work in a revolutionary
      way”. 
The starving, exhausted and worn-out Moscow railwaymen, both
      skilled and unskilled, have for the sake of victory over Kolchak
      inaugurated “communist subbotniks”—work
      without pay for several hours a week to continue until victory
      over Kolchak is complete—and have, moreover, developed
      unprecedented labour productivity, exceeding the  usual
      productivity many times over; this goes to show that much, very
      much can still be done. 

    

      And we must do it. 

    

      Then we shall win.

      Central Committee 
      of the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks) 

Collected Works Volume 29
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## The Present Situation and the
Immediate Tasks of Soviet Power Report











The Present Situation and the Immediate Tasks of Soviet Power



V. I. Lenin
The Present Situation And The
Immediate Tasks Of Soviet Power
Report Delivered To A Joint Meeting Of The All-Russia
Central Executive Committee, The Moscow Soviet Of Workers’
And Red Army Deputies, The All-Russia Council of Trade
Unions And Representatives Of Moscow Factory Committees
July 4, 1919[1]


Delivered: 4 July,1919
      
First Published: Brief report published in Pravda No.145, July 5, 1919; First published in full in 1932; Published according to the verbatim report, verified with the Pravda text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, pages 456-469
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


Comrades, when one is confronted with the task of
    assessing our general situation as it now is, the idea enters
    one’s head, whether one wishes it or not, of comparing July
    1919 with July 1918. I think that such a comparison, which
    naturally suggests itself, can best give us a true conception of
    those new difficulties--to a certain extent they are also old
    difficulties-which have grown up and have made our situation a
    burdensome one demanding a fresh effort; on the other hand this
    comparison shows us the tremendous step forward that has been made
    by the world revolution in that year and tells us why, taking a
    most sober, even a most sceptical view of affairs, we again are
    quite confident that we are advancing to the complete and final
    victory.
Recall the situation a year ago, comrades. It was ill July 1918
    that the menacing black clouds had gathered and that seemingly
    insurmountable misfortunes threatened the Soviet Republic. The
    food situation, then as today, had become graver at the end of the
    farming year, when stocks were running short and the new harvest
    had not been gathered. Last year the situation was incomparably
    worse. Then, as today, serious political and war difficulties,
    both at home and abroad, were added to the food difficulties. The
    meeting of the Congress of Soviets last year coincided with the
    revolt of the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries ill Moscow and the
    treason of Muravyov, a Left Socialist-Revolutionary then in
    command of the army, who left our front almost open. In the summer
    of 1918 there was the gigantic plot in Yaroslavi which, as has now
    been proved and is admitted by those participating, was due to the
    activities of French Ambassador Noulens, who persuaded Savinkov to
    organise the plot with a guarantee that the French troops landed
    at Archangel would come to the aid of Yaroslavl and that in the
    most difficult situation in Yaroslavi the town could expect to
    link with Archangel and the Allies and, consequently, could expect
    the early fall of Moscow. At that time the enemy succeeded ill
    capturing Samara, Kazan, Simbirsk, Syzran and Saratov ill the
    East. In the South, Cossack troops reinforced by German
    imperialism--this has been fully established-obtained money and
    munitions. The enemy launched an offensive, closed in on us from
    two sides and began to poke fun at its. From German imperialist
    quarters it was said that if we could not defeat the Czechoslovaks
    how could we hope to defeat them. Such was the insolent tone
    adopted by the imperialists.
Such was the seemingly hopeless way in which the Soviet
    Republic was surrounded at a time of unprecedented food troubles,
    at a time when our army was only just beginning to take shape. The
    army lacked organisation and experience and we had to get it
    together hastily, contingent by contingent, when systematic,
    integrated work was out of the question. We lived through that
    year and, relying on the experience gained and never once
    forgetting the past, we have every right to say today that
    although the situation is indeed a difficult one, if we compare
    what we experienced last year with the present situation-anyone
    who wishes to make a careful study of it, observe and not give way
    to his own moods will have no doubts about it-we shall see that
    our present situation is incomparably more stable even from the
    point of view of the simple internal balance of forces, even by
    comparing the facts bearing on our temporary difficulties, and to
    give way to panic would be criminal a thousand times over. A year
    ago the situation was incomparably more difficult yet those
    difficulties were surmounted, so that we may say with absolute
    confidence and without any exaggeration of our forces or
    underestimation of our difficulties that we shall also surmount
    our present difficulties. I must give you the main comparable
    figures and speakers who follow me will deal with the question in
    greater detail.
When the food situation became acute last summer, things were
    so bad that in July and August there was literally nothing in the
    warehouses of the Commissariat of Food, the organisation which
    deals with food supplies, nothing which could be issued to the
    most war-weary, the most tormented and the most hungry people of
    the towns and the non-agricultural districts. This year our food
    distribution machinery has made a tremendous advance. During the
    year from August 1, 1917 to August 1, 1918 we procured only 30
    million poods of grain but between August 1, 1918 and May
    1, 1919 we procured as much as 100 million poods. This is
    very little compared with what we need, and it shows that to win a
    victory in the struggle for food there are millions of
    organisational obstacles that have to be overcome; they are being
    erected against us by every peasant who has grain surpluses and
    who is used to trading in a free market and who considers it his
    sacred right to sell grain at uncontrolled prices; this peasant is
    unable to understand that at such a time, when the country is
    lighting against. Russian and international capital, trading in
    grain is the most serious state crime. It is a mockery of the poor
    and the hungry, it is the best service he could do the capitalist
    and the profiteer. We know that every peasant who has earned his
    livelihood by toil, sweat and blood, by bending his back,
    understands what capitalism is. He sympathises with the
    proletariat, even if only hazily, instinctively, because he
    believes that the proletariat are devoting their whole lives and
    forfeiting their blood to overthrow capital. But he will have to
    make tremendous progress from this level before lie is able to
    uphold the interests of the socialist state and to place those
    interests higher than the interests of the huckster who wants to
    profit right now while he can sell grain at unheard-of,
    unprecedented prices. We are now beginning to get the measure of
    it. We have made part of the journey and, therefore, know for
    certain that no matter how difficult and tortuous the road, we are
    capable of surmounting the difficulties. We have made considerable
    progress as compared with last year but we have not yet solved all
    problems. We cannot promise an immediate improvement, but we know
    that the situation offers much greater hopes; we now know at any
    rate that our resources are not cut off as they were last year by
    Cossack gangs in the South-East, by German imperialism in the
    South-West and by the Czechoslovaks in the grain-producing
    East. The situation is much better so that we shall be able to
    live through and overcome the next few weeks that will undoubtedly
    bring fresh burdens and claim fresh sacrifices knowing that we did
    it last year, knowing that our situation is better, knowing that
    we already have practical experience of the chief difficulty of
    any socialist revolution, the food difficulty. And we really can
    say, without relying on assumptions and hopes, but on the basis of
    our own practical experience, that we have learned to tackle this
    difficulty and will learn to surmount it.
If you take the present war situation in which the Allies
    collapsed when they seized the Ukraine after the Germans and when
    they had Odessa and Sevastopol, we see that the threat which
    seemed irrevocable to the mass of the petty bourgeoisie and to the
    scared philistines turned out to be an empty one, that it was
    nothing more than a giant with feet of clay. They did everything
    they could to help the whiteguards, landowners and capitalists
    with arms and ammunition. The British newspapers-and British
    ministers, too-boasted openly that they had sent reinforcements to
    Denikin. We have received information that they have sent
    equipment for 250,000 men and have provided all the arms. We have
    also received information, and it has been confirmed, to the
    effect that they have sent dozens of tanks. That made possible the
    severe attacks by Denikin that were launched at a time when the
    enemy was pressing oil us from the East. We know the difficult
    time we experienced last July. We do not in the least
    underestimate the danger and do not close our eyes to the fact
    that we must go openly to the masses, we must tell them what the
    situation is, tell them the whole truth and open their eyes,
    because time more this truth is known to the workers and
    particularly to the peasants-it is very difficult to convince
    peasants of the truth-the more determinedly, more steadfastly and
    class-consciously will they come over to our
    side. (Applause.)

In the Central Committee, comrades, we yesterday decided that
    Comrade Trotsky would make the report to you on the war
    situation. Unfortunately the doctors today forbade him absolutely
    to make that report. I shall, therefore, outline the situation in
    a few words, although I cannot by any means claim the role of
    rapporteur on these matters; I can, however, tell in brief
    outline, comrades, what we heard yesterday from Comrade Trotsky
    who had made a tour of the Southern Front.
The situation there is truly a grave one, extremely heavy
    attacks have been launched against us and we have suffered huge
    losses. There is a double reason for our failures. Yes, just two
    reasons; first, we had to withdraw large numbers of troops and
    transfer them as reinforcements to the East at a time when Kolchak
    was attacking. Precisely at this time Denikin carried out
    universal mobilisation. It is true, as one of the members of the
    Revolutionary Council of the Southern Front who has been working
    there a long time told us, that universal mobilisation will be the
    ruin of Denikin as it was of Kolchak; as long as he had a class
    army of volunteers who hated socialism it was strong and sound,
    but when he began universal recruitment he did, of course, get an
    army together more quickly, but the army became the weaker, and
    its class character less pronounced. Peasants recruited into
    Denikin’s army will do the same in that army as the Siberian
    peasants did in Kolchak’s army-they brought complete
    disintegration into the army.
Another reason for the failures, apart from the tremendous
    increase in Denikin’s army, was the development of guerrilla
    methods on the Southern Front. Comrade Trotsky also described this
    in detail yesterday. You all know what our armies experienced as a
    result of Grigoriev’s adventure, which resulted from
    Makhno’s banditry and what the Ukrainian peasants and the
    entire Ukrainian proletariat experienced during the rule of the
    Hetman. In the Ukraine, owing to the low level of proletarian
    class-consciousness, owing to weakness and lack of organisation,
    owing to Petlyura’s disorganising tactics arid the pressure
    of German imperialism-on these grounds hostility and guerrilla
    tactics have emerged spontaneously. In every group the peasants
    were taking up arms, electing their own atainan, or
    “father”, to set up an authority, to create it on the
    spot. They paid no attention whatever to the central authorities
    and every “father” thought he was the boss on the
    spot, that lie alone could settle all Ukrainian problems,
    disregarding what was being done at the centre. It is now quite
    clear to us that in the present circumstances the peasants cannot
    he won over by enthusiasm alone-such a method is not reliable. We
    have warned the Ukrainian comrades a thousand times that when it
    is a matter of the movement of million-strong masses words are not
    enough; they must have their own day-to-day experience so that
    people can verify instructions themselves, so that they believe in
    their own experience. This experience has cost the Ukrainian
    peasants very dear. During the German occupation they suffered
    incredible misfortunes, made unbelievable sacrifices, many times
    greater than what we experienced; nevertheless they still do not
    know how to achieve an organisation and how to win their
    independence and state sovereignty. In the first period after the
    liberation from German imperialism, when Denikin’s gangs
    began to gain strength, our troops did not always deal them a
    suitable rebuff, and when our troops were held up by the rapid
    swelling of the rivers in spring, when it was impossible to
    advance and no reinforcements came from here, there arrived that
    catastrophic moment in which the first blow fell on the Ukrainian
    peasantry as a whole and on the peasantry of the zone contiguous
    to the Ukraine and the Don, but which will fortunately cure them
    of the defects of guerrilla tactics and chaos. We know full well
    that the Ukrainian peasants are strong enough to defeat
    Denikin’s forces, and we know that the blows they have
    received are very grave and will arouse in them a new
    classconsciousness and fresh strength. And Comrade Trotsky who
    himself saw the incredible losses suffered there, stated
    definitely that the experience of the Ukrainians cannot pass
    without leaving a trace, that it would bring about a complete
    change in the entire psychology of the Ukrainian peasants is that
    not what we have experienced? We know that our situation was no
    better last year. We know that a number of countries looked upon
    us, the young Russian republic, with contempt, and that today the
    same thing is beginning in many countries, the same phenomena are
    to be observed.

    

      The Ukraine is recuperating with greater difficulty than we die,
      but she is recuperating. The lessons of collapse, of guerrilla
      tactics, have been assimilated. This will he an epoch of change
      in the entire Ukrainian revolution, and that will influence the
      entire development of the Ukraine. This is the period of change
      we, too, experienced when we turned our hacks on guerrilla
      tactics and the scattering of revolutionary phrases-we can do
      auything!-and began to realise the need for sound, sustained,
      persistent and difficult organising activities. This was the
      road we took many months after the October Revolution and on
      which we have achieved considerable success. We look towards the
      future fully confident that we shall surmount all
      difficulties.
One of the circumstances that Comrade Trotsky spoke of as being
    clear evidence of the change is what he observed in respect of
    deserters. He visited many gubernias where the comrades we had
    sent to combat desertion from the army had met with no success. He
    spoke himself at meetings and saw that tens of thousands of
    deserters in this country had either given way to panic or were
    trailing along too easily in the wake of the
    bourgeoisie. Nevertheless we had been ready to draw conclusions
    that were tantamount to despair. Trotsky, who travelled through
    Kursk and Byazan, was convinced, on the example of a number of
    towns, that the change that had taken place in this sphere was
    beyond description. Some commissars said they were now swamped
    with deserters pouring into the Red Army. They are joining the Red
    Army in such numbers that we can suspend our mobilisation as the
    ranks are filled by old deserters returning to the army.
The peasants have seen what campaigns by the Cossacks and by
    Denikin mean, and the masses of peasants have begun to show a
    double degree of class-consciousness—they had wanted an
    immediate peace and had been unable to understand that the Civil
    War had been forced on us. The peasants did everything they could
    to avoid enlistment—they hid in the woods or joined the
    green bands[Gangs of bandits in
    the Ukraine who engaged in plunder under cover of political
    slogans against Reds and Whites during the Civil
    War—Editor.] and there tried to ignore
    everything else. This is the state of affairs that led to collapse
    in the Ukraine; this was the state of affairs that gave us many
    thousands of deserters. Trotsky spoke about the change that took
    place when we granted the deserters a longer period in which to
    report, when we approached the problem more boldly. Hundreds of
    comrades turned up for work in Ryazan Gubernia and the change took
    place. They attended the meeting and deserters poured into the Red
    Army. The local commissars say they could not keep pace with
    them. This is the circumstance connected with the recapture of
    Liski railway station which strengthened our positions at Kursk
    and Voronezh. This circumstance gave Trotsky reason to say that
    the position in the South was serious and that we should bend all
    efforts. I maintain, however, that the situation is not
    catastrophic. That is the conclusion we arrived at
    yesterday. (Applause.)
That conclusion is not open to doubt and we shall do everything
    to exert all our efforts; we are sure the class consciousness of
    the working masses will triumph for we have the experience of the
    Ukraine which tells us that the closer Denikin approaches and the
    clearer it becomes what lie and the capitalists, and landowners
    are bringing, the easier will it be for us to combat desertion and
    the more boldly can we offer the deserters a further week in which
    to report The day before yesterday the Council of Defence extended
    the period by a further week because we are now fully confident
    that the class-consciousness that Denikin is bringing them will
    not be wasted and the Red Army will continue to grow if we
    remember that all our efforts during the next few months must be
    devoted to war work. We must tell you that we shall now help the
    South and achieve victory there in the same way as we did in the
    East. There may be people who give way to moods, comrades, those
    most inclined to panic, who will ask whether we shall not lose
    what we have gained in the East if we turn our main attention to
    the South. As far as this is concerned we may ay that the
    conquests made by our troops in the East will, by all accounts,
    merge with the Siberian revolution. (Applause.)
Yesterday a certain Menshevik made a speech in Moscow. You can
    read Citizen Colosov’s report in Izvestia; he said
    that time Mensheviks were leaving for Siberia, believing that
    there was a Constituent Assembly and the power of the people
    there, that universal suffrage and the will of the people ruled,
    and not some dictatorship of one class, usurpation,
    violence—as they dub Soviet power. The experience of these
    people, who flirted with Kerensky for eight months and who gave up
    everything to Kornilov, who learned nothing and went over to
    Kolchak—experience has now shown that it was not the
    Bolsheviks, but the enemies of the Bolsheviks, people who devoted
    all their activities to the struggle against the Bolsheviks and
    travelled hundreds of versts to do it, who drew the
    conclusions that we have heard and which the public learned from
    the reports of the Mensheviks, conclusions that show that the
    Merisheviks have repelled not only the workers but the peasants as
    well, and not only the peasants, but even the kulaks. Even the
    kulaks are rebelling against Kolchak! (Applause.) None of
    those descriptions of the revolts against Kolchak’s rule was
    in the least bit exaggerated. Not merely workers and peasants, but
    also patriotically-minded intellectuals, who had all formerly
    sabotaged our work and who had been allies of the Entente-Kolchak
    has repelled even them. We are now being told that an insurrection
    is under way in the Urals, that we have before us an instance of a
    real workers’ uprising; and again we say that there is every
    chance that victory in the Urals will be a turn towards the
    complete victory of the entire mass of the Siberian population
    over Kolchak’s government, and that there are grounds for
    expecting it within the next few months.
Comrades, you read of the capture of Motovilikha in
    yesterday’s newspapers-this is where the Urals factory
    district begins. The details of the capture of Perm, where several
    regiments came over to our side, confirm it, and every day we are
    receiving telegram after telegram indicating that a decisive
    turning-point has been reached in the Urals. This is corroborated
    by a telegram I received today from Ufa dated July 2. We have more
    detailed information which gives us good grounds to assert that a
    decisive turning-point has been reached and we shall be victorious
    in the Urals. By the capture of Penn and then of Motovilikha we
    have achieved a great deal; they are big factory centres where the
    workers are organising, are coming over to our side in hundreds
    and are cutting the railway lines in the rear of the
    enemy. Probably few of you have had an opportunity of seeing
    Kolchak’s people, workers and peasants who have come from
    there, but we should like people in Moscow to see more of those
    who come from there. Were not the Cis-Urals and Siberian peasants
    ready to turn their backs on the Bolsheviks a year ago? They were
    discontented and indignant at the Bolsheviks for demanding help in
    a difficult war and for saying “victory over the landowners
    and capitalists is not easily won and if they make war on you, you
    must he prepared to make every sacrifice to defend the gains of
    the revolution. Revolutions are not easily made, and if you find
    these sacrifices too much for you, if you have not enough stamina
    to make these sacrifices, you will ruin the revolution”. The
    peasants did not want to listen to this, they thought it was
    nothing more than a revolutionary appeal. When the other side
    offered peace and the help of the Entente they went over to that
    side. You realise, of course, that the Siberian peasants have
    never experienced serfdom. They are the best-fed peasants in
    Russia, they are used to exploiting people exiled from Russia;
    they are peasants who could not see that there would he anything
    to gain from the revolution, and these peasants got their leaders
    from the entire Russian bourgeoisie, from all the Mensheviks and
    Socialist-Revolutionaries-there were hundreds, thousands of them
    there. Some people put the present population of Omsk, for
    instance, at 900,000 bourgeois and others at 500,000. Literally
    all the bourgeoisie got together there, all those who claimed the
    right to lead the people because of their possession of knowledge
    and culture and their habit of ruling-people of all parties, from
    the Mensheviks to the Socialist-Revolutionaries, gathered
    there. They had well-fed peasants, solid men not inclined to
    socialism, they had aid from all the Entente countries, from the
    all-powerful countries that held power in their hands throughout
    the world. They had railway lines with free access to the sea, and
    that meant complete mastery, for the flag of the Allies has no
    rival anywhere in the world and rules over the entire globe. What
    else was wanting? Why was it that these people who had everything
    that was to he had against the Bolsheviks-a country with strong,
    solid peasants and the aid of the Entente-why did they collapse so
    badly after two years’ experience that all that was left in
    place of the “power of the people” was the barbaric
    rule of the sons of landowners and capitalists? Kolchakia broke
    down completely, and this is actually tangible when our Red Army
    approaches the Urals as the liberator. A year ago the peasants
    were shouting, “Down with the Bolsheviks, they put burdens
    on the shoulders of the peasants”, and they went over to the
    side of the landowners and capitalists. At that time they did not
    believe what we told them; now they have experienced for
    themselves, now they have seen that the Bolsheviks took one horse
    away from a peasant whereas the Kolchak people took everything,
    the horses and everything else, and re-introduced tsarist
    discipline. Now that the peasants have the experience of the past
    they welcome the Red Army as their deliverer and say that sound
    and complete liberty will come to Siberia together with the
    Bolsheviks. (Applause.)
This experience of Koichakia is a most valuable experience for
    us; it shows us on a small scale what is going on all over the
    world, it shows us the real sources-sources that are invincible,
    sources that are ineradicable-of the strength of the
    Bolsheviks. We had seemed helpless when Siberia was in the hands
    of our enemies. Now that gigantic power has collapsed. Why?
    Because we were right in our appraisal of the imperialist war and
    its consequences, we were right when we said that mankind would
    not emerge from this as it had from previous wars-people had
    suffered so much, had been tormented so much, were so full of
    wrath against capitalism that the rule of the working class would
    set in and socialism would be established. The “middle
    way” has been mentioned here, and I know very well that the
    Right Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks dream of that
    middle way, that the best people in those intermediate parties
    dream sincerely of that middle way, but we know from the
    experience of whole countries and peoples that it is an empty
    dream, because there is no middle way in the kingdom of the
    Constituent Assembly where the Chernovs and Maiskys again began
    their ministerial careers and were a complete failure. Is this an
    accident or Bolshevik slander? Nobody will believe that it is! If
    they started out with such faith in the Constituent Assembly and
    ended up with such a failure it only goes to show once again that
    the Bolsheviks are right when they say that there must he either
    the dictatorship of the proletariat, the dictatorship of all
    working people and a victory over capitalism, or the most filthy
    and sanguinary rule of the bourgeoisie, even going as fare as a
    monarchy established by Kolchak, as in Siberia. And now I can go
    over from the lessons and conclusions drawn from Siberia to a
    brief outline of the international situation.
Comrades, we have made tremendous progress in our internal
    policy; millions of Russian peasants who a year ago had an
    absolutely unenlightened view of the wide world, who believed any
    glib talk about the Constituent Assembly, who lost heart oil
    account of the burdens imposed by Bolshevism, who ran away every
    time there was an appeal to struggle-since then the peasants have
    had such an incredibly burdensome and sanguinary experience at the
    hands of the Germans in the South that they have learned a lot. We
    have become infinitely strong because millions of people have
    realised what Kolchak is; millions of peasants in Siberia have
    come over to Bolshevism-they are waiting for the Bolsheviks,
    literally all of them-not because of our sermons and doctrines,
    but because of their own experience; they called for the
    Socialist-Revolutionaries and put them in power but from their
    having placed the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks in
    power they got the old Russian monarchy, the old Russian
    policeman, who introduced incredible lawlessness into the country
    together with the “democracy”, This cure of time
    people, however, is worth a lot. (Applause).
Take a glance at the world situation. Have we not made a
    tremendous step forward in this respect during the past year when
    we compare it with what we had a year ago? Did not even people
    devoted to the revolution turn against us at that time, did they
    not say that time Bolsheviks had sold Russia to the German
    predators, that the Brest peace had demonstrated what a serious
    mistake had been made, and did they not believe that only the
    alliance of democratic France and Britain would save Russia? And
    what happened? A few months after last year’scrisis the
    Brest peace had ceased to exist. Six months passed after November
    9, 1918, when Germany was defeated, and it took that six
    months’ effort on the part of the French and British
    imperialists to conclude peace. And what did the peace bring? What
    it gave was this: all the workers who had until then been on the
    side of the champions of the French and British imperialists who
    had preached war to the end, all of them are now coming over to
    our side, not even day by day but hour by hour; they tell
    themselves that they had been deceived into waging war for four
    years. They had. been promised the defeat of Germany in the name
    of liberty, the victory of liberty and equality, the victory of
    democracy, and instead of it they had been given the Treaty of
    Verailles, an unworthily imposed peace for the purpose of plunder
    and profit. During that year our situation has been one of intense
    struggle for the victory of the world revolution. And our
    situation, if you compare it to that of the enemies, has been such
    that we have acquired ever more allies throughout the world at
    every step we have taken. We now see that what the Germans, from
    their imperialist point of view consider a defeat, that what the
    French and British consider a full victory-we see that this is the
    beginning of the end for the French and British imperialists. The
    working-class movement is growing faster and faster. The workers
    are demanding the withdrawal of foreign troops from Russia and the
    annulment of the Treaty of Versailles. We were alone at the time
    of the Treaty of Brest; it was swept away and its place was taken
    by the Treaty of Versailles that is strangling Germany.
In appraising the last year’s experience, in recognising
    frankly all difficulties, we are able to say to you calmly,
    confidently and soberly, “Comrades, we have come again and
    again to outline to you the general situation and to picture to
    the advanced workers of Moscow those difficulties that we have
    again come up against; we invite you to give some thought to the
    lessons we have learned in this difficult period and on the basis
    of your thinking and your appraisal, on the basis of this
    experience, reach, together with us, the firm and unshakable
    conviction that victory will be ours, on a world and not only on a
    Russian scale. Again and again we shall muster our forces to make
    up for the defeats we have suffered in the South. We shall put
    forward the tried and tested weapons of organisational ability,
    discipline and loyalty, and then we are certain that Denikin will
    be broken, and will collapse in the same way as Kolchak has
    collapsed and the French and British imperialists are now
    collapsing. (Stormy applause.)

Endnotes
[1]
    This meeting was held in the Bolshoi Theatre, Moscow, when the
    situation was difficult on account of Deminkin’s
    offensive. Because of Leon Trotsky’s illness, Lenin combined
    his own notes and that of Trotsky—s report, who was Chairman
    of the Revolutionary War Council of the Republic and
    People’s Commissar for Military and Naval Affairs and
    closely collaborated with Lenin on military and political affairs
    during this period. Lenin’s report was followed by the
    adoption of an appeal “To All Workers, Peasants, Red Army
    Men and Sailors” to bend all their efforts to repulse the
    enemy and achieve a decisive victory over Kolchak, Denikin and all
    the satraps of the counter-revolution.

 Collected Works Volume 29

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive 
 
 







==========

## The State: a Lecture
  Delivered at the Sverdlov University











The State:  A Lecture Delivered at the Sverdlov University



V. I. Lenin
  The State:
 A Lecture Delivered at the Sverdlov University
July 11, 1919


Delivered: 11 July,1919
      
First Published: Pravda No. 15, January 18, 1929
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, pages 470-488
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: Jon Muller, David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Second Proofreading: D. Walters, 2009
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


 Comrades, according to the plan you have adopted and which has  been conveyed to me, the subject of today’s talk is the state. I  do not know how familiar you are already with this subject. If  I am not mistaken your courses have only just begun and this is  the first time you will be tackling this subject systematically. If that is so, then it may very well happen that in the first lecture on this difficult subject I may not succeed in making my exposition sufficiently clear and comprehensible to many of my listeners. And if this should prove to be the case, I would request you not to be perturbed by the fact, because the question of the state is a most complex and difficult one, perhaps one that more than any other has been confused by bourgeois scholars, writers and philosophers. It should not therefore be expected that a thorough understanding of this subject can be obtained from one brief talk, at a first sitting. After the first talk on this subject you should make a note of the passages which you have not understood or which are not clear to you, and return to them a second, a third and a fourth time, so that what you have not understood may be further supplemented and elucidated later, both by reading and by  various lectures and talks. I hope that we may manage to meet  once again and that we shall then be able to exchange opinions  on all supplementary questions and see what has remained most  unclear. I also hope that in addition to talks and lectures you  Will devote some time to reading at least a few of the most  important works of Marx and Engels. I have no doubt that these  most important works are to be found in the lists of books and  in the handbooks which are available in your library for the  students of the Soviet and Party school; and although, again,  some of you may at first be dismayed by the difficulty of the  exposition, I must again warn you that you should not let this  worry you; what is unclear at a first reading will become clear  at a second reading, or when you subsequently approach the  question from a somewhat different. angle. For I once more  repeat that the question is so complex and has been so confused  by bourgeois scholars and writers that anybody who desires to  study it seriously and master it independently must attack it  several times, return to it again and again and consider it from  various angles in order to attain a clear, sound understanding  of it. Because it is such a fundamental, such a basic question  in all politics, and because not only in such stormy and  revolutionary times as the present, but even in the most  peaceful times, you will come across it every day in any  newspaper in connection with any economic or political question  it will be all the easier to return to it. Every day, in one  context or another, you will be returning to the question: what  is the state, what is its nature, what is its significance and  what is the attitude of our Party, the party that is fighting  for the overthrow of capitalism, the Communist Party—what is its  attitude to the state? And the chief thing is that you should  acquire, as a result of your reading, as a result of the talks  and lectures you will hear on the state, the ability to approach  this question independently, since you will be meeting with it  on the most diverse occasions, in connection with the most  trifling questions, in the most unexpected contexts and in  discussions and disputes with opponents. Only when you learn to  find your way about independently in this question may you consider yourself sufficiently confirmed in your convictions and able with sufficient success to defend them against anybody and at any time. 
  After these brief remarks, I shall proceed to deal with the  question itself—what is the state, how did it arise and  fundamentally what attitude to the state should be displayed by  the party of the working class, which is fighting for the  complete overthrow of capitalism—the Communist Party? 
  I have already said that you are not likely to find another question which has been so confused, deliberately and unwittingly, by representatives of bourgeois science, philosophy, jurisprudence, political economy and journalism, as the question of the state. To this day it is very often confused with religious questions; not only those professing religious doctrines (it is quite natural to expect it of them), but even people who consider themselves free from religious prejudice, very often confuse the specific question of the state with questions of religion and endeavour to build up a doctrine—very often a complex one, with an ideological, philosophical approach and argumentation—which claims that the state is something  divine, something supernatural, that it is a certain force by  virtue of which mankind has lived, that it is a force of divine  origin which confers on people, or can confer on people, or  which brings with it something that is not of man, but is given  him from without. And it must be said that this doctrine is so  closely bound up with the interests of the exploiting  classes—the landowners and the capitalists—so serves their  interests, has so deeply permeated all the customs, views and  science of the gentlemen who represent the bourgeoisie, that you  will meet with vestiges of it on every hand, even in the view of  the state held by the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries,  although they are convinced that they can regard the state with  sober eyes and reject indignantly the suggestion that they are  under the sway of religious prejudices. This question has been  so confused and complicated because it affects the interests of  the ruling classes more than any other question (yielding place  in this respect only to the foundations of economic  science). The doctrine of the state serves to justify social  privilege, the existence of exploitation, the existence of  capitalism—and that is why it would be the greatest mistake to  expect impartiality on this question, to approach it in the  belief that people who claim to be scientific can give you a  purely scientific view on the subject. In the question of the  state, in the doctrine of the state, in the theory of the state,  when you have become familiar with it and have gone into it  deeply enough, you will always discern the struggle between  different classes, a struggle which is reflected or expressed in  a conflict of views on the state, in the estimate of the role   and significance of the state. 
  To approach this question as scientifically as possible we must cast  at least a fleeting glance back on the history of the state, its  emergence and development. The most reliable thing in a question of  social science, and one that is most necessary in order really to  acquire the habit of approaching this question correctly and not  allowing oneself to get lost in the mass of detail or in the immense  variety of conflicting opinion—the most important thing if one is to  approach this question scientifically is not to forget the underlying  historical connection, to examine every question from the standpoint  of how the given phenomenon arose in history and what were the  principal stages in its development, arid, from the standpoint of its development, to examine what it has become today.
I hope that in studying this question of the state you will acquaint yourselves with Engels’s book The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State. This is one of the fundamental works of modern socialism, every sentence of which can be accepted with confidence, in the assurance that it has not been said at random but is based on immense historical and political material. Undoubtedly, not all the parts of this work have been expounded in an equally popular and comprehensible way; some of them presume a reader who already possesses a certain knowledge of history and economics. But I again repeat that you should not be perturbed if on reading this work you do not understand it at once. Very few people do. But returning to it later, when your interest has been aroused, you will succeed —in understanding the greater part, if not the whole of it. I refer to this book because it gives the correct approach to the question in the sense mentioned. It begins with a historical sketch of the origin of the state.
This question, like every other—for example, that of the origin of capitalism, the exploitation of man by man, socialism, how socialism arose, what conditions gave rise to it—can be approached soundly and confidently only if we cast a glance back on the history of its development as a whole. In connection with this problem it should first of all be noted that the state has not always existed. There was a time when there was no state. It appears wherever and whenever a division of society into classes appears, whenever exploiters and exploited appear.
Before the first form of exploitation of man by man arose, the first form of division into classes—slave-owners and slaves—there existed the patriarchal family, or, as it is sometimes called, the clan family. (Clan-tribe; at the time people of one kin lived together.) Fairly definite traces of these primitive times have survived in the life of many primitive peoples; and if you take any work whatsoever on primitive civilisation, you will always come across more or less definite descriptions, indications and recollections of the fact that there was a time, more or less similar—to primitive communism, when the division of society into slave-owners and slaves did not exist. And in those times there was no state, no special apparatus for the systematic application of force and the subjugation of people by force. It is such an apparatus that is called the state.
In primitive society, when people lived in small family groups and were still at the lowest stages of development, in a condition approximating to savagery—an epoch from which modern, civilised human society is separated by several thousand years—there were yet no signs of t e existence of a state. We find the predominance of custom, authority, respect, the power enjoyed by the elders of the clan; we find this power sometimes accorded to women the position of women then was not like the downtrodden and oppressed condition of women today—but nowhere do we find a special category of people set apart to rule others and who, for the sake and purpose of rule, systematically and permanently have at their disposal a certain apparatus of coercion, an apparatus of violence, such as is represented at the present time, as you all realise, by armed contingents of troops, prisons and other means of subjugating the will of others by force—all that which constitutes the essence of the state.
If we get away from what are known as religious teachings, from the subtleties, philosophical arguments and various opinions advanced by bourgeois scholars, if we get away from these and try to get at the real core of the matter, we shall find that the state really does amount to such an apparatus of rule which stands outside society as a whole. When there appears such a special group of men occupied solely with government, and who in order to rule need a special apparatus of coercion to subjugate the will of others by force—prisons, special contingents of men, armies, etc.—then there appears the state.
But there was a time when there was no state, when general ties,   the community itself, discipline and the ordering of work were   maintained by force of custom and tradition, by the authority or   the respect enjoyed by the elders of the clan or by women—who in   those times  not only frequently enjoyed a status equal to that   of men, but not infrequently enjoyed an even higher status—and   when there was no special category of persons who were   specialists in ruling. History shows that the state as a special   apparatus for coercing people arose wherever and whenever   there appeared a division of society into classes, that is, a   division into groups of people some of which were permanently in   a position to appropriate the labour of others, where some   people exploited others.   
   And this division of society into classes must always be clearly   borne in mind as a fundamental fact of history. The development   of all human societies for thousands of years, in all countries   without exception, reveals a general conformity to law, a   regularity and consistency; so that at first we had a society   without classes—the original patriarchal, primitive society, in   which there were no aristocrats; then we had a society based on   slavery—a slaveowning society. The whole of modern, civilised   Europe has passed through this stage—slavery ruled supreme two   thousand years ago. The vast majority of peoples of the other   parts of the world also passed through this stage. Traces of   slavery survive to this day among the less developed peoples;   you will find the institution of slavery in Africa, for example,   at the present time. The division into slaveowners and slaves   was the first important class division. The former group not   only owned all the means of production—the land and the   implements, however poor and primitive they may have been in   those times—but also owned people. This group was known as   slave-owners, while those who laboured and supplied labour for   others were known as slaves.
This form was followed in history by another—feudalism. In the great majority of countries slavery in the course of its development evolved into serfdom. The fundamental division of society was now into feudal lords and peasant serfs. The form of relations between people changed. The slave-owners had regarded the slaves as their property; the law had confirmed this view and regarded the slave as a chattel completely owned by the slave-owner. As far as the peasant serf was concerned, class oppression and dependence remained, but it was not considered that the feudal lord owned the peasants as chattels, but that he was only entitled to their labour, to the obligatory performance of certain services. In practice, as you know, serfdom, especially in Russia where it survived longest of all and assumed the crudest forms, in no way differed from slavery.
Further, with the development of trade, the appearance of the world market and the development of money circulation, a new class arose within feudal society—the capitalist class. From the commodity, the exchange of commodities and the rise of the power of money, there derived the power of capital. During the eighteenth century, or rather, from the end of the eighteenth century and during the nineteenth century, revolutions took place all over the world. Feudalism was abolished in all the countries of Western Europe. Russia was the last country in which this took place. In 1861 a radical change took place in Russia as well; as a consequence of this one form of society was replaced by another—feudalism was replaced by capitalism, under which division into classes remained, as well as various traces and remnants of serfdom, but fundamentally the division into classes assumed a different form.
The owners of capital, the owners of the land and the owners of the factories in all capitalist countries constituted and still constitute an insignificant minority of the population who have complete command of the labour of the whole people, and, consequently, command, oppress and exploit the whole mass of labourers, the majority of whom are proletarians, wage-workers, who procure their livelihood in the process of production only by the sale of their own worker’s hands, their labour-power. With the transition to capitalism, the peasants, who had been disunited and downtrodden in feudal times, were converted partly
   (the majority) into proletarians, and partly (the minority)   into   wealthy peasants who themselves hired labourers and who   constituted a rural bourgeoisie.
This fundamental fact—the transition of society from primitive forms of slavery to serfdom and finally to capitalism—you must always bear in mind, for only by remembering this fundamental fact, only by examining all political doctrines placed in this fundamental scheme, will you be able properly to appraise these doctrines and understand what they refer to; for each of these great periods in the history of mankind, slave-owning, feudal and capitalist, embraces scores and hundreds of centuries and presents such a mass of political forms, such a variety of political doctrines, opinions and revolutions, that this extreme diversity and immense variety (especially in connection with the political, philosophical and other doctrines of bourgeois scholars and politicians) can be understood only by firmly holding, as to a guiding thread, to this division of society into classes, this change in the forms of class rule, and from this standpoint examining all social questions—economic, political, spiritual, religious, etc.
If you examine the state from the standpoint of this fundamental   division, you will find that before the division of society into   classes, as I have already said, no state existed. But as the   social division into classes arose and took firm root, as class   society arose, the state also arose and took firm root. The   history of mankind knows scores and hundreds of countries that   have passed or are still passing through slavery, feudalism and   capitalism. In each of these countries, despite the immense   historical changes that have taken place, despite all the   political vicissitudes and all the revolutions due to this   development of mankind, to the transition from slavery through   feudalism to capitalism and to the present world-wide struggle   against capitalism, you will always discern the emergence of the   state. It has always been a certain apparatus which stood   outside society and consisted of a group of people engaged   solely, or almost solely, or mainly, in ruling. People are   divided into the ruled, and into specialists in ruling, those   who rise above society and are called rulers, statesmen. This   apparatus, this group of people who rule others, always   possesses certain means of coercion, of physical force, irrespective of whether this violence over people is expressed in the primitive club, or in more perfected types of weapons in the epoch of slavery, or in the firearms which appeared in the Middle Ages, or, finally, in modern weapons, which in the twentieth century are technical marvels and are based entirely on the latest achievements of modern technology. The methods of violence changed, but whenever there was a state there existed in every society a group of persons who ruled, who commanded, who dominated and who in order to maintain their power possessed an apparatus of physical coercion, an apparatus of violence, with those weapons which corresponded to the technical level of the given epoch. And by examining these general phenomena, by asking ourselves why no state existed when there were no classes, when there were no exploiters and exploited, and why it appeared when classes appeared—only in this way shall we find a definite answer to the question of what is the nature and significance of the state. 
   The state is a machine for maintaining the rule of one class   over another. When there were no classes in society, when,   before the epoch of slavery, people laboured in primitive   conditions of greater equality, in conditions when the   productivity of labour was still at its lowest, and when   primitive man could barely procure the wherewithal for the   crudest and most primitive existence, a special group of people   whose function is to rule and to dominate the rest of society,   had not and could not yet have emerged. Only when the first form   of the division of society into classes appeared, only when   slavery appeared, when a certain class of people, by   concentrating on the crudest forms of agricultural labour, could   produce a certain surplus, when this surplus was not absolutely   essential for the most wretched existence of the slave and   passed into the hands of the slave-owner, when in this way the   existence of this class of slave-owners was secure—then in order   that it might take firm root it was necessary for a state to   appear.
And it did appear—the slave-owning state, an apparatus which gave the slave-owners power and enabled them to rule over the slaves. Both society and the state were then on a much smaller scale than they are now, they possessed incomparably poorer means of communication—the modern means of communication did not then exist. Mountains, rivers and seas were immeasurably greater obstacles than they are now, and the state took shape within far narrower geographical boundaries. A technically weak state apparatus served a state confined within relatively narrow boundaries and with a narrow range of action. Nevertheless,. there did exist an apparatus which compelled the slaves to remain in slavery, which kept one part of society subjugated to and oppressed by another. It is impossible to compel the greater part of society to work systematically for the other part of society without a permanent apparatus of coercion. So long as there were no classes, there was no apparatus of this sort. When classes appeared, everywhere and always, as the division grew and took firmer hold, there also appeared a special institution—the state. The forms of state were extremely varied. As early as the period of slavery we find diverse forms of the state in the countries that were the most advanced, cultured and civilised according to the standards of the time—for example, in ancient Greece and Rome which were based entirely on slavery. At that time there was already a difference between monarchy and republic, between aristocracy and democracy. A monarchy is the power of a single person, a republic is the absence of any non-elected authority; an aristocracy is the power of a relatively small minority, a democracy is the power of the people (democracy in Greek literally means the power of the people). All these differences arose in the epoch of slavery. Despite these differences, the state of the slave-owning epoch was a slave-owning state, irrespective of whether it was a monarchy or a republic, aristocratic or democratic.
In every course on the history of ancient times, in any lecture on this subject, you will hear about the struggle which was waged between the monarchical and republican states. But the fundamental fact is that the slaves were not regarded as human beings—not only were they not regarded as citizens, they were not even regarded as human beings. Roman law regarded them as chattels. The law of manslaughter, not to mention the other laws for the protection of the person, did not extend to slaves. It defended only the slaveowners, who were alone recognised as citizens with full rights. But whether a monarchy was instituted or a republic, it was a monarchy of the slave-owners or a republic of the slave-owners. All rights were enjoyed by the slave-owners, while the slave was a chattel in the eyes of the law; and not only could any sort of violence be perpetrated against a slave, but even the killing of a slave was not considered a crime. Slave-owning republics differed in their internal organisation, there were aristocratic republics and democratic republics. In an aristocratic republic only a small number of privileged persons took part in the elections; in a democratic republic everybody took part but everybody meant only the slave-owners, that is, everybody except the slaves. This fundamental fact must be borne in mind, because it throws more light than any other on the question of the state and clearly demonstrates the nature of the state. 
   The state is a machine for the oppression of one class by   another, a machine for holding in obedience to one class other,   subordinated classes. There are various forms of this   machine. The slave-owning state could be a monarchy, an   aristocratic republic or even a democratic republic. In fact the   forms of government varied extremely, but their essence was   always the same: the slaves enjoyed no rights and constituted an   oppressed class; they were not regarded as human beings. We find   the same thing in the feudal state. 
   The change in the form of exploitation transformed the   slave-owning state into the feudal state. This was of immense   importance. In slave-owning society the slave enjoyed no rights   whatever and was not regarded as a human being; in feudal   society the peasant was bound to the soil. The chief   distinguishing feature of serfdom was that the peasants (and at   that time the peasants constituted the majority; the urban   population was still very small) were considered bound to the   land—this is the very basis of "serfdom". The peasant might work   a definite number of days for himself on the plot assigned to   him by the landlord; on the other days the peasant serf worked   for his lord. The essence of class society remained—society was   based on class exploitation. Only the owners of the land could   enjoy full rights; the peasants had no rights at all. In   practice their condition differed very little from the condition   of slaves in the slave-owning state. Nevertheless, a wider road   was opened for their emancipation, for the emancipation of the   peasants, since the peasant serf was not regarded as the direct   property of the lord. He could work part of his time on his own   plot, could, so to speak, belong to himself to some extent; and   with the wider opportunities for the development of exchange and trade relations the feudal system steadily disintegrated and the scope of emancipation of the peasantry steadily widened. Feudal society was always more complex than slave society. There was a greater development of trade and industry, which even in those days led to capitalism. In the Middle Ages feudalism predominated. And here too the forms of state varied, here too we find both the monarchy and the republic, although the latter was much more weakly expressed. But always the feudal lord was regarded as the only ruler. The peasant serfs were deprived of absolutely all political rights.
Neither under slavery nor under the feudal system could a small minority of people dominate over the vast majority without coercion. History is full of the constant attempts of the oppressed classes to throw off oppression. The history of slavery contains records of wars of emancipation from slavery which lasted for decades. Incidentally, the name "Spartacist" now adopted by the German Communists—the only German party which is really fighting against the yoke of capitalism—was adopted by them because Spartacus was one of the most prominent heroes of one of the greatest revolts of slaves, which took place about two thousand years ago. For many years the seemingly omnipotent Roman Empire, which rested entirely on slavery, experienced the shocks and blows of a widespread uprising of slaves who armed and united to form a vast army under the leadership of Spartacus. In the end they were defeated, captured and put to torture by the slave-owners. Such civil wars mark the whole history of the existence of class society. I have just mentioned an example of the greatest of these civil wars in the epoch of slavery. The whole epoch of feudalism is likewise marked by constant uprisings of the peasants. For example, in Germany in the Middle Ages the struggle between the two classes—the landlords and the serfs—assumed wide proportions and was transformed into a civil war of the peasants against the landowners. You are all familiar with similar examples of repeated uprisings of the peasants against the feudal landowners in Russia.
In order to maintain their rule and to preserve their power, the   feudal lords had to have an apparatus by which they could unite   under their subjugation a vast number of people and subordinate   them to certain laws and regulations; and all these laws   fundamentally amounted to one thing—the maintenance of the power   of the lords over the peasant serfs. And this was the feudal   state, which in Russia, for example, or in quite backward Asiatic countries (where feudalism prevails to this day) differed in form—it was either a republic or a monarchy. When the state was a monarchy, the rule of one person was recognised; when it was —a republic, the participation of the elected representatives of landowning society was in one degree or another recognised—this was in feudal society. Feudal society represented a division of classes under which the vast majority—the peasant serfs—were completely subjected to an insignificant minority—the owners of the land.
The development of trade, the development of commodity exchange,   led to the emergence of a new class—the capitalists. Capital   took shape at the close of the Middle Ages, when, after the   discovery of America, world trade developed enormously, when the   quantity of precious metals increased, when silver and gold   became the medium of exchange, when money circulation made it   possible for individuals to possess tremendous wealth. Silver   and gold were recognised as wealth all over the world. The   economic power of the landowning class declined and the power of   the new class—the representatives of capital—developed. The   reconstruction of society was such that all citizens seemed to   be equal, the old division into slave-owners and slaves   disappeared, all were regarded as equal before the law   irrespective of what capital each owned; whether he owned land   as private property, or was a poor man who owned nothing but his   labour-power—all were equal before the law. The law protects   everybody equally; it protects the property of those who have it   from attack by the masses who, possessing no property,   possessing nothing but their labour-power, grow steadily   impoverished and ruined and become converted into proletarians. Such is capitalist society.
I cannot dwell on it in detail. You will return to this when you   come to discuss the Programme of the Party you will then hear a   description of capitalist society. This society advanced against   serfdom, against the old feudal
 system, under the slogan of liberty. But it was liberty for those who owned property. And when feudalism was shattered, which occurred at the end of the eighteenth century and the beginning of the nineteenth century—in Russia it occurred later than in other countries, in 1861—the feudal state was then superseded by the capitalist state, which proclaims liberty for the whole people as its slogan, which declares that it expresses the will of the whole people and denies that it is a class state. And here there developed a struggle between the socialists, who are fighting for the liberty of the whole people, and the capitalist state—a struggle which has led to the creation of the Soviet Socialist Republic and which is spreading all over the world.
To understand the struggle that has been started against world capital, to understand the nature of the capitalist state, we must remember that when the capitalist state advanced against the feudal state it entered the fight under the slogan of liberty. The abolition of feudalism meant liberty for the representatives of the capitalist state and served their purpose, inasmuch as serfdom was breaking down and the peasants had acquired the opportunity of owning as their full property the land which they had purchased for compensation or in part by quit-rent—this did not concern the state: it protected property irrespective of its origin, because the state was founded on private property. The peasants became private owners in all the modern, civilised states. Even when the landowner surrendered part of his land to the peasant, the state protected private property, rewarding the landowner by compensation, by letting him take money for the land. The state as it were declared that it would fully preserve private property, and the state accorded it every support and protection. The state recognised the property rights of every merchant, industrialist and manufacturer. And this society, based on private property, on the power of capital, on the complete subjection of the propertyless workers and labouring masses of the peasantry, proclaimed that its rule was based on liberty. Combating feudalism, it proclaimed freedom of property and was particularly proud of the fact that the state had ceased, supposedly, to be a class state.
Yet the state continued to be a machine which helped the capitalists to hold the poor peasants and the working class in subjection. But in outward appearance it was free. It proclaimed universal suffrage, and declared through its champions, preachers, scholars and philosophers, that it was not a class state. Even now, when the Soviet Socialist Republics have begun to fight the state, they accuse us of violating liberty, of building a state based on coercion, on the suppression of some by others, whereas they represent a popular, democratic state. And now, when the world socialist revolution has begun, and when the revolution has succeeded in some countries, when the fight against world capital has grown particularly acute, this question of the state has acquired the greatest importance and has become, one might say, the most burning one, the focus of all present-day political questions and political disputes.
Whichever party we take in Russia or in any of the more civilised countries, we find that nearly all political disputes, disagreements and opinions now centre around the conception of the state. Is the state in a capitalist country, in a democratic republic—especially one like Switzerland or the U.S.A.—in the freest democratic republics, an expression of the popular will, the sum total of the general decision of the people, the expression of the national will, and so forth; or is the state a machine that enables the capitalists of those countries to maintain their power over the working class and the peasantry? That is the fundamental question around which all political disputes all over the world now centre. What do they say about Bolshevism? The bourgeois press abuses the Bolsheviks. You will not find a single newspaper that does not repeat the hackneyed accusation that the Bolsheviks violate popular rule. If our Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries in their simplicity of heart (perhaps it is not simplicity, or perhaps it is the simplicity which the proverb says is worse than robbery) think that they discovered and invented the accusation that the Bolsheviks have violated liberty and popular rule, they are ludicrously mistaken. Today every one of the richest newspapers in the richest countries, which spend tens of millions on their distribution and disseminate bourgeois lies and imperialist policy in tens of millions of copies—every one of these newspapers repeats these basic arguments and accusations against Bolshevism, namely, that the U.S.A., Britain and Switzerland are advanced states based on popular rule, whereas the Bolshevik republic is a state of bandits in which
 liberty is unknown, and that the Bolsheviks have violated the idea of popular rule and have even gone so far as to disperse the Constituent Assembly. These terrible accusations against the Bolsheviks are repeated all over the world. These accusations lead us directly to the question—what is the state? In order to understand these accusations, in order to study them and have a fully intelligent attitude towards them, and not to examine them on hearsay but with a firm opinion of our own, we must have a clear idea of what the state is. We have before us capitalist states of every kind and all the theories in defence of them which were created before the war. In order to answer the question properly we must critically examine all these theories and views. 
   I have already advised you to turn for help to Engels’s book The   Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State. This book   says that every state in which private ownership of the land and   means of production exists, in which capital dominates, however   democratic it may be, is a capitalist state, a machine used by   the capitalists to keep the working class and the poor peasants   in subjection; .while universal suffrage, a Constituent   Assembly, a parliament are merely a form, a sort of promissory   note, which does not change the real state of affairs.
The forms of domination of the state may vary: capital manifests its power in one way where one form exists, and in another way where another form exists—but essentially the power is in the hands of capital, whether there are voting qualifications or some other rights or not, or whether the republic is a democratic one or not—in fact, the more democratic it is the cruder and more cynical is the rule of capitalism. One of the most democratic republics in the world is the United States of America, yet nowhere (and those who have been there since 1905 probably know it) is the power of capital, the power of a handful of multimillionaires over the whole of society, so crude and so openly corrupt as in America. Once capital exists, it dominates the whole of society, and no democratic republic, no franchise can change its nature.
The democratic republic and universal suffrage were an immense progressive advance as compared with feudalism; they have enabled the proletariat to achieve its present unity and solidarity, to form those firm and disciplined
 ranks which are waging a systematic struggle against capital. There was nothing even approximately resembling this among the peasant serfs, not to speak of the slaves. The slaves, as we know, revolted, rioted, started civil wars, but they could never create a class-conscious majority and parties to lead the struggle, they could not clearly realise what their aims were, and even in the most revolutionary moments of history they were always pawns in the hands of the ruling classes. The bourgeois republic, parliament, universal suffrage—all represent great progress from the standpoint of the world development of society. Mankind moved towards capitalism, and it was capitalism alone which, thanks to urban culture, enabled the oppressed proletarian class to become conscious of itself and to create the world working-class movement, the millions of workers organised all over the world in parties—the socialist parties which are consciously leading the struggle of the masses. Without parliamentarism, without an electoral system, this development of the working class would have been impossible. That is why all these things have acquired such great importance in the eyes of the broad masses of people. That is why a radical change seems to be so difficult. It is not only the conscious hypocrites, scientists and priests that uphold and defend the bourgeois lie that the state is free and that it is its mission to defend the interests of all; so also do a large number of people who sincerely adhere to the old prejudices and who cannot understand the transition from the old, capitalist society to socialism. Not only people who are directly dependent on the bourgeoisie, not only those who live under the yoke of capital or who have been bribed by capital (there are a large number of all sorts of scientists, artists, priests, etc. , in the service of capital), but even people who are simply under the sway of the prejudice of bourgeois liberty, have taken up arms against Bolshevism all over the world because when the Soviet Republic was founded it rejected these bourgeois lies and openly declared: you say your state is free, whereas in reality, as long as there is private property, your state, even if it is a democratic republic, is nothing but a machine used by the capitalists to suppress the workers, and the freer the state, the more clearly is this expressed. Examples of this are Switzerland in Europe and the United States in America. Nowhere does capital rule so cynically and ruthlessly, and nowhere is it so clearly apparent, as in these countries, although they are democratic republics, no matter how prettily they are painted and notwithstanding all the talk about labour democracy and the equality of all citizens. The fact is that in Switzerland and the United States capital dominates, and every attempt of the workers to achieve the slightest real improvement in their condition is immediately met by civil war. There are fewer soldiers, a smaller standing army, in these countries—Switzerland has a militia and every Swiss has a gun at home, while in America there was no standing army until quite recently and so when there is a strike the bourgeoisie arms, hires soldiery and suppresses the strike; and nowhere is this suppression of the working-class movement accompanied by such ruthless severity as in Switzerland and the U.S.A. , and nowhere does the influence of capital in parliament manifest itself as powerfully as in these countries. The power of capital is everything, the stock exchange is everything, while parliament and elections are marionettes, puppets.... But the eyes of the workers are being opened more and more, and the idea of Soviet government is spreading farther and farther afield, especially after the bloody carnage we have just experienced. The necessity for a relentless war on the capitalists is becoming clearer and clearer to the working class.
Whatever guise a republic may assume, however democratic it may be, if it is a bourgeois republic, if it retains private ownership of the land and factories, and if private capital keeps the whole of society in wage-slavery, that is, if the republic does not carry out what is proclaimed in the Programme of our Party and in the Soviet Constitution, then this state is a machine for the suppression of some people by others. And we shall place this machine in the hands of the class that is to overthrow the power of capital. We shall reject all the old prejudices about the state meaning universal equality—for that is a fraud: as long as there is exploitation there cannot be equality. The landowner cannot be the equal of the worker, or the hungry man the equal of the full man. This machine called the state, before which people bowed in superstitious awe, believing the old tales that it means popular rule, tales which the proletariat declares to be a bourgeois lie—this machine the proletariat will smash. So far we have deprived the capitalists of this machine and have taken it over. We shall use this machine, or bludgeon, to destroy all exploitation. And when the possibility of exploitation no longer exists anywhere in the world, when there are no longer owners of land and owners of factories, and when there is no longer a situation in which some gorge while others starve, only when the possibility of this no longer exists shall we consign this machine to the scrap-heap. Then there will be no state and no exploitation. Such is the view of our Communist Party. I hope that we shall return to this subject in subsequent lectures, return to it again and again.     
    



Collected Works Volume 29
 Collected Works Table of
Contents
 Lenin Works Archive

 
 
 







==========

## The Domestic and Foreign Situation
  of the Republic











The Domestic and Foreign Situation of the Republic



V. I. Lenin
The Domestic and Foreign Situation
of the Republic
Report Delivered To The Moscow Conference
of The R.C.P. (B.)
July 12, 1919[1]
Newspaper Report


Delivered: 12 July,1919

      
First Published: Pravda No. 154, July 16, 1919; Published according to the Pravda text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, pages 489-493
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


The previous speaker spoke of the feelings of
deep regret with which we have had to contravene our food
policy[2]

None of this, of course, is anything more than darning the
holes of an old garment instead of acquiring a new one. But
what we have done is right. We may recall last year, when the
food situation was much worse’we had absolutely no food
resources. At that time there was considerable confusion in
our ranks because we had to retract from the principles of our
food policy. It was thought that small concessions would lead
to bigger ones and that a return to a socialist policy would
be impossible. That turned out to be untrue. Difficult as the
situation was, we got over it, and our enemies’ hopes
were not fulfilled.
The situation today is much better than last year’s;
we now have food resources we dared not even dream of last
year. The territory occupied by the enemy was much greater
last year. We have now scored big victories in the East where
a bumper harvest is expected. Apart from that we have
experience, and that is the main thing. Having this experience
we are able to say with greater confidence that we shall
overcome the difficulties that stand in our way. July is the
worst month not only as far as food is concerned, but also
because counter-revolution raises its head higher than
before.
The counter-revolutionary wave inside the country, however,
was more powerful last year than this. The activities of the
Left Socialist-Revolutionaries had reached the highest point
at that time. The armed struggle that they launched suddenly
in place of their verbal support took us by surprise. The
difficulties were immense, for they had chosen their time very
cleverly. The Socialist-Revolutionaries hoped to play on the
mood of the man in the street who was in despair from
hunger. At the same time Muravyov betrayed us at the
front. The revolt of the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries was
very quickly suppressed but there was serious wavering in the
provinces for several days.
We now have a more correct attitude to the petty-bourgeois
parties, due to the year’s experience. The experience of
the revolts led by Makhno and Grigoriev and the waverings of
the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks have shown us
that their influence over the worker and peasant masses is
only an apparent one. Their actual strength is nil, so that
when we are told that Chernov at a recent meeting of the
Council of the Right Socialist-Revolutionary Party said,
“If not we and not today, then who else will kick out
the Bolsheviks?” we can only say, “The nightmare
was terrible, but God is good.” Today we can only
express our amazement at their not being tired of repeating
their own mistakes. Throughout two years we have been
witnessing the complete collapse of all their dreams about
“democracy in general”, nevertheless every one of
their groups considers it its duty to make the experiment in
its own way. The development of the revolution shows that
their mistakes are being repeated and that the repetition is
causing us countless calamities. The peasants in the East
supported the Socialist-Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks
because they did not want war and realised that the Bolsheviks
were a sound government that would insist on their
participating in the war. The result was that Kolchak forces
appeared and brought countless calamities. Now that they are
retreating they are destroying everything in their path, the
country is completely ruined and the sufferings there are
unimaginable, far worse than anything we are experiencing. To
speak of Bolshevik atrocities in face of these facts requires
all the hypocrisy of bourgeois writers.
In the Kolchak business, the Socialist-Revolutionaries and
Mensheviks have again followed the same sanguinary political
road as they did with Kerensky; it has brought them back to
the starting-point and has demonstrated the falseness of all
their coalition ideas.
The masses have now abandoned them and we are witnessing a
revolt in Siberia in which not only workers and peasants but
even intellectuals and kulaks are taking part. We see the
complete collapse of Kolchak’s movement. Apparently
every one of their mistakes must be repeated before the eyes
of the unenlightened masses are opened. When the masses see
that the coalition leads to reaction they come to us, battered
and tormented but nevertheless taught and steeled by
experience. The same may be said of all imperialists. They
drag out the war, cause greater exhaustion and thereby merely
strengthen in the masses a consciousness of the need for
revolution. Difficult as the year has been, it has been useful
because not only the leaders but even the broadest masses,
even the peasants in the most remote holes and corners have
had an experience that has led them to draw the same
conclusions as we do. This gives us firm conviction in our
victory. Without Kolchak the Siberian peasants would not have
become convinced in a single year that they need our
workers’ government. It took the very sad experience of
this year to convince them of that.
It is quite possible that the Socialist-Revolutionary and
Menshevik literary groups will die out without ever having
understood anything about our revolution and for a long time
will continue repeating, parrot fashion, that theirs would
have been the best government in the world, a truly socialist
and truly democratic government without civil war, if it had
not been for Kolchak and the Bolsheviks; that, however, is not
important, there have also been stubborn cranks in all
revolutions. The important thing is that the masses who
followed them are now leaving them. The peasant masses have
gone over to the Bolsheviks’that is a fact. Siberia
demonstrates this best of all. The peasants will not forget
what they experienced under Kolchak’s government.; the
greater the trials, the better the Bolsheviks’ lessons
will have been learned.
We are now gaining important victories on the Eastern Front
and these give its reason to hope that we shall have finished
with Kolchak in the East in a few weeks. A turning point has
been reached on the Southern Front, arid, what is more
important, a turning-point in the temper of the peasants in
the vicinity of the front has also been reached. These,
incidentally, are rich peasants’middle peasants in those
parts are like kulaks. But there has been a change in their
mood in our favour’this is a fact that is proved by the
return of deserters and by the armed resistance we are putting
up. The workers living in the towns, where they are close to
events, assimilate our ideas from conferences, speeches and
newspapers. The peasant cannot do this, he is convinced only
from his own experience. The peasants in the South were
prepared to curse the Bolsheviks in words, but when Denikin
arrived shouting about democracy (for it is not only the
Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries that shout about it,
the word is to be found in every line of Denikin’s
newspaper) the peasants began to fight against him for they
soon realised from their own experience that floggings and
plunder lay hidden under the pretty words. The torments and
ruination in the districts near the Southern Front are having
the same effect as in the East’they are giving us more
reliable gains. We have not for a moment forgotten the
difficulties that we are experiencing, we have not forgotten
that the greatest effort and the mobilisation of our forces
are essential, but we can say that the result will be a more
sound victory. The experience of the past year has shown the
masses that today only one form of power is possible and
necessary’the workers’ and peasants’ power
of the Bolsheviks. That is what enables us to say with
confidence that this difficult July will be the last difficult
July.
A glance at the international situation only serves to
strengthen our confidence in victory.
Forces friendly to us are growing up in all hostile
states. Take the small countries’Finland, Latvia,
Poland, Rumania. All attempts to set up a coalition of the big
and petty bourgeoisie in those countries to fight against us
have ended in a break-down and ours turns out to be the only
form of government possible there.
The same thing is true of big states. Take
Germany. Immediately the Treaty of Versailles was signed a big
revolutionary movement began. The Entente bogey has gone and
the workers are now rising, notwithstanding all the sacrifices
that the proletariat has made. During the past year Germany
has had the same experience as we and Siberia have had, but in
a somewhat different form’experience that will lead to
the communist revolution. And what about the Entente, the
victors? They say that victory has given them security, but no
sooner had they signed the peace treaty than it became clear
that in signing it they were signing their own death
warrant. The mass movement against them is growing. That is
why we say with confidence, taking all our experience, all
that has happened in the past year into account, that we shall
surmount all difficulties and that this July will be the last
difficult July, and that next July we shall welcome the
victory of the world Soviet republic and that victory will be
full and complete.

Endnotes
[1] This conference was attended by 200
delegates of the Moscow Party organisations. Following
Lenin’s report the conference passed a resolution
indicating the need to improve Party and government
work—army, food, social security, agitation and
propaganda work, and also cultural, educational and political
work among workers and men of the Red Army. It was planned to
call regular non-Party conferences of workers and Red Army
soldiers.
[2] This refers to decisions by the Moscow
August 24) and Petrograd (September 5, 1918) Soviets
permitting factory and office workers to transport up to
one-and-half poods of foodstuffs (until October 1,
1918) and the decree of the Council of People’s
Commissars of June 30, 1919 on food procurement in Simbrisk
Gubernia up to August 15, 1919 by workers’s and rural
organisations of the central gubernias, etc. The Soviet
Government was compelled to adopt these measures because of
the grave food situation of the country.

 Collected Works Volume 29

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive 
 
 







==========

## The Tasks of the Third
  International











The Tasks of the Third International



V. I. Lenin
 The Tasks of the Third International
Ramsay Macdonald On The Third International


Written: 14 July,1919
 
First Published: August 1919; Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, pages 494-512
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


The French social-chauvinist newspaper Humanité,
      issue No. 5475, dated April 14, 1919, contains an editorial by
      Ramsay MacDonald, the well-known leader of the British so-called
      Independent Labour Party, which is actually an opportunist party
      that has always been dependent on the bourgeoisie. This article
      is so typical of the position taken by the trend which
      it is customary to call the Centre and which was called by that
      name at the First Congress of the Communist International in
      Moscow that we quote it in full together with the
      introductory lines of the l’Humanité
      editorial board:
The Third International
Our friend Ramsay MacDonald was the
      authoritative leader of the Labour Party in the House of Commons
      before the war. A socialist and a man of convictions, he
      considered it his duty to condemn the war as imperialist, in
      contrast to those who welcomed it as a war for a righteous
      cause. Consequently, after August 4 he resigned from his
      position of leader of the Labour Party, and together with
      comrades in the Independent Labour Party and with Keir Hardie
      whom we all admire, did not fear to declare war on war.
 This required day-to-day heroism.
 MacDonald showed by his example that courage,
      in the words of Jaurès, “consists in not submitting
      to the law of the triumphant lie and in not serving as the echo
      of the applause of imbeciles and the catcalling of
      fanatics”.
 In the khaki [Called “khaki”
      election by soldiers who were ordered to vote for the Government
      candidates.] election held at the end of November, MacDonald was
      defeated by Lloyd George. But we may rest assured that MacDonald
      will have his revenge, and that in the very near future. 

      The rise of separatist tendencies in the national and
      international policies of socialism has been a misfortune for
      the socialist movement.
 It is, however, not a bad thing that there are
    shades of opinion and variations of method within socialism. Our
    socialism is still in the experimental stage.
 Its basic principles are fixed, but the method
    of best applying them, the combinations which will bring about the
    triumph of the revolution, the manner in which the socialist state
    is to be built are still problems to be discussed, and the last
    word concerning them has not yet been spoken. Only deep study of
    all these points can lead us to sublimer truth.
 Extremes may clash, and such a struggle may
    serve to fortify socialist views; but evil commences when
    everybody considers his opponent a traitor, a believer fallen from
    grace, one who deserves to have the gates of the party paradise
    slammed in his face.
 When socialists are possessed by the spirit of
    dogmatism, like that which in former days of Christianity preached
    civil war for the greater glory of God and the discomfiture of the
    devil, the bourgeoisie may sleep in peace, for the days of its
    rule are not yet ended, no matter how great the local and
    international successes achieved by socialism.
 At the present moment our movement is
    unfortunately encountering a new obstacle. A new International has
    been proclaimed in Moscow.
 I am very much grieved over this, for the
    Socialist International is at present sufficiently open to all
    forms of socialist thought and in spite of all theoretical and
    practical disagreements engendered within it by Bolshevism I see
    no reason why its Left wing should separate from the Centre and
    form an independent group.
 It must first of all be remembered that we are
    still living, in the infancy of the revolution. The forms of
    government that have sprung up from the political and social
    debris wrought by the war have not yet stood the test and have not
    yet been definitely established.
 A new broom sweeps remarkably clean at first,
    but nobody can be certain beforehand how it will work in the
    end.
 Russia is not Hungary, Hungary is not France,
    France is not Britain, and therefore anyone who introduces a split
    in the International after the experience of some one nation
    displays criminal narrow-mindedness.
 Besides, what is Russia’s experience
    really worth? Who can answer that? The Allied governments are
    afraid to let us enlighten ourselves. But there are two things we
    do know.
 First and foremost, that there was no prepared plan
      according to which the revolution was accomplished by the
      present Russian Government. It developed according to the course
      of events. Lenin started his attack on Kerensky by demanding a
      Constituent Assembly. Events led him to suppress this
      Assembly. When the socialist revolution broke out in Russia no
      one thought the Soviets would take the place in the government
      which they did. 

    

      Subsequently Lenin quite justly exhorted Hungary not to copy
      Russia slavishly but to allow the Hungarian revolution to evolve
      freely according to its own character.
 The evolution and fluctuations of those
    experiments we are now witnessing should on no account call forth
    a split in the International.
 All socialist governments need the help and
    advice of the International. It is necessary that the
    International should watch their experiences with an alert eye and
    an open mind.
*     *
*
 I have just heard from a friend who recently saw
    Lenin that no one is more free in his criticism of the Soviet
    Government than Lenin himself.

    

      If the post-war disorders and revolutions do not justify a
      split, does the latter not find justification in the attitude
      which some socialist factions took during the war? I frankly
      admit that here the grounds may seem more justified. But if
      there really is some excuse for split in the International, this
      question was at any rate presented most unhappily at the Moscow
      Conference.
 I am one of those who consider that the
    discussion at the Berne Conference on who was responsible for the
    war was merely a concession to non-socialist public
    opinion.
 At Berne it was not only impossible to adopt a
    decision on this question that would be of some historical value
    (although it might have some political value), but even the
    question itself was not broached properly.
 The condemnation of the German majority (a
    condemnation which that majority fully deserved and with which I
    have very gladly associated myself) could not serve as an
    exposition of the origin of the war.
 The Berne debate was not accompanied by a frank
    discussion of the views held by other socialists concerning the
    war.
 It produced no formula of conduct for socialists
    during a war. All the International had said before then was that
    in a war of national defence socialists must unite with the other
    parties.
 Under these circumstances whom are we going to
    condemn?
 Some of us knew that what the International
    decided meant nothing and did not constitute a practical guide for
    action.
 We knew that such a war would end in victory for
    imperialism and, being neither pacifists in the usual sense of the
    word nor anti-pacifists, we pursued a policy which in our opinion
    was the only one compatible with internationalism. But the
    International never prescribed any such rule of conduct for
    us.
 That is why the moment the war began the
    International collapsed. It lost its authority and did not issue a
    single decision on the basis of which we would now have the right
    to condemn those who honestly carried out the resolutions of the
    international congresses.
 In consequence, the attitude we should adopt
    today is the following: instead of parting ways on account of what
    has taken place, let us create a really active International which
    will guard the socialist movement during the period of revolution
    and reconstruction which we have now entered.
 We must restore our socialist principles. We
    must place our international socialist conduct on firm
    foundations.
 If, however, it appears that we differ
    essentially on these principles, if we do not arrive at any
    agreement on the issues of freedom and democracy, if our views on
    the conditions under which the proletariat may take power are
    definitely at variance, if finally it turns out that the war has
    infected some sections of the International with the virus of
    imperialism, then a split is possible.
 But I do not think there should be such a
    calamity.
 That is why I regret the Moscow Manifesto as
    being premature, to say the least, and certainly useless; and I
    hope that my French comrades, upon whom as well as upon me during
    the sombre last four years so much slander and misfortune has been
    heaped, will not, in an outburst of impatience, be instrumental in
    breaking up international solidarity.
 Otherwise their children will have to set up
    that solidarity once more, if the proletariat is ever to rule the
    world. 

    
J. Ramsay MacDonald
The author of this article, as the reader can see, tries to
    prove that a split is unnecessary. However, its inevitability
    follows from the very way the argument is presented by
    Ramsay MacDonald—that typical representative of the Second
    International and worthy colleague of Scheidemann and Kautsky,
    Vandervelde and Branting, and so on and so forth.
Ramsay MacDonald’s article is a fine specimen of the
    smooth, euphonious, hackneyed, apparently socialistic phrases
    which have long served in all the advanced capitalist countries to
    conceal bourgeois policy within the working-class movement. 
    
I
Let us begin with what is least important but especially
    characteristic. Like Kautsky (in his pamphlet The Dictatorship
    of the Proletariat ), the author repeats the bourgeois lie
    that no one in Russia foresaw the role of the Soviets, that the
    Bolsheviks and I began to fight Kerensky only on the issue of the
    Constituent Assembly.
That is a bourgeois lie. Actually, as early as April 4, 1917,
    the first day after my arrival in Petrograd, I presented
    ”theses” containing the demand for a Soviet,
    and not a bourgeois-parliamentary, republic. I repeated
    this many times under Kerensky in the press and at meetings. The
    Bolshevik Party solemnly and officially announced this in the
    decisions of its conference of April 29, 1917. Who does not know
    this does not want to know the truth about the socialist
    revolution in Russia. If one does not want to understand that a
    bourgeois-parliamentary republic with a Constituent Assembly is a
    step forward from the same sort of republic without a
    Constituent Assembly, and that a Soviet republic is two
    steps forward, one is merely closing one’s eyes to the
    difference between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat.
To call oneself a socialist and not to see this difference two
    years after the issue was raised in Russia and one and a half
    years after the victory of the Soviet revolution in Russia means
    stubbornly to remain completely captive to “non-socialist
    public opinion”, that is to say, to the ideas and
    the policy of the bourgeoisie.
A split with such people is necessary and inevitable, for it is
    impossible to accomplish the socialist revolution if you join
    hands with those who pull in the direction of the bourgeoisie.
And if “leaders” like Ramsay MacDonald or Kautsky,
    etc., have refused to overcome even so very small a
    “difficulty” as an acquaintance with the
    documents concerning the attitude of the Bolsheviks
    toward Soviet power, concerning the way this problem was posed
    before and after October 25 (November 7), 1917, would it not be
    ridiculous to expect such people to be ready and able to overcome
    the incomparably greater difficulties of the real struggle for a
    socialist revolution?
There are none so deaf as those who will not hear.
II
Let us pass on to the second untruth (from among the countless
      untruths in which the whole article by Ramsay MacDonald abounds,
      for in this article there are perhaps more untruths than
      words). This untruth is probably the most important one. 

    

      Ramsay MacDonald asserts that until the war of 1914-18 the
      International only said that “in a war of national defence
      socialists must unite with the other parties”.
That is a monstrous, a glaring deviation from the truth.
Everybody knows that the Basle Manifesto of 1912 was
    unanimously adopted by all socialists and that of all the
    documents of the International it alone refers precisely to the
    war between the British and German groups of imperialist
    predators, which in 1912 everybody clearly saw was in preparation
    and which broke out in 1914. It was about this war that the Basle
    Manifesto said three things which MacDonald now passes over in
    silence, thereby committing an enormous crime against socialism
    and proving that with people like him a split is necessary,
    because in fact they serve the bourgeoisie and not the
    proletariat.
These three things are the following:
the war that threatens cannot be justified one whit as being in
    the interest of national freedom;
in this war it would be a crime on the part of the workers to
    shoot at one another;
the war leads to proletarian revolution.
Here you have the three basic, fundamental truths, by
    “forgetting” which (though he put his signature to
    them before the war) MacDonald in fact is going over to
    the bourgeoisie against the proletariat and thereby proves that a
    split is necessary.
The Communist International will not agree to unity with
    parties which refuse to admit this truth and are incapable of
    demonstrating by their deeds their determination,
    readiness and ability to bring these truths home to the
    masses.
The Treaty of Versailles has proved even to the stupid and
    blind, even to the mass of short-sighted people, that the Entente
    was and is as bloody and filthy an imperialist predator as
    Germany. Only hypocrites and liars could fail to see this, people
    who deliberately conduct the policy of the bourgeoisie in the
    working-class movement, direct agents and henchmen of the
    bourgeoisie (labour lieutenants of the capitalist class,[These words are in English in the
    original.—Editor] as the American Socialists
    say), or people who have so far succumbed to bourgeois ideas and
    bourgeois influence that they are socialists only in words, but in
    deeds are petty bourgeois, philistines, toadies to the
    capitalists. The difference between the first and the second
    category is important from the viewpoint of their personalities,
    i.e., for an appraisal of the Tom, Dick or Harry of the
    social-chauvinists of all countries. For the politician, i.e.,
    from the viewpoint of the relations among millions of people,
    among the classes, this difference is not substantial.
Those socialists who during the war of 1914-18 failed to
    understand that it was a criminal, reactionary, predatory,
    imperialist war on both sides, are social-chauvinists, i.e.,
    socialists in words and chauvinists in deeds; friends of the
    working class in words, but in deeds lackeys of “their
    own” national bourgeoisie, individuals who help to deceive
    the people by depicting as “national”,
    “emancipatory”, “defensive”,
    “righteous” and so forth the war between the British
    and German groups of imperialist predators, who are
    equally filthy, selfish, blood-thirsty, criminal,
    reactionary.
Unity with the social-chauvinists is betrayal of the
    revolution, betrayal of the proletariat, betrayal of socialism,
    desertion to the bourgeoisie, because it is “unity”
    with the national bourgeoisie of “one’s
    own” country against the unity of the international
    revolutionary proletariat, is unity with the bourgeoisie
    against the proletariat.
The war of 1914-18 has definitely proved this. Let anyone who
    does not understand this remain in the yellow Berne International
    of traitor-socialists.
III
Ramsay MacDonald, with the amusing naïveté of a
    “drawing-room” socialist who carelessly uses words
    without at all understanding their serious significance, giving no
    thought whatever to the fact that words commit one to
    deeds, declares that in Berne “a concession to
    non-socialist public opinion” was made.
Precisely! We regard the whole of the Berne International as
      yellow, treacherous and perfidious because the whole of
      its policy is a “concession ” to the
      bourgeoisie. 

    

      Ramsay MacDonald knows perfectly well that we have built the
      Third International and broken unreservedly with the Second
      International because we became convinced that it was hopeless,
      incorrigible, played the part of a servant to imperialism, of a
      vehicle of bourgeois influence, bourgeois lies and bourgeois
      corruption in the labour movement. If in desiring to discuss The
      Third International Ramsay MacDonald evades the substance of the
      matter, beats about the bush, utters empty phrases and does not
      speak of what should be spoken about, that is his fault and his
      crime. For the proletariat needs the truth, and there is nothing
      more harmful to its cause than plausible, respectable,
      petty-bourgeois lies.
The problem of imperialism and of its connection with
    opportunism in the labour movement, with the betrayal of the
    workers’ cause by labour leaders, was raised long ago, very
    long ago.
For a period of forty years, from 1852 to 1892, Marx
    and Engels constantly pointed to the fact that the upper stratum
    of the British working class was becoming increasingly
    bourgeois as a consequence of the country’s
    peculiar economic conditions (colonies, monopoly of the world
    market, etc.).[1] In the seventies of last century Marx
    won himself the honourable hatred of the despicable heroes of the
    Berne International trend of those days, of the opportunists and
    reformists, for branding many of the British trade union leaders
    as men who had sold themselves to the bourgeoisie or were in its
    pay for services rendered to its class from
    within the labour movement.
During the Anglo-Boer War, the Anglo-Saxon press quite clearly
    raised the problem of imperialism as the latest (and last
    ) stage of capitalism. If my memory serves me right, it was
    none other than Ramsay MacDonald who then resigned from the Fabian
    Society, that prototype of the Berne International, that nursery
    and model of opportunism, which Engels describes, with the power,
    brilliancy and truth of genius, in his correspondence with
    Sorge.[2] “Fabian
    imperialism”—such was the common expression employed
    at that time in British socialist literature.
If Ramsay MacDonald has forgotten this, all the worse for him. 

    

      “Fabian imperialism” and
      “social-imperialism” are one and the same thing:
      socialism in words, imperialism in deeds, the growth of
      opportunism into imperialism. This has now become, during
      the war of 1914-18 and since, a universal fact. The failure to
      understand it shows the great blindness of the Berne yellow
      International, and is its great crime. Opportunism, or
      reformism, inevitably had to grow into a phenomenon of
      world-wide importance, socialist-imperialism, or
      social-chauvinism, because imperialism brought to the fore a
      handful of very rich, advanced nations, engaged in plundering
      the whole world, and thereby enabled the bourgeoisie of those
      countries, out of their monopolist superprofits (imperialism is
      monopoly capitalism), to bribe the upper strata of the
      working class.
Only ignoramuses or hypocrites who deceive the workers by
    repeating platitudes about capitalism and in this way
    cover up the bitter truth that a whole trend in socialism
    has gone over to the imperialist bourgeoisie could fail to see the
    economic inevitability of this development under imperialism.
And from this fact two indisputable conclusions emerge.
First conclusion: the Berne International is in fact, from the
    angle of its real historical and political role, and irrespective
    of the good will and pious wishes of particular members of it,
    an organisation of agents of international imperialism
    operating within the labour movement, permeating that
    movement with bourgeois influence, bourgeois ideas, bourgeois
    lies, and bourgeois corruption.
In countries where democratic parliamentary culture is of long
    standing, the bourgeoisie has learned splendidly to use deception,
    bribery and flattery in their most subtle forms as well as
    violence. Not for nothing have the “luncheons” given
    to British “labour leaders” (i.e., lieutenants of the
    bourgeoisie whose duty is to fool the workers) have acquired
    notoriety; Engels in his day spoke about them.[3] To the
    same category of facts belongs the “charming”
    reception given by M. Clemenceau to the traitor-socialist
    Merrheim, the courteous receptions given by Entente ministers to
    the leaders of the Berne International, and so on and so
    forth. “You train ’em, and we buy ’em,” a
    clever capitalist, an Englishwoman, said to Mr. Social-imperialist
    Hyndman, who related in his memoirs how this lady, a person
    shrewder than all the leaders of the Berne International put
    together, appraised the “labours” of the socialist
    intellectuals in training workers to become socialist leaders.
During the war, when the Vanderveldes, Brantings and the whole
    gang of traitors organised “international”
    conferences, the French bourgeois newspapers were bitingly
    scornful, and right]y so. They said: “These Vanderveldes
    seem to be suffering from a sort of tic. Just as those who suffer
    from tic cannot utter a couple of phrases without strangely
    twitching the muscles of the face, so the Vanderveldes cannot make
    a political speech without repeating, parrot-like, the words
    internationalism, socialism, international working-class
    solidarity, proletarian revolution, etc. Let them repeat any
    sacramental formulas they like so long as they help to lead the
    workers by the nose and serve us, the capitalists, in waging the
    imperialist war and enslaving the workers.”
Sometimes the British and French bourgeoisie are very clever
    and excellently appraise the servile role played by the Berne
    International.
Martov wrote somewhere: “You Bolsheviks hurl abuse at the
    Berne International but ’your own’ friend Loriot is a
    member of it.”
That is the argument of a rogue; for everybody knows that
    Loriot is openly, honestly and heroically fighting for the Third
    International. In 1902, when Zubatov organised meetings of workers
    in Moscow in order to hoodwink them with “police
    socialism”, the worker Babushkin, whom I had known since
    1894 when he was in my study circle for workers in St. Petersburg,
    and who was one of the best and most devoted workers of the
    Iskra trend, one of the best leaders of the revolutionary
    proletariat, and was shot in 1906 by Rennenkampf in
    Siberia—Babushkin used to attend the Zubatov
    meetings in order to fight Zubatovism and to withdraw the
    workers from its clutches. Babushkin had no more connection with
    Zubatov than Loriot with Berne.
IV
The second conclusion is that the Third, Communist,
    International has been formed so as to prevent
    “socialists” from confining themselves to the
    verbal recognition of revolution, examples of which are
    provided by Ramsay MacDonald in his article. Verbal recognition of
    revolution, which in fact concealed a thoroughly opportunist,
    reformist, nationalist, petty-bourgeois policy, was the basic sin
    of the Second International, and we are waging a life-and-death
    struggle against this evil.
When it is said that the Second International died after
    suffering shameful bankrupt( y, one must be able to understand
    what this means. It means that opportunism, reformism,
    petty-bourgeois socialism went bankrupt and died. For.the Second
    International rendered historic service, it has achievements to
    its credit that are  GREEK PAGE 504 (everlasting) and which the
    class-conscious worker will never renounce—the creation of
    mass working-class organisations—co-operative, trade union
    and political—the utilisation of the bourgeois parliamentary
    system, and of all the institutions in general of bourgeois
    democracy, etc.
In order to really defeat opportunism, which caused the
    shameful death of the Second International, in order to really
    assist the revolution, the approach of which even Ramsay
    MacDonald is obliged to admit, it is necessary:
Firstly, to conduct all propaganda and agitation from
    the viewpoint of revolution as opposed to reforms, systematically
    explaining to the masses, both theoretically and practically, at
    every step of parliamentary, trade union, co-operative, etc.,
    activity, that they are diametrically opposed. Under no
    circumstances to refrain (save in special cases, by way of
    exception) from utilising the parliamentary system and all the
    “liberties” of bourgeois democracy; not to reject
    reforms, but to regard them only as a by-product
    of the revolutionary class struggle of the proletariat. Not a
    single party affiliated to the Berne International meets these
    requirements. Not a single one of them shows that it has any idea
    of how to conduct its propaganda and agitation as a
    whole, explaining how reform differs from
    revolution; nor do they know how to train both the Party and the
    masses’ unswervingly for revolution.
Secondly, legal work must be combined with
    illegal work. The Bolsheviks have always taught this, and
    did so with particular insistence during the war of 1914-18. The
    heroes of despicable opportunism ridiculed this and smugly
    extolled the “legality”, “democracy”,
    “liberty” of the West-European countries, republics,
    etc. Now, however, only out-and-out swindlers, who deceive the
    workers with phrases, can deny that the Bolsheviks proved to be
    right. In every single country in the world, even the most
    advanced and ’freest” of the bourgeois republics,
    bourgeois terror reigns, and there is no such thing as freedom to
    carry on agitation for the socialist revolution, to carry on
    propaganda and organisational work precisely in this sense. The
    party which to this day has not admitted this under the rule of
    the bourgeoisie and does not carry on systematic, all-sided
    illegal work in spite of the laws of the bourgeoisie and
    of the bourgeois parliaments is a party of traitors and scoundrels
    who deceive the people by their verbal recognition of
    revolution. The place for such parties is in the yellow, Berne
    International. There is no room for them in the Communist
    International.
Thirdly, unswerving and ruthless war must be waged for
    the expulsion from the labour movement of all those opportunist
    leaders who exposed themselves both before and particularly during
    the war, both in the political sphere and particularly in the
    trade unions, and the co-operatives. The theory of
    “neutrality” is a false and despicable evasion, which
    helped the bourgeoisie to capture the masses in 1914-18. Parties
    which stand for revolution in words but in deeds fail to carry on
    undeviating work to spread the influence of precisely the
    revolutionary and only of the revolutionary party in every sort of
    mass organisation of the workers are parties of traitors.
Fourthly, there must be no toleration of the verbal
    condemnation of imperialism while no real revolutionary struggle
    is waged for the liberation of the colonies (and dependent
    nations) from one’s own imperialist
    bourgeoisie. That is hypocrisy. That is the policy of the agents
    of the bourgeoisie in the labour movement (labour lieutenants of
    the capitalist class). The British, French, Dutch, Belgian, or
    other party which is hostile to imperialism in words but in deeds
    does not wage a revolutionary struggle within “its
    own” colonies for the overthrow of “its
    own” bourgeoisie, does not systematically assist the
    revolutionary work which has already begun everywhere in
    the colonies, and does not send arms and literature to the
    revolutionary parties in the colonies, is a party of scoundrels
    and traitors.
Fifthly, the extreme hypocrisy of the parties of the
    Berne International is to be seen in their typical recognition of
    revolution in words while they flaunt before the workers
    high-sounding phrases about recognising revolution but as far as
    deeds are concerned go no farther than adopting a purely reformist
    attitude to those beginnings, elements, manifestations of the
    growth of revolution in all mass actions which break bourgeois
    laws and go beyond the bounds of all legality, as for example,
    mass strikes, street demonstrations, soldiers’ protests,
    meetings among the troops, leaflet distribution in barracks,
    camps, etc.
If you ask any hero of the Berne International whether his
    party does such systematic work, he will answer you either with
    evasive phrases to conceal that such work is not being
    done—his party lacks the organisations and the machinery for
    doing it, is incapable of doing it—or with declamatory
    speeches against “putschism ” (pyrotechnics),
    “anarchism”, etc. And it is that which constitutes the
    betrayal of the working class by the Berne International, its
    actual desertion to the camp of the bourgeoisie.
All the-scoundrelly leaders of the Berne International take
    great pains to affirm their “sympathy” for revolution
    in general, and for the Russian revolution in particular. But only
    hypocrites or simpletons can fail to understand that the
    particularly rapid successes of the revolution in Russia are
    due to the many years’ work by the revolutionary party
    in the ways indicated; for years illegal machinery was
    systematically built up to direct demonstrations and strikes, to
    conduct work among the troops; a detailed study was made of
    methods; illegal literature was issued summing up experience
    acquired and educating the whole Party in the idea that revolution
    was necessary; leaders of the masses were trained for such events,
    etc., etc. 
    
V
The most profound and radical differences, which sum up all
    that has been said above and explain the inevitability of an
    irreconcilable theoretical and practical political struggle of the
    revolutionary proletariat against the Berne International, centre
    around two issues—transformation of the imperialist war into
    civil war, and the dictatorship of the proletariat.
The best proof that the Berne International is held captive by
    bourgeois ideology is its failure to understand (or not desiring
    to understand, or pretending not to understand) the imperialist
    character of the war of 1914-18 and the inevitability of its
    transformation into civil war between the proletariat and the
    bourgeoisie in all the advanced countries.
When the Bolsheviks, as far back as November 1914, pointed to
    this inevitability, the philistines of all countries retorted with
    stupid sneers, and among these philistines were all the leaders of
    the Berne International. Now, the transformation of the
    imperialist war into civil war has become a fact in a number of
    countries, not only in Russia but also in Finland, in Hungary, in
    Germany, and even in neutral Switzerland, and that civil war is
    maturing is seen, felt, and sensed in all advanced countries
    without exception.
To ignore this problem now (as Ramsay MacDonald does) or to try
    to evade the issue of the inevitability of civil war with
    sentimental conciliatory phrases (as Messrs. Kautsky and Co. do)
    is tantamount to direct betrayal of the proletariat, equivalent to
    actual desertion to the bourgeoisie. Because the real political
    leaders of the bourgeoisie have long understood the inevitability
    of civil war and are making excellent, thoughtful and systematic
    preparations for it and are strengthening their positions in
    anticipation of it.
The bourgeoisie of the whole world are exerting all their
    strength, enormous energy, intellect and determination, hesitating
    at no crime, and condemning whole countries to famine and complete
    extinction, in the preparations they are making to crush the
    proletariat in the impending civil war. The heroes of the Berne
    International, on the other hand, like simpletons, or hypocritical
    parsons, or pedantic professors, chant their old, worn-out,
    threadbare reformist song! No spectacle could be more revolting or
    more disgusting!
The Kautskys and MacDonalds continue to frighten the
    capitalists with the menace of revolution, to scare the
    bourgeoisie with the menace of civil war in order to obtain
    concessions from them and get them to agree to follow the
    reformist path. This is what all the writings, all the philosophy,
    all the policy of the entire Berne International amount to. We saw
    that miserable lackey’s trick played in Russia in 1905 by
    the liberals (Constitutional-Democrats), and in 1917-19 by the
    Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries. The servile souls of the
    Berne International never think of inculcating upon the
    masses the idea of the inevitability and necessity of
    defeating the bourgeoisie in civil war, of pursuing a
    policy wholly dedicated to this aim, of elucidating, raising and
    solving all problems from this, and only from this, point of
    view. That is why our sole aim should be once and for all to push
    the incorrigible reformists, i.e., nine-tenths of the leaders of
    the Berne International, into the cesspool of the hirelings of the
    bourgeoisie.
The bourgeoisie needs hirelings who enjoy the trust of
    a section of the working class, whitewash and prettify the
    bourgeoisie with talk about the reformist path being possible,
    throw dust in the eyes of the people by such talk, and
    divert the people from revolution by giving glowing
    descriptions of the charms and possibilities of the reformist
    path.
All the writings of the Kautskys, and of our Mensheviks and
    Socialist-Revolutionaries, boil down to such white-washing and to
    the whining of the cowardly philistine who fears revolution.
We cannot repeat here in detail the main economic causes that
    have made the revolutionary (and only the revolutionary) path
    inevitable, and have made impossible any solution other than civil
    war to the problems history has placed on the order of the
    day. Volumes must and will be written about this. If the Kautskys
    and other leaders of the Berne International do not understand
    this, all that can be said is ignorance is closer to the truth
    than prejudice.
Now, after the war, ignorant but sincere men of labour and
    supporters of the working people, understand the inevitability of
    revolution, of civil war and of the dictatorship of the
    proletariat far more easily than do the gentlemen stuffed with
    most learned reformist prejudices, the Kautskys, MacDonalds,
    Vanderveldes, Brantings, Turatis, and tutti quanti.[All the others.—Editor]
As one of the particularly striking confirmations of the
    phenomenon observable everywhere, on a mass scale, namely, that of
    the growth of revolutionary consciousness among the masses, we may
    take the novels of Henri Barbusse, Le Feu (Under Fire)
    and Clarté (Light). The former has already been
    translated into all languages, and in France 230,000 copies have
    been sold. The transformation of an absolutely ignorant
    rank-and-filer, utterly crushed by philistine ideas and
    prejudices, into a revolutionary under the influence of the war is
    depicted with extraordinary power, talent and truthfulness.
The mass of proletarians and semi-proletarians are on our side
    and are coming over to us by leaps and bounds. The Berne
    International is a General Staff without an army, and will
    collapse like a house of cards if thoroughly exposed to the
    masses.
The name of Karl Liebknecht was used in the whole of the
    Entente bourgeois press during the war in order to deceive the
    masses; the French and British imperialist pirates and plunderers
    were shown as sympathising with this hero, with this “sole
    honest German”, as they said.
Now the heroes of the Berne International belong to the same
    organisation as the Scheidemanns who engineered the murder of Karl
    Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg, the Scheidemanns who fulfilled the
    role of worker-executioners and rendered hangman’s service
    to the bourgeoisie. In words—hypocritical attempts to
    “condemn” the Scheidemanns (as if
    “condemning” makes any difference!). In
    deeds—belonging to the same organisation as the murderers
    do.
In 1907 the late Harry Quelch was expelled by the German
    Government from Stuttgart for describing a gathering of European
    diplomats as a “thieves’ supper”.[4]

      The leaders of the Berne International are not only participants
      in a thieves’ supper, but even in a vile assassins’
      supper.
They will not escape the justice of the revolutionary
    workers.
VI
Ramsay MacDonald disposes of the problem of the dictatorship of
    the proletariat in a couple of words as if it were a subject for a
    discussion on freedom and democracy.
But it is not. It is time to act, it is too late for
    discussions.
The most dangerous thing about the Berne International is its
    verbal recognition of the dictatorship of the proletariat. These
    people are capable of recognising everything, of signing
    everything, as long as they can keep at the head of the labour
    movement. Kautsky now says that he is not opposed to the
    dictatorship of the proletariat! The French social-chauvinists and
    Centrists put their names to resolutions in favour of the
    dictatorship of the proletariat!
But they deserve not the slightest confidence.
It is not verbal recognition that is needed, but a complete
    rupture in deeds with the policy of reformism, with
    prejudices about bourgeois freedom and bourgeois democracy, the
    pursuit in deeds of the policy of revolutionary class
    struggle.
Attempts are being made to recognise the dictatorship of the
    proletariat in words, in order to smuggle in along with it the
    “will of the majority”, “universal
    suffrage” (this is exactly what Kautsky does), bourgeois
    parliamentarism, rejection of the idea that the entire bourgeois
    machinery of state must be destroyed, smashed, blown up. These new
    evasions, new loopholes of reformism, are most of all to be
    feared.
The dictatorship of the proletariat would be impossible if the
    majority of the population did not consist of proletarians and
    semi-proletarians. Kautsky and Co. try to falsify this truth by
    arguing that “the vote of the majority is required for the
    dictatorship of the proletariat to be recognised as
    “valid”.
Comical pedants! They fail to understand that voting within the
    bounds, institutions and customs of bourgeois parliamentarism is a
    part of the bourgeois state machinery that has to be
    broken and smashed from top to bottom in order to give
    effect to the dictatorship of the proletariat, in order to pass
    from bourgeois democracy to proletarian democracy.
They fail to understand that when history places the
    dictatorship of the proletariat on the order of the day it is not
    voting, but civil war that decides all serious political
    problems.
They fail to understand that the dictatorship of the
    proletariat is the rule of one class, which takes into
    its hands the entire machinery of the new state, and
    which defeats the bourgeoisie and neutralises
    the whole of the petty bourgeoisie—the peasantry, the lower
    middle class and the intelligentsia.
The Kautskys and MacDonalds recognise the class struggle in
    words, but in deeds forget about it at the most decisive moment in
    the history of the struggle for the emancipation of the
    proletariat—at the moment when, having seized state power,
    and supported by the semi-proletariat, the proletariat with the
    aid of this power continues the class struggle until
    classes are abolished.
Like real philistines, the leaders of the Berne International
    repeat bourgeois-democratic catchwords about freedom, equality and
    democracy, but fail to see that they are repeating fragments of
    ideas concerning the free and equal commodity owner, fail
    to understand that the proletariat needs a state not for the
    “freedom”, but for the suppression of its
    enemy, the exploiter, the capitalist.
The freedom and equality of the commodity owner are as
    dead as capitalism. And the Kautskys and MacDonalds will never be
    able to revive it.
The proletariat needs the abolition of classes—such is
    the real content of proletarian democracy, of proletarian
    freedom (freedom from the capitalist, from commodity
    exchange), of proletarian equality (not equality of
    classes— that is the banality which the Kautskys,
    Vanderveldes and MacDonalds slip into—but the equality of
    the working people who overthrow capital and
    capitalism).
So long as classes exist the freedom and equality of classes is
    a bourgeois deception. The proletariat takes power, becomes the
    ruling class, smashes bourgeois parliamentarism and
    bourgeois democracy, suppresses the bourgeoisie, suppresses
    all the attempts of all other classes to return
    to capitalism, gives real freedom and equality to the
    working people (which is practicable only when the private
    ownership of the means of production has been abolished
    ), and gives them not only the “right to”, but
    the real use of, what has been taken from the
    bourgeoisie.
He who fails to understand this content of the
    dictatorship of the proletariat (or what is the same thing, Soviet
    power, or proletarian democracy) is misusing the term dictatorship
    of the proletariat. 
 
    

      I cannot here develop these ideas in greater detail; I have done
      so in The State
      and Revolution and in the pamphlet The Proletarian
      Revolution and the Renegade Kautsky. I shall conclude
      by dedicating these remarks to the delegates to the Lucerne
      Congress[5] (August 10, 1919) of the Berne
      International.
July 14, 1919

Endnotes
[1]
    Marx and Engels, Selected Correspondence, Moscow, 1965,
    pp. 110, 351, 408; Engels’s letter to Marx of August 11,
    1881 and to F. Sorge of September 21, 1872, Marx and Engels,
    Selected Works, Vol. II, Moscow, 1962, pp. 414-19.
[2]
    Marx and Engels, Selected Correspondence, Moscow, 1965,
    pp. 453-54. 
[3]
    Marx and Engels, Selected Correspondence, Moscow, 1965,
    pp. 408.
[4]
    Harry Quelch said this in his speech at the Stuttgart Congress of
    the Second International in 1907. Harry Quelch called the Hague
    Conference, held at the same time, “a thieves’
    supper”, and for this was deported by the German Government
    (see the article “Harry Quelch”, present edition,
    Vol. 19, pages 369-71). 
[5]
      This refers to the conference of the Second International held
      in Lucerne (Switzerland) from August 2 to August 9, 1919. Lenin
      characterised the speeches of the delegates in his article
      “How the Bourgeoisie Utilises Renegades” (see
      present edition, Vol. 30).

 Collected Works Volume 29

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive 
 
 







==========

##  Speech on the Domestic and
  Foreign Situation Delivered to a Red army Conference
  Held in Khodynseoye Camp











The Domestic and Foreign Situation Delivered to a Red Army Conference held in Khodynskoye Camp July 15, 1919



V. I. Lenin
Speech On
The Domestic And Foreign Situation
Delivered To A Red Army Conference Held
In Khodynskoye Camp
July 15, 1919
Brief Newspaper Report


Delivered: 15 July,1919
 
First Published: Published in Vechernijje Izvestia Moskovskogo Soveta No. 293, July 17,1919; Published according to the newspaper text

Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, pages 513-514
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


Lenin’s appearance on the platform was greeted by a storm of applause. Lenin said that they were living at an important moment—the concluding stage of the imperialist war. After the defeat of Germany in November 1918, all the Allies had been busy drawing up peace terms and saying that German imperialism was dead and the peoples had been liberated. The National Assembly had ratified the Treaty and peace had been established after a war in which ten million people had died and twenty million had been maimed for gain, for purposes of plunder.
After the conclusion of the Treaty of Versailles the Bolsheviks were proved to have been right—the Treaty of Versailles was worse than the Treaty of Brest that Soviet Russia had at one time concluded with moribund German imperialism. It was becoming clearer and clearer that the day of the Treaty of Versailles would be the day of defeat for British, American and any other imperialism. Immediately the Treaty had been signed the imperialists became busy dividing up the colonies; Britain had taken Persia; Syria arid Turkey were being carved up, and the eyes of the workers in capitalist countries had been opened to the fact that the war had been a war between predators. Strange as it might have seemed, information had been received to the effect that Prince Lvov, a former member of Kerensky’s Provisional Government who was then in Paris, was demanding that the Allies give Constantinople and the Straits to Russia on the grounds that Russia had fought in the war only for their sake-naturally this naÃ¯ve demand received an answer to the effect that they would be given only to old, powerful Russia.
In order to hoodwink the people, the French imperialists had appointed July 14, the anniversary of the capture of the Bastille, as the day on which to celebrate victory over Germany. The French workers, however, had not taken the bait, and on July 14 cafß and restaurant employees had declared a strike—on the day on which the streets are usually filled with carnival crowds and people dancing all the cafßs and restaurants were closed and there was no celebration. British, French and Italian workers had declared a general strike for July 21[1] and one could say that for France and Britain the Treaty of Versailles would end with a defeat of the capitalists and a victory of the proletariat in the same way as the Treaty of Brest had for Germany. The failure of the first Entente offensive in the South of Russia and of the second offensive in Siberia were an indication of this movement of the proletariat in the West, and showed that the proletariat were for Soviet Russia.
The peasantry of Siberia and the Ukraine, who had formerly given their support to Koichak and Denikin had turned against them after imposition of taxes, wholesale plunder and violence. It had become clear that Kolchak was finished and that victory over Denikin was near; this victory would end with the victory of the proletariat in the West, for the working-class movement in the West was acquiring a Bolshevik character, and although Russia and her Soviet power had at first been alone, she had later been joined by Soviet Hungary. Events were moving towards the transfer of power to the Workers’ Councils in Germany and the day was not far distant when all Europe would be united in a single Soviet republic that would remove the rule of the capitalists throughout the world. (Prolonged applause.)

Endnotes
[1] An International political strike was in fact planned for July 21, 1919 in support of the Russian and Hungarian revolutions; it was to demand non-intervention in Russian and Hungarian affairs. There were sporadic strikes throughout Western Europe, Scandinavia and Central Europe. In many more countries where strikes did not place mass demonstrations were held.

 Collected Works Volume 29

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive 
 







==========

## Answers to an American Journalist’s Questions











Answers To An American Journalist’s Questions



V. I. Lenin
Answers
To An American Journalist’s 
Questions[1]


Interviewed: 20 July,1919
 
First Published: Pravda No. 162, July 25, 1919; Published according to the Pravda text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, pages 515-519
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License



I answer the five questions put to me on condition of the fulfilment of the written promise that my answers will be printed in full in over a hundred newspapers in the United States of America.
1. The governmental programme of the Soviet Government was not a reformist, but a revolutionary one. Reforms are concessions obtained from a ruling class that retains its rule. Revolution is the overthrow of the ruling class. Reformist programmes, therefore, usually consist of many items of partial significance. Our revolutionary programme consisted properly of one general item—removal of the yoke of the landowners arid capitalists, the overthrow of their power and the emancipation of the working people from those exploiters. This programme we have never changed. Some partial measures aimed at the realisation of the programme have often been subjected to change; their enumeration would require a whole volume. I will only mention that there is one other general point in our governmental programme which has, perhaps, given rise to the greatest number of changes of partial measures. That point is—the suppression of the exploiters’ resistance. After the Revolution of October 25 (November 7), 1917 we did not close down even the bourgeois newspapers and there was no mention of terror at all. We released not only many of Kerensky’s ministers, but even Krasnov who had made war onus. It was only after the exploiters, i.e., the capitalists, had begun developing their resistance that we began to crush that resistance systematically, applying even terror. This was the proletariat’s response to such actions of the bourgeoisie as the conspiracy with the capitalists of Germany, Britain, Japan, America and France to restore the rule of the exploiters in Russia, the bribery of the Czechoslovaks with Anglo-French money, the bribery of Mannerheirn, Denikin and others with German and French money, etc. One of the latest conspiracies leading to “a change”—to put it precisely, leading to increased terror against the bourgeoisie in Petrograd—was that of the bourgeoisie, acting jointly with the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries; their conspiracy concerned the surrender of Petrograd, the seizure of Krasnaya Gorka by officer-conspirators, the bribing by British and French capitalists of employees of the Swiss Embassy and of many Russian employees, etc.
2. The activities of our Soviet Republic in Afghanistan, India and other Moslem countries outside Russia are the same as our activities among the numerous Moslems and other non-Russian peoples inside Russia. We have made it possible, for instance, for the Bashkirian people to establish an autonomous republic within Russia, we are doing everything possible to help the independent, free development of every nationality, the growth and dissemination of literature in the native language of each of them, we are translating and propagandising our Soviet Constitution which has the misfortune to be more pleasing to more than a thousand million inhabitants of the earth who belong to colonial, dependent, oppressed, underprivileged nations than the constitutions of the West-European and American bourgeois—” democratic”  states that perpetuate private property in land and capital, i.e., strengthen the oppression of the working people of their own countries and of hundreds of millions of people in the colonies of Asia, Africa, etc., by a small number of “civilised”  capitalists.
3. As far as the Uhited States and Japan are concerned, our first political objective is to repulse their shameless, criminal, predatory invasion of Russia that serves only to enrich their capitalists. We have many times made solemn proposals of peace to both these countries, but they have not even answered us and continue to make war on us, helping Denikin and Kolchak, plundering Murmansk and Archangel, ruining and laying waste to, especially, Eastern Siberia, where the Russian peasants are offering heroic resistance to the capitalist bandits of Japan and the United States of America.
We have one further political and economic objective in respect of all peoples—including those of the United States and Japan—fraternal alliance with the workers and all working people of all countries without exception.
4. We have, on many occasions, given a precise, clear and written exposition of the terms upon which we agree to conclude peace with Kolchak, Denikin and Mannerheimfor instance to Bullitt[2] who conducted negotiations with us (and with me personally in Moscow) on behalf of the United States Government, in a letter to Nansen,[3] etc. It, is not our fault that the governments of the United States and other countries are afraid to publish those documents in full and that they hide the truth from the people. I will mention only our basic condition; we are prepared to pay all debts to France and other countries provided there is a real peace and not peace in words alone, i.e., if it is formally signed and ratified by the governments of Great Britain, France, the United States, Japan and Italy—Denikin, Koichak, Mannerheirn and the others being mere pawns in the hands of those governments.
5. More than anything else I should like to state the following to the American public:
Compared to feudalism, capitalism was an historical advance along the road of “liberty”, “equality”, “democracy”  and “civilisation” . Nevertheless capitalism was, and remains, a system of wage-slavery, of the enslavement of millions of working people, workers and peasants, by an insignificant minority of modern slave-owners, landowners and capitalists. Bourgeois democracy, as compared to feudalism, has changed the form of this economic slavery, has created a brilliant screen for it but has not, and could not, change its essence. Capitalism and bourgeois democracy are wage-slavery.
The gigantic progress of technology in general, and of means of transport in particular, and the tremendous growth of capital and banks have resulted in capitalism becoming mature and over mature. It has outlived itself. It has become the most reactionary hindrance to human progress. It has become reduced to the absolute power of a handful of millionaires and multimillionaires who send whole nations into a bloodbath to decide whether the German or the Anglo-French group of plunderers is to obtain the spoils of imperialism, power over the colonies, financial “spheres of influence”  or “mandates to rule” , etc.
During the war of 1914-18 tens of millions of people were killed or mutilated for that reason and for that reason alone. Knowledge of this truth is spreading with, indomitable force and rapidity among the working people of all countries, the more so because the war has everywhere caused unparalleled ruin, and because interest on war debts has to be paid everywhere, even by the “victor”  nations. What is this interest? It is a tribute of thousands of millions to the millionaire gentlemen who were kind enough to allow tens of millions of workers and peasants to kill and maim one another to settle the question of the division of profits by the capitalists.
The collapse of capitalism is inevitable. The revolutionary consciousness of the masses is everywhere growing; there are thousands of signs of this. One small, sign, unimportant, but impressive to the man in the street, is the novels written by Henri Barbusse (Le Feu, Clarté) who was a peaceful, modest, law-abiding petty bourgeois, a philistine, a man in the street, when lie went to the war.
The capitalists, the bourgeoisie, can at “best”  put off the victory of socialism in one country or another at the cost of slaughtering further hundreds of thousands of workers and peasants. But they cannot save capitalism. The Soviet Republic has come to take the place of capitalism, the Republic which gives power to the working people and only to the working people, which entrusts the proletariat with the guidance of their liberation, which abolishes private property in land, factories and other means of production, because this private property is the source of the exploitation of the many by the few, the source of mass poverty, the source of predatory wars between nations, wars that enrich only the capitalists.
The victory of the world Soviet republic is certain.
A brief illustration in conclusion: the American bourgeoisie are deceiving the, people by boasting of the liberty, equality and democracy of their country. But neither this nor, any other bourgeoisie nor any government in the world can accept, it is afraid to accept, a contest with our government on the basis of real liberty, equality and democracy; let us suppose that an agreement ensured our government and any other government freedom to exchange ... pamphlets published in the name of the government in any language and containing the text of the laws of the given country, the text of its constitution, and an explanation of its superiority over the others.
Not one bourgeois government in the world would dare conclude such a peaceful, civilised, free, equal, democratic treaty with us.
Why? Because all of them, with the exception of Soviet governments, keep in power by the oppression and deception of the masses. But the great war of 1914-18 exposed the great deception.
Lenin
July 20, 1919

Endnotes
[1]  The five questions put to Lenin by the United Press Agency were:
 1. Has the Russian Soviet Republic introduced any small or big changes into the original government programme of domestic and foreign policy and into the economic programme, when and what changes? 
2. What tactics does the Russian Soviet Republic pursue in respect of Afghanistan, India and other Moslem countries out-side the frontiers of Russia? 
3. What political and economic aims do you pursue in respect of the United States and Japan? 4. On what terms would you be willing to conclude peace with Kolchak Denikin and Mannerheim? 5. What else would you care to bring to the notice of American public opinion?
The Left socialist journal The Liberator published an article inOctober 1919 under the heading “A Statement and a Challenge”in which it gave Lenin’s answer to the fifth question. In an editorial note the journal said that the United Press Agency had distributed  Lenin’s answers to the newspapers but had omitted the fifth as being purely Bolshevik propaganda.
[2]  The talks with William Bullitt, who came to Moscow on the instructions of President Wilson of the U.S.A., took place in March 1919. The Soviet Government introduced a number of amendmentsand addenda to the proposals submitted by the U.S.A. and Britain after which a draft agreement was drawn up. Those governments
did not accept the Soviet proposals because Kolchak had begun his offensive in the spring of that year and they hoped for the rout of the Soviet forces.
[3] The letter to Fridtjof Nansen (the Norwegian Arctic explorer) on the Soviet Government’s readiness to start talks with the Entente governments on the cessation of hostilities was dispatched by the People’s Commissariat of Foreign Affairs on May 7, 1919. The Soviet Government’s proposal was transmitted by Nansen to theEntente governments but no replies were received.

 Collected Works Volume 29

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive 
 







==========

## The Food and War
  Situation











The Food And War Situation



V. I. Lenin
The Food And War Situation
Speech At A Moscow Conference Of Factory Committees,
Trade Unions And Representatives Of The Moscow
Central Workers’ Co-Operative
July 30, 1919


Interviewed: 30 July,1919
 
First Published: Brief report published in Pravda No. 167, July 31, 1919; First published in full in 1932; Published according to the shorthand notes
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, pages 520-531
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


(Applause.) Comrades, I should like to
    give you a brief, summarised explanation of the food situation and
    the war situation. I expect that you are all familiar with the
    main facts in these spheres and my job seems to be to throw some
    light on the significance of those facts.
At this very moment when you have to settle problems of the
    co-operatives we are experiencing a moment of difficulty similar
    to that of last summer, especially in regard to food. You know
    that our food policy has been a great success during the past year
    as compared with that of the previous year. It is hardly likely
    that we can measure the success of our Soviet activities in other
    fields as accurately as we can in the field of food
    supplies. During the first year of Soviet power—it included
    the last period of the Kerensky regime—state procurements
    amounted to only 30 million poods. In the following year
    we procured 107 million poods despite a worse war
    situation and worse conditions of access to the best grain-growing
    regions, since Siberia, the Ukraine and the greater part of the
    distant South were out of reach. Despite this our grain
    procurements were, as you see, trebled. Viewed from the standpoint
    of the food supply apparatus, this was an important success, but
    from the standpoint of actual food supplies for the
    non-agricultural districts it is very little; when the food
    conditions of the non-agricultural population, especially those of
    the urban working population, were given a thorough study, it was
    found that this spring and summer the urban worker obtained about
    a half his food from the Commissariat of Food and had to buy the
    rest on the open market, at Sukharevka, and from the profiteers;
    furthermore, the first half accounts for one-tenth of the
    worker’s expenditure on food, while for the second half he
    has to pay nine-tenths. The profiteering gentry, as is to be
    expected, get nine times as much out of the worker as the state
    does for grain procured. If we examine the exact figures of our
    food situation we shall have to admit that we are standing with
    one foot in the old capitalism, that we have clambered only
    half-way out of that morass, out of that swamp of profiteering, on
    to the road of genuine socialist grain procurement, where grain
    ceases to be a commodity, ceases to be the object of profiteering,
    the object of and reason for squabbles, for struggle and for the
    impoverishment of the many. As you see very little has been done
    insofar as concerns the needs of the non-agricultural and
    working-class population, but you have only to imagine the
    difficult conditions under which the work had to be done, with the
    Civil War going on, when the greater part of the grain-growing
    regions was not in our hands, to realise that the food supply
    apparatus has been built up at unusually high speed. I think that
    everybody will agree with me that in this respect the
    organisational task, the task of collecting grain from the
    peasantry in a noncapitalist manner has been an extremely
    difficult one that cannot be carried out by any change of
    institutions—to say nothing of a change of
    government—because it is a task that requires organisational
    changes, it requires the reorganisation of the basis of farm life
    that has been built up in the course of hundreds, if not
    thousands, of years. If, in conditions of absolute peace’,
    we were to be given, say, five years to build up an organisational
    apparatus that would be capable of gathering all the grain into
    the hands of the state and keeping it out of the hands of
    profiteers, we would say that such speed of social and economic
    reorganisation is something unprecedented, something unheard
    of. If we, however, have been able to solve half the problem in
    less than two years we have done a lot. This is indisputable proof
    that Soviet power has taken the right line on the food problem,
    the most difficult and burdensome of problems, and is on the right
    road. In any case, I can tell you that Soviet power has decided
    with the greatest firmness to continue only in this way and not to
    be put off by the waverings, doubts and criticisms and, sometimes,
    even the despair we see around us. It is no wonder that we witness
    the most terrible, tormenting despair among people in the hungry
    places. It is no wonder, because the figures I have quoted on the
    food obtained by workers in the non-agricultural and urban regions
    show that they are dependent on profiteers, on chance, and so on,
    for half their food.
You know that food profiteering in our country has taken on the
    character of a fierce struggle and sheer plunder on the part of
    those who have had an opportunity of getting produce to the
    market. It is not surprising that we meet with despair among those
    who have gone under in this savage struggle between the profiteers
    and the hungry. It is obvious that under prevailing conditions,
    when the railways are working badly, when typical of the chief
    grain-growing districts is what is happening in the Ukraine, where
    we have not succeeded in getting an apparatus going, where the
    remnants of guerrilla methods prevent any possibility of
    organisational work, where the population has not yet been able to
    abandon guerrilla methods—obviously all this is to the
    advantage of Denikin who has scored his easiest victories there,
    and makes it more difficult for us to make use of the rich grain
    markets where there are stocks of grain that could easily get us
    out of our difficulties, I repeat, that under these circumstances
    it is no wonder that all around we meet expressions of despair
    from those who have suffered the greatest loss in this battle for
    bread. If we take the development of Soviet work in its totality
    and not in individual cases, and compare what was provided by
    Soviet power with what was provided by the free market, we shall
    have to admit that the half of the food supply business in the
    hands of the profiteers Is still the source of fierce oppression
    and the most fantastic, most disgraceful, absolutely uncontrolled
    profit for the speculators, and this in circumstances when there
    are, on the one hand, hungry people, and, on the other hand,
    opportunities for some people to make a profit—it is a
    source of the most infamous corruption.
It can be understood that people who are unable to grasp this
    process in all its aspects should, in many cases, instead of
    thinking about how to solve this new problem in the struggle
    against capitalism—the organised procurement of grain at
    fixed prices due to confidence in the workers’
    state—instead of giving thought to this they say to us,
    “Look, if the worker spends nine-tenths of his money on
    Sukharevka that shows that you exist only owing to food profiteers
    and speculators. And so you have to conform to it.”  We
    sometimes hear this from people who think they have their wits
    about them arid have a profound understanding of events. Actually
    they are indulging in sophistry. The experience of the revolution
    shows that changes in the form of government are not difficult,
    that it is possible to oust the ruling class of landowners and
    capitalists in a short time, if the revolution develops
    successfully it may he done in a few weeks, but the reorganisation
    of the fundamental conditions of economic life, the struggle
    against habits that in the course of hundreds and thousands of
    years have become second nature to every petty proprietor is
    something that requires many long years of persistent
    organisational work after the exploiting classes have been
    completely overthrown. And when they point out that alongside us
    Sukharevka is thriving, and tell us how much Soviet power depends
    on that market, we ask them what they are surprised at. Could the
    problem possibly have been solved in a period of less than two
    years with Russia cut off from the best agricultural regions?
    Those people who most of all object from the standpoint of
    principle and who even at times assert that they are speaking from
    a socialist angle—but God save us from such
    socialism—accuse the Bolsheviks of utopianism and
    adventurism because the Bolsheviks said that they could and should
    not only smash the monarchy and landed proprietorship in a
    revolutionary manner, but they could and should smash the
    capitalist class as well, and sweep them and the remnants of the
    imperialist war away so as to clear the ground for organisational
    work which will require a lengthy period of working-class rule,
    the only form of rule capable of giving a lead to the peasant
    masses. Those people who accuse us of utopianism because we
    recognised the possibility of smashing the capitalist and
    landowning classes in a revolutionary manner, are themselves
    imposing a utopian task upon us by wanting the organisational
    questions of the new socialist system and the struggle against old
    customs that cannot be overcome by any abolition of
    institutions—by wanting these problems settled at a moment
    when our hands are tied by the Civil War and wanting them settled
    in a period too brief for their solution by any earthly
    forces.
Yes, it is the food policy that demonstrates most clearly that
    the struggle between socialism and capitalism in its latest form
    is being fought out right here where we not only have to overcome
    old institutions, not only the landowners and capitalists, but all
    the habits and economic conditions, created by capitalism,
    affecting millions of petty proprietors. We have to make reason
    stronger than their prejudices. Any peasant who is at all
    class-conscious will agree that freedom to trade in grain and the
    sale of grain on the open market when the people are hungry means
    war between people and the enrichment of the profiteers, while for
    the masses of the people it means hunger. This
    class-consciousness, however, is not enough because all the
    peasant’s prejudices and all his habits tell him that it is
    more profitable to sell grain to a profiteer for several hundred
    rubles than to give it to the state for a few dozen paper rubles
    that he cannot get anything for at the moment. We say that since
    the country is ruined, since there is no fuel and the factories
    are at a standstill, you, the peasant, must help the
    workers’ state, you must give up your grain as a loan, The
    paper money you are being given for your grain certifies that you
    have made the state a loan. And if you, the peasant, make the
    state a loan and give up your grain, the worker will be able to
    rehabilitate industry. There is no other way of rehabilitating
    industry in a country that has been ruined by four years of
    imperialist war and two years of civil war—there is no other
    way! Any peasant who is a little bit developed and has emerged
    from his primordial muzhik darkness will agree that there is no
    other way. But the class-conscious peasant that you can convince
    if you speak to him as man to man is one thing and the prejudices
    of millions of peasants are another; they understand that they
    have lived under capitalism all their lives and consider they are
    justified in regarding the grain as their property—they have
    not had any experience of the new order and cannot put their trust
    in it. ’1 hat is ’why we say that precisely in this
    sphere, in the matter of food, there is the most bitter war
    between capitalism and socialism, a war in actual fact and not
    merely in words and not in the upper echelons of state
    organisation. Those upper echelons are easily reorganised, and the
    significance of such changes is not very great. But here the
    consciousness of the working people and of their vanguard, the
    working class, is fighting the last, decisive battle against the
    prejudices and disunity of the peasant. masses. When the advocates
    of capitalism—no matter whether they call themselves
    representatives of bourgeois parties, or Mensheviks, or
    Socialist-Revolutionaries—when they say, “Renounce the
    implementation of the state grain monopoly, the compulsory
    requisitioning of grain at fixed prices,”  we answer them by
    saying, “You, dear Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries,
    you are perhaps sincere people, but you are defenders of
    capitalism, you preach nothing but the prejudices of the old,
    petty-bourgeois democracy that knows nothing but freedom to trade,
    that stands aside from the fierce war against capitalism and
    considers that all this can be amicably settled.”  We have
    enough experience and we know that those who really belong to the
    working masses, those who have not risen to the upper echelons,
    those who have been exploited by the landowners and capitalists
    all their lives—they know that here it is a matter of the
    last, decisive battle against capitalism, a battle that does not
    allow of any conciliation. They know that there cannot be any
    concessions here, in this particular sphere. When Soviet power
    said that temporarily—as it did last summer—for so
    many weeks people would be allowed to carry with them one and a
    half poods of grain, the food apparatus that was later
    set working procured more than before. You know that at the
    present time we have had to make a similar concession and allow
    such an interval—let the worker during his holidays get his
    own supplies. By this we are giving ourselves greater
    opportunities to renew our work and guarantee our socialist
    activities. We are fighting a real battle against capitalism and
    we assert that no matter what concessions capitalism may force us
    to make we are still in favour of the struggle against it and
    against exploitation. We shall fight in this field as ruthlessly
    as we are fighting Denikin and Kolchak, because they draw fresh
    strength for themselves from the might of capitalism, and this
    might, of course, does not fall from the sky, it is based on
    freedom to trade in grain and other goods. We know that one of the
    main sources of capitalism is freedom to trade in grain in the
    country, and it is this source that has been the ruin of all
    previous republics.. Today the last, decisive battle against
    capitalism and against freedom to trade is being fought and for us
    this is a truly basic battle between capitalism and socialism. If
    we win in this fight there will be no return to capitalism and the
    former system, no return to what has been in the past. Such a
    return will be impossible so long as there is a war against the
    bourgeoisie, against profiteering and against petty
    proprietorship, and as long as the principle “every man for
    himself and God for all”  is not retained. We have to forget
    the principle that every peasant should be for himself and Kolchak
    for all. We now have a new type of relations and of
    organisation. It must be remembered that socialism is progressing
    and no matter to what extent we impose remnants of the old on
    ourselves they will be nothing but old fragments of old ideas
    because the peasant must have a completely different attitude to
    the article of consumption he produces; if, on the other hand, he
    sells food to workers at uncontrolled prices he will most
    certainly become a bourgeois and a property-owner, but we say that
    food must be sold at fixed state prices so that we shall have an
    opportunity to get away from capitalism. And now that we have to
    live through this difficult period of hunger and compare the
    present situation with last year’s we have to admit that the
    situation this year is incomparably better than it was last
    year. It is true that we have to make certain concessions, but we
    can always answer for them and explain them. But still, although
    we have done a lot in twenty months of Soviet power we have not
    yet found a way out of all the difficulties of the present grave
    situation.
When we have got the peasant away from his property and when we
    have made him turn towards the work of our state we. shall be able
    to say that we have covered a difficult section of our road. But
    we shall not deviate from that road, any more than we shall
    deviate from the road of struggle against Denikin and Kolchak. We
    hear such things from those people who call themselves
    Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks as “the war is
    hopeless” , “there is no way out of the war and we
    must make every effort to end it” you will hear such things
    said everywhere. People say this who do not understand the real
    state of affairs. They think the Civil War is hopeless because it
    is too burdensome, but can they not understand that the war is
    being forced on us by European imperialists because they are
    afraid of Soviet Russia? Furthermore, they have in their palaces,
    today Savinkov, tomorrow Maklakov and then Breshkovskaya—and
    they have not got them there for gossip, they talk to them about
    the most rational way of sending soldiers and guns and other
    death-dealing weapons here, to us, how to send help to the
    Archangel Front, how to link it up with the Southern and Eastern
    fronts and even the Petrograd Front. All Europe, and all the
    European bourgeoisie have taken up arms against Soviet
    Russia. They have become so insolent that they even make such
    proposals to the Hungarian Government as, “You reject Soviet
    power and we’ll give you bread.”  I am thinking that
    the proposal will serve as powerful propaganda in Hungary when
    they read about it in the Budapest newspapers! Nevertheless it is
    better and more frank and honest than all the chiromancy about the
    struggle for freedom to trade, etc. Here the issue is
    clear—you need bread, reject whatever is not to our
    advantage and we will, give you the bread.
If, therefore, the kind capitalists were to turn to the Russian
      peasants with the same proposal we would be very grateful to
      them. We should be able to say that we are short of
      propagandists but now Clemenceau, Lloyd George and Wilson have
      come to our aid and have shown themselves to be the best
      propagandists. There would not be any more speeches about the
      Constituent Assembly, about freedom of assembly, etc.,
      everything would be above-board. But we shall ask the capitalist
      gentry—you have so many war debts, your bags are packed
      tight with promissory notes for so many thousand millions of war
      debts — do you think the people are going to pay them? You
      have so many shells, cartridges, guns, that you don’t now
      what to do with them—was firing at Russian workers the
      best thing you could think of? You bought Kolchak, why
      didn’t you save him? You recently passed a resolution to
      the effect that the international League of Nations of the
      Allied powers recognised Kolchak as the only authoritative
      Russian ruler.” ’ And after that nothing was seen of
      Kolchak but a pair of clean heels. Why did that happen?
      (Applause.) And so we see from the experience of
      Kolchakia what the promises of the Socialist-Revolutionary and
      Menshevik leaders are worth. Did not they begin the Kolchak
      campaign? They held power in Samara. What are their promises
      worth? And what are we to do if they gather against us forces
      that from the military point of view are, of course,
      immeasurably superior to ours—we cannot make even an
      approximate comparison? The bourgeoisie, great and small,
      naturally draw the relevant conclusion from this and they say to
      the weary, hungry masses, “You have been dragged into a
      civil war from which there is no way out. How can your backward,
      weary country fight against Britain, France and America?”
      We are constantly hearing this tune sung all round us—we
      hear it daily and hourly from the bourgeois intelligentsia. They
      are trying to prove that the Civil War is a hopeless
      business. We can find the answer in historythe history of the
      government in Siberia. We know that there are affluent peasants
      living there who have never known serfdom and who cannot,
      therefore, show gratitude to the Bolsheviks for liberating them
      from the landowners. We know that a government was organised
      there and that for a start some beautiful banners prepared by
      the Socialist-Revolutionary Chernov and the Menshevik Maisky
      were sent there; these banners bore such slogans as
      “Constituent Assembly” , “Freedom to
      Trade” they were willing to inscribe on them everything
      the ignorant peasant wanted so long as he would help them
      overthrow the Bolsheviks! And what happened to that government?
      Instead of a Constituent Assembly they got Kolchak’s
      dictatorship, the worst possible, worse than any tsarist
      dictatorship. Was that an accident? We are told that it was a
      mistake. Gentlemen—individuals may make mistakes in some
      act or another in their lives, but here you had the aid of all
      the best people, the best there were in your parties. Did you
      not have the help of the intelligentsia? Even if they were not
      there—and we know that they were—you still had the
      intelligentsia of all the advanced countries— France,
      Britain, America and Japan. You, had land, you had a fleet, you
      had an army and you had money—why, then, did everything
      collapse? Was it because of a mistake that was made by some
      Chernov or Maisky? No, it was because there cannot be any middle
      way in this desperate war, and in order to hold out the
      bourgeoisie has to shoot down by scores and hundreds the very
      best of the working class. This is clear from the example of
      Finland, and now Siberia is showing another example of it. In
      order to prove the rootless nature of the Bolsheviks, the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks began organising a new
      power and flopped with it triumphantly directly at the feet of
      Kolchak’s government. That was no accident, for the same
      thing is happening all over the world, and if all the Bolshevik
      speeches were to disappear, and with them all their printed
      publications that are being persecuted in every country where
      Bolshevik pamphlets are being fished out as something infectious
      and dangerous to poor Wilson, Clemenceau and Lloyd
      George—if all that were to disappear we would point to
      Siberia where their henchmen have only just been operating and
      we would say, “Here is what works better than any
      agitation!” This shows that there can be no middle way
      between the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie and the dictatorship
      of the working class. This is an argument that is penetrating
      into the heads of the least class-conscious of the peasants to
      say nothing of the working class. You know that the peasants
      said that they did not want a Bolshevik government, they wanted
      freedom to trade in grain. You know that in Samara the
      peasantry, the middle peasants, were on the side of the
      bourgeoisie. Who has now driven them away from Kolchak? It seems
      that the peasant alone cannot create his own...[This word could not be deciphered in the
      shorthand notes—Editor.].
    
    This is confirmed by the entire history of revolution, and
    anybody who is familiar with it and with the history of the
    socialist movement knows that the development of political parties
    in the nineteenth century leads to this.
The peasant, of course, did not know this. He has never studied
    the history of socialism or the history of revolution but he
    recognises and believes in arguments derived from his own
    experience. When he saw that Bolshevik imposed hardships were for
    the sake of victory over the exploiters, and that Kolchak’s
    government brought back capitalism with its old policemen, he
    said, fully conscious of what he was saying, “I choose the
    dictatorship of the working-class masses and will go so far as to
    help in the full defeat of the dictatorship of the bureaucratic
    bourgeoisie (that is what he calls Kolchak’s dictatorship)
    so that there will be the dictatorship of the proletariat, the
    dictatorship of the people.”  The history of Kolchak shows
    that no matter how long the Civil War may last, how difficult it
    may be and how hopeless it may seem, it will not lead us into a
    blind alley. It will lead the masses of the people, those that are
    farthest removed from the Bolsheviks, to believe through their own
    experience in the need to go over to the side of Soviet power.
And that, comrades, is the war situation. Now allow me to
    finish up my report by some indications of the co-operative work
    that we have before us. Many comrades have spoken who are more
    competent than I to appraise the practical tasks with which you
    are faced. I will allow myself to express the hope that the task
    you have to undertake—the creation of a consumers’
    co-operative society that embraces the masses of the working
    people—that this tremendously important task will be carried
    out successfully. In the conditions of capitalist society the
    co-operatives naturally, produced a top group that formed their
    leadership, and this top layer were all whiteguards. It turned out
    this way not only in our country; it was proved by the
    co-operative leaders who concluded an agreement with Kolchak. It
    was the same in Britain and Germany, in capitalist countries. When
    the war broke out, the upper strata of the co-operatives who were
    accustomed to a luxurious way of life, went over to the
    imperialists.
It is no accident that throughout the world the upper echelons
    of the socialist parliamentarians, the upper echelons of the
    socialist movement went over entirely to the imperialists during
    the imperialist war. They helped start the war, and they have gone
    so far that their friends head the government that murdered
    Liebknechit and Luxemburg and are helping shoot the leaders of the
    working class. This is not the fault of individual people. It is
    not the crime of any unfortunate criminal. It is the result of
    capitalism that has corrupted them. That is how it was everywhere
    in the world, and Russia is no holy land; we could not get out of
    capitalist society in any other way than by engaging in a serious
    war with those upper echelons. It is still not over today, when it
    embraces the masses of the people and the masses have arisen in
    struggle against all forms of profiteering. Those who have
    personally experienced exploitation will not forget it when they
    take the business of distribution into their own hands. It is
    possible that in this field we shall suffer quite a few
    defeats. We know that in this field there is a great deal of
    backwardness and ignorance and that we shall fail, first in one
    place and then in anotherwe know that we cannot achieve anything
    at a single blow. But we who are conscientiously carrying on
    Soviet work, we, class-conscious workers and peasants who are
    organising socialist Russia, shall continue that war. You will
    pursue this war together with us, and we shall end that war,
    difficult as it may be, with full victory,
    comrades. (Applause.)

 Collected Works Volume 29

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive 
 
 







==========

## Speech at the First
  all-Russia Congress of Workersin Education and
  Socialist Culture











Speech At the First All-Russia Congress of Workers in Education and Socialist Culture July 31, 1919



V. I. Lenin
Speech At The First All-Russia Congress Of
 Workers In Education and Socialist Culture
July 31, 1919[1]


Delivered: 30 July,1919

      
First Published: Pravda No. 170, August 5. 1919; Published according to the Pravda text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, pages 532-539
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


Comrades, it gives me great pleasure to greet your
    Congress in the name of the Council of People’s Commissars.

    

      In the sphere of education we have long had to struggle against
      the same difficulties that Soviet power encounters in all
      spheres of work and in all spheres of organisation. We saw that
      organisations regarded as the only mass organisations were from
      the very outset headed by people who, for a lengthy period, were
      under the influence of bourgeois prejudices. In the first days
      of Soviet power, in October 1917, we even saw how the army
      swamped us in Petrograd with declarations to the effect that it
      did not recognise Soviet power, threatened to go against
      Petrograd and expressed solidarity with bourgeois
      governments. As long ago as that we were sure that these
      declarations came from the top people in these organisations,
      from the army committees of that time, who represented the past
      in the development of the moods, convictions and views of our
      army. The situation has since then repeated itself in all mass
      organisations—in respect of the railway proletariat, and
      again in respect of the post and telegraph employees. We have
      always noted that at first the past maintains its power and
      influence over mass organisations. We were, therefore, riot.at
      all surprised at the lengthy and stubborn struggle that went on
      among the school-teachers, the majority of whom, if not all,
      from the very beginning took a stand hostile to Soviet power. We
      saw how we gradually had to overcome bourgeois prejudices and
      how the school-teachers, who were closely connected with the
      workers and labouring peasantry, had to struggle against the
      former bourgeois system to win for themselves rights and to
      break a road to a genuine rapprochement with the working masses,
      to a genuine understanding of the nature of the socialist
      revolution that was under way. Until now you have had more than
      anybody else to deal with the old prejudices of the bourgeois
      intelligentsia, with their usual methods and arguments, with
      their defence of bourgeois or capitalist society, with their
      struggle, not usually direct but carried on under cover of some
      outwardly pleasant slogans which are advanced to defend
      capitalism in one way or another.
Comrades, you may remember how Marx describes the way the
    worker got to the modern capitalist factory, how he analysed the
    enslavement of the worker in a disciplined, cultured and "free"
    capitalist society, studied the causes of the oppression of labour
    by capital, how he approached the fundamentals of the production
    process, how he described the worker’s entry into a
    capitalist factory where the robbery of surplus-value takes place
    and the foundation of capitalist exploitation is laid down, where
    capitalist society is built, the society that gives riches to the
    few and holds the many in a state of oppression. When Marx reached
    this most significant, most fundamental place in his
    book—the analysis of capitalist exploitation—he
    accompanied his introduction to this analysis with the ironical
    remark that the place he was taking the reader to, the place where
    profit was extracted by the capitalists, was the place where
    liberty, equality and Bentham ruled.[2] By this Marx stressed
    the ideology up-held by the bourgeoisie in capitalist society and
    which they justify because from their point of view, from the
    point of view of the bourgeoisie who had won the fight against the
    feudals, "Liberty, Equality and Bentham" ruled in capitalist
    society which was based on the rule of money, the rule of capital
    and the exploitation of the working people. What they call liberty
    is liberty to make profit, liberty for the few to become rich, the
    liberty of the trade turnover; what they call equality is equality
    between capitalist, and worker; and the rule of Bentham is the
    rule of the petty-bourgeois prejudice about liberty and equality.

    

      If we look around us, if we take a look at those arguments that
      were used in the struggle against us yesterday and which are
      being used today by members of the old teachers’ union and
      which we still meet with among our ideological opponents who
      call themselves socialists (the Socialist-Revolutionaries and
      Mensheviks), those arguments that we meet with in a not very
      conscious form in our day-to-day talks with the peasant masses
      who have not yet understood the significance of
      socialism—if you take a look at and give some thought to
      the ideological meaning of these arguments you will find the
      very same bourgeois motif that Marx stressed in Capital. All
      these people reiterate the catch-phrase that Liberty, Equality
      and Bentham rule in capitalist society. And when objections to
      us are raised from this point of view and it is said that we,
      the Bolsheviks and Soviet power, are contravening freedom and
      equality, we refer those who say so to the elements of political
      economy, to the basic doctrines of Marx. We maintain that the
      freedom you accuse the Bolsheviks of contravening is the freedom
      of capital, the freedom of an owner to sell grain on the open
      market, i.e., the freedom for the few to make profit, for those
      who have grain surpluses. That freedom of the press that the
      Bolsheviks have constantly been accused of having
      violated—what is this freedom of the press in a capitalist
      society? Everybody could see what the press was in our "free"
      Russia. This was seen to a still greater extent by people who
      were familiar with, have been able to observe closely or had had
      dealings with press affairs in the advanced capitalist
      countries. Freedom of the press in capitalist society means
      freedom to trade in publications and in their influence on the
      masses. Freedom of the press means that the press, a powerful
      medium for influencing the masses, is maintained at the expense
      of the capitalists. Such is the freedom of the press that the
      Bolsheviks violated and they are proud of having
      produced—the first press free of the capitalists, that in
      a gigantic country they have for the first time set up a press
      that does not depend on a handful of rich men and
      millionaires—a press that is devoted entirely to the
      struggle against capital, the struggle to which we must
      subordinate everything. Only the factory proletariat that is
      capable of leading the peasant masses that are not
      class-conscious can be the leader, the vanguard, of the working
      people in this struggle.
When we are reproached with having established a dictatorship
    of one party and, as you have heard, a united socialist front is
    proposed, we say, "Yes, it is a dictatorship of one party! This is
    what we stand for and we shall not shift from that position
    because it is the party that has won, in the course of decades,
    the position of vanguard of the entire factory and industrial
    proletariat. This party had won that position even before the
    revolution of 1905. It is the party that was at the head of the
    workers in 1905 and which since then—even at the time of the
    reaction after 1905 when the working-class movement was
    rehabilitated with such difficulty under the Stolypin
    Duma—merged with the working class and it alone could lead
    that class to a profound, fundamental change in the old society."
    When a united socialist front is proposed to us we say that it is
    the Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik parties that propose it,
    and that they have wavered in favour of the bourgeoisie throughout
    the revolution. We have had a double experience—the Kerensky
    period when the Socialist-Revolutionaries formed a coalition
    government that was helped by the Entente, that is, by the world
    bourgeoisie, the imperialists of France, America and Britain. What
    did that result in? Was there that gradual transition to socialism
    they had promised? No, there was collapse, the absolute rule of
    the imperialists, the rule of the bourgeoisie and the complete
    bankruptcy of all sorts of illusions about class conciliation.
If that experience is not enough, take Siberia. There we saw
    the same thing happen again. In Siberia the government was against
    the Bolsheviks. At the beginning the entire bourgeoisie who had
    fled from Soviet power came to the help of the Czechoslovak
    uprising and the uprising of time Socialist-Revolutionaries and
    Mensheviks. They were helped by the entire bourgeoisie and the
    capitalists of the most powerful countries of Europe and America;
    their aid was not merely ideological but financial and military
    aid as well. And what was the result? What came of this rule that
    was allegedly the rule of the Constituent Assembly, that allegedly
    democratic government of Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks?
    It led to the Kolchak gamble. Why did it lead to the collapse that
    we have witnessed? Because here we saw the effect of the basic
    truth, which the so-called socialists from the camp of our
    opponents do not want to understand, that there can be only one of
    two possible powers in capitalist society, either the power of the
    capitalists or the power of the proletariat, no matter whether
    that society is developing, is firmly on its feet, or is
    declining. Every middle-of-the-road power is a dream, and every
    attempt to set up something in between leads only to people, even
    if they are absolutely sincere, shifting to one side or the
    other. Only the power of the proletariat, only the rule of the
    workers can ally to itself the majority of those who work, because
    the peasant masses, although they constitute a mass of working
    people, are nevertheless to a certain extent the owners of their
    small properties, of their own grain. And that is the struggle
    that has unfolded before our eyes, the struggle which shows how
    the proletariat, in the course of lengthy political trials, during
    the changes in governments that we see in various places on the
    outskirts of Russia, is sweeping away everything that serves
    exploitation; it shows how the proletariat is breaking its own
    road and is becoming more and more the genuine, absolute leader of
    the masses of working people in suppressing and eliminating the
    resistance of capital.
Those who say that the Bolsheviks violate freedom and who
    propose the formation of a united socialist front, that is, an
    alliance with those who vacillated, and twice in the history of
    the Russian revolution went over to the side of the
    bourgeoisie—these people are very fond of accusing us of
    resorting to terror. They say that the Bolsheviks have introduced
    a system of terror in administration, and if Russia is to be
    saved, the Bolsheviks must renounce it. This reminds me of a witty
    French bourgeois who, in his bourgeois manner, said with reference
    to the abolition of the death penalty, "Let the murderers be the
    first to abolish the death penalty." I recall this when people
    say, "Let the Bolsheviks renounce the terror." Let the Russian
    capitalists and their allies, America, France and Britain, that
    is, those who first imposed terror on Soviet Russia, let them
    renounce it! They are the imperialists who attacked us and are
    still attacking its with all their military might, which is a
    thousand times greater than ours. Is it not terror for all the
    Entente countries, all the imperialists of Britain, France and
    America, to keep in their capitals servitors of international
    capital—whether their names are Sazonov or
    Maklakov—who have organised tens and hundreds of thousands
    of the dissatisfied, ruined, hum’iliated and indignant
    representatives of capital and the bourgeoisie? You must have
    heard about the plots among the military, you must have read about
    the latest plot in Krasnaya Gorka, which nearly led to the loss of
    Petrograd; what was this but a manifestation of terror on the part
    of the bourgeoisie of the whole world, which will commit any
    violence, crime and atrocity in order to reinstate the exploiters
    in Russia and stamp out the flames of the socialist revolution,
    which is now threatening even their own countries? There is the
    source of terror, that is where the responsibility lies! That is
    why we are sure that those who preach renunciation of terror in
    Russia are nothing but conscious, or unwitting, tools and agents
    of the imperialist terrorists, who are trying to crush Russia with
    their blockades and aid to Denikin and Kolchak. But their cause is
    a hopeless one.
Russia is the country assigned by history the role of
    trail-blazer of the socialist revolution, and that is just why so
    much struggle and suffering has fallen to our lot. The capitalists
    and imperialists of other countries realise that Russia is up in
    arms, and that the future not only of Russian but of international
    capital is being decided in Russia. That is why in all their
    press—in all the bourgeois world press which they have
    bribed with their many millions—they spread the most
    incredible slanders about the Bolsheviks.
They are attacking Russia in the name of the selfsame
    principles of "Liberty, Equality and Bentham". If you come across
    someone in this country who thinks that when he speaks of freedom
    and equality and of their violation by the Bolsheviks, he is
    championing something that is quite independent, the principles of
    democracy in general, ask him to have a look at the capitalist
    press of Europe. What is the screen being used by Denikin and
    Kolchak, what is the screen being used by European capitalists and
    the bourgeoisie in their efforts to crush Russia? Liberty and
    equality—that is all they talk about! When the Americans,
    British and French seized Archangel, when they sent their troops
    to the South, they did so in defence of liberty and equality. That
    is the kind of slogan they use as camouflage, and that is why the
    proletariat of Russia has risen against world capital in this
    fierce struggle. Such is the purpose of these slogans of freedom
    and equality which all agents of the bourgeoisie use to deceive
    the people, and which intellectuals who really side with the
    workers and peasants have to expose.
We see that as the attempts of the Entente imperialists become
    more desperate and vicious they meet with ever greater resistance
    on the part of the proletariat of their own countries. The first
    attempt at an international strike by workers in Britain, France
    and Italy against their governments that was made on July 21 had
    as its slogan, "Hands off Russia, and an honest peace with the
    Republic". This strike failed. Separate strikes broke out in
    Britain, France and Italy. In America and Canada, everything that
    looks like Bolshevism is fiercely persecuted. In the last few
    years, we have gone through two great revolutions. We know how
    hard it was for the vanguard of the Russian working people in 1905
    to rise in the struggle against tsarism. We know that after the
    first bloody lesson of January 9, 1905, the strike, movement
    developed slowly and laboriously until October 1905, when the mass
    strike scored its first success in Russia. We know how hard the
    going was. This was proved by the experience of two revolutions,
    although the situation in Russia was more revolutionary than in
    other countries. We know with what difficulty the forces for the
    struggle against capitalism are mobilised in a series of
    strikes. That is why we are not surprised by the failure of this
    first international strike of July 21. We know that there is much
    greater resistance and opposition to the revolution in the
    European countries than over here. We know that in fixing July 21
    as the date for an international strike, the workers of Britain,
    France and Italy had to overcome incredible difficulties. It was
    an experiment unparalleled in history. It is not surprising that
    it failed. But we also know that the working people of the leading
    and most civilised countries are on our side despite the European
    bourgeoisie’s rabid hatred of us, that they understand our
    cause, and whatever the hardships of the revolution and the trials
    ahead, whatever the atmosphere of lies and deception in the name
    of the "freedom and equality" of capital, equality of the starved
    and the overfed, whatever the atmosphere, we know that our cause
    is the cause of the workers of all countries, and that is why this
    cause will inevitably defeat international capital.

Endnotes
[1]
    This Congress, held in Moscow from July 28 to August 1, 1919, was
    attended by 230 delegates from 32 gubernias. The Congress heard
    reports on the education programme, the current tasks in the field
    of cultural development, trade union movement, the youth movement
    in Russia and the West, and other questions. The Congress founded
    the All-Russia Trade Union of Workers in Education and Socialist
    Culture; it elected the Central Committee of the Union.
[2]
    See Karl Marx, Capital, Moscow, 1959, Vol. I, p. 176.
    

 Collected Works Volume 29

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive 
 







==========

## In the Servants’ Quarters 











In The Servants’ Quarters



V. I. Lenin
In The Servants’ Quarters


Written: July, 1919
First Published: 1925; Published according to
the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, pages 540-546
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


Comrades have brought several Menshevik,
    Socialist-Revolutionary and other publications from the South that
    give us a glimpse of the “ideological life” on the
    other side of the barricades, in the other camp.
    The Kharkov Mysi of Bazarov and Martov, Gryadushchy Dyen
    run by Myakotin and Peshekhonov, Bunakov and Vishnyak, Potresov
    and Grossman, Yuzhnoye Dyelo and Obyedineniye
    run by Balabanov, S. Ivanovich, Myakotin and
    Peshekhonov—these are the names of the publications and of
    some of their best-known contributors.
Even the few haphazard issues of the above-mentioned
    periodicals produce such a strong and full aroma that one
    immediately feels that one is in the servants’
    quarters. Educated intellectuals who imagine they are socialists
    and call themselves such, saturated through and through with
    bourgeois prejudices and fawning before the
    bourgeoisie—such, if we get down to brass tacks, is that
    entire clique of writers There are many trends among them but they
    have no serious meaning from the political point of view for they
    differ only in the extent to which they are hypocritical or
    sincere, crude or astute, clumsy or skilled in doing their
    servants’ duties to the bourgeoisie.
I

      The duty of a lackey involves wearing a tail-coat and white
      gloves and possessing a civilised appearance and the relevant
      manners. The lackey is permitted to possess a certain love for
      the people; this, on the one hand, is inevitable because the
      milieu that provides lackeys must be in needy circumstances; on
      the other hand, it is even to the master’s advantage, for
      it gives him an opportunity to “practise” his
      philanthropy, in the first place, of course, among those
      “obedient” sections of the population from which
      servants, shop assistants and workers are drawn. The cleverer
      and the better educated the classes that keep servants, the more
      regularly and thoughtfully they pursue their policy, using their
      lackeys to spy on the working people, to disunite the working
      people by granting concessions to a certain part of them, to
      strengthen their own position and to interest their
      “faithful servants” in increasing the master’s
      wealth in the hope of receiving a rakeoff, etc., etc.
Love for the people is permitted the lackey only to a very
    modest degree, of course, and only on the imperative condition
    that he expresses humble and servile feelings in addition to his
    readiness to comfort the working and exploited people. Let it be
    said in parenthesis that Feuerbach gave a very neat answer to
    those who defended religion as a source of comfort for people; to
    comfort the slave, he said, is to the advantage of the
    slave-owner, while the real friend of the slaves teaches them
    indignation and revolt, teaches them to cast off the yoke and does
    not comfort them. The lackey paints and prettifies the artificial
    flowers that serve to comfort the slaves who are fettered by
    wage-slavery. Champions of the emancipation of people from
    wage-slavery tear away the artificial flowers from the fetters
    they decorate so that the slave can learn to hate his fetters more
    consciously and more strongly, the quicker to throw them off and
    reach out his hand for living flowers.
The necessity to combine a very moderate dose of love for the
    people with a very big dose of obedience and, of protection of the
    master’s interests that is specific to the position of the
    lackey, inevitably produces the hypocrisy that is typical of the
    lackey as a social type. Here it is a case of a social type and
    not of the qualities possessed by individuals. A lackey may be the
    most honest of men, an exemplary member of his family, an
    excellent citizen but he is fatally doomed to hypocrisy because
    the main feature of his trade is the combination of the interests
    of the master whom he is “pledged to serve truly and
    faithfully” and those of the milieu from which servants are
    recruited. If this problem, therefore, is studied from the
    political point of view, i.e., from the point of view of millions
    of people and the relations between millions, one must come to the
    conclusion that the chief features of the lackey as a social type
    are hypocrisy and cowardice. These qualities are inculcated by the
    lackey’s trade, and they are the most important from the
    point of. view of the wage-slaves and the mass of working people
    in any capitalist society.
II
Educated intellectuals who call themselves Mensheviks,
    Social-Democrats, Socialist-Revolutionaries and what not want to
    teach the people politics. They had, therefore, to touch upon the
    fundamental issue of the entire period in which we are
    living—the conversion of the imperialist war into a civil
    war. See how they argue on this point.
Mr. P. Yushkevich, writing in Obyedineniye, devotes a
    whole article to “Revolution and Civil War”. The class
    of literature — if such it can be called—to which the
    article belongs may be judged from just the following two
    statements of the author’s.
’Having as its objective a revolution that
    is in the interests of the majority and is carried out by that
    majority, socialism has no grounds F!! to turn to methods [!!!] of
    the civil war to which a minority that has seized power is fatally
    doomed ....“The most advanced class of modern society, when
    it has become sufficiently mature to understand in full its world
    mission of emancipation and the tasks accompanying it, must throw
    it (civil war) aside together with other things inherited from
    historical barbarity ....”
A real gem , is it not ?
Immediately after the Bolshevik revolution the Russian
    bourgeoisie started seeking agreements and concluding agreements
    with the foreign bourgeoisie against the working people of their
    own country. The Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries
    supported them. The same thing occurred in Finland at the
    beginning of 1918. And it was the same in the North of Russia and
    in the South at the beginning of 1918 when the
    Constitutional-Democrats, Mensheviks and
    Socialist-Revolutionaries, in alliance with the Germans, tried to
    crush the Bolsheviks. The same again in Georgia. The Germans gave
    Krasnov money and arms. Then the Entente bourgeoisie bought over
    the Czechoslovaks and Denikin and landed their troops in Murmansk,
    Archangel, Siberia, Baku and Ashkhabad.
The world bourgeoisie—at first the German and then the
    Anglo-French (often both together)—made war on the
    victorious proletariat of Russia. And, then comes this man who
    calls himself a socialist, who has gone over to the side of the
    bourgeoisie and who advises the workers “to throw
    aside” “civil war methods”. Is he not a Judas
    Golovlyov[1] of the latest capitalist type?
I shall probably be told that Yushkevich is merely a
    rank-and-file bourgeois journalistic cooly, that he is not typical
    of any party and they do not accept responsibility for him. That,
    however, would not be true. In the first place the entire staff
    and the trend followed by Obyedineniye show. that this
    particular sort of servility is typical of the entire
    Menshevik-Socialist-Revolutionary brotherhood. In the second place
    there is the example of L. Martov. This character is a most
    prominent (and probably the most “Left”) of the
    Mensheviks and also a highly respected member of the Berne
    International who is in agreement with its ideological leader,
    Karl Kautsky.
Take a look at Martov’s arguments. In the April 1919
    issue of Mysi he writes about “world Bolshevism”. He
    has a thorough knowledge of the literature of Bolshevism and about
    Bolshevism. And this is what that author writes about civil
    war:
“In the early days of the war I had
    occasion to write that the crisis it had called forth in the
    working-class movement was primarily a ’moral crisis’,
    a crisis of the loss of mutual trust between different sections of
    the proletariat and loss of the faith of the proletarian masses in
    the old moral and political values. At that time I could not
    imagine that this loss of mutual trust, this destruction of
    ideological bonds that for the last decades had united not only
    reformists and revolutionaries but had, at certain moments, united
    socialists and anarchists and both of them with liberal and
    Christian workers—1 could not imagine that this destruction
    would lead to civil war between proletarians ....”
The italics belong to Mr. Martov. He stresses that here he is
    appraising specifically civil war. It may even be that he is
    stressing his full agreement with Kautsky who, in any case, argues
    in the same way about civil war. 

    

      In this argument there is so much
      refined corruption, such an abyss of lies, deception of the
      workers, and despicable betrayal of their interests, such a
      hypocritical attitude to and defection from socialism that one is
      amazed at the amount of servility the Kautskys and Martovs have
      accumulated in the course of decades of “playing” with
      opportunism!
Firstly, when Kautsky and Martov pharisaically shed tears over
    “civil war between proletarians” they are
    trying to hide their desertion to the side of the
    bourgeoisie. Actually, the civil war is between the proletariat
    and the bourgeoisie. There never has been in history, nor can
    there be in a class society, a civil war of the exploited masses
    against the exploiting minority in which some of the exploited
    have not gone over to the side of the exploiters and fought with
    them against their own brothers. Any literate person will admit
    that a Frenchman who, at the time of the peasant uprising in
    VendÂe in behalf of the monarchy and the landowners, had
    bewailed the “civil war between peasants”
    would be a lackey of the monarchy, disgusting in his
    hypocrisy. The Kautskys and Martovs are just such lackeys of the
    capitalists.
The international bourgeoisie, powerful throughout the world,
    are crushing the victorious workers of one country for having
    defeated capital and have the following of some of the deceived,
    uninformed, downtrodden workers; and such scoundrels as the
    Kautskys and Martovs are shedding tears over “civil war
    between proletarians”. These characters have to resort to
    such disgusting hypocrisy since they cannot openly admit that they
    are on the side of the bourgeoisie in the civil war between the
    proletariat and the bourgeoisie!
In the second place, Martov, like Kautsky and the entire Berne
    International, knows full well that they enjoyed the sympathy of
    the workers as socialists because they preached the necessity for
    proletarian revolution. In 1902 Kautsky wrote about the possible
    connection between revolution and war and said that the future
    proletarian revolution would probably coincide with civil war to a
    greater extent than former revolutions. In 1912 the entire Second
    International solemnly declared in the Basle Manifesto that the
    coming war would be connected with the coming proletarian
    revolution. And when that war broke out the
    “revolutionaries” of the Second International turned
    out to be lackeys of the bourgeoisie!
In November 1914 the Bolsheviks declared that the imperialist
    war was likely to he transformed into a civil war. This proved to
    be true. It is now a fact on a world scale. In speaking of world
    Bolshevism, Martov is compelled to admit this fact. But instead of
    honestly admitting his complete ideological failure, the collapse
    of the views of all those who, with the contemptuous grimace of
    the philistine rejected the idea of turning the imperialist war
    into a civil war—instead of this Martov “points”
    hypocritically to the “proletarian masses” who are
    supposed to have “lost faith in the old moral and political
    values”!
The renegades are blaming the masses for their own treachery,
    but the masses sympathise with the Bolsheviks and are everywhere
    taking the revolutionary path. According to the
    “theory” of those who all their lives have sworn
    loyalty to the revolution only to find themselves in the camp of
    the bourgeoisie against the proletariat when the revolution came,
    the masses are to blame for this.
In the third place, the two different theories that existed
    before the war on the question of the internal struggle within
    socialism were the following. Kautsky and Martov, like most of the
    opportunists, regarded the reformists arid the revolutionaries as
    two legitimate trends, essential wings of the movement of one
    class. The divergence of these two trends was condemned. Their
    rapprochement and merging at every grave moment in the proletarian
    class struggle was recognised as inevitable. Champions of a split,
    were accused of short-sightedness.
The Bolsheviks had a different view; they regarded the
    reformists as the vehicle of bourgeois influence among the
    proletariat, an alliance with them was sanctioned as a temporary
    evil in situations that were clearly not revolutionary, a break
    and a split with them was considered inevitable whenever the
    struggle took on a serious, sharpened form, especially at the
    beginning of the revolution.
And who proved to be right?
The Bolsheviks.
Throughout the world the war caused a split in the
    working-class movement when the socialist-patriots went over to
    the bourgeoisie. After Russia this was to be seen most clearly in
    Germany, an advanced capitalist country. To defend the
    “ideological bonds” of the reformists and
    revolutionaries today is tantamount to giving support to such
    hangmen of working-class origin as Noske and Scheidemann, who
    helped the bourgeoisie murder Rosa Luxemburg and Karl Lieb kriecht
    and kill thousands of workers for their revolutionary struggle
    against the bourgeoisie.

Endnotes
[1]
Judas Colovlyov—the nickname of Porfiry Golovlyov,
    a serf-owner,hypocrite and blood-sucker in The
    Golovlyob Family, a novel by M. Y. Saltykov-Shchedrin.

 Collected Works Volume 29

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive 
 
 







==========

## Speech at a Non-Party
  Conference of Workers and Men Of the Red Army











Speech At A Non-Party Conference Of Workers And Men Of The Red Army August 6, 1919



V. I. Lenin
Speech At A Non-Party Conference Of 
Workers And Men Of The Red Army
August 6, 1919
Newspaper Report


Delivered: August 6, 1919
First Published: First version in Izvestia No. 173, August 7, 1919; Second version in Vecherniye Izvestia Moskovskogo Soveta No, 312, August 8, 1919; Published according to the newspaper text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, pages 547-550
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


First Version
Lenin’s appearance was greeted with an enthusiastic ovation. He said that he would begin with events they had read about in the newspapers of that day and the day before the events in Hungary.
A Kerensky-type government had dominated Hungary up to the end of March; at that time the members of that government had resigned, realising that they could not hold out; the socialist-conciliators had then sent representatives to the prison in which Comrade Bela Kurt, who had at one time served in the ranks of our Red Army, was confined. They had entered into negotiations with him and he went straight from prison into the government.
Information had recently been received to the effect that things were going wrong inside the Socialist Party of Hungary.
Lenin then said that Rumanian troops had entered Budapest but that no particular attention should be paid to that.
“That is what happened in our country,” he said, “on the various fronts. But we had sufficient forces in the country to dig ourselves in and then deal Kolchak a proper blow—or to give an answer as we have done on the Petrograd Front. You know that our troops have captured Yamhurg.[The old Russian name of Kingisepp.—Editor.]
Lenin then spoke about the political experience the Soviet Republic had acquired in that period, an experience which the Hungarians, of course, did not possess.
“We shall not,” he said, “become downhearted because we know what these temporary triumphs of the Koichaks and Kornilovs will lead to. Let the Rumanian Koichaks dance on the bodies of Hungarian workers today, we know that their triumph Will be short-lived. It is true that only the steel-like strength of the workers, who give aid to all working people and punish all profiteers, can get us out of this terrible war.”
Lenin went on to speak of the actions of the conciliators, the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries in Siberia; they were then accusing the Soviet Government of incorrect tactics but could not themselves produce a model of tactics. In reality everything that had happened in Siberia, all the promises that the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries had given had brought nothing but suffering to the peasants as well as the workers. But since the Treaty of Versailles had been signed the workers of France, Britain and other countries were beginning more and more to understand the situation.
For this reason, he said, the recent events in Hungary, burdensome as they were, were similar to what had occurred in the camp of Denikin and Koichak. The events would open the eyes of hundreds of thousands more workers and would show them that capital was stretching out its hand to recover what it had lost on dishonoured bills.
Lenin then spoke about the conspiracies of the Mensheviks, Socialist-Revolutionaries and capitalists to recapture power. “They themselves are plotting, and at the same time they are agitating the Soviet Government to renounce terror.
“But we shall not renounce terror because we know that it would only lead to the temporary victory of the Koichaks and Denikins! Capital is killing itself in the war, and the dying beast is roaring at the workers in its death throes. It cannot, however, prolong its life and it will die!” (Stormy applause.)
Second Version
Lenin said that he would begin with the events they were witnessing in Hungary.
They would remember that until the end of March a Kerensky-type government with all its joys had been dominant. When Soviet power had suddenly been established on March 21—the local Mensheviks incidentally had agreed to support that power—one might have thought that a new era had set in in socialism .... Recent events had shown that the socialist-conciliators had not changed in the least. Apparently what was happening in Hungary was a repetition on a grand scale of what they had recently witnessed in Baku.[1]
Lenin then drew a clear picture of the tragic history of the Baku proletariat; the traitor-socialists had appealed to the British command for help and behind the backs of the workers had entered into a secret agreement with Western imperialists. He drew an analogy between the Baku tragedy and the present revolt in Hungary and spoke of the wireless message that had informed them that the Rumanians had already entered Red Budapest.
Lenin then went on to compare the situation in Hungary with that of Soviet Russia and recalled in brief the temporary Soviet failures; he said that Russia had been saved by her tremendous territory while Hungary was too small to repulse all her enemies. Going over to the question of conciliators in general, Lenin spoke about the Russian socialist parties of conciliators and said:
“If the conciliators of Russia made a mistake under Kerensky that lasted throughout six months of work, why did they not correct that mistake under Kolchak in Siberia?
“The point is that Denikin’s crowd are also singing songs about a Constituent Assembly; the counter-revolution does not come out into the open anywhere, so that we can say that temporary failures, like the recent events in Hungary, will not disconcert us. There is no way out of all these misfortunes other than revolution, and there remains only one sure method—the dictatorship of the proletariat. We say that every new defeat of the Red Army only serves to strengthen it, makes it more steadfast and class-conscious, for the workers and peasants have now learned from a sanguinary experience what to expect from the power of the bourgeoisie and the conciliators. The dying beast of world capital is making its last efforts, but it would nevertheless die!” (Stormy applause.)

Endnotes
[1] At a meeting of the Baku Soviet on July 25, 1918, the Mensheviks, Socialist-Revolutionaries and Dashnaks passed, by a small majority, the traitorous decision to ask the British imperialists for aid under pretence of defending Baku from the advancing Turkish forces. Counter-revolutionary subversive activities in Baku, the breakdown in supplies, the counter-revolutionary propaganda in the army and navy were all guided by the British Consul MacDonnell. The Bolshevik group at the July 25 meeting, guided by the instructions of Lenin and Sverdlov given in the name of the Council of People’s Commissars and the All-Russia Central Executive Committee to pursue an independent foreign policy and wage a resolute struggle against the agents of foreign capital, tabled a draft resolution demanding that immediate measures be taken to defend Baku, using local forces. This motion was rejected by a majority vote. The Bolsheviks, being in the minority, resigned from the Baku Soviet so that power was actually in the hands of the counter-revolutionary government, which called itself the “Central Caspian Dictatorship”. The British, who had been invited, entered Baku a few days later. The Bolshevik members of the Baku Soviet—the twenty-six Baku commissars-were brutally murdered by the British interventionists with the direct participation of the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries.

 Collected Works Volume 29

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive 
 







==========

## To Comrades Serhati and Lazzari











To Comrades Serrati And Lazzari



V. I. Lenin
To Comrades Serrati And Lazzari


Written: 19 August,1919
 
First Published: Published in Italian in Avanti! No. 243, September 2, 1919; First published in nussian in 1932; Published according to the newspaper text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, page 551
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


Dear Comrades and Friends,
Thanks for the greetings conveyed to us on behalf of your Party. We know very little about your movement; we have no documents whatever. However, the little we do know shows us that we stand together for the Communist International and against the Berne yellow International, which deceives the masses. The negotiations which the leaders of the yellow International conducted with your Party show that they are merely a general staff without an army. The dictatorship of the proletariat and the Soviet system have already won moral victory throughout the world. Real and final victory will inevitably come in all countries of the world, despite all difficulties and all bloodshed, despite the White terror of the bourgeoisie, etc.
Down with capitalism! Down with false democracy, bourgeois democracy! Long live the world republic of Soviets!
Ever yours,
V. Lenin
Moscow, August 19, 1919

 Collected Works Volume 29

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive 
 







==========

## Letter to the Workers and Peasants apropos of the Victory Over Kolchak











Letter To The Workers And Peasants Apropos Of The Victory Over Kolchak



V. I. Lenin
    Letter To The Workers And Peasants
Apropos Of The Victory Over Kolchak


Written: 24 August, 1919
 
First Published: Pravda No. 190,   August 28, 1919; Published according to the text of the pamphlet V. I. Lenin, Letter to the Workers and Peasants Apropos the Victory Over Kolchak, Moscow, 1919 
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, pages 552-560
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


   
  Comrades, Red troops have liberated the entire Urals area from Kolchak and have begun the liberation of Siberia. The workers and peasants of the Urals and Siberia are enthusiastically welcoming Soviet power, for it is sweeping away with an iron broom all the landowner and capitalist scum who ground down the people with exactions, humiliations, floggings, and the restoration of tsarist oppression. 
Although we all rejoice at the liberation of the Urals and the entry of the Red troops into Siberia we must not allow ourselves to be lulled into a sense of security. The enemy is still far from being destroyed. He has not even been definitely broken. 
Every effort must be made to drive Kolchak and the Japanese and other foreign bandits out of Siberia, and an even greater effort is needed to destroy the enemy, to prevent him from starting his banditry again and again. 
How is that to be achieved? 
The harrowing experience of the Urals and Siberia, as well as the experience of all countries which have been through the torments of the four years of imperialist war, must not be without its lessons for us. 
Here are the five chief lessons which all workers and peasants, all working people, must draw from this experience so as to ensure themselves against a repetition of the calamities of the Kolchak rule. 
First lesson. In order to defend the power of the workers and peasants from the bandits, that is, from the landowners and capitalists, we need a powerful Red Army. We have proved—not by words but by actual deeds—that we are  capable of creating it, that we have learned to direct it and to defeat the capitalists notwithstanding the lavish assistance in arms and equipment they are receiving from the richest countries in the world. That much the Bolsheviks have proved by actual deeds. All workers and peasants—if they are class-conscious—must place their faith in them, not on the strength of their word (for to believe a man on the strength of his word is foolish), but on the strength of the experience of millions upon millions of people in the Urals and Siberia. It is a most difficult problem to combine two elements—arming the workers and peasants and giving the command to ex-officers, who for the most part sympathise with the landowners and capitalists. It can be solved only given splendid organising ability, strict and conscious discipline, and the confidence of the broad masses in the guiding force, the worker commissars. This most difficult problem the Bolsheviks have solved; cases of treachery on the part of ex-officers are very numerous, nevertheless the Red Army is not only in our hands, but has learned to defeat the generals of the tsar and the generals of Britain, France, and America. 
Consequently, everyone who seriously wishes to rid him self of the rule of Kolchak must devote all his energies, means and ability without reservation to the task of building up and strengthening the Red Army. Obey all the laws on the Red Army and all orders conscientiously and scrupulously, support discipline in it in every way, and help the Red Army, each to the best of his ability—such is the prime, fundamental, and principal duty of every class-conscious worker and peasant who does not want the rule of Kolchak. 
Fear like the plague the unruly guerrilla spirit, the arbitrary actions of isolated detachments and disobedience to the central authorities, for it spells doom as the Urals, Siberia, and the Ukraine have demonstrated. 
He who does not unreservedly and selflessly assist the Red Army, or support order and discipline in it with all his might, is a traitor and treason-monger, a supporter of the rule of Kolchak, and should be shown no mercy. 
With a strong Red Army we shall be invincible. Without a strong army we shall inevitably fall victim to Kolchak, Denikin, and Yudenich. 
Second lesson. The Red Army cannot be strong without large state stocks of grain, for without them it is impossible to move an army freely or to train it properly. Without them we cannot maintain the workers who are producing for the army. 
Every class-conscious worker and peasant must know and remember that the chief reason now that our Red Army successes are not swift and stable enough is precisely the shortage of state stocks of grain. He who does not give his surpluses of grain to the state is helping Kolchak, he is a traitor and betrayer of the workers and peasants and is responsible for the unnecessary death and suffering of tens of thousands of workers and peasants in the Red Army. 
Rogues and profiteers and very ignorant peasants argue in this way—better sell my grain at the open market price, I will get far more for it than the fixed price paid by the state. 
But the whole point is that free sale promotes profiteering; a few get rich, only the wealthy are sated, while the working masses go hungry. We saw that in practice in the richest grain-bearing-districts of Siberia and the Ukraine. 
With the free sale of grain capital triumphs, while labour starves and suffers. 
With the free sale of grain the price rises to thousands of rubles per pood, money loses its value, a handful of profiteers benefit while the people grow poorer. 
With the free sale of grain the government granaries are empty, the army is powerless, industry dies, and the victory of Kolchak and Denikin is inevitable. 
Only the rich, only the worst enemies of the workers’ and peasants’ government are consciously in favour of the free sale of grain. Those who out of ignorance are in favour of the free sale of grain should learn to understand from the example of Siberia and the Ukraine why it means victory for Kolchak and Denikin. 
There are still unenlightened peasants who argue as follows: let the state first give me in exchange for my grain good wares at pre-war prices, then I will give up my surplus grain, otherwise I will not. And by this sort of argument the rogues and supporters of the landowners often hoodwink the unenlightened peasants.
It should not be difficult to understand that the workers’ state which the capitalists completely devastated by four years of a predatory war for the sake of Constantinople, and which the Kolchaks and Denikins are now devastating again by way of revenge with the help of the capitalists of the whole world—it should not be difficult to understand that such a state cannot at this moment supply the peasants with goods, for industry is at a standstill. There is no food, no fuel, no industry. 
Every sensible peasant will agree that the surplus grain must be given to the starving worker as a loan on condition of receiving industrial goods in return. 
That is the way it is now. All class-conscious and sensible peasants, all except the rogues and profiteers will agree that all surplus grain without exception must be turned over to the workers’ state as a loan, because then the state will restore industry and supply industrial goods to the peasants. 
But, we may be asked, will the peasants trust the workers’ state sufficiently to loan their surplus grain to it? 
Our reply is that first, the state gives a bond for the loan in the shape of treasury notes. Secondly, all peasants know by experience that the workers’ state, that is, Soviet power, helps the working people and fights the landowners and capitalists. That is why Soviet power is called workers’ and peasants’ power. Thirdly, the peasants have no other alternative—either they trust the worker or they trust the capitalist; they give their confidence and a loan either to the workers’ state or to the capitalist state. There is no other alternative either in Russia or in any country in the world. The more class-conscious the peasants become, the more firmly they stand by the workers and the more resolute they are in their decision to help the workers’ state in every way so as to make the return of the power of the landowners and capitalists impossible. 
Third lesson. If Kolchak and Denikin are to he completely destroyed the strictest revolutionary order must be maintained, the laws and instructions of the Soviet government must be faithfully observed, and care must be taken that they are obeyed by all. 
Kolchak’s victories in Siberia and the Urals have been a clear example to all of us that the least disorder, the slightest infringement of Soviet laws, the slightest laxity or negligence at once serve to strengthen the landowners and capitalists and make for their victory. For the landowners and capitalists have not been destroyed and do not consider themselves vanquished; every intelligent worker and peasant sees, knows, and realises that they have only been beaten and have gone into hiding, are lying low, very often disguising themselves by a “Soviet” “protective” colouring. Many landowners have wormed their way into state farms, and capitalists into various “chief administrations” and “central boards”, acting the part of Soviet officials; they are watching every step of the Soviet government. waiting for it to make a mistake or show weakness, so as to overthrow it, to help the Czechoslovaks today and Denikin tomorrow. 
Everything must be done to track down these bandits, these landowners and capitalists who are lying low, and to ferret them out, no matter what guise they take, to expose them and punish them ruthlessly, for they are the worst foes of the working people, skilful, shrewd, and experienced enemies who are patiently waiting for an opportune moment to set a conspiracy going; they are saboteurs, who stop at no crime to injure Soviet power. We must be merciless towards these enemies of the working people, towards the landowners, capitalists, saboteurs, and counter-revolutionaries. 
And in order to be able to catch them we must be skilful, careful, and class-conscious, we must watch out most attentively for the least disorder, for the slightest deviation from the conscientious observance of the laws of the Soviet government. The landowners and capitalists are strong not only because of their knowledge and experience and the assistance they get from the richest countries in the world, but also because of the force of habit and the ignorance of the broad masses who want to live in the “good old way” and do not realise how essential it is that Soviet laws be strictly and conscientiously observed. 
The slightest lawlessness, the slightest infraction of Soviet law and order is a loophole the foes of the working people take immediate advantage of, it is a starting-point for Kolchak and Denikin victories. It would be criminal to forget that the Kolchak movement began through some slight  lack of caution in respect of the Czechoslovaks, with insignificant insubordination on the part of certain regiments. 
Fourth lesson. It is criminal to forget not only that the Kolchak movement began with trifles but also that the Mensheviks (”Social-Democrats”) and S.R.s (”Socialist Revolutionaries”) assisted its birth and directly supported it. It is time we learned to judge political parties not by their words, but by their deeds. 
The Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries call themselves socialists, but they are actually abettors of the counter-revolutionaries, abettors of the landowners and capitalists. This was proved in practice not only by isolated facts, but by two big periods in the history of the Russian revolution: (1) the Kerensky period, and (2) the Kolchak period. Both times the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries, while professing to be “socialists” and “democrats”, actually played the role of abettors of the whiteguards. Are we then going to be so foolish as to believe them now they are suggesting we let them “try again”, and call our permission a “united socialist (or democratic) front”? Since the Kolchak experience, can there still be peasants other than few isolated individuals, who do not realise that a “united front” with the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries means union with the abettors of Kolchak? 
It may be objected that the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries have realised their mistake and renounced all alliance with the bourgeoisie. But that is not true. In the first place, the Right Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries have not renounced such an alliance, and there is no definite line of demarcation from these “Rights”. There is no such line through the fault of the “Left” Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries; for although they verbally “condemn” their “Rights”, even the best of the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries, in spite of all they say, are actually powerless compared with them. Secondly, what even the best of the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries advocate are actually Kolchak ideas which assist the bourgeoisie and Kolchak and Denikin and help to mask their filthy and bloody capitalist deeds. These ideas are: A people’s government, universal, equal, and direct suffrage, a constituent assembly, freedom of the press, and the like. All over the world we see capitalist republics which justify capitalist rule and wars for the enslavement of colonies precisely by this lie of “democracy”. In our own country we see that Kolchak, Denikin, Yudenich or any other general readily hands out such “democratic” promises. Can we trust a man who on the strength of verbal promises helps a known bandit? The Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries, all without exception, help known bandits, the world imperialists, using pseudo-democratic slogans to paint their state power, their campaign against Russia, their rule and their policy in bright colours. All the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries offer us an “alliance” on condition that we make concessions to the capitalists and their leaders, Kolchak and Denikin; as, for example, that we “renounce terror” (when we are faced with the terror of the multi-millionaires of the whole Entente, of the whole alliance of the richest countries, that are engineering plots in Russia), or that we open the way for freedom to trade in grain, and so on. What these “conditions” of the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries boil down to is this: we, the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries, are wavering towards the capitalists, and we want a “united front” with the Bolsheviks, against whom the capitalists taking advantage of every concession are fighting! No, my Menshevik and Socialist-Revolutionary gentlemen, look no more in Russia for people capable of believing you. In Russia class-conscious workers and peasants now realise that the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries are abettors of the whiteguards—some deliberate and malicious, others unwitting and because of their persistence in their old mistakes, but abettors of the whiteguards nevertheless. 
Fifth lesson. If Kolchak and his rule are to be destroyed and not allowed to recur, all peasants must unhesitatingly make their choice in favour of the workers’ state. Some people (especially the Mensheviks and the Socialist-Revolutionaries—all of them, even the “Lefts” among them) are trying to scare the peasants with the bogey of the “dictatorship of one party”, the Party of Bolsheviks, Communists. 
The peasants have learned from the Kolchak regime not to be
    afraid of this bogey.  

    

  Either the dictatorship (i.e., the iron rule) of the landowners and capitalists, or the dictatorship of the working class. 
There is no middle course. The scions of the aristocracy, intellectualists and petty gentry, badly educated on bad books, dream of a middle course. There is no middle course anywhere in the world, nor can there be. Either the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie (masked by ornate Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik phraseology about a people’s government, a constituent assembly, liberties, and the like), or the dictatorship of the proletariat. He who has not learned this from the whole history of the nineteenth century is a hopeless idiot. And we in Russia have all seen how the Mensheviks and the Socialist-Revolutionaries dreamed of a middle course under Kerensky and under Kolchak. 
To whom did these dreams do service? Whom did they assist? Kolchak and Denikin. Those who dream of a middle course are abettors of Kolchak. 
In the Urals and Siberia the workers and peasants had an opportunity of comparing the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie with the dictatorship of the working class. The dictatorship of the working class is being implemented by the Bolshevik Party, the party which as far back as 1905 and even earlier merged with the entire revolutionary proletariat. 
Dictatorship of the working class means that the workers’ state will unhesitatingly suppress the landowners and capitalists and the renegades and traitors who help these exploiters, and will defeat them. 
The workers’ state is an implacable enemy of the landowner and capitalist, of the profiteer and swindler, an enemy of the private ownership of land and capital, an enemy of the power of money. 
The workers’ state is the only loyal friend and helper the working people and the peasantry have. No leaning towards capital but an alliance of the working people to fight it, workers’ and peasants’ power, Soviet power—that is what the “dictatorship of the working class” means in practice. 
The Mensheviks and the Socialist-Revolutionaries want to scare the peasants with these words. They won’t succeed. After Kolchak, the workers and peasants even in the most remote backwoods realise that these words mean precisely that without which there can be no salvation from Kolchak. 
Down with the waverers, with the spineless people who are erring in the direction of helping capital and have been captivated by the slogans and promises of capital! An implacable fight against capital, and an alliance of the working people, an alliance of the peasants and the working class—that is the last and most important lesson of the Kolchak regime. 
N. Lenin
      
    

      August 24, 1919
    

 Collected Works Volume 29

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive 
 
 







==========

## Letter to Sylvia Pankhurst











Letter to Sylvia Pankhurst




V. I. Lenin
Letter to Sylvia Pankhurst[1]


Written: 28 August, 1919

 
First Published: September 1919; Published
 according to the manuscript

      
Source: Lenin’s Collected
 Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972
 Volume 29, pages 561-566

      
Translated: George Hanna

      
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters
 & Robert Cymbala

      
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License



To Comrade Sylvia Pankhurst, London

    

      August 28, 1919

      Dear Comrade,

      I received your letter of July 16, 1919, only yesterday. I am
      extremely grateful to you for the information about Britain and
      will try to fulfil your request, i.e., reply to your
      question. 

      I have no doubt at all that many workers who are among the best,
      most honest and sincerely revolutionary members of the
      proletariat are enemies of parliamentarism and of any
      participation in Parliament. The older capitalist culture and
      bourgeois democracy in any country, the more understandable this
      is, since the bourgeoisie in old parliamentary countries has
      excellently mastered the art of hypocrisy and of fooling the
      people in a thousand ways, passing off bourgeois parliamentarism
      as “democracy in general” or as “pure
      democracy” and so on, cunningly concealing the million
      threads which bind Parliament to the stock exchange and the
      capitalists, utilising a venal mercenary press and exercising
      the power of money, the power of capital in every way. 

      There is no doubt that the Communist International and the
      Communist Parties of the various countries would be making an
      irreparable mistake if they repulsed those workers who stand for
      Soviet power, but who are against participation in the
      parliamentary struggle. If we take the problem in its general
      form, theoretically, then it is this very programme, i.e., the
      struggle for Soviet power, for the Soviet republic, which is
      able to unite, and today must certainly unite, all sincere,
      honest revolutionaries from among the workers. Very many
      anarchist workers are now becoming sincere supporters of Soviet
      power, and that being so, it proves them to be our best comrades
      and friends, the best of revolutionaries, who have been enemies
      of Marxism only through misunderstanding, or, more correctly,
      not through misunderstanding but because the official socialism
      prevailing in the epoch of the Second International (1889-1914)
      betrayed Marxism, lapsed into opportunism, perverted
      Marx’s revolutionary teachings in general and his
      teachings on the lessons of the Paris Commune of 1871 in
      particular. I have written in detail about this in my book
      The State and Revolution and will therefore not dwell
      further on the problem.

      What if in a certain country those who are Communists by their
      convictions and their readiness to carry on revolutionary work,
      sincere partisans of Soviet power (the “Soviet
      system”, as non-Russians sometimes call it), cannot unite
      owing to disagreement over participation in Parliament? 

      I should consider such disagreement immaterial at present, since
      the struggle for Soviet power is the political struggle of the
      proletariat in its highest, most class-conscious, most
      revolutionary form. It is better to be with the revolutionary
      workers when they are mistaken over some partial or secondary
      question than with the “official” socialists or
      Social-Democrats, if the latter are not sincere, firm
      revolutionaries, and are unwilling or unable to conduct
      revolutionary work among the working masses, but pursue correct
      tactics in regard to that partial question. And the question of
      parliamentarism is now a partial, secondary question. Rosa
      Luxemburg and Karl Liebknecht were, in my opinion, correct when
      they defended participation in the elections to the German
      bourgeois parliament, to the constituent National Assembly, at
      the January 1919 Conference of the Spartacists in Berlin,
      against the majority at the Conference.[2] But,
      of course, they were still more correct when they preferred
      remaining with the Communist Party, which was making a partial
      mistake, to siding with the direct traitors to socialism, like
      Scheidemann and his party, or with those servile souls,
      doctrinaires, cowards, spineless accomplices of the bourgeoisie,
      and reformists in practice, such as Kautsky, Haase, Däumig
      and all this “party” of German
      “Independents”.  

    

      I am personally convinced that to renounce participation in the
      parliamentary elections is a mistake on the part of the
      revolutionary workers of Britain, but better to make that
      mistake than to delay the formation of a big workers’
      Communist Party in Britain out of all the trends and elements,
      listed by you, which sympathise with Bolshevism and sincerely
      support the Soviet Republic. If, for example, among the B.S.P.
      there were sincere Bolsheviks who refused, because of
      differences over participation in Parliament, to merge at once
      in a Communist Party with trends 4, 6 and 7, then these
      Bolsheviks, in my opinion, would be making a mistake a thousand
      times greater than the mistaken refusal to participate in
      elections to the British bourgeois parliament. In saying this I
      naturally assume that trends 4, 6 and 7, taken together, are
      really connected with the mass of the workers, and are
      not merely small intellectual groups, as is often the
      case in Britain. In this respect particular importance probably
      attaches to the Workers Committees and Shop Stewards, [These words are in English in the
      original.—Editor] which, one should
      imagine, are closely connected with the masses. 

      Unbreakable ties with the mass of the workers, the ability to
      agitate unceasingly among them, to participate in every strike,
      to respond to every demand of the masses—this is the chief
      thing for a Communist Party, especially in such a country as
      Britain, where until now (as incidentally is the case in all
      imperialist countries) participation in the socialist movement,
      and the labour movement generally, has been confined chiefly to
      a thin top crust of workers, the labour aristocracy, most of
      whom are thoroughly and hopelessly spoiled by reformism and are
      held back by bourgeois and imperialist prejudices. Without a
      struggle against this stratum, without the destruction of every
      trace of its prestige among the workers, without convincing the
      masses of the utter bourgeois corruption of this stratum, there
      can be no question of a serious communist workers’
      movement. This applies to Britain, France, America and
      Germany. 

      Those working-class revolutionaries who make parliamentarism the
      centre of their attacks are quite right inasmuch as these
      attacks serve to express their denial in principle of bourgeois
      parliamentarism and bourgeois democracy. Soviet power, the
      Soviet republic—this is what the workers’ revolution
      has put in place of bourgeois democracy, this is the form of
      transition from capitalism to socialism, the form of the
      dictatorship of the proletariat. And criticism of
      parliamentarism is not only legitimate and necessary, as giving
      the case for the transition to Soviet power, but is quite
      correct, as being the recognition of the historically
      conditional and limited character of parliamentarism, its
      connection with capitalism and capitalism alone, of its
      progressive character as compared with the Middle Ages, and of
      its reactionary character as compared with Soviet
      power. 

      But the critics of parliamentarism in Europe and America, when
      they are anarchists or anarcho-syndicalists, are very often
      wrong insofar as they reject all participation in
      elections and parliamentary activity. Here they simply show
      their lack of revolutionary experience. We Russians, who have
      lived through two great revolutions in the twentieth century,
      are well aware what importance parliamentarism can have, and
      actually does have during a revolutionary period in general and
      in the very midst of a revolution in
      particular. Bourgeois parliaments must be abolished and replaced
      by Soviet bodies. There is no doubt about that. There is no
      doubt now, after the experience of Russia, Hungary, Germany and
      other countries, that this absolutely must take place
      during a proletarian revolution. Therefore, systematically to
      prepare the working masses for this, to explain to them in
      advance the importance of Soviet power, to conduct propaganda
      and agitation for it—all this is the absolute
      duty of the worker who wants to be a revolutionary in deeds. But
      we Russians fulfilled that task, operating in the
      parliamentary arena, too. In the tsarist, fake,
      landowners’ Duma our representatives knew how to carry on
      revolutionary and republican propaganda. In just the same way
      Soviet propaganda can and must be carried on
      in and from within bourgeois parliaments. 

      Perhaps that will not be easy to achieve at once in this or that
      parliamentary country. But that is another question. Steps must
      be taken to ensure that these correct tactics are mastered by
      the revolutionary workers in all countries.  And if the
      workers’ party is really revolutionary, if it is
      really a workers’ party (that is, connected with
      the masses, with the majority of the working people, with the
      rank and file of the proletariat and not merely with
      its top crust), if it is really a party, i.e., a
      firmly, effectively knit organisation of the revolutionary
      vanguard, which knows how to carry on revolutionary work
      among the masses by all possible means, then such a party will
      surely be able to keep its own parliamentarians in
      hand, to make of them real revolutionary propagandists, such as
      Karl Liebknecht was, and not opportunists, not those who corrupt
      the proletariat with bourgeois methods, bourgeois customs,
      bourgeois ideas or bourgeois poverty of ideas. 

      If that failed to be achieved in Britain at once, if, in
      addition, no union of the supporters of Soviet power proved
      possible in Britain because of a difference over parliamentarism
      and only because of that, then I should consider a good step
      forward to complete unity the immediate formation of
      two Communist Parties, i.e., two parties which stand
      for the transition from bourgeois parliamentarism to Soviet
      power. Let one of these parties recognise participation in the
      bourgeois parliament, and the other reject it; this disagreement
      is now so immaterial that the most reasonable thing would be not
      to split over it. But even the joint existence of two such
      parties would be immense progress as compared with the present
      situation, would most likely be a transition to complete unity
      and the speedy victory of communism. 

      Soviet power in Russia has not only shown by the experience of
      almost two years that the dictatorship of the proletariat is
      possible even in a peasant country and is capable, by
      creating a strong army (the best proof that organisation and
      order prevail), of holding out in unbelievably, exceptionally
      difficult conditions. 

      Soviet power has done more: it has already achieved a moral
      victory throughout the world, for the working masses
      everywhere, although they get only tiny fragments of the truth
      about Soviet power, although they hear thousands and millions of
      false reports about Soviet power, are already in favour of
      Soviet power. It is already understood by the proletariat
      of the whole world that this power is the power of the working
      people, that it alone is salvation from capitalism, from the
      yoke of capital, from wars between the imperialists, that it
      leads to lasting peace. 

      That is why defeats of individual Soviet republics by the
      imperialists are possible, but it is impossible to conquer the
      world Soviet movement of the proletariat. 
With communist greetings,

    


      N. Lenin

      P.S.—The following cutting from the Russian press will
      give you an example of our information about Britain: 

 
    

      “London, 25.8 (via Beloostrov). The London correspondent
      of the Copenhagen paper Berlingske Tidende wires on
      August 3rd concerning the Bolshevik movement in Britain:
      “The strikes which have occurred in the last few days and
      the recent revelations have shaken the confidence of the British
      in the immunity of their country to Bolshevism. At present the
      press is vigorously discussing this question, and the government
      is making every effort to establish that a
      “conspiracy” has existed for quite a long time and
      has had for its aim neither more nor less than the overthrow of
      the existing system. The British police have arrested a
      revolutionary bureau which, according to the press had both
      money and arms at its disposal. The Times publishes the
      contents of certain documents found on the arrested men. They
      contain a complete revolutionary programme, according to which
      the entire bourgeoisie are to be disarmed; arms and ammunition
      are to be obtained for Soviets of Workers’ and Red Army
      Deputies and a Red Army formed; all government posts are to be
      filled by workers. Furthermore, it was planned to set up a
      revolutionary tribunal for political criminals and persons
      guilty of cruelly treating prisoners. All foodstuffs were to be
      confiscated. Parliament and other organs of public government
      were to be dissolved and revolutionary Soviets created in their
      place. The working day was to be lowered to six hours and the
      minimum weekly wage raised to Â£7. All state and other debts were
      to be annulled. All banks, industrial and commercial enterprises
      and means of transport were to be declared nationalised.”
    

      If this is true, then I must offer the British imperialists and
      capitalists, in the shape of their organ, the richest newspaper
      in the world, The Times, my respectful gratitude and
      thanks for their excellent propaganda in behalf of
      Bolshevism. Carry on in the same spirit, gentlemen of The
      Times, you are splendidly leading Britain to the victory of
      Bolshevism!

Endnotes
[1] [See Glossary entry]
[2] This refers to the Inaugural Congress of the Communist Party of Germany, held in Berlin from December 30, 1918 to January 1, 1919. Despite the speeches by Karl Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg proposing participation in the elections to the National Assembly, the Congress, by a majority vote (62 against 23) adopted the decision not to participate in the election campaign. 

 Collected Works Volume 29

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive 
 
 







==========

## Freedom to Trade In Grain, the Basic Conditions for Victory











Letter to Sylvia Pankhurst



V. I. Lenin
Freedom To Trade In Grain 
The Basic Condition For Victory 


Written: August, 1919
 
First Published: 1930; Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 29, pages 567-570
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


How are we to consolidate our victory over Koichak?
    How to complete it by destroying Denikin? How to make it
    impossible for the landowners, capitalists and kulaks to make any
    further attempts to regain their power, their land, their capital
    and their rule over the workers and peasants?
These are the questions that are actually identical with the
    question of the fate of the socialist revolution in Russia. Every
    politically-conscious worker and peasant has given some thought to
    this question, and it is not difficult to come to the conclusion
    that the food question now lies at the bottom of all socialist
    development.
Collecting all grain surpluses in the hands of the Soviet
    central authorities and correctly distributing them means making
    our Red Army invincible, it means the final rout of Kolchak and
    Denikin, it means the rehabilitation of industry and guarantees
    proper socialist production and distribution, guarantees the
    complete victory of the socialist system.
We now have enough experience of food supply work and socialist
    organisation to get a clear picture of its dimensions and the
    means of doing it. We know all the difficulties involved, we also
    know from experience that we have found the right way to surmount
    them and that by concentrating on this task, by applying greater
    energy, by mustering our forces and improving the apparatus we can
    solve this problem in its entirety.
Between August 1, 1917 and August 1, 1918, the state pro-cured
    30 million poods of grain. Between August 1, 1918 and
    August 1, 1919, we procured about 105 million poods,
    i.e., three and a half times more, although in this latter period
    we did not have the Don region, the North Caucasus and Western
    Siberia, and had a very small part of the Ukraine-we did not have
    the main grain-growing regions.
With a good harvest in 1919 we shall be able to procure very
    much grain, perhaps 400 million poods or more. Then we
    shall increase tremendously our output of fuel, timber, coal,
    etc. Then we shall restore industry and take the broad road of
    planned socialist development, firmly and irrevo-cably. Then we
    shall completely defeat profiteering and shall destroy this
    disgusting survival of capitalism that is today everywhere
    damaging the young beginnings of socialism.
The True Road To Victory
The figures given above show that Soviet power has achieved
    important successes in matters of food; these suc-cesses have been
    achieved in conditions of unprecedented, unheard-of
    difficulty. Even the clearest figures and the most indisputable
    facts are either challenged or passed over in silence when it
    comes to defending the selfish interests of the bourgeoisie,
    capitalists, profiteers and kulaks.
An exact study of the food situation of the urban worker shows
    that he obtains only a half (approximately) of his food from the
    state, from the Commissariat of Food, and the other half he buys
    in the “free”, “open” market, i.e., from
    the profiteers. Furthermore, for the first half he pays only
    one-tenth of the total amount spent on food and for the
    second half he pays the other nine-tenths.
The profiteers skin the hungry worker nine times over.
The profiteers plunder him unbelievably. We all know that an
    orgy of profit-making, robbery and crime, that the
    torments of hunger for the masses of the workers and the
    enrichment of a few scoundrels are connected with this notorious
    "freedom to trade” in grain.
Notwithstanding this there are people who advocate freedom to trade!
Our workers' and peasants' government, the entire Soviet
    Republic, all the socialist society of ours now being born, are in
    a state of war, a brutal, desperate, savage war for survival
    against capitalism, against profiteering, against freedom to trade
    in grain. This is the most profound, most radical, daily and truly
    mass struggle between capitalism and socialism. The fate of our
    revolution as a whole depends on the outcome of this struggle. But
    people who call them-selves “socialists”,
    Social-Democrats, Menshevi ks,
    “Socialist-Revolutionaries” are helping capitalism in
    this struggle against socialism! Even the best of these people,
    those most hostile to Kolchak, Denikin and the capitalists, go
    over to the side of capitalism when it comes to the question of
    the food policy of Soviet power, and demand minor concessions in
    favour of the “private commercial apparatus”,
    “individual enterprise” and so on, and so forth.
If you study this carefully, if you think deeply about why,
    actually, there is a struggle against Soviet power, you come to
    the conclusion that the enemies of Soviet power may be divided
    into two big groups both of which defend capi-talism against
    socialism. One of them acts brutally and with the crudest
    selfishness; this is the group of landowners, capitalists, kulaks,
    Denikins, Kolchaks, Black Hundreds and
    Constitutional-Democrats. The other group defends capitalism
    “ideologically”, that is, unselfishly, without any
    direct, personal profit, but out of prejudice and cowardice in
    face of the new; this is the group of Mensheviks and
    Socialist-Revolutionaries. These are the last
    “ideological” advocates of capitalism. And it was by
    no means an accident that the Koichaks and Denikins, the Russian
    and all foreign capitalists march under cover of the Mensheviks
    and Socialist-Revolutionaries, behind their banner,
    behind their

    flag, and repeat their slogans and phrases about
    “freedom” in general, about “democracy” in
    general, about “private” (commercial, capitalist)
    enterprise, etc., etc.
Clever capitalists realise that the “ideological”
    position of the Menslieviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries is of
    ser-vice to them, to their class, to “their”
    capitalism, but the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries, like
    all petty-bourgeois socialists everywhere and at all times, do not
    realise this. They fear a life-and-death struggle against freedom
    to trade in grain, they want to make concessions to i, to
    recognise it at least in part, to be in “peace” and
    agreement with it.
What Is Freedom To Trade In Grain?
Freedom to trade in grain is a return to capitalism, to the
    full power of the landowners and capitalists, to a savage struggle
    between people for profit, to the “free” enrichment of
    the few, to the poverty of the masses, to the eternal bon-dage we
    see in all bourgeois states, including the freest and most
    democratic republics.
If we ask any person who works for his living, any factory
    worker, peasant or even intellectual, whether he wants such a
    “system” he will certainly say “no”. The
    whole trouble and the whole danger is that a very large number of
    working people, especially a large number of peasants, do not
    realise that freedom to trade in grain is connected with the
    universal power of the landowrers and capitalists.

 Collected Works Volume 29

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive 
 
 





